THE TENTH MUSE Lately sprung up in AMERICA. OR Several Poems, compiled with
great variety of Wit and Learning, full of delight. Wherein especially is
contained a complete discourse and description of The Four Elements, The Four
Constitutions, The Four Ages of Man, The Four Seasons of the Year.


Together with an Exact Epitomie of the Four Monarchies, viz. The Assyrian, The
Persian, The Grecian, The Roman.


Also a Dialogue between Old England and New, concerning the late troubles.
With diverse other pleasant and serious Poems.

By a Gentlewoman in those parts.

Printed at London for Stephen Bowtell at the sign of the Bible in Popes
Head-Alley. 1650.

Kind Reader:
HAd I opportunity but to borrow some of the Authors wit, it is possible I might
so trim this curious Work with such quaint expressions, as that the Preface
might bespeake thy further perusal; but I fear 'twil be a shame for a man
that can speak so little, to be seen in the title page of this Woman's Book,
lest by comparing the one with the other, the Reader should pass his sentence,
that it is the gift of women, not only to speak most, but to speak best; I
shall leave therefore to commend that, which with any ingenious Reader will too
much commend the Author, unless men turn more peevish then women, to envy
the excellency of the inseriour Sex. I doubt not but the Reader will quickly
find more then I can say, and the worst effect of his reading will be
unbeleif, which will make him question whether it be a woman's Work, and ask,
Is it possible? If any do, take this as an answer from him that dares avow it;
It is the Work of a Woman, honored, and esteemed where she lives, for her
gracious demeanor, her eminent parts, her pious conversation, her courteous
disposition, her exact diligence in her place, and discreet mannaging of her
family occasions; and more then so, these Poems are the fruit but of some few
hours, curtailed from her sleep, and other refreshments. I dare add little,
lest I keep thee too long, if thou will not believe the worth of these things
(in their kind) when a man says it, yet believe it from a woman when thou
see it. This only I shall annex, I fear the displeasure of no person in the
publishing of these Poems but the Authors, without whose knowledge, and
contrary to her expectation, I have presumed to bring to public view what she
resolved should never in such a manner see the Sun; but I found that diverse had
gotten some scattered papers, affected them well, were likely to have sent forth
broken pieces to the Authors prejudice, which I thought to prevent, as well as
to pleasure those that earnestly desired the view of the whole.

MErcury showed Apollo, Bartas Book,
Minerva this, and wished him well to look,
And tell uprightly, which did which excel;
He viewed, and viewed, and vowed he could not tell.
They bid him Hemisphear his moldy nose,
With His cracked leering-glasses, for it would pose
The best brains he had in's old pudding-pan,
Sex weighed, which best, the Woman, or the Man?
He peer'd, and por'd, and glar'd, and said for wore,
I Am even as wise now, as I was before:
They both 'gan laugh, and said, it was no mar'l
The Auth'resse was a right Du Bartas Girl.
Good sooth quoth the old Don, tell, ye me so,
I muse whither at length these Girls will go;
It half revives my chil frost-bitten blood,
To see a woman once do, ought, that is good;
And chode buy Chaucers Boots, and Homers Furrs,
Ler men look to it, least women wear the Spurs.
To my dear Sister, the Author of these Poems.
THough most that know me, dare (I think) affirm
I never was borne to do a Poet harm,
Yet when I read your pleasant witty strains,
It wrought so strongly on my addle brames;
That though my verse be not so finely spun,
And so (like yours) cannot so neatly run,
Yet am I willing, with upright intent,
To show my love without a complement.
There needs no painting to that comely face,
That in its native beauty has such grace;
What I (poor silly I) prefix therefore,
Can but do this, make yours admired the more;
And if but only this, I do attain
Content, that my disgrace may be your gain.
If women, I with women, may compare,
Your Works are solid, others weak as air;
Some books of Women I have heard of late,
Perused some, so witless, intricate,
So void of sense, and truth, as if to err
Were only wished (acting above their sphere)
And all to get, what (filly souls) they lack,
Esteem to be the wisest of the pack;
Though (for your sake) to some this be permitted,
To print, yet wish I many better witted;
Their vanity make this to be inquired,
If women are with wit, and sense inspired:
Yet when your Works shall come to public view,
'Twill be affirmed, 'twill be confirmed by you:
And I, when seriously I had revolved
What you had done, I presently resolved,
Theirs was the Persons, not the Sexes failing,
And therefore did be-speak a modest vailing.
You have acutely in Eliza's ditty
Acquitted women, else I might with pity,
Have wished them all to women's Works to look,
And never more to meddle with their book.
What you have done, the Sun shall witness bear,
That for a woman's Work it is very rare;
And if the Nine vouchsafe the Tenth a place,
I think they rightly may yield you that grace.
But least I should exceed, and too much love,
Should too too much endeared affection move,
To super-adde in praises I shall cease,
Least while I please my self I should displease
The longing Reader, who may chance complain,
And so requite my love with deep disdain;
That I your silly Servant, stand in the porch,
Lighting your Sun-light with my blinking torch;
Hindering his minds content, his sweet repose,
Which your delightful Poems do disclose,
When once the Caskets opened; yet to you
Let this be added, then i will bid adieu,
If you shall think, it will be to your shame
To be in print, then I must bear the blame:
I^'t be a fault, it is mine, it is shame that might
Deny so fair an infant of its right,
To look abroad; I know your modest mind,
How you will blush, complain, it is too unkind,
To force a woman's birth, provoke her pain,
Expose her Labors to the world's disdain:
I know you will say, you do defy that mint,
That stamped you thus, to be a fool in print,
It Is true, it does not now so neatly stand,
As ift 'twere pollisht with your own sweet hand;
It Is not so richly decked, so trimly tired,
Yet it is such as justly is admired.
If it be folly, it is of both, or neither,
Both you and I, we will both be fools together;
And he that says, it is foolish (if my word
May sway) by my consent shall make the third.
I dare outface the worlds disdain for both,
If you alone profess you are not wroth;
Yet if you are, a woman's wrath is little,
When thousands else admire you in each tittle.
^. W.

Upon the Author, by a known Friend.
NOw I believe Tradition, which does call
The Muses, Virtues, Graces, Females all;
Only they are not nine, eleaven, nor three,
Our Authresse proves them but one unity.
Mankind take up some blushes on the score,
Menopolize perfection no more:
In your own Arts, confess your selves outdone,
The Moon has totally eclipsed the Sun,
Not with her sable mantle mufling him,
But her bright silver makes his gold look dim:
Just as his beams force our pale Lamps to wink,
And earthly Fires within their ashes shrink.
I cannot wonder at Apollo now,
That he with Female Laurel crowned his brow,
That made him witty: had I leave to choose,
My Verse should be a Page unto your Muse.
C. B.

Arm, arm, Soldado's arm, Horse, Horse, speed to your Horses,
Gentle-women, make head, they vent their plots in Verses;
They write of Monarchies, a most seditious word,
It signifies Oppression, Tyranny, and Sword:
March amain to London, they will rise, for there they flock,
But stay a while, they seldom rise till ten a clock.
R. Q.

In praise of the Author, Mistress Anne Bradstreet, Virtue's true and lively
Pattern, Wife of the Worshipful Simon Bradstreet Esquire.
At present residing in the Occidentall parts of the World, in America, alias
NOV-ANGLIA.
What Golden splendent STAR is this, so bright,
One thousand miles thrice told, both day and night,
(From the Orient first sprung) now from the West
That shines; swift-winged Phoebus, and the rest,
Of all Joves fiery stames surmounting far,
As does each Planet, every falling Star;
By whose divine, and lucid light most clear,
Natures dark secret Mysteries appear;
Heaven's, Earths admired wonders, noble acts
Of Kings, and Princes most heroic facts,
And what e're else in darkness seemed to dye,
Revives all things so obvious now to the eye;
That he who these, its glittering Rays viewes over,
Shall see what is done in all the world before.
N. H.

Upon the Author.
TWere extreme folly should I dare attempt,
To praise this Authors worth with complement;
None but her self must dare commend her parts,
Whose sublime brain's the Synopsis of Arts:
Nature and Skill, here both in one agree,
To frame this Master-peice of Poetry:
False Fame, belie their Sex, no more, it can,
Surpass, or parallel, the best of man.
C. B.

Another to Mris. Anne Bradstreete, Author of this Poem.
I Have read your Poem (Lady) and admire,
Your Sex, to such a pitch should e're aspire;
Go on to write, continue to relate,
New Histories, of Monarchy and State:
And what the Romans to their Poets gave,
Be sure such honor, and esteem you will have.
H. S.

An Anagram.

Anna Bradestreate.

Deer Neat An Bartas.

So Bartas like thy fine spun Poems been,
That Bartas name will prove an Epicene.
Another.

Anne Bradstreate.

Arts bred neat An*

To her most Honored Father Thomas Dudley Esquire; these humbly presented.
Dear Sir, of late delighted with the sight,
Of your T D. on the four parts of the world
sour sisters, decked in black and white
Of fairer Dames, the sun near saw the face,
(though made a pedestall for Adams Race)
Their worth so shines, in those rich lines you show.
Their paralells to find I scarcely know,
To climb their Climes, I have nor strength, nor skill,
To mount so high, requires an Eagles quill:
Yet view thereof, did cause my thoughts to soar,
My lowly pen, might wait upon those four,
I bring my four; and four, now meanly clad,
To do their homage unto yours most glad,
Who for their age, their worth, and quality,
Might seem of yours to claim precedence;
But by my humble hand thus rudely penned
They are your bounden handmaids to attend.
These same are they, of whom we being have,
These are of all, the life, the nurse, the grave,
These are, the hot, the cold, the moist, the dry,
That sink, that swim, that fill, that upwards fly,
Of these consists, our bodies, clothes, and food,
The world, the useful, hurtful, and the good:
Sweet harmony they keep, yet jar often times,
Their discord may appear, by these harsh rimes.
Yours did contest, for Wealth, for Arts, for Age,
My first do show, their good, and then their rage,
My other four, do intermixed tell
Each others faults, and where themselves excel:
How hot, and dry, contend with moist, and cold,
How Air, and Earth, no correspondence hold,
And yet in equal tempers, how they gree,
How diverse natures, make one unity.
Some thing of all (though mean) I did intend,
But feared you would judge, one Bartas was my friend,
I honor him, but dare not wear his wealth,
My goods are true (though poor) I love no stealth,
But if I did, I durst not send them you;
Who must reward a theife, but with his due.
I shall not need my innocence to clear,
These ragged lines, will do it, when they appear.
On what they are, your mild aspect I crave,
Accept my best, my worst vouchsafe a grave.
From her, that to your self more duty owes,
Then waters, in the boundless Ocean flows.
ANNE BRADSTREET.

THE PROLOGUE.
1.
TO sing of Wars, of Captains, and of Kings,
Of Cities founded, Commonwealths begun,
For my mean Pen, are too superior things,
And how they all, or each, their dates have run:
Let Poets, and Historians set these forth,
My obscure Verse, shall not so dim their worth.
2.
But when my wondering eyes, and envious heart,
Great Bartas sugared lines do but read over;
Fool, I do grudge, the Muses did not part
'Twixt him and me, that over-fluent store;
A Bartas can, do what a Bartas will,
But simple I, according to my skill.
3.
From School-boyes tongue, no Rhethorick we expect,
Nor yet a sweet Consort, from broken strings,
Nor perfect beauty, where is a maine defect,
My foolish, broken, blemished Muse so sings;
And this to mend, alas, no Art is able,
'Cause Nature made it so irreparable.
4.
Nor can I, like that fluent sweet tongued Greek
Who lisp'd at first, speak afterward more plain
By Art, he gladly found what he did seek,
A full requital of his striving pain:
Art can do much, but this maxime's most sure,
A weak or wounded brain admits no cure.
5.
Iam obnoxious to each carping tongue,
Who says, my hand a needle better fits,
A Poets Pen, all scorn, I should thus wrong;
For such despite they cast on female wits:
If what I do prove well, it will not advance,
They Will say its stolen, or else, it was by chance.
6.
But sure the antic Greeks were far more mild,
Else of our Sex, why feigned they those nine,
And poesy made, Calliope's own child,
So amongst the rest, they placed the Arts divine:
But this weak knot they will full soon untye,
The Greeks did naught, but play the fool and lie.
7.
Let Greeks be Greeks, and Women what they are,
Men have precedence, and still excel,
It is but vain, unjustly to wage war,
Men can do best, and Women know it well;
Pre-eminence in each, and all is yours,
Yet grant some small acknowledgement of ours.
8.
And oh, ye high flown quils, that soar the skies,
And ever with your prey, still catch your praise,
If e're you daigne these lowly lines, your eyes
Give wholesome Parsley wreath, I ask no Bays:
This mean and unrefined stuff of mine,
Will make your glistering gold but more to shine.
A. B.

The Four Elements.
FIre, Air, Earth, and Water, did all contest
which was the strongest, noblest, and the best,
Who the most good could show, and who most rage
For to declare, themselves they all engage;
And in due order each her turn should speak,
But enmity, this amity did break:
All would be chief, and all scorned to be under,
Whence issued raines, and winds, lightning and thunder;
The quaking Earth did groan, the sky looked black,
The Fire, the forced Air, in sunder crack;
The sea did threat the heavens, the heavens the earth,
All looked like a Chaos, or new birth;
Fire broyled Earth, and scorched Earth it choked,
Both by their darings; Water so provoked,
That roaring in it came, and with its source
Soon made the combatants abate their force;
The rumbling, hissing, puffing was so great,
The worlds confusion it did seem to threat;
But Air at length, contention so abated,
That betwixt hot and cold, she arbitrated
The others enmity: being less, did cease
All storms now laid, and they in perfect peace,
That Fire should first begin, the rest consent,
Being the most impatient Element.
Fire.
WHat is my worth (both ye) and all things know,
Where little is, I can but little show,
But what I am, let learned Grecians say;
What I can do, well skilled Mechanics may,
The benefit all Beings, by me find;
Come first ye Artists, and declare your mind.
What tool was ever framed, but by my might;
O Martialist! what weapon for your fight?
To try your valor by, but it must feel
My force? your sword, your Pike, your flint and steel,
Your Cannon's bootlesse, and your powder too
Without mine aid, alas, what can they do?
The adverse wall's not shak'd, the Mine Is not blown,
And in despite the City keeps her own,
But I with one Granado, or Petard,
Set open those gates, that before so strong was barred,
Ye Husbandmen, your coulter's made by me,
Your shares, your mattocks, and what e're you see,
Subdue the earth, and fit it for your grain,
That so in time it might requite your pain;
Though strong limbed Vulcan forged it by his skill,
I m^^e it flexible unto his will.
Ye Cooks, your kitchen implements I framed,
Your spits, pots, jacks, what else I need not name,
Your dainty food, I wholesome make, I warm
Your shrinking limbs, which winters cold does harm;
Ye Paracelsians too, in vaine's your skill
In chymestry, unless I help you Still,
And you Philosophers, if ere you made
A transmutation, it was through mine aid.
Ye Silver-smiths, your ure I do refine,
What mingled lay with earth, I cause to shine.
But let me leave these things, my flame aspires
To match on high with the Celestial fires.
The Sun, an Orb of Fire was held of old,
Our Sages new, another tale have told:
But be he what they list, yet his aspect,
A burning fiery heat we find reflect;
And of the self same nature is with mine,
Good sister Earth, no witness needs but thine;
How does his warmth refresh thy frozen backs,
And trim thee gay, in green, after thy blacks?
Both man and beast, rejoice at his approach,
And birds do sing, to see his glittering Coach.
And though naught but Sal'manders live in fire;
The Fly Pyrausta called, all ^else expire.
Yet men and beasts, Astronomers can tell,
Fixed in heavenly constellations dwell,
My Planets, of both Sexes, whose degree,
Poor Heathen judged worthy a Diety:
With Orion armed, attended by his dog,
The Theban stout Alcides, with his club:
The Valiant Perseus who Medusa slew,
The Horse that killed Bellerophon, then flew.
My Crabbe, my Scorpion, fishes, you may see,
The maid with balance, wayn with horses three;
The Ram, the Bull, the Lion, and the Beagle;
The Bear, the Goat, the Raven, and the Eagle,
The Crown, the Whale, the Archer, Bernice Hare,
The Hidra, Dolphin, Boys, that waters bear.
Nay more then these, Rivers amongst stars are found,
Eridanus, where Phaeton was drowned,
Their magnitude and height should I recount,
My story to a Volume would amount:
Out of a multitude, these few I touch,
Your wisdom out of little gathers much,
I Will here let pass, my Choler cause of wars,
And influence of diverse of those stars,
When in conjunction with the sun, yet more,
Augment his heat, which was too hot before:
The Summer ripening season I do claim;
And man from thirty unto fifty frame.
Of old, when Sacrifices were divine,
I of acceptance was the holy sign.
Among all my wonders which I might recount;
There Is none more strange then Aetna's sulphery mount
The choking flames, that from Vesuvius flew
The overcurious second Pliny slew:
And with the ashes, that it sometimes shed
Apulia's jacent parts were covered;
And though I be a servant to each man;
Yet by my force, master my master can.
What famous Towns to cinders have I turned?
What lasting Forts my kindleed wrath has burned?
The stately seats of mighty Kings by me:
In confused heaps of ashes may ye see.
Where Is Ninus great wal'd Town, and Troy of old?
Carthage, and hundred moe^ in stories told,
Which when they could not be over come by foes
The Army through my help victorious rose;
Old sacred Zion, I demolished thee;
So great Diana's Temple was by me.
And more then brutish Sodom for her lust,
With neighboring Towns I did consume to dust,
What shall I say of Lightning, and of Thunder,
Which Kings, and mighty ones; amazed with wonder,
Which made a Caesar, (Romes) the worlds proud head,
Foolish Caligula, creep under's bed
Of Metors, Ignis Fatuus, and the rest,
But to leave those to'th' wise, I judge is best,
The rich I often make poor, the strong I maime,
Not sparing life when I can take the same;
And in a word, the World I shall consume,
And all therein at that great day of doom;
Not before then, shall cease my raging ire,
And then, because no matter more for fire:
Now Sisters, pray proceed, each in her course,
As I: impart your usefulness, and force.
Earth.
THe next in place, Earth judged to be her due,
Sister, in worth I come not short of you;
In wealth and use I do surpass you all,
And Mother Earth, of old, men did me call,
Such was my fruitfulness; an Epithet
Which none ere gave, nor you could claim of right,
Among my praises this I count not least,
I am the original of man and beast,
To tell what sundry fruits my fat soil yields,
In vine-yards, orchards, gardens, and corn fields,
Their kinds, their tastes, their colors, and their smells,
Would so pass time, I could say nothing else;
The rich and poor, wise, fool, and every sort,
Of these so common things, can make report:
To tell you of my Countries, and my regions
Soon would they pass, not hundreds, but legions,
My cities famous, rich, and populous,
Whose numbers now are grown innumerous;
I have not time to think of every part,
Yet let me name my Grecia, it is my heart
For Learning, Arms, and Arts, I love it well:
But chiefly, 'cause the Muses there did dwell;
I Will here skip over my mountains, reaching skies,
Whether Pyrenian, or the Alps; both lies
On either side the country of the Gauls,
Strong forts from Spanish and Italian braules,
And huge great Taurus, longer then the rest,
Dividing great Armenia from the least,
And Hemus, whose steep sides, none foot upon,
But farewell all, for dear mount Helicon,
And wondrous high Olimpus, of such fame,
That heaven it self was often called by that name;
Sweet Parnassus, I dote too much on thee,
Unless thou prove a better friend to me;
But i will skip over these Hills, not touch a Dale,
Nor yet expatiate, in Temple vale;
I Will here let go, my Lions of Numedia,
My Panthers, and my Leopards of Libia,
The Behemoth, and rare found Unicorne,
Poisons sure antidote lies in his horn.
And my Hyaena (imitates man's voice)
Out of huge numbers, I might pick my choice,
Thousands in woods, and planes, both wild, and tame,
But here, or there, I list now none to name;
No, though the fawning dog did urge me sore
In his behalf to speak a word the more;
Whose trust, and valor I might here commend:
But time's too short, and precious so to spend.
But hark, ye worthy Merchants who for prize
Send forth your well manned ships, where sun does rise.
After three years, when men and meat is spent,
My rich commodities pays double rent.
Ye Galenists, my Drugs that come from thence
Do cure your patients, fill your purse with pence;
Besides the use you have, of Herbs and Plants,
That with less cost, near home, supplies your wants.
But Mariners, where got you ships and sails?
And Oars to row, when both my sisters fails?
Your Tackling, Anchor, Compass too, is mine;
Which guides, when Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars do shine.
Ye mighty Kings, who for your lasting fames
Built Cities, Monuments called by your names;
Was those compiled heaps of massy stones?
That your ambition laid, ought but my bones?
Ye greedy misers who do dig for gold;
For gemmes, for silver, treasures which I hold:
Will not my goodly face, your rage suffice?
But you will see what in my bowels lies?
And ye Artificers, all trades and sorts;
My bounty calls you forth to make reports,
If ought you have to use, to wear, to eat?
But what I freely yield upon your sweat?
And choleric sister, thou (for all thine ire)
Well know, my fuel must maintain thy fire.
As I ingenuously (with thanks) confess
My cold, thy (fruitful) heat, does crave no less:
But how my cold, dry temper, works upon
The melancholy constitution.
How the Autumnal season I do sway;
And how I force the gray head to obey.
I should here make a short, yet true narration,
But that thy method is my imitation.
Now might I show my adverse quality,
And how I often work man's mortality.
He sometimes finds, maugre his toyling pain,
Thistles and thorns, where he expected grain;
My sap, to plants and trees, I must not grant,
The Vine, the Olive, and the Figtree want:
The Corn, and Hay, both fall before they are mowne;
And buds from fruitful trees, before they are blown.
Then dearth prevails, that Nature to suffice,
The tender mother on her Infant flies:
The Husband knows no Wife, nor father sons;
But to all outrages their hunger runs.
Dreadful examples, soon I might produce,
But to such auditors 'twere of no use.
Again, when Delvers dare in hope of gold,
To open those veins of Mine, audacious bold:
While they thus in my intralls seem to dive;
Before they know, they are interred alive.
Ye affrighted wights, appalled how do you shake
If once you feel me, your foundation, quake,
Because in the abyss of my dark womb:
Your Cities and your selves I often intombe.
O dreadful Sepulcher! that this is true,
Korah and all his Company well knew.
And since, fair Italy full sadly knows
What she has lost by these my dreadful woes.
And Rome, her Curtius, cannot forget I think;
Who bravely rode into my yawning chinke.
Again, what veins of poison in me lie;
As Stibium and unfixt Mercury:
With diverse more, nay, into plants it creeps;
In hot, and cold, and some benums with sleeps,
Thus I occasion death to man and beast,
When they seek food, and harm mistrust the least.
Much might I say, of the Arabian sands;
Which rise like mighty billows on the lands:
Wherein whole Armies I have overthrown;
But windy sister, 'twas when you have blown.
I Will say no more, yet this thing add I must,
Remember sons, your mould is of my dust,
And after death, whether interred, or burned;
As earth at first, so into earth returned.
Water.
SCarce Earth had done, but the angry waters moved;
Sister (quoth she) it had full well behooved
Among your boastings to have praised me;
Cause of your fruitfulness, as you shall see:
This your neglect, shows your ingratitude;
And how your subtilty would men delude.
Not one of us, all knows, that is like to thee,
Ever in craving, from the other three:
But thou art bound to me, above the rest;
Which am thy drink, thy blood, thy sap, and best.
If I withhold, what art thou, dead, dry lump
Thou bear no grass, nor plant, nor tree, nor stump.
Thy extreme thirst is moistened by my love,
With springs below, and showers from above;
Or else thy sunburned face, and gaping chapps;
Complains to th'heaven, when I withhold my drops:
Thy Bear, thy Tiger, and thy Lion stout,
When I am gone, their fierceness none need doubt;
The Camel has no strength, thy Bull no force;
Nor mettl's found in the courageous Horse:
Hindes leave their Calves, the Elephant the Fens;
The Woolves and savage Beasts, forsake their Dens.
The lofty Eagle and the Storke fly low,
The Peacock, and the Ostrich, share in woe:
The Pine, the Cedars, yea and Daph'nes tree;
Do cease to flourish in this misery.
Man wants his bread, and wine, and pleasant fruits;
He knows such sweets, lies not in earths dry roots,
Then seeks me out, in River and in Well;
His deadly mallady, I might expel.
If I supply, his heart and veins rejoice;
If nor, soon ends his life, as did his voice.
That this is true, earth thou can not deny;
I call thine Egypt, this to verify;
Which by my fatting Nile, does yield such store;
That she can spare, when Nations round are poor.
When I run low, and not over flow her brinks;
To meet with want, each woeful man bethinks.
But such I am, in Rivers, showers and springs;
But what is the wealth that my rich Ocean brings?
Fishes so numberless I there do hold;
Should thou but buy, it would exhaust thy gold.
There lives the oily Whale, whom all men know,
Such wealth, but not such like, Earth thou may show.
The Dolphin (loving music) Arions friend.
The crafty Barbell, whose wit does her commend;
With thousands more, which now I list not name,
Thy silence of thy beasts, does cause the same.
My pearls that dangle at thy darlings ears;
Not thou, but shellfish yields, as Pliny clears.
Was ever gem so rich found in thy trunk?
As Aegypts wanton Cleopatra drunk.
Or have thou any color can come nigh;
The Roman Purple, double Tirian dye.
Which Caesar's, Consuls, Tribunes all adorn;
For it, to search my waves, they thought no scorn.
Thy gallant rich perfuming Ambergris:
I lightly cast a shore as frothy fleece.
With rolling grains of purest massy gold:
Which Spaines Americans, do gladly hold.
Earth, thou have not more Countries, Vales and Mound^,
Then I have Fountains, Rivers, Lakes and Ponds:
My sundry Seas, Black, White, and Adriatique
Ionian, Balticke, and the vast Atlantique;
The Ponticke, Caspian, Golden Rivers fine.
Asphaltis Lake, where naught remains alive.
But I should go beyond thee in thy boasts,
If I should show, more Seas, then thou have Coasts.
But note this maxim in Philosophy:
Then Seas are deep, Mountains are never high.
To speak of kinds of Waters I Will neglect,
My diverse Fountains and their strange effect;
My wholesome Bathes, together with their cures.
My water Sirens, with their guilefull lures:
The uncertain cause, of certain ebbs and flows;
Which wondering Aris^o^les wit, never knows.
Nor will I speak of waters made by Art,
Which can to life, restore a fainting heart:
Nor fruitful dewes, nor drops from weeping eyes;
Which pity moves, and often deceives the wise.
Nor yet of Salt, and Sugar, sweet and smart,
Both when we list, to water we convert.
Alas; thy ships and oars could do no good
Did they but want my Ocean, and my Flood.
The wary Merchant, on his weary beast
Transfers his goods, from North and South and East;
Unless I ease his toil, and do transport,
The wealthy fraught, unto his wished Port.
These be my benefits which may suffice:
I now must show what force there in me lies.
The flegmy constitution I uphold;
All humors, Tumors, that are bred of cold.
Over childehood, and Winter, I bear the sway;
Yet Luna for my Regent I obey.
As I with showers often time refresh the earth;
So often in my excess, I cause a dearth:
And with abundant wet, so cool the ground,
By adding cold to cold, no fruit proves sound;
The Farmer, and the Plowman both complain
Of rotten sheep, lean kine, and mildew'd grain.
And with my wasting floods, and roaring torrent;
Their Cattle, Hay, and Corn, I sweep down current,
Nay many times, my Ocean breaks his bounds:
And with astonishment, the world confounds.
And swallows Countries up, never seen again:
And that an Island makes, which once was maine.
Thus Albion (it is thought) was cut from France,
Cicily from Italy, by th'like chance.
And but one land was Affriea and Spain,
Until straight Gibralter, did make them twain.
Some say I swallowed up (sure it is a notion)
A mighty Country in the Atlanticke Ocean.
I need not say much of my Hail and Snow,
My Ice and extreme cold, which all men know.
Whereof the first, so ominous I rained,
That Isreal's enemies, therewith was brained.
And of my chilling colds, such plenty be;
That Caucasus high mounts, are seldom free.
Mine Ice does glaze Europs big'st Rivers over,
Till Sun release, their ships can sail no more.
All know, what innundations I have made;
Wherein not men, but mountains seemed to wade
As when Achaia, all under water stood,
That in two hundred year, it never proved good.
Ducalions great deluge, with many more;
But these are trifles to the Flood of Noe.
Then wholly perished, earths ignoble race;
And to this day, impaires her beauteous face.
That after times, shall never feel like woe:
Her confirmed sons, behold my colored bow.
Much might I say of wracks, but that I Will spare,
And now give place unto our sister Air.
Air.
COntent (quoth Air) to speak the last of you,
Though not through ignorance, first was my due,
I do suppose, you will yield without control;
I am the breath of every living soul.
Mortals, what one of you, that loves not me,
Abundantly more then my sisters three?
And though you love Fire, Earth, and Water well;
Yet Air, beyond all these ye know t'excell.
I ask the man condemned, that is near his death:
How gladly should his gold purchase his breath,
And all the wealth, that ever earth did give,
How freely should it go, so he might live.
No world, thy witching trash, were all but vain.
If my pure Air, thy sons did not sustain.
The famisht, thirsty man, that craves supply:
His moveing reason is, give least I dye.
So loath he is to go, though nature's spent,
To bid a due, to his dear Element.
Nay, what are words, which do reveal the mind?
Speak, who, or what they will, they are but wind.
Your Drums, your Trumpets, and your Organs sound,
What is it? but forced Air which must rebound,
And such are Echoes, and report o'th gun
Which tells afar, the exployt which he has done.
Your songs and pleasant tunes, they are the same,
And so's the notes which Nightingales do frame.
Ye forging Smiths, if Bellows once were gone;
Your red hot work, more coldly would go on.
Ye Mariners, it is I that fill your Sails,
And speed you to your Port, with wished gales.
When burning heat, does cause you faint, I cool,
And when I smile, your Ocean's like a Poole.
I ripe the corn, I turn the grinding mill;
And with my self, I every vacuum fill.
The ruddy sweet sanguine, is like to Air,
And youth, and spring, sages to me compare.
My moist hot nature, is so purely thin,
No place so subtly made, but I get in.
I grow more pure and pure, as I mount higher,
And when I Am thoroughly rarifi'd, turn fire.
So when I am condensed, I turn to water;
Which may be done, by holding down my vapor.
Thus I another body can assume,
And in a trice, my own nature resume.
Some for this cause (of late) have been so bold,
Me for no Element, longer to hold.
Let such suspend their thoughts, and silent be;
For all Philosophers make one of me.
And what those Sages, did, or spoke, or writ,
Is more authentic then their modern wit.
Next, of my Fowls such multitudes there are;
Earths Beasts, and Waters Fish, scarce can compare.
The Ostrich with her plumes, The Eagle with her eyne;
The Phoenix too (if any be) are mine;
The Stork, the Crane, the Partrich, and the Phesant;
The Pie, the Jay, the Lark, a prey to the Peasant.
With thousands more, which now I may omit;
Without impeachment, to my tale or wit.
As my fresh Air preserves, all things in life;
So when 'ts corrupt, mortality is rife.
Then Feavours, Purples, Pox, and Pestilence;
With diverse more, work deadly consequence.
Whereof such multitudes have died and fled,
The living, scarce had power, to bury dead.
Yea so contagious, Countries have me known;
That birds have not escaped death, as they have flown,
Of murrain, Cattle numberless did fall.
Men feared destruction epidemicall.
Then of my tempests, felt at Sea and Land,
Which neither ships nor houses could withstand.
What woeful wracks I Have made, may well appear,
If naught was known, but that before Algire.
Where famous Charles the fifth, more loss sustained,
Then in his long hot wars, which Millain gained.
How many rich fraught vessels, have I split?
Some upon sands, some upon rocks have hit.
Some have I forced, to gain an unknown shore;
Some overwelm'd with waves, and seen no more.
Again, what tempests, and what hericanoes
Knows VVestern Isles, Christophers, Barbados;
Where neither houses, trees, nor plants, I spare;
But some fall down, and some fly up with air.
Earth-quaks so hurtful and so feared of all,
Imprisoned I, am the original.
Then what prodigious sights, sometimes I show:
As battles pitched in the Air (as Countries know;)
Their joining, fighting, forcing, and retreat;
That earth appears in heaven, oh wonder great!
Sometimes strange flaming swords, and blazing stars,
Portentious signs, of Famines, Plagues and Wars.
Which makes the mighty Monarchs fear their Fates,
By death, or great mutations of their States.
I have said less, then did my sisters three;
But what is their worth, or force, but more's in me.
To add to all I Have said, was my intent,
But dare not go, beyond my Element.
Of the four Humors in Man's constitution.
THe former four, now ending their Discourse,
Ceasing to vaunt, their good, or threat their force.
Lo! other four step up, crave leave to show
The native qualities, that from each flow,
But first they wisely showed their high descent,
Each eldest Daughter to each Element;
Choler was owned by Fire, and Blood by Air,
Earth knew her black swarth child, Water her fair;
All having made obeisance to each Mother,
Had leave to speak, succeeding one the other;
But amongst themselves they were at variance,
Which of the four should have predominance;
Choler hotly claimed, right by her mother,
Who had precedence of all the other.
But Sanguine did disdain, what she required,
Pleading her self, was most of all desired;
Proud Melancholy, more envious then the rest,
The second, third, or last could not digest;
She was the silencest of all the four,
Her wisdom spoke not much, but thought the more.
Cold phlegm, did not contest for highest place,
Only she craved, to have a vacant space.
Well, thus they parle, and chide, but to be brief,
Or will they nil they, Choler will be chief;
They seeing her imperiosity,
At present yielded, to necessity.
Choler.
TO show my great descent, and pedigree,
Your selves would judge, but vain prolixity.
It is acknowledged, from whence I came,
It shall suffice, to tell you what I am:
My self, and Mother, one as you shall see,
But she in greater, I in less degree;
We both once Masculines, the world does know,
Now Feminines (a while) for love we owe
Unto your Sister-hood, which makes us tender
Our noble selves, in a less noble Gender.
Though under fire, we comprehend all heat,
Yet man for Choler, is the proper seat.
I in his heart erect my regal throne,
Where Monarch-like I play, and sway alone,
Yet many times, unto my great disgrace,
One of your selves are my compeers, in place:
Where if your rule once grow predominant,
The man proves boyish, sottish, ignorant,
But if ye yield sub-servient unto me,
I make a man, a man in the highest degree,
Be he a Soldier, I more fence his heart
Then Iron Corslet, against a sword or dart;
What makes him face his foe, without appal?
To storm a Breach, or scale a City wall?
In dangers to account himself more sure,
Then timorous Hares, whom Castles do immure?
Have ye not heard of Worthies, Demigods?
'Twixt them and others, what is it makes the odds
But valor, whence comes that? from none of you;
Nay milk-sops, at such brunts you look but blew,
Here Is Sister Ruddy, worth the other two,
That much will talk, but little dares she do,
Unless to court, and claw, and dice, and drink,
And there she will out-bid us all, I think;
She loves a Fiddle, better then a Drum,
A Chamber well, in field she dares not come;
She Will ride a Horse as bravely, as the best,
And break a staff, provided't be in jest,
But shuns to look on wounds, and blood that is spilt,
She loves her sword, only because its gilt;
Then here is our sad black Sister, worse then you,
She Will neither say, she will, nor will she do:
But peevish, Malcontent, musing she sits,
And by misprisions, like to loose her wits;
If great persuasions, cause her meet her foe;
In her dull resolution, she is slow.
To march her pace, to some is greater pain,
Then by a quick encounter, to be slain;
But be she beaten, she will not run away,
She Will first advise, if it be not best to stay.
But let us give, cold, white; Sister Phlegm her right.
So loving unto all, she scorns to fight.
If any threaten her, she will in a trice,
Convert from water, to conjealed Ice;
Her teeth will chatter, dead and wan's her face,
And before she be assaulted, quits the place,
She dare, not challenge if I speak amiss;
Nor has she wit, or heat, to blush at this.
Here Is three of you, all sees now what you are,
Then yield to me, pre-eminence in War.
Again, who fits, for learning, science, Arts?
Who rarifies the intellectual parts?
Whence flow fine spirits, and witty notions?
Not from our dull slow Sisters motions:
Nor sister Sanguine, from thy moderate heat,
Poor spirits the Liver breeds, which is thy seat,
What comes from thence, my heat refines the same,
And through the arteries sends over the frame,
The vital spirits they are called, and well they may,
For when they fail, man turns unto his clay:
The Animal I claim, as well as these,
The nerves should I not warm, soon would they freeze.
But Phlegm her self, is now provoked at this,
She thinks I never shot so far amiss;
The Brain she challenges, the Head's her seat,
But know'ts a foolish brain, that wants heat;
My absence proves, it plain, her wit then flies
Out at her nose, or melts at her eyes;
Oh, who would miss this influence of thine,
To be distilled a drop on every line!
No, no, thou have no spirits, thy company
Will feed a Dropsy, or a Timpany,
The Palsy, Gout, or Cramp, or some such dolor,
Thou wast not made for Soldier, or for Scholar;
Of greasy paunch, and palled cheeks, go vaunt,
But a good head from these are disonant;
But Melancholy, would have this glory thine?
Thou say, thy wits are stayed, subtle and fine:
It Is true, when I am midwife to thy birth;
Thy self's as dull, as is thy mother Earth.
Thou can not claim, the Liver, Head nor Heart;
Yet have thy seat assigned, a goodly part,
The sink of all us three, the hateful spleen;
Of that black region, Nature made thee Queen;
Where pain and sore obstructions, thou do work;
Where envy, malice, thy companions lurk.
If once you are great, what follows thereupon?
But bodies wasting, and destruction.
So base thou art, that baser cannot be;
The excrement, adustion of me.
But I am weary to dilate thy shame;
Nor is it my pleasure, thus to blur thy name:
Only to raise my honors to the Skies,
As objects best appear, by contraries.
Thus arms, and arts I claim, and higher things;
The Princely quality, befitting Kings.
Whose Serene heads, I line with policies,
They Are held for Oracles, they are so wise.
Their wrathful looks are death, their words are laws;
Their courage, friend, and foe, and subject awes,
But one of you would make a worthy King:
Like our fixed Henry, that same worthy thing.
That when a Varlet, struck him over the side,
Forsooth you are to blame, he grave replied.
Take choler from a Prince, what is he more,
Then a dead Lion? by beasts triumphed ore.
Again, ye know, how I act every part:
By the influence I send still from the heart.
Its not your muscles, nerves, nor this nor that:
Without my lively heat, does ought that's flat.
The spongy Lungs, I feed with frothy blood.
They cool my heat, and so repay my good.
Nay, the stomach, magazeen to all the rest,
Without my boiling heat cannot digest.
And yet to make, my greatness far more great:
What differences the Sex, but only heat?
And one thing more to close with my narration.
Of all that lives, I cause the propagation.
I have been sparing, what I might have said,
I love no boasting, that is but childrens trade:
To what you now shall say, I will attend,
And to your weakness, gently condescend.
Blood.
GOod sisters giveme leave (as is my place)
To vent my grief, and wipe off my disgrace.
Your selves may plead, your wrongs are no whit less,
Your patience more then mine, I must confess.
Did ever sober tongue, such language speak?
Or honesty such ties, unfriendly break?
Do know thy self so well, us so amiss?
Is It ignorance, or folly causes this?
I Will only show the wrongs, thou'st done to me.
Then let my sisters, right their injury.
To pay with railings, is not mine intent,
But to evince the truth, by argument.
I will annalise, thy so proud relation;
So full of boasting, and prevarication.
Thy childish incongruities, I Will show:
So walk thee til you are cold, then let thee go.
There is no Soldier, but thy self thou say,
No valor upon earth, but what thou have.
Thy foolish provocations, I despise.
And leave't to all, to judge where valor lies.
No pattern, nor no Patron will I bring,
But David, Judah's most heroyick King:
Whose glorious deeds in arms, the world can tell,
A rosy cheek'd musician, thou know well.
He knew how, for to handle, Sword and Harp,
And how to strike full sweet, as well as sharp.
Thou laugh'st at me, for loving merriment:
And scorn'st all Knightly sports, at turnament.
Thou say I love my sword, because it is guilt:
But know, I love the blade, more then the hilt.
Yet do abhor, such timerarious deeds,
As thy unbridled, barbarous Choler yields.
Thy rudeness counts, good manners vanity,
And real complements, base flattery.
For drink, which of us twain, like it the best,
I Will go no further then thy nose for test.
Thy other scoffs not worthy of reply:
Shall vanish as of no validity.
Of thy black calumnies, this is but part:
But now I Will show, what Soldier thou art.
And though thou'st used me, with opprobrious spite,
My ingenuity must give thee right.
Thy Choler is but rage, when it is most pure.
But useful, when a mixture can endure.
As with thy mother Fire, so it is with thee,
The best of all the four, when they agree.
But let her leave the rest, and I presume,
Both them and all things else, she will consume.
Whilst us, for thine associates thou take,
A Soldier most complete in all points make.
But when thou scorn'st to take the help we lend,
Thou art a fury, or infernal Fiend.
Witness the execrable deeds thou'st done:
Nor sparing Sex, nor age, nor sire, nor son.
To satisfy thy pride, and cruelty
Thou often have broke bounds of humanity.
Nay should I tell, thou would count me no blab,
How often for the lie, thou'st given the stab.
To take the wal's a sin, of such high rate,
That naught but blood, the same may expiate.
To cross thy will, a challenge does deserve.
So spils that life, you are bounden to preserve.
Will thou this valor, manhood, courage call:
Nay, know it is pride, most diabolical.
If murders be thy glory, it is no less.
I Will not envy thy feats, nor happiness.
But if in fitting time, and place, on foes;
For Countries good, thy life thou dare expose:
Be dangers near so high, and courage great,
I Will praise that fury, valor, choler, heat.
But such thou never art, when al alone;
Yet such, when we al four are joined in one.
And when such thou art, even such are we.
The friendly coadjutors, still to thee.
Nextly, the spirits thou do wholly claim,
Which natural, vital, animal we name.
To play Philosopher, I have no list;
Nor yet Physician, nor Anatomist.
For acting these, I have nor will, nor art,
Yet shall with equity give thee thy part,
For the natural, thou do not much contest,
For there are none, thou say, if some, not best.
That there are some, and best, I dare aver;
More useful then the rest, don't reason err;
What is there living, which cannot derive
His life now animal, from vegative?
If thou giv'st life, I give thee nourishment,
Thine without mine, is not, it is evident:
But I, without thy help can give a growth,
As plants, trees, and small Embryon know'th,
And if vital spirits do flow from thee,
I am as sure, the natural from me;
But thine the nobler, which I grant, yet mine
Shall justly claim priority of thine;
I am the Fountain which thy Cisterns fills,
Through the warm, blew conduits of my veinal rils;
What has the heart, but what is sent from the liver?
If you are the taker, I must be the giver:
Then never boast of what thou do receive,
For of such glory I shall thee bereave;
But why the heart, should be usurpt by thee,
I must confess, is somewhat strange to me,
The spirits through thy heat, are made perfect there,
But the materials none of thine, that is clear,
Their wondrous mixture, is of blood, and air,
The first my self, second my sister fair,
But I Will not force retorts, nor do thee wrong,
Thy fiery yellow froth, is mixed among.
Challenge not all, 'cause part we do allow,
Thou know I Have there to do, as well as thou;
But thou will say, I deal unequally,
There lives the irascible faculty:
Which without all dispute, is Cholers own;
Besides the vehement heat, only there known,
Can be imputed unto none, but Fire;
Which is thy self, thy Mother, and thy Sire;
That this is true, I easily can assent,
If still thou take along my Aliment,
And let me be thy Partner, which is due,
So will I give the dignity to you.
Again, stomachs concoction thou do claim,
But by what right, nor do, nor can thou name;
It is her own heat, not thy faculty,
Thou do unjustly claim, her property,
The help she needs, the loving Liver lends,
Who th'benefit of the whole ever intends:
To meddle further, I shall be but shent,
The rest to our Sisters, is more pertinent.
Your slanders thus refuted, takes no place,
Though cast upon my guiltless blushing face;
Now through your leaves, some little time i will spend;
My worth in humble manner, to commend.
This hot, moist, nurtritive humor of mine,
When it is untaint, pure, and most genuine
Shall firstly take her place, as is her due,
Without the least indignity to you;
Of all your qualities I do partake,
And what you singly are, the whole I make.
Your hot, dry, moist, cold, natures are four,
I moderately am all, what need I more:
As thus, if hot, then dry; if moist, then cold;
If this cannot be disproved, then all I hold:
My virtues hid, i have let you dimly see;
My sweet complexion, proves the verity,
This scarlet die's a badge of what is within,
One touch thereof so beautifies the skin;
Nay, could I be from all your tangs but pure,
Man's life to boundless time might still endure;
But here is one thrusts her heat, where'ts not required
So suddenly, the body all is fired:
And of the sweet, calm temper, quite bereft,
Which makes the mansion, by the soul soon left;
So Melancholy ceases on a man;
With her uncheerful visage, swarth and wan;
The body dryes, the mind sublime does smother,
And turns him to the womb of 's earthy mother,
And Phlegm like wise can show, her cruel art,
With cold distempers, to pain every part;
The Lungs, she rots, the body wears away,
As if she would leave no flesh to turn to clay,
Her languishing diseases, though not quick,
At length demolishes the faberick,
All to prevent, this curious care I take;
In The last concoction, segregation make.
Of all the perverse humors from mine own,
The bitter choler, most malignant known
I turn into his cel, close by my side,
The Melancholy to the Spleen to 'bide;
Likewise the Whey, some use I in the veins,
The over plus I send unto the reins;
But yet for all my toil, my ear, my skill,
It Is doomed by an irrevocable will:
That my intents should meet with interruption,
That mortal man, might turn to his corruption.
I might here show, the nobleness of mind,
Of such as to the Sanguine are inclined,
They Are liberal, pleasant, kind, and courteous,
And like the Liver, all benignious;
For Arts, and Sciences, they are the fittest,
And maugre (Choler) still they are the wittest,
An ingenious working fantasy,
A most volumnious large memory,
And nothing wanting but solidity.
But why, alas, thus tedious should I be?
Thousand examples, you may daily see
If time I have transgrest, and been too long,
Yet could not be more brief, without much wrong.
I Have scarce wiped off the spots, proud Choler cast,
Such venom lies in words, though but a blast,
No braggs i have used, t'your selves I dare appeal,
If modesty my worth do not conceal.
I Have used no bitterness, nor taxt your name,
As I to you, to me, do ye the same.
Melancholy.
HE that with two assaylents has to do,
Had need be armed well, and active too,
Especially when freindship is pretended:
That blow's most deadly, where it is intended;
Though Choler rage, and rail, i will not do so,
The tongue's no weapon to assault a foe,
But since we fight with words, we might be kind,
To spare our selves, and beat the whistling wind.
Fair rosy Sister, so might thou escape free,
I Will flatter for a time, as thou did me,
But when the first offenders I have laid,
Thy soothing girds shall fully be repaid;
But Choler, be thou cooled, or cha^'d, i will venture,
And in contentions lists, now justly enter.
Thy boasted valor stoutly's been repelled,
If not as yet, by me, thou shall be quelled:
What moved thee thus to villifie my name?
Not past all reason, but in truth all shame:
Thy fiery spirit shall bear away this prize,
To play such furious pranks I am too wise;
If in a Soldier rashness be so precious,
Know, in a General its most pernicious.
Nature does teach, to shield the head from harm,
The blow that is aimed thereat is latch'd by th'arm,
When in Battalia my foes I face,
I then command, proud Choler stand thy place,
To use thy sword, thy courage, and thy Art,
For to defend my self, thy better part;
This wariness count not for cowardice,
He is not truly valiant that is not wise;
It Is no less glory to defend a town,
Then by assault to gain one, not our own.
And if Marcellus bold, be called Romes sword,
Wise Fabius is her buckler: all accord.
And if thy haste, my slownesse should not temper,
'Twere but a mad, irregular distemper;
Enough of that, by our Sister heretofore,
I Will come to that which wounds me somewhat more:
Of Learning, and of Policy, thou would bereave me,
But's not thy ignorance shall thus deceive me.
What greater Clerk, or politician lives?
Then he whose brain a touch my humor gives.
What is too hot, my coldness does abate;
What Is diffluent, I do consolidate.
If I be partial judged, or thought to err,
The melancholy Snake shall it aver.
Those cold dry heads, more subrilly does yield,
Then all the huge beasts of the fertile field.
Thirdly, thou do confine me to the spleen,
As of that only part I was the Queen:
Let me as well make thy precincts, the gal;
To prison thee within that bladder small.
Reduce the man to's principles, then see
If I have not more part, then al ye three:
What is without, within, of theirs, or thine.
Yet time and age, shall soon declare it mine.
When death does seize the man, your stock is lost,
When you poor bankrupts prove, then have I most.
You Will say, here none shall ere disturb my right;
You high born (from that lump) then take your flight
Then who is man's friend, when life and all forsakes?
His mother (mine) him to her womb retakes,
Thus he is ours, his portion is the grave.
But whilst he lives, I Will show what part I have.
And first, the firm dry bones, I justly claim:
The strong foundation of the stately frame.
Likewise the useful spleen, though not the best,
Yet is a bowel called well as the rest.
The Liver, Stomach, owes it thanks of right.
The first it draines, of the last quicks appetite,
Laughter (though thou savst malice) flows from hence,
These two in one cannot have residence.
But thou most grossly do mistake, to think
The Spleen for all you three, was made a sink.
Of all the rest, thou'st nothing there to do;
But if thou have, that malice comes from you.
Again, you often touch my swarthy hew,
That black is black, and I am black, it is true;
But yet more comely far, I dare avow,
Then is thy torrid nose, or brazen brow.
But that which shows how high thy spite is bent,
In charging me, to be thy excrement.
Thy loathsome imputation I desie;
So plain a slander needs no reply.
When by thy heat, thou'st baked thy self to crust,
Thou do assume my name, well be it just;
This transmutation is, but not excretion,
Thou wants Philosophy, and yet discretion.
Now by your leave, I Will let your greatness see;
What officer thou art to al us three.
The Kitchen Drudge, the cleanser of the sinks,
That casts out all that man or eats, or drinks.
Thy bittering quality, still irretates,
Til filth and thee, nature exhonorates.
If any doubt this truth, whence this should come;
Show them thy passage to the Duodenum.
If there you are stopped, to the Liver thou turn'st in,
And so with jaundise, Safferns all the skin.
No further time i will spend, in confutations,
I trust I Have cleared your slandrous imputations.
I now speak unto al, no more to one;
Pray hear, admire, and learn instruction.
My virtues yours surpass, without compare:
The first, my constancy, that jewel rate.
Choler's too rash, this golden gift to hold.
And Sanguine is more fickle many fold.
Here, there, her restless thoughts do ever fly;
Constant in nothing, but inconstancy,
And what Phlegm is, we know, likewise her mother,
Unstable is the one, so is the other.
With me is noble patience also found,
Impatient Choler loves not the sound.
What Sanguine is, she does not heed, nor care.
Now up, now down, transported like the Air.
Flegm's patient, because her nature's tame.
But I by virtue, do acquire the same.
My temperance, chastity, is eminent,
But these with you, are seldom resident.
Now could I stain my ruddy sisters face,
With purple dye, to show but her disgrace.
But I rather with silence, veil her shame;
Then cause her blush, while I dilate the same.
Nor are ye free, from this inormity,
Although she bear the greatest obloquie.
My prudence, judgment, now I might reveal,
But wisdom it is, my wisdom to conceal.
Unto diseases not inclined as ye:
Nor cold, nor hot, Ague, nor Plurisie;
Nor Cough, nor Quinsie, nor the burning Feavor.
I rarely feel to act his fierce endeavor.
My sickness chiefly in conceit does lie,
What I imagine, that is my malady.
Strange Chymera's are in my fantasy,
And things that never were, nor shall I see.
Talk I love not, reason lies not in length.
Nor multitude of words, argues our strength;
I Have done, pray Sister Phlegm proceed in course,
We shall expect much sound, but little force.
Phlegm.
PAtient I am, patient i would need to be,
To bear the injurious taunts of three,
Though wit I want, and anger I have less,
Enough of both, my wrongs for to express;
I Have not forgot how bitter Choler spoke,
Nor how her Gaul on me she causlesse brake;
Nor wonder 'twas, for hatred there is not small,
Where opposition is diametrical:
To what is truth, I freely will assent,
(Although my name do suffer derriment)
What Is slanderous, repel; doubtful, dispute;
And when i have nothing left to say, be mute;
Valor I want, no Soldier am, it is true,
I Will leave that manly property to you;
I love no thundering Drums, nor bloody Wars,
My polished skin was not ordained for skars,
And though the pitched field ^'ve ever fled,
At home, the Conquerours, have conquered:
Nay, I could tell you (what is more true then meet)
That Kings have laid their Scepters at my feet,
When sister Sanguine paints my Ivory face,
The Monarchs bend, and sue, but for my grace;
My Lilly white, when joined with her red,
Princes has slav'd, and Captains captived:
Country with Country, Grecce with Asia fights,
Sixty nine Princes, all stout Hero Knights.
Under Troys walls, ten years will wast away,
Rather then loose, one beauteous Hellena;
But 'twere as vain, to prove the truth of mine,
As at noon day to tell, the Sun does shine.
Next difference betwixt us twain does lie,
Who does possess the Brain, or thou, or I;
Shame forced thee say, the matter that was mine,
But the spirits, by which it acts are thine;
Thou speak truth, and I can speak no less,
Thy heat does much, I heartily confess,
But yet thou art as much, I truly say,
Beholding unto me another way.
And though I grant, thou art my helper here,
No debtor I, because it is paid else where;
With all your flourishes, now Sisters three,
Who is it or dare, or can compare with me;
My excellencies are so great, so many,
I am confounded, before I speak of any:
The Brain's the noblest member all allow,
The situation, and form will it avow,
Its ventricles, membrances, and wondrous ner,
Galen, Hipocrates, drives to a set.
That divine Essence, the immortal Soul,
Though it in all, and every part be whole:
Within this stately place of eminence,
Does doubtless keep its mighty residence;
And surely the Souls sensative here lives,
Which life and motion to each Creature gives,
The conjugations of the parts toth 'brain
Does show, hence flows the power which they retain;
Within this high built Citadel does lie,
The Reason, Fancy, and the Memory;
The faculty of speech does here abide,
The spirits animal, from whence does slide,
The five most noble Senses, here do dwell,
Of three, its hard to say, which does excel;
This point for to discuss longs not to me,
I Will touch the Sight, great'st wonder of the three;
The optic nerve, coats, humors, all are mine,
Both watery, glassie, and the christaline.
O! mixture strange, oh color, colourlesse,
Thy perfect temperament, who can express?
He was no fool, who thought the Soul lay here,
Whence her affections, passions, speak so clear;
O! good, O bad, O true, O traitorous eyes!
What wonderments, within your bals there lies?
Of all the Senses, Sight shall be the Queen;
Yet some may wish, oh, had mine eyes never seen.
Mine likewise is the marrow of the back,
Which runs through all the spondles of the rack,
It is the substitute o'th royal Brain,
All nerves (except seven pair) to it retain;
And the strong ligaments, from hence arise,
With joint to joint, the entire body ties;
Some other parts there issue from the Brain,
Whose use and worth to tell, I must refrain;
Some worthy learned Crook may these reveal,
But modesty has charged me to conceal;
Here Is my epitome of excellence,
For what is the Brains, is mine, by consequence;
A foolish Brain (says Choler) wanting heat,
But a mad one, say I, where it is too great,
Phrensie's worse, then folly, one would more glad,
With a tame fool converse, then with a mad,
Then, my head for learning is not the fittest,
Never did I hear that Choler was the witt'est;
Thy judgment is unsafe, thy fancy little,
For memory, the sand is not more brittle.
Again, none's fit for Kingly place but thou,
If Tyrants be the best, i will it allow;
But if love be, as requisite as fear,
Then I, and thou, must make a mixture here:
Well, to be brief, Choler I hope now is laid,
And I pass by what sister Sanguine said;
To Melancholy i will make no reply,
The worst she said, was, instability,
And too much talk; both which, I do confess,
A warning good, hereafter i will say less.
Let Us now be friends, it is time our spite was spent,
Lest we too late, this rashness do repent,
Such premises will force a sad conclusion,
Unless we 'gree, all falls into confusion.
Let Sanguine, Choier, with her hot hand hold,
To take her moist, my moistness will be bold;
My cold, cold Melanchollies hand shall clasp,
Her dry, dry Cholers other hand shall grasp;
Two hot, two moist, two cold, two dry here be,
A golden Ring, the Posey, Unity:
Nor jars, nor scoffs, let none hereafter see,
But all admire our perfect amity;
Nor be discerned, here is water, earth, air, fire,
But here is a compact body, whole, entire:
This loving counsel pleased them all so well,
That Phlegm was judged, for kindness to excel.
The Four Ages of Man.
Lo now! four other acts upon the stage,
Childhood, and Youth, the Manly, and Old Age.
The first: son unto Phlegm, grandchild to water,
Unstable, supple, moist, and cold's his Naure.
The second, frolic, claims his pedigree,
From blood and air, for hot, and moist is he.
The third, of fire, and choler is composed,
Vindicative, and quarelsome disposed.
The last, of earth, and heavy melancholy,
Solid, hating all lightness, and al folly.
Childhood was clothed in white, and given to show,
His spring was intermixed with some snow.
Upon his head a Garland Nature set:
Of Dazy, Primrose, and the Violet.
Such cold mean flowers (as these) blossom betime,
Before the Sun has thoroughly warmed the clime.
His hobby striding, did not ride, but run,
And in his hand an hour-glasse new begun,
In dangers every moment of a fall,
And when it is broke, then ends his life and all.
But if he hold, til it have run its last,
Then may he live, til threescore years or past.
Next, youth came up, in gorgeous attire;
(As that fond age, does most of al desire.)
His Suit of Crimson, and his Scarf of Green:
In's countenance, his pride quickly was seen.
Garland of Roses, Pinks, and Gilliflowers,
Seemed to grow on's head (bedewed with showers:)
His face as fresh, as is Aurora fair,
When blushing first, she 'gins to red the Air.
No wooden horse, but one of metal tried:
He seems to fly, or swim, and not to ride.
Then prauncing on the Stage, about he wheels;
But as he went, death waited at his heels.
The next came up, in a more graver sort,
As one that cared, for a good report.
His Sword by's side, and choler in his eyes;
But neither used (as yet) for he was wise.
Of Autumn fruits a basket on his arm.
His golden god in's purse, which was his charm,
And last of al, to act upon this Stage;
Leaning upon his staff, comes up old age.
Under his arm a Sheafe of wheat he bore,
A Harvest of the best, what needs he more.
In's other hand a glass, even almost run,
This writ about: This out, then I am done.
His hoary hairs, and grave aspect made way;
And al gave ear, to what he had to say.
These being met, each in his equipage,
Intend to speak, according to their age:
But wise Old Age, did with all gravity,
To childish childhood, give precedence.
And to the rest, his reason mildly told;
That he was young, before he grew so old.
To do as he, the rest full soon assents,
Their method was, that of the Elements,
That each should tell, what of himself he knew;
Both good and bad, but yet no more then is true.
With heed now stood, three ages of frail man;
To hear the child, who crying, thus began.
Childhood.
AH me! conceived in sin, and born in sorrow,
A nothing, here to day, but gone to morrow.
Whose mean beginning, blushing cannot reveal,
But night and darkness, must with shame conceal.
My mothers breeding sickness, I will spare;
Her nine months weary burden not declare.
To show her bearing pangs, I should do wrong,
To tell that pain, which cannot be told by tongue;
With tears into this world I did arrive;
My mother still did waste, as I did thrive:
Who yet with love, and all alacrity,
Spending was willing, to be spent for me;
With wayward cries, I did disturb her rest;
Who sought still to appease me, with her breast,
With weary arms, she danced, and By, By, sung,
When wretched I (ungrate) had done the wrong.
When Infancy was past, my Childishness,
Did act al folly, that it could express.
My silliness did only take delight,
In that which riper age did scorn, and slight:
In Rattles, Bables, and such toyish stuff.
My then ambitious thoughts, were low enough.
My high-borne soul, so straightly was confined:
That its own worth, it did not know, nor mind.
This little house of flesh, did spacious count:
Through ignorance, all troubles did surmount.
Yet this advantage, had mine ignorance,
Freedom from Envy, and from Arrogance,
How to be rich, or great, I did not carke;
A Baron or a Duke, never made my mark.
Nor studious was, Kings favors how to buy,
With costly presents, or base flattery.
No office coveted, wherein I might
Make strong my self, and turn aside weak right.
No malice bare, to this, or that great Peer,
Nor unto buzzing whisperors, gave ear.
I gave no hand, nor vote, for death, or life:
I Would naught to do, 'twixt Prince, and peoples strife.
No Statist I: nor Marti'list in the field;
Where e're I went, mine innocence was shield.
My quarrels, not for Diadems did rise;
But for an Apple, Plumbe, or some such prize,
My stroks did cause no death, nor wounds, nor skars.
My little wrath did cease soon as my wars.
My duel was no challenge, nor did seek.
My foe should weltering, with his bowels reek.
I had no Suits at law, neighbors to vex.
Nor evidence for land, did me perplex.
I feared no storms, nor all the winds that blows,
I had no ships at Sea, no fraughts to loose.
I feared no drought, nor wet, I had no crop,
Nor yet on future things did place my hope.
This was mine innocence, but oh the seeds,
Lay raked up; of all the cursed weeds,
Which sprouted forth, in my ensuing age,
As he can tell, that next comes on the stage.
But yet let me relate, before I go,
The sins, and dangers I am subject to.
From birth stained, with Adams sinful fact;
From thence I 'gan to sin, as soon as act.
A perverse will, a love to what is forbid:
A serpents sling in pleasing face lay hid.
A lying tongue as soon as it could speak,
And fifth Commandment do daily break.
Often stubborn, peevish, sullen, pout, and cry:
Then naught can please, and yet I know not why.
As many was my sins, so dangers too:
For sin brings sorrow, sickness, death, and woe.
And though I miss, the tossings of the mind:
Yet griefs, in my frail flesh, I still do find.
What gripes of wind, mine infancy did pain?
What tortures I, in breeding teeth sustain?
What crudities my cold stomach has bred?
Whence vomits, worms, and flux have issued?
What breaches, knocks, and falls I daily have?
And some perhaps, I carry to my grave.
Some times in fire, sometimes in waters fall:
Strangely preserved, yet mind it not at all.
At home, abroad, my danger's manifold.
That wonder it is, my glass till now does hold.
I Have done, unto my elders I give way.
For it is but little, that a child can say.
Youth.
MY goodly clothing, and my beauteous skin,
Declare some greater riches are within;
But what is best i will first present to view,
And then the worst, in a more ugly hue;
For thus to do, we on this Stage assemble,
Then let not him, which has most craft dissemble;
Mine education, and my learning's such,
As might my self, and others, profit much:
With nurture trained up in virtues Schools,
Of Science, Arts, and Tongues, I know the rules,
The manners of the Court, I likewise know,
Nor ignorant what they in Country do;
The brave attempts of valiant Knights I prize,
That dare climb Battlements, reared to the skies;
The snorting Horse, the Trumpet, Drum I like,
The glistring Sword, and well advanced Pike;
I cannot lie in trench, before a Town,
Nor wait til good advice our hopes do crown;
I scorn the heavy Corsset, Musket-proof,
I fly to catch the Bullet that is aloof;
Though thus in field, at home, to all most kind,
So affable that I do suit each mind;
I can insinuate into the breast,
And by my mirth can raise the heart deprest^
Sweet Mufick rapteth my harmonious Soul,
And elevates my thoughts above the Pole.
My wit, my bounty, and my courtesy,
Makes all to place their future hopes on me.
This is my best, but youth (is known) alas,
To be as wild as is the snuffing Ass,
As vain as froth, as vanity can be,
That who would see vain man, may look on me:
My gifts abused, my education lost,
My woeful Parents longing hopes all crossed,
My wit, evaporates in meriment:
My valor, in some beastly quarrel's spent;
Martial deeds I love not, 'cause they are virtuous,
But doing so, might seem magnanimous.
My Lust does hurry me, to all that is ill,
I know no Law, nor reason, but my will;
Sometimes lay wait to take a wealthy purse,
Or stab the man, in's own defense, that is worse,
Sometimes I cheat (unkind) a female Heir,
Of all at once, who not so wise, as fair,
Trusts my loving looks, and glozing tongue,
Until her friends, treasure, and honor's gone.
Sometimes I sit carousing others health,
Until mine own be gone, my wit, and wealth;
From pipe to pot, from pot to words, and blows,
For he that loves Wine, wants no woes;
Days, nights, with Ruffins, Roarers, Fiddlers spend;
To all obscenity, my ears I bend.
All counsel hate, which tends to make me wise,
And dearest friends count for mine enemies;
If any care I take, it is to be fine,
For sure my suit more then my virtues shine;
If any time from company I spare,
It Is spent in curling, frisling up my hair;
Some young Adonis I do strive to be,
Sardana Pallas, now survives in me:
Cards, Dice, and Oaths, concomitant, I love;
To Masks, to Plays, to Taverns still I move;
And in a word, if what I am you would hear,
Seek out a British, brutish Cavaleer;
Such wretch, such monster am I; but yet more,
I want a heart all this for to deplore.
Thus, thus alas! I have misspent my time,
My youth, my best, my strength, my bud, and prime:
Remembering not the dreadful day of Doom,
Nor yet that heavy reckoning for to come;
Though dangers do attend me every hour,
And ghastly death often threats me with her power,
Sometimes by wounds in idle combats taken,
Sometimes by Agues all my body shaken;
Sometimes by Fevers, all my moisture drinking,
My heart lies frying, and my eyes are sinking;
Sometimes the Cough, Stitch, painful Plurifie,
With sad affrights of death, does menace me;
Sometimes the loathsome Pox, my face be-mars,
With ugly marks of his eternal scars;
Sometimes the Frenzy, strangely madds my Brain,
That often for it, in Bealam I remain.
Too many's my Diseases to recite,
That wonder it is I yet behold the light,
That yet my bed in darkness is not made,
And I in black oblivions den long laid;
Of Marrow full my bones, of Milk my breasts,
Ceased by the gripes of Sergeant Death's Arrests:
Thus I have said, and what i have said you see,
Childhood and youth is vain, yea vanity.
Middle Age.
CHildehood and youth, forgot, sometimes I Have seen,
And now am grown more staid, that have beengreen,
What they have done, the same was done by me,
As was their praise, or shame, so mine must be.
Now age is more, more good ye do expect;
But more my age, the more is my defect.
But what is of worth, your eyes shall first behold,
And then a world of dross among my gold.
When my Wild Oats, were sown, and ripe, and mown,
I then received a harvest of mine own.
My reason, then bad judge, how little hope,
Such empty seed should yield a better crop.
I then with both hands, graspt the world together,
Thus out of one extreme, into another.
But yet laid hold, on virtue seemingly,
Who climbes without hold, climbes dangerously.
Be my condition mean, I then take pains;
My family to keep, but not for gains.
If rich, I Am urged then to gather more.
To bear me out in the world, and feed the poor,
If a father, then for children must provide:
But if none, then for kindred near allied.
If Noble, then mine honor to maintain.
If not, yet wealth, Nobility can gain.
For time, for place, likewise for each relation,
I wanted not my ready allegation.
Yet all my powers, for self ends are not spent,
For hundreds bless me, for my bounty sent.
Whose loins I Have clothed, and bellies I have fed;
With mine own fleece, and with my household bread.
Yea justice I have done, was I in place;
To cheer the good, and wicked to deface.
The proud I crushed, the oppressed I set free,
The liars curbed but nourisht verity.
Was I a pastor, I my flock did feed:
And gently lead the lambs, as they had need,
A Captain I, with skill I trained my band;
And showed them how, in face of foes to stand.
If a Soldier, with speed I did obey,
As readily as could my Leader say:
Was I a laborer, I wrought all day,
As cheerfully as ere I took my pay.
Thus has mine age (in all) sometimes done well.
Sometimes mine age (in all) been worse then hell.
In meannesse, greatness, riches, poverty;
Did toil, did broile; oppressed, did steal and lie.
Was I as poor, as poverty could be,
Then baseness was companion unto me.
Such scum, as Hedges, and Highways do yield,
As neither sow, nor reap, nor plant, nor build.
If to Agricolture, I was ordained.
Great labors, sorrows, crosses I sustained
The early Cock, did summon but in vain,
My wakefull thoughts, up to my painful gain.
For restless day and night, I Am robbed of steep,
By can kered care, who sentinel does keep.
My weary beast, rest from his toil can find;
But if I rest, the more distressed my mind.
If happiness my sordidnesse has found,
'Twas in the crop of my manured ground:
My fatted Ox, and my exuberous Cow,
My fleeced Ewe, and ever far owing Sow.
To greater things, I never did aspire,
My dunghill thoughts, or hopes, could reach no higher.
If to be rich, or great, it was my fate;
How was I broyl'd with envy, and with hate?
Greater, then was the great'st, was my desire,
And greater still, did set my heart on fire.
If honor was the point, to which I steered;
To run my hull upon disgrace I feared.
But by ambitious sails, I was so carried;
That over flats, and sands, and rocks I hurried,
Oppressed, and sunk, and sact, all in my way;
That did oppose me, to my longed bay:
My thirst was higher, then Nobility.
And often longed sore, to taste on Royalty.
Whence poison, Pistols, and dread instruments,
Have been cursed furtherers of mine intents.
Nor Brothers, Nephews, Sons, nor Sires I Have spared.
When to a Monarchy, my way they barred.
There set, I rid my self straight out of hand.
Of such as might my son, or his withstand.
Then heapt up gold, and riches as the clay;
Which others scatter, like the dew in May.
Sometimes vainglory is the only bait,
Whereby my empty soul, is lured and caught.
Be I of worth, of learning, or of parts;
I judge, I should have room, in all men's hearts.
And envy gnawes, if any do surmount.
I hate for to be had, in small account.
If Bias like, I Am stripped unto my skin,
I glory in my wealth, I have within.
Thus good, and bad, and what I am, you see,
Now in a word, what my diseases be.
The vexing Stone, in bladder and in reins,
Torments me with intolerable pains;
The windy Cholick often my bowels rend,
To break the darksome prison, where it is pend;
The knotty Gout does sadly torture me,
And the restraining lame Sciatica;
The Quinsie, and the Feavours, often distaste me,
And the Consumption, to the bones does wast me;
Subject to all Diseases, that is the truth,
Though some more incident to age, or youth:
And to conclude, I may not tedious be,
Man at his best estate is vanity.
Old Age.
WHat you have been, even such have I before,
And all you say, say I, and something more;
Babes innocence, Youths wildnes I have seen.
And in perplexed Middle-age have bin,
Sickness, dangers, and anxieties have past,
And on this Stage am come to act my last:
I have bin young, and strong, and wise as you,
But now, Bis pueri senes, is too true;
In every Age i have found much vanity,
An end of all perfection now I see.
It Is not my valor, honor, nor my gold,
My ruined house, now falling can uphold;
It Is not my Learning, Rhetoric, wit so large,
Now has the power, Deaths Warfare, to discharge;
It Is not my goodly house, nor bed of down,
That can refresh, or ease, if Conscience frown;
Nor from alliance now can I have hope,
But what I have done well, that is my prop;
He that in youth is godly, wise, and sage,
Provides a staff for to support his age.
Great mutations, some joyful, and some sad,
In this short Pilgrimage I often have had;
Sometimes the Heavens with plenty smiled on me,
Sometimes again, rained all adversity;
Sometimes in honor, sometimes in disgrace,
Sometime an abject, then again in place,
Such private changes often mine eyes have seen,
In various times of state i have also been.
I Have seen a Kingdom flourish like a tree,
When it was ruled by that Celestial she;
And like a Cedar, others so surmount,
That but for shrubs they did themselves account;
Then saw I France, and Holland saved, Cales won,
And Philip, and Albertus, half undone;
I saw all peace at home, terror to foes,
But ah, I saw at last those eyes to close:
And then, me thought, the world at noon grew dark,
When it had lost that radiant Sun-like spark,
In midst of greifs, I saw some hopes revive,
(For 'twas our hopes then kept our hearts alive)
I saw hopes dashed, our forwardness was shent,
And silenced we, by Act of Parliament.
I Have seen from Rome, an execra^le thing,
A plot to blow up Nobles, and their King;
I Have seen designs at Ree, and Cades crossed,
And poor Palatinate for ever lost;
I Have seen a Prince, to live on others lands,
A Royal one, by alms from Subjects hands,
I Have seen base men, advanced to great degree,
And worthy ones, put to extremity:
But not their Princes love, nor state so high;
could once reverse, their shameful destiny.
I Have seen one stabbed, another loose his head;
And others fly their Country, through their dread.
I Have seen, and so have ye, for it is but late,
The desolation, of a goodly State.
Plotted and acted, so that none can tell,
Who gave the counsel, but the Prince of hell.
I Have seen a land unmoulded with great pain.
But yet may live, to see it made up again:
I Have seen it shaken, rent, and soaked in blood,
But out of troubles, ye may see much good,
These are no old wives tales, but this is truth;
We old men love to tell, what is done in youth.
But I return, from whence I stepped awry,
My memory is short, and brain is dry.
My Almond-tree (gray hairs) does flourish now,
And back, once straight, begins apace to bow.
My grinders now are few, my sight does fail
My skin is wrinkled, and my cheeks are pale.
No more rejoice, at musickes pleasant noise,
But do awake, at the cocks clanging voice.
I cannot scent, savours of pleasant meat,
Nor sapors find, in what I drink or eat.
My hands and arms, once strong have lost their might,
I cannot labor, nor I cannot fight:
My comely legs, as nimble as the Roe,
Now stiff and numb, can hardly creep or go.
My heart sometimes as fierce, as Lion bold,
Now trembling, and fearful, sad, and cold;
My golden Bowl, and silver Cord, e're long,
Shall both be broke, by wracking death so strong;
I then shall go, whence I shall come no more,
Sons, Nephews, leave, my death for to deplore;
In pleasures, and in labors, I have found.
That earth can give no consolation sound.
To great, to rich, to poor, to young, or old,
To mean, to noble, fearful, or to bold:
From King to beggar, all degrees shall find
But vanity, vexation of the mind;
Yea knowing much, the pleasant'st life of all,
Has yet amongst that sweet, some bitter gall.
Though reading others Works, does much refresh,
Yet studying much, brings weariness to the flesh;
My studies, labors, readings, all are done,
And my last period now e'n almost run;
Corruption. my Father, I do call,
Mother, and sisters both; the worms, that crawl,
In my dark house, such kindred I have store,
There, I shall rest, til heavens shall be no more;
And when this flesh shall rot, and be consumed,
This body, by this soul, shall be assumed;
And I shall see, with these same very eyes,
My strong Redeemer, coming in the skies;
Triumph I shall, over Sin, over Death, over Hell,
And in that hope, I bid you all farewell.
The four Seasons of the Year.
Spring.
ANother Four i have yet for to bring on,
Of four times four, the last quaternian;
The Winter, Summer, Autumn, and the Spring,
In season all these Seasons I shall bring;
Sweet Spring, like man in his minority,
At present claimed, and had priority,
With smiling Sunshine face, and garments green,
She gently thus began, like some fair Queen;
Three months there are allotted to my share,
March, April, May, of all the rest most fair;
The tenth of the first Sol into Aries enters,
And bids defiance to all tedious Winters:
And now makes glad those blinded Northern wights,
Who for some months have seen out starry lights,
Crosses the Line, and equals night and day,
Still adds to the last, til after pleasant May;
Now goes the Plowman to his merry toil,
For to unloose his Winter-locked soil;
The Seeds-man now does lavish out his Grain,
In hope, the more he casts, the more to gain;
The Gardner, now superfluous branches l^ps,
And Poles erects, for his green clambering Hops;
Now digs, then sows, his herbs, his flowers, and ^oots,
And carefully manures his trees of fruits.
The Pleiades, their influence now give,
And all that seemed as dead, afresh do live.
The croaking Frogs, whom nipping Winter killed,
Like Birds, now chirp, and hop about the field,
The Nitingale, the Blackbird, and the Thrush,
Now tune their lays, on sprays of every bush;
The wanton frisking Kids, and soft fleeced Lambs,
Now jump, and play, before their feeding Dams,
The tender tops of budding Grass they crop,
They joy in what they have, but more in hope,
For though the Frost has lost his binding power,
Yet many a fleece of Snow, and stormy shower,
Does darken Sols bright face, makes us remember
The pinching Nor-west cold, of fierce December.
My second month is April, green, and fair,
Of longer days, and a more temperate air;
The Sun now keeps his posting residence
In Taurus Sign, yet hastes straight from thence;
For though in's running progress he does take
Twelve houses of the oblique Zodiac,
Yet never minute still was known to stand,
But only once at Joshua's strange command;
This is the month whose fruitful showers produces
All Plants, and Flowers, for all delights, and uses;
The Pear, the Plumbs, and Apple Tree now flourish,
And Grass grows long, the tender Lambs to nourish;
The Primrose pale, and azure Violet,
Among the verduous Grass has Nature set,
That when the Sun (on's love) the earth does shine,
These might as Lace, set out her Garments fine;
The fearful Bird, his little house now builds,
In trees, and walls, in cities, and in fields,
The outside strong, the inside warm and near.
A natural Artificer complete.
The clocking hen, her chipping brood now leads,
With wings, and beak, defends them from the gleads.
My next, and last, is pleasant fruitful May,
Wherein the earth, is clad in rich array:
The sun now enters, loving Geminie,
And heats us with, the glances of his eye,
Our Winter raiment, makes us lay aside,
Least by his fervor, we be terrified,
All flowers before the sunbeams now discloses,
Except the double Pinks, and matchless Roses.
Now swarms the busy buzzing honey Be.
Whose praise deserves a page, from more then me.
The cleanly huswives D^ry, now is in the prime,,
Her shelves, and Firkins filled for winter time.
The Meads with Cowslip, Hony-suckl's dight,
One hangs his head, the other stands upright:
But both rejoice, at the heavens clear smiling face,
More at her showers, which water them a space.
For fruits, my season yields, the early Cherry,
The hasty Pease, and wholesome red Strawberry,
More solid fruits, require a longer time.
Each season, has his fruit, so has each clime.
Each man his own peculiar excellence,
But none in all that has pre-eminence.
Some subject, shallow brains, much matter yields,
Sometime a theme that is large, proves barren fields.
Melodious Spring, with thy short pittance fly,
In this harsh strain, I find no melody,
Yet above all, this privilege is th^ne,
Thy days still lengthen, without least decline.
Summer.
WHen Spring had done, then Summer must begin,
With melted tauny face, and garments thin.
Resembling choler, fite and middle-age;
As Spring did air, blood, youth in's equipage.
Wiping her sweat from off her brow, that ran,
With hair all wet, she puffing thus began.
Bright June, July, and August, hot are mine,
In The first, Sol does in crabed Cancer shine.
His progress to the North; now is fully done,
And retrograde, now is my burning Sun.
Who to his Southward tropic still is bent,
Yet does his parching heat the more augment,
The reason why, because his flames so fair,
Has formerly much heat, the earth and air.
Like as an oven, that long time has been heat.
Whose vehemence, at length does grow so great,
That if you do, remove her burning store,
She Is for a time as fervent as before.
Now go those frolic swains, the shepherd lad,
To wash their thick clothed flocks, with pipes full glad.
In the cool streams they labor with delight,
Rubbing their dirty coats, till they look white.
Whose fleece when purely spun, and deeply died,
With robes thereof, Kings have been dignified.
Amongst all ye shepherds, never but one man,
Was like that noble, brave Archadian.
Yet has your life, made Kings the same envy,
Though you rep^se on grass under the sky.
Careless of worldly wealth, you sit and pipe,
Whilst they are imbroyl'd in Wars, and troubles ripe;
Which made great Bajazet cry out in's woes,
Oh! happy Shepherd, which had not to lose.
Orthobulus, nor yet Sebastia great,
But whist'leth to thy Flock in cold, and heat,
Viewing the Sun by day, the Moon by night,
Endimions, Diana's dear delight;
This Month the Roses are distilled in Glasses,
Whose fragrant scent, all made-perfume surpasses;
The Cherry, Goos-berry, is now in the prime,
And for all sorts of Pease this is the time.
July my next, the hot'st in all the year,
The Sun in Leo now has his carrear,
Whose flaming breath does melt us from afar,
Increased by the Star Canicular;
This month from Julius Caesar took the name,
By Romans celebrated to his fame.
Now go the Mowers to their slashing toil,
The Medows of their burden to dispoyl;
With weary strokes, they take all in their way,
Bearing the burning heat of the long day;
The Forks, and Rakes do follow them amain,
Which makes the aged fields look young again,
The groaning Carts to bear away this prise.
To Barns, and Stacks, where it for Fodder lies.
My next, and last, is August, fiery hot,
For yet the Southward Sun abateth not;
This month he keeps with Virgo for a space,
The dried earth is parched by his face.
August, of great Augustus took its name,
Romes second Emperor of peaceful fame;
With Sickles now, the painful Reapers go,
The ruffling tresse of terra for to more,
And bundles up in sheaves the weighty Wheat,
Which after Manchet's made, for Kings to eat;
The Barley, and the Rye, should first had place,
Although their Bread have not so white a face.
The Carter leads all home, with whistling voice,
He plowed with pain, but reaping does rejoice;
His sweat, his toil, his careful, wakeful nights,
His fruitful crop, abundantly requites.
Now Is ripe the Pear, Pear-plumbe, and Apricock,
The Prince of Plumbs, whose stone is hard as Rock.
The Summer's short, the beauteous Autumn hastes,
To shake his fruit, of most delicious tastes;
Like good Old Age, whose younger juycie roots,
Has still ascended up in goodly Fruits,
Until his head be gray, and strength be gone,
Yet then appears the worthy deeds he 'ath done:
To feed his boughs, exhausted has his sap,
Then drops his Fruits into the Eaters lap.
Autumn.
OF Autumn months, September is the prime,
Now day and night are equal in each clime;
The tenth of this, Sol rises in the Line,
And does in poyzing Libra this month shine.
The Vintage now is ripe, the Grapes are pressed,
Whose lively liquor often is cursed, and blessed;
For nought's so good, but it may be abused,
But its a precious juice, when well it is used.
The Raisins now in clusters dried be,
The Orange, Lemon, Dangle on the tree;
The Fig is ripe, the Pomgranet also,
And Apples now their yellow sides do show;
Of Medlar, Quince, of Warden, and of Peach,
The season's now at hand, of all, and each;
Sure at this time, Time first of all began,
And in this month was made apostate man;
For then in Eden was not only seen
Boughs full of leaves, or fruits, but raw, and green,
Or withered stocks, all dry, and dead,
But trees with goodly fruits replenished;
Which shows, nor Summer, Winter, nor the Spring,
Great Adam was of Paradise made King.
October is my next, we hear in this,
The Northern Winter blasts begin to hiss;
In Scorpio resideth now the Sun,
And his declining heat is almost done.
The fruitful trees, all withered now do stand,
Whose yellow saplesse leaves by winds are fanned:
Which notes, when youth, and strength, have past their prime,
Decrepit age must also have its time;
The sap does slily creep toward the earth,
There rests, until the Sun give it a birth:
So does Old Age still tend unto his Grave,
Where also he, his Winter time must have;
But when the Son of Righteousness draws nigh,
His dead old stock, again shall mount on high.
November is my last, for time does haste,
We now of Winters sharpness 'gin to taste;
This month's the Sun in Sagitarius,
So far remote, his glances warm not us;
Almost at shortest is the shortened day,
The Northern Pole beholds not one ray.
Now Green-land, Groen-land, Lap-land, Fin-land, see
No Sun, to lighten their obscurity;
Poor wretches, that in total darkness lie,
With minds more dark, then is the darkened sky;
This month is timber for all uses felled,
When cold, the sap to the roots has low'st repelled;
Beef, Brawn, and Pork, are now in great'st request,
And solid'st meats, our stomachs can digest;
This time warm clothes, full diet, and good fires,
Our pinched flesh, and empty panch requires:
Old cold, dry age, and earth, Autumn resembles,
And melancholy, which most of all dissembles.
I must be short, and short's, the shortened day,
What Winter has to tell, now let him say.
Winter.
COld, moist, young, flegmy Winter now does lie
In Swaddling clouts, like newborn infancy,
Bound up with Frosts, and fur^'d with Haiss, and Snows,
And like an Infant, still he taller grows.
December is the first, and now the Sun
To the Southward tropic his swift race has run;
This month he is housed in horned Capricorn,
From thence he 'gins to length the shortened morn,
Through Christendom, with great festivity
Now Is held, a Guest, (but blessed) Nativity.
Cold frozen January next comes in,
Chilling the blood, and shrinking up the skin.
In Aquarias, now keeps the loved Sun,
And Northward his unwearied race does run;
The day much longer then it was before,
The cold not lessened, but augmented more.
Now toes, and ears, and fingers often freeze,
And Travelers sometimes their noses leese.
Moist snowie February is my last,
I care not how the Winter time does haste;
In Pisces now the golden Sun does shine,
And Northward still approaches to the Line;
The Rivers now do open, and Snows do melt,
And some warm glances from the Sun are felt,
Which is increased by the lengthened day,
Until by's heat he drives all cold away.
My Subjects bare, my Brains are bad,
Or better Lines you should have had;
The first fell in so naturally,
I could not tell how to passe't by:
The last, though bad, I could not mend,
Accept therefore of what is penned,
And all the faults which you shall spy,
Shall at your feet for pardon cry.
Your dutiful Daughter. A. B.

The Four Monarchies,
the Assyrian being the first, beginning under Nimrod, 131. years after the
Flood.
WHen Time was young, and World in infancy,
Man did not strive for Sovereignty,
But each one thought his petty rule was high,
If of his house he held the Monarchy:
This was the Golden Age, but after came,
The boisterous Sons of Cush, Grandchild to Ham.
That mighty Hunter, who in his strong toyls,
Both Beasts and Men subjected to his spoils.
The strong foundation of proud Babel laid,
Erech, Accad, and Calneh also made;
These were his first, all stood in Shinar land,
From thence he went Assyria to command;
And mighty Ninivie, he there begun,
Nor finished, til he his race had run;
R^sea, Caleh, and Rehoboth likewise,
By him, to Cities eminent did rise;
Of Sa^urn, he was the original,
Whom the succeeding times a god did (...)
When thus with rule he had been dignified,
One hundred fourteen years, he after dyed.
Bellus.
GReat Nimrod dead, Bellus the next, his Son,
Confirms the rule his Father had begun,
Whose acts, and power, is not for certainty,
Left to the world, by any History;
But yet this blot for ever on him lies,
He taught the people first to Idolize;
Titles divine, he to himself did take,
Alive, and dead, a god they did him make;
This is that Bell, the Chaldees worshipped,
Whose Priests, in Stories, often are mentioned;
This is that Bell, to whom the Israelites
So often profanely offered sacred rites;
This is Beelzebub, god of Ekronites,
Likewise Bal-peor, of the Moabites:
His reign was short, for as I calculate,
At twenty five, ended his regal dare.
Ninus.
HIs father dead, Ninus begins his reign,
Transfers his Seat, to the Assyrian plain,
And mighty Ninivie more mighty made,
Whose foundation was by his Grand-sire laid;
Four hundred forty Furlongs, walled about,
On which stood fifteen hundred towers stout:
The walls one hundred sixty foot upright,
So broad, three Chariots run abrest there might,
Upon the pleasant banks of Tigris flood,
This stately seat of warlike Ninus stood.
This Ninus for a god, his father canonized,
To whom the sottish people sacrificed;
This Tyrant did his neighbors all oppress,
Where e're he warred he had too good success,
Barzanes, the great Armenian King,
By force, his tributary, he did bring.
The Median country, he did also gain,
Pharmus, their King, he caused to be slain;
An army of three Millions he led out,
Against the Bactrians (but that I doubt)
Zoroaster, their King, he likewise slew,
And all the greater Asia did subdue;
Semiramis from Menon he did take,
Then drown himself, did Menon, for her sake;
Fifty two years he reigned (as we are told)
The world then was two thousand nineteen old.
Semiramis.
THis great oppressing Ninus dead, and gone,
His wife, Semiramis, usurped the throne,
She like a brave Virago, played the rex,
And was both shame, and glory of her sex;
Her birthplace was Philistrius Ascalon,
Her Mother Docreta, a Curtezan;
Others report, she was a vestal Nun,
Adjudged to be drowned, for what she would done;
Transformed into a fish, by Venus will,
Her beauteous face (they feign) retaining still.
Sure from this fiction, Dagon first began,
Changing his woman's face, into a man.
But all agree, that from no lawful bed;
This great renowned Empress, issued.
For which, she was obscurely nourished.
Whence rose that fable, she by birds was fed.
This gallant dame, unto the Bactrian war;
Accompaning her husband Menon far,
Taking a town, such valor she did show,
That Ninus of her, amorous soon did grow;
And thought her fit, to make a Monarch's wife,
Which was the cause, poor Menon lost his life,
She flourishing with Ninus, long did reign;
Till her ambition, caused him to be slain:
That having no compeer, she might rule all,
Or else she sought, revenge for Menons fall:
Some think the Greeks, this slander on her cast,
As of her life, licenti^^s, and unchaste.
And that her worth, deserved no such blame,
As their aspersions, cast upon the same.
But were her virtues, more, or less, or none;
^he for her potency, must go alone.
H^^ wealth she showed, in building Babylon;
Adm^^'d of all, but equaliz'd of none.
(...) walls so ^^ong, and curiously were wrought;
(...) after ages, skill, by them were taught.
With Tow^^s, and Bulwalks made of costly stone
Quadrangle was the form, it ^ood upon:
Each Square, was (...) thousand paces long,
An hundred (...), it had, of mertall strong.
Three hundred sixty foot, the walls in height:
Almost incredible, they were in breadth.
Most writers say, six chariots might a front,
With great facility, march safe upon it.
About the wall, a ditch so deep and wide,
That like a river, long it did abide.
Three hundred thousand men, here day, by day;
Bestowed their labor, and received their pay,
But that which did, all cost, and art excel,
The wondrous Temple was, she reared to Bell;
Which in the midst, of this brave Town was placed,
(Continuing, till Xerxes it defaced)
Whose stately top, beyond the clouds did rise;
From whence, Astrologers, often viewed the skies,
This to discribe, in each particular,
A structure rare, I should but rudely mar,
Her gardens, bridges, arches, mounts, and spires;
All eyes that saw, or ears that hears, admires.
On Shinar plain, by the Euphratan flood,
This wonder of the world, this Babell stood.
An expedition to the East she made.
Great King Staurobates, for to invade.
Her Army of four Millions did consist,
(Each man believe it, as his fancy list)
Her Camells, Chariots, Gallyes in such number,
As puzzells best hystorians to remember:
But this is marvelous, of all those men,
(They say) but twenty, ere came back again.
The River Indus swept them half away,
The rest Staurobates in fight did slay.
This was last progress of this mighty Queen,
Who in her Country never more was seen.
The Poets feign her turned into a Dove,
Leaving the world, to Venus, soared above,
Which made the Assyrians many a day,
A Dove within their Ensign to display.
Forty two years she reigned, and then she died,
But by what means, we are not certifi'd.
Ninias, or Zamies.
HIs Mother dead, Ninias obtains his right,
A Prince wedded to ease, and to delight,
Or else was his obedience very great,
To sit, thus long (obscure) wronged of his seat;
Some write, his Mother put his habit on,
Which made the people think they served her Son;
But much it is, in more then forty years,
This fraud, in war, nor peace, at all appears;
It is more like, being with pleasures fed,
He sought no rule, til she was gone, and dead?
What then he did, of worth, can no man tell,
But is supposed to be that Amraphel,
Who warred with Sodoms, and Gomorahs King,
Against whom his trained Bands Abram did bring.
Some may object, his Parents ruling all,
How he thus suddenly should be thus small?
This answer may suffice, whom it will please,
He thus voluptuous, and given to ease;
Each wronged Prince, or child that did remain,
Would now advantage take, their own to gain;
So Province, after Province, rent away,
Until that potent Empire did decay.
Again, the Country was left bare (there is no doubt)
Of men, and wealth, his mother carried out;
Which to her neighbors, when it was made known,
Did then incite, them to regain their own.
What e're he was, they did, or how it fell,
We may suggest our thoughts, but cannot tell;
For Ninias, and all his Race are left,
In deep oblivion, of acts bereft,
And eleav'n hundred of years in silence sit,
Save a few names anew, Berosus writ.
And such as care not, what befalls their fames,
May feign as many acts, as he did names;
It is enough, if all be true that is past,
TO Sardanapalus next we will make haste.
Sardanapalus.
SArdanapalus, (Son to Ocrazapes)
Who wallowed in all voluptuousness,
That palliardizing sot, that out of doors
Never showed his face, but revell'd with his Whores.
Did wear their garb, their gestures imitate,
And their kind to excel did emulate.
Knowing his baseness, and the peoples hate,
Kept ever close, fearing some dismal fate;
At last Arbaces brave, unwarily,
His master like a Strumpet chanced to spy,
His manly heart disdained, in the least,
Longer to serve this Metamorphos'd beast;
Unto Belosus, then he brake his mind,
Who sick of his disease, he soon did find.
These two ruled Media and Babylon,
Both, for their King, held their dominion,
Belosus, promised Arbaces aid,
Arbaces him, fully to be repaid.
The last, the Medes and Persians does invite.
Against their monstrous King to bring their might,
Eclosus the Chaldeans does require,
And the Arabians, to further his desire.
These all agree, and forty thousand make,
The rule from their unworthy Prince to take.
By prophecy, Belosus strength's their hands,
Arbaces must be master of their lands.
These Forces mustered, and in array,
Sardanapalus leaves his Apish play.
And though of wars, he did abhor the sight;
Fear of his diadem, did force him sight:
And either by his valor or his fate;
Arbaces courage he did sore abate:
That in despair, he left the field and fled.
But with fresh hopes Belosus succored.
From Bactaria an Army was at hand,
Pressed for this service, by the Kings command;
These with celerity, Arbaces meers,
And with all terms of amity, he greets,
Makes promises, their necks for to un-yoak,
And their Taxations sore, all to revoake,
T'in franchise them, to grant what they could crave,
To want no privilege, Subjects should have,
Only entreats them, join their force with his,
And win the Crown, which was the way to bl^sse,
Won by his loving looks, more loving speech,
TO accept of what they could, they him beseech.
Both sides their hearts, their hands, their bands unite,
And set upon their Princes Camp that night;
Who revelling in Cups, sung care away,
For victory obtained the other day;
But all surprised, by this unlookt for fright,
Bereft of wits, were slaughtered down right.
The King his Brother leaves, all to sustain,
And speeds himself to Ninivic amain;
But Salmeneus slain, his Army falls,
The King's pursued unto the City walls;
But he once in, pursuers, came too late,
The walls, and gates, their course did terminate;
There with all store he was so well provided,
That what Arbaces did, was but derided;
Who there encamped two years, for little end,
But in the third, the River proved his friend,
Which through much rain, then swelling up so high,
Part of the wall it level caused to lie;
Arbaces marches in, the town did take,
For few, or none, did there resistance make;
And now they saw fulfilled a Prophecy;
That when the River proved their enemy,
Their strong walled town should suddenly be taken;
By this accomplishment, their hearts were shaken:
Sardanapalus did not seek to fly,
This his inevitable destiny;
But all his wealth, and friends, together gets,
Then on himself, and them, a fire he sets;
This the last Monarch was, of Ninus race,
Which for twelve hundred years had held that place;
Twenty he reigned, same time, as Stories tell,
That Am^zia was King of Israel;
His Father was then King (as we suppose)
When Jonah for their sins denounced such woes;
He did repent, therefore it was not done,
But was accomplished now, in his Son.
Arbaces thus, of all becoming Lord,
Ingeniously with each did keep his word;
Of Babylon, Belosus he made King,
With overplus of all treasures therein,
To Bactrians, he gave their liberty,
Of Ninivites, he caused none to dye,
But suffered, with goods to go elsewhere,
Yet would not let them to inhabit there;
For he demolished that City great,
And then to Media transferred his seat.
Thus was the promise bound, since first he craved,
Of Medes, and Persians, their assisting aid;
A while he, and his race, aside must stand,
Not pertinent to what we have in hand;
But Belochus in's progeny pursue,
Who did this Monarchy begin anew.
Belosus, or Belochus.
BElosus settled, in his new, old seat,
Not so content, but aiming to be great,
Incroached still upon the bord'ring Lands,
Til Mesopotamia he got in's hands,
And either by compound, or else by strength,
Assyria he also gained at length;
Then did rebuild destroyed Ninivi^,
A costly work, which none could do but he,
Who owned the treasures of proud Babylon,
And those which seemed with Sardanapal's gone;
But though his Palace, did in ashes lie,
The fire, those Metals could not damnifie;
From rubbish these, with diligence he rakes,
Arbaces suffers all, and all he takes.
He thus inricht, by this new tried gold,
Raises a Phoenix new, from grave o'th old;
And from this heap did after Ages see,
As fair a Town, as the first Ninivie.
When this was built, and all matters in peace,
Molests poor Israel, his wealth to increase.
A thousand tallents of Menahem had,
Who to be rid of such a guest, was glad;
In sacred Writ, he is known by name of Pull,
Which makes the world of differences so full,
That he, and Belochus, one could not be,
But circumstance, does prove the verity;
And times of both computed, so fall out,
That those two made but one, we need not doubt:
What else he did, his Empire to advance,
To rest content we must, in ignorance.
Forty eight years he reigned, his race then run,
He left his new got Kingdoms to his Son.
Tiglath Palasser.
BElosus dead, Tiglath his wa^like Son
Neyt treads the steps, by which his Father won,
Damascus, ancient seat of famous Kings,
Under subjection by his sword he brings;
Resin their valiant King, he also slew,
And Syria to obedience did subdue;
Iuda's bad King occasioned this War,
When Resins force his borders sore did mar.
And diverse Cities, by strong hand did seize,
To Tiglath then does Ahaz send for ease.
The temple robes, so to fulfill his ends,
And to Assyria's King a Present sends.
I am thy Servant, and thy Son (quoth he)
From Rezin, and from Pekah set me free:
Gladly does Tiglath this advantage take,
And succors Ahaz, yet for Tiglath's sake,
When Rezin's slain, his Army over-thrown,
Syria he makes a Province of his own.
Unto Damascus then, comes Judah's King,
His humble thankfulness (with have) to bring,
Acknowledging the Assyrians high desert,
To whom, he ought all loyalty of heart.
But Tiglath, having gained his wished end,
Proves unto Ahaz but a feigned friend;
All Isreal's Land, beyond Jordan, he takes.
In Galilee, he woeful havoc makes;
Through Syria now he marched, none stopped his way,
And Ahaz open, at his mercy lay,
Who still implored his love, but was distressed,
(This was that Ahaz, which so much transgrest.)
Thus Tiglath reigned, and wart'd, twenty seven years,
Then by his death, released, was Isreal's fears.
Salmanasser, or Nabonasser. [10 years.

TIglath deceased, Salmanasser is next,
He I sraelites, more then his Father vexed;
Hoshea, their last King, he did invade,
And him six years his tributary made;
But weary of his servitude, he sought,
To Aegypts King, which did avail him naught;
For Salmanasser, with a mighty Host,
Besieged his regal town, and spoiled his Coast,
And did the people, nobles, and their King,
Into perpetual thraldom that time bring;
Those that from Joshua's time had been Estate,
Did Justice now, by him, eradicate:
This was that strange degenerated brood,
On whom, nor threars, nor mercies could do good;
Laden with honor, prisoners, and with spoil,
Returns triumphant Victor to his soil;
Placed Israel in's Land, where he thought best,
Then sent his Colonies, theirs to invest;
Thus Jacobs Sons, in exile must remain,
And pleasant Canaan never see again:
Where now those ten Tribes are, can no man tell,
Or how they fare, rich, poor, or ill, or well;
Whether the Indians of the East, or West,
Or wild Tartarians, as yet never blessed,
Or else those Chinoes rare, whose wealth, and Arts,
Has bred more wonder, then belief in hearts;
But what, or where they are, yet know we this;
They shall return, and Zion see, with bliss.
Senacherib. [7 years

SEnacherib Salmaneser succeeds,
Whose haughty heart is shown in works, and deeds;
His Wars none better then himself can boast,
On Henah, Arpad, and on Ivah least;
On Hena's, and on Sepharuaim's gods,
'Twixt them and Isreal's he knew no odds.
Until the thundering hand of heaven he felt,
Which made his Army into nothing melt;
With shame then turned to Ninivie again,
And by his Sons in's Idols house was slain.
Essarhadon.
HIs Son, weak Essarhadon reigned in's place,
The fifth, and last, of great Belosus race;
Brave Merodach, the Son of Balladan,
In Babylon, Leiutenant to this man,
Of opportunity advantage takes,
And on his Masters ruins, his house makes;
And Belosus, first, his did unthrone,
So he is now styled, the King of Babylon;
After twelve years did Essarhadon dye,
And Merodach assume the Monarchy.
Merodach Baladan. [21 years.

ALl yields to him, but Ninivie kept free,
Until his Grandchild made her bow the knee;
Ambassadors to Hezekiah sent,
His health congratulates with complement.
Ben. Merodach. [22 years.

BEn. Merodach, Successor to this King,
Of whom is little said in any thing;
But by conjecture this, and none but he,
Led King Manasseh, to captivity.
Nebulassar. [12 years.

BRave Nebulassar to this King was Son,
The ancient Niniveh by him was won;
For fifty years, or more, it had been free,
Now yields her neck unto captivity:
A Viceroy from her foe, she is glad to accept,
By whom in firm obedience she is kept.
Nebuchadnezar, or Nebopolassar.
THe famous Wars, of this Heroyick King,
Did neither Homer, Hesiode, Virgil sing;
Nor of his acts have we the certainty,
From some Thucidides grave History;
Nor's Metamorphosis from Ovids Book,
Nor his restoring from old legends took;
But by the Prophets, Penmen most Divine,
This Prince in's magnitude does ever shine;
This was of Monarchies that head of gold,
The richest, and the dreadfull'st to behold;
This was that tree, whose branches filled the earth,
Under whose shadow, birds, and beasts, had birth;
This was that King of Kings, did what he pleased,
Killed, saved, pulled down, set up, or pained, or eased;
And this is he, who when he feared the least,
Was turned from a King, unto a Beast;
This Prince, the last year of his Fathers reign,
Against Ichoiakim marched with his train;
Judah's poor King besieged, who succourlesse,
Yields to his mercy, and the present stresse;
His Vassal is, gives pledges for his truth,
Children of Royal blood, unblemished youth;
Wise Daniel, and his fellows amongst the rest,
By the victorious King to Babel's pressed;
The temple of rich ornaments defaced,
And in his Idols house the Vassal's placed.
The next year he, with unresisted hand,
Quite vanquished Pharaoh Necho, and his Band;
By great Euphrates did his Army fall,
Which was the loss of ^yria withal;
Then into Egypt, Necho did retire,
Which in few years proves the Assyrians hire;
A mighty Army next, he does prepare,
And unto wealthy Tire with ha^^ repure.
Such was the situation of this place,
As might not him, but all the world outface;
That in her pride, she knew not which to boast,
Whether her wealth, or yet her strength was most;
How in all Merchandise she did excel,
None but the true Ezekiel need to tell:
And for her strength, how hard she was to gain,
Can Babels tired Soldiers tell with pain;
Within an Island had this City seat,
Divided from the maine, by channel great;
Of costly Ships, and Galleys, she had store,
And Mariners, to handle sail, and oar;
But the Chaldeans had nor ships, nor skill,
Their shoulders must their Masters mind fulfill;
Fetch rubbish from the opposite old town,
And in the channel throw each burden down;
Where after many aslayes, they make at last,
The Sea firm Land, whereon the Army past,
And took the wealthy town, but all the gain
Requited not the cost, the toil, and pain.
Full thirteen years in this strange work he spent,
Before he could accomplish his intent;
And though a Victor home his Army leads,
With peeled shoulders, and with balded heads,
When in the Tyrian wars, the King was hot,
Jehoiakim his Oath had clean forgot;
Thinks this the fittest time to break his bands,
While Babels King thus deep engaged stands;
But he (alas) whose fortunes now in the ebb,
Had all his hopes like to a Spiders web;
For this great King, with-drawes part of his force,
To Judah marches with a speedy course,
And unexpected finds the feeble Prince,
Whom he chastased for his proud offense;
Fast bound, intends at Babel he shall stay,
But changed his mind, and slew him by the way;
Thus cast him out, like to a naked Ass,
For this was he, for whom none said, Alas!
His Son three months he suffered to reign,
Then from his throne, he pulled him down again:
Whom with his Mother, he to Babel led,
And more then thirty years in prison fed;
His Uncle, he established in's place,
Who was last King of holy David's race;
But he, as perjured as Ichoiakim,
Judah lost more (then e're they lost) by him;
Seven years he keeps his faith, and safe he dwells,
But in the eighth, against his Prince rebels;
The ninth, came Nebuchadnezar with power,
Besieged his City, Temple, Zions Tower;
And after eighteen months he took them all,
The walls so strong, that stood so long, now fall;
The cursed King, by flight could no wise free
His well deserved, and foretold misery;
But being caught, to Babels wrathful King,
With Children, Wives, and Nobles, all they bring,
Where to the sword, all but himself was put,
And with that woeful sight his eyes close shut.
A hapless man, whose darksome contemplation,
Was nothing, but such ghastly meditation;
In midst of Babel now, til death he lies,
Yet as was told, ne^e saw it with his eyes;
The Temple's burnt, the Vessels had away,
The Towers, and Palaces, brought to decay;
Where late, of Harp, and Lute, was heard the noise,
Now Zim, and Sim, lift up their shriking voice;
All now of worth, are captive led with tears,
There sit bewailing Zion seventy years,
With all these Conquests, Babels King rests not,
No, nor when Moab, Edom he had got.
Kedar, Hazer, the Arabians too,
All Vassals, at his hands, for grace must sue;
A total Conquest of rich Egypt makes,
All rule, he from the ancient Pharoes takes;
Who had for sixteen hundred years born sway,
To Babylons proud King, now yields the day.
Then Put, and Lud, do at his mercy stand,
Where e're he goes, he Conquers every Land;
His sumptuous buildings passes all conceit,
Which wealth, and strong ambition made so great;
His Image, Iudahs Captives worship not,
Although the Furnace be seven times more hot;
His Dreams, wise Daniel does expound full well,
And his unhappy change with grief fore-tel;
Strange melancholy humors on him lay,
Which for seven years his reason took away;
Which from no natural causes did proceed,
For by the Heavens above it was decreed:
The time expired, remains a Beast no more,
Resumes his Government, as heretofore,
In splender, and in Majesty, he sits,
Contemplating those times he lost his wits;
And if by words, we may guess at the heart,
This King among the righteous had a part:
Forty four years he reigned, which being run,
He left his Wealth, and Conquest, to his Son.
Evilmerodach.
BAbels great Monarch, now laid in the dust,
His son possesses wealth, and rule, as just;
And in the first year of his royalty,
Eases Jehoiakims captivity.
Poor forlorn Prince, that had all state forgot,
In seven and thirty years, had seen no jot,
Among the Conquered Kings, that there did lie,
Is Judah's King, now lifted up on high.
But yet in Babell, he must still remain:
And native Canaan, never see again,
Unlike his father, Evilmerodach,
Prudence, and magnanimity, did lack
Fair Egypt is, by his remissness lost;
Arabia, and all the boardering coast.
Wars with the Medes, unhappily he waged,
(Within which broiles, r^ch Croesus was engaged,)
His Army routed, and himself there slain,
His Kingdom to Belshazzar did remain,
Belshazzar.
UNworthy Belshazzar next wears the Crown,
Whose profane acts, a sacred pen sets down.
His lust, and cruelty, in books we find,
A Royal State, ruled by a b^uitish mind.
His life so base, and dissolute, invites
The Noble Persians, to invade his rights.
Who with his own, and Uncles power anon;
Lays siedge to's regal seat, proud Babylon,
The coward King, whose strength lay in his walls,
To banqueting, and revelling now falls,
To show his little dread, but greater store,
To cheer his friends, and scorn his foes the more.
The holy vessels, thither brought long since,
Carous'd they in; and sacrilegious Prince,
Did praise his gods of metal, wood, and stone,
Protectors of his Crown, and Babylon,
But he above, his doings did deride,
And with a hand, soon dashed all his pride.
The King, upon the wall casting his eye,
The fingers of his handwriting did spy.
Which horrid sight, he fears, must needs portend,
Destruction to his Crown, to's Person end.
With quaking knees, and heart appalled, he cries,
For the Soothsayers, and Magicians wise;
This language strange, to read, and to unfold;
With gifts of Scarlet robe, and Chains of gold,
And highest dignity, next to the King,
To him that could interpret clear this thing:
But dumb the gazing Astrologers stand,
Amazed at the writing, and the hand.
None answers the affrighted Kings intent.
Who still expects some fearful sad event,
As thus amort he sits, as all undone:
In comes the Queen, to cheer her heartlesse son.
Of Daniel tells, who in his Grand-fires days,
Was held in more request, then now he was,
Daniel in haste, is brought before the King,
Who does not flatter, nor once cloak the thing.
Re-minds him of his Grand-fires height, and fall,
And of his own notorious sins, withal;
His drunkenness, and his prophainnesse high,
His pride, and sottish gross Idolatry.
The guilty King, with color pale, and dead,
There hears his Mean, and his Tekel read;
And did one thing worthy a King (though late)
Performed his word, to him, that told his fate;
That night victorious Cyrus took the town,
Who soon did terminate his Life, and Crown:
With him did end the race of Baladan,
And now the Persian Monarchy began.
The end of the Assyrian Monarchy.
The Second Monarchy, being the Persian, begun under Cyrus, Darius (being his
Uncle, and his Father in Law) reigning with him about two years.
CYrus Cambyses, Son of Persia's King,
Whom Lady Mandana did to him bring;
She Daughter unto great Astiages,
He in descent the seventh from Arbaces.
Cambyses was of Achemenes race,
Who had in Persia the Lieutenants place.
When Sardanapalus was over-thrown,
And from that time, had held it as his own;
Cyrus, Darius Daughter took to wife,
And so unites two Kingdoms, without strife;
Darius was unto Mandana brother,
Adopts her Son for his, having no other:
This is of Cyrus the true pedigree,
Whose Ancestors, were royal in degree;
His Mothers Dream, and Grand-fires cruelty,
His preservation in his misery;
His nourishment afforded by a Bitch,
Are fit for such, whose ears for fables itch;
He in his younger days an Army led,
Against great Cressus, then of Lidia head;
Who overcurious of wars event,
For information to Apollo went:
And the ambiguous Oracle did trust,
So over-thrown of Gyrus, as was just;
Who him pursues to Sardis, takes the town,
Where all that do resist, are slaughtered down;
Disguised Cressus, hoped to escape in the throng,
Who had no might to save himself from wrong;
But as he past, his Son, who was born dumb,
With pressing grief; and sorrow, overcome,
Amidst the tumult, bloodshed, and the strife,
Brake his long silence, cried, spare Cressus life:
Cressus thus known, it was great Cy^us doom,
(A hard decree) to ashes he consume;
Then on a Pike being set, where all might eye,
He Solon, Solon, Solon, thrice did cry.
Upon demand, his mind to Cyrus broke,
And told, how Solon in his hight had spoke.
With pity Cyrus moved, knowing Kings stand,
Now up, now down, as fortune turns her hand,
Weighing the age, and greatness of the Prince,
(His Mothers Uncle, stories do evince:)
Gave him at once, his life, and Kingdom too,
And with the Lidians, had no more to do.
Next war, the restless Cyrus thought upon,
Was conquest of the stately ^abylon,
Now trebble walled, and moated so about,
That all the world they neither fear, nor doubt;
To drain this ditch, he many sluices cut,
But till convenient time their heads kept shut;
That night Belshazzar feasted all his rout,
He cuts those banks, and let the river out;
And to the walls securely marches on,
Not finding a defendant thereupon;
Enters the town, the sottish King he slayes,
Upon earths richest spoils his Soldiers preys;
Here twenty years provision he found,
Forty five mile this City scarce could round;
This head of Kingdoms, Caldes excellence,
For Owls, and Satyrs, makes a residence;
Yet wondrous Monuments this stately Queen,
Had after thousand years fair to be seen.
Cyrus does now the Jewish captives free,
An Edict makes, the Temple builded be,
He with his Uncle Daniel sets on high,
And caused his foes in Lions den to dye.
Long after this, he against the Sythians goes,
And Tomris Son, an Army over-throwes;
Which to revenge, she hires a mighty power,
And sets on Cyrus, in a fatal hour;
There routs his Host, himself she prisoner takes,
And at one blow, worlds head, she headless makes;
The which she baked within a But of blood,
Using such taunting words as she thought good.
But Zenophon reports, he died in's bed,
In honor, peace, and wealth, with a gray head,
And in his Town of Pasargada lies,
Where Alexander fought, in hope of prize,
But in this Tomb was only to be found
Two Sythian bows, a sword, and target round;
Where that proud Conqueror could do no less,
Then at his Hearse great honors to express;
Three Daughters, and two Sons, he left behind,
Innobled more by birth, then by their mind;
Some thirty years this potent Prince did reign,
Unto Cambyses then, all did remain.
Cambyses.
CAmbyses, no ways like, his noble Sire,
But to enlarge his state, had some desire;
His reign with Blood, and Incest, first begins;
Then sends to find a Law for these his sins;
That Kings with Sisters match, no Law they find,
But that the Persian King, may act his mind;
Which Law includes all Laws, though lawless still,
And makes it lawful Law, if he but will;
He wages war, the fifth year of his reign,
Against Aegypts King, who there by him was slain,
And all of Royal blood that came to hand,
He seized first of life, and then of Land;
(But little Marus, escaped that cruel fate,
Who grown a man, resumed again his state)
He next to Cyprus sends his bloody Host,
Who landed soon upon that fruitful coast,
Made Evelthon their King, with bended knee,
To hold his own, of his free courtesy;
The Temples he destroys not, for his zeal,
But he would be professed god of their Weal;
Yea, in his pride, he ventured so far,
To spoil the Temple of great Jupiter;
But as they marched over those desert sands,
The stormed dust o'r-whelm'd his daring bands;
But scorning thus by Jove to be out-brav'd,
A second Army there had almost engraved;
But vain he found, to fight with Elements,
So left his sacrilegious bold intents:
The Egyptian Apis then he likewise slew,
Laughing to scorn that calvish, sottish crew.
If all his heat, had been for a good end,
Cambyses to the clouds, we might commend;
But he that before the gods, himself preferrs,
Is more profane, then gross Idolaters;
And though no gods, if he esteem them some,
And contemn them, woeful is his doom.
He after this, saw in a Vision,
His brother Smerdis sit upon his throne;
He strait to rid himself of causlesse fears,
Complots the Princes death, in his green years,
Who for no wrong, poor innocent must dye,
Praraspes now must act this tragedy;
Who into Persia with Commission sent,
Accomplished this wicked Kings intent;
His sister, whom incestuously he wed,
Hearing her harmless brother thus was dead,
His woeful fate with tears did so bemoane,
That by her Husbands charge, she caught her own;
She with her fruit was both at once undone,
Who would have born a Nephew, and a Son.
O hellish Husband, Brother, Uncle, Sire,
Thy cruelty will Ages still admire.
This strange severity, one time he used,
Upon a Judge, for breach of Law accused;
Flayd him alive, hung up his stuffed skin
Over his Seat, then placed his Son therein;
To whom he gave this in rememberance,
Like fault must look, for the like recompense.
Praraspes, to Cambyses favorite,
Having one son, in whom he did delight,
His cruel Master, for all service done,
Shot through the heart of his beloved son:
And only for his fathers faithfulness,
Who said but what, the King bad him express.
'T would be no pleasant, but a tedious thing,
To tell the facts, of this most bloody King.
Feared of all, but loved of few, or none,
All thought his short r^ign long, till it was done
At last, two of his Officers he heart,
Had set a Smerdis up, of the same years;
And like in feature, to the Smerdis dead,
Ruling as they thought good, under his head.
Touched with this news, to Persia he makes,
But in the way, his sword just vengeance takes.
Unsheathes, as he his horse mounted on high,
And with a Martall thrust, wounds him in the thigh,
Which ends before begun, the Persian Wa^re,
Yielding to death, that dreadful Conqueror.
Grief for his brothers death, he did express,
And more, because he dyed issulesse.
The Male line, of great Cyrus now did end.
The Female many ages did extend,
A Babylon in Egypt did he make.
And built fair Meroe, for his sisters sake.
Eight years he reigned, a short, yet too long time,
Cut off in's wickedness, in's strength, and prime.
The inter Regnum between Cambyses, and Darius Hyslaspes.
Childlesse Cambyses, on the sudden dead,
The Princes meet to choose one in his stead,
Of which the chief were seven, called Satrapes,
(Who like to Kings, ruled Kingdoms as they please,)
Descended all, of Ach^menes blood,
And kinsmen in account, to The King they stood,
And first these noble Magi 'gree upon,
To thrust the Imposter Smerdis our of throne,
Their Forces instantly they raise, and rout,
This King, with conspirators so stout,
Who little pleasure had, in his short reign,
And now with his accomplyces lie slain.
But yet, before this was done, much blood was shed,
And two of these great Peers, in place lay dead:
Some write that sorely hurt, they 'scap'd away;
But so or no, sure it is, they won the day.
All things in peace, and Rebels thoroughly que^'d,
A Consultation by the States was held.
What form of Government now to erect,
The old, or new, which best, in what respect,
The greater part, declined a Monarchy.
So late crushed by their Princes Tyranny;
And thought the people, would more happy be,
If governed by an Aristocracy.
But others thought (none of the dullest brain,)
But b^tter one, then many Tyrants reign.
What arguments they used, I know not well,
Too politic (it is like) for me to tell,
But in conclusion they all agree,
That of the seven a Monarch chosen be;
All envy to avoid, this was thought on,
Upon a Green to meet, by rising Sun;
And he whose Horse before the rest should neigh,
Of all the Peers should have precedence.
They all attend on the appointed hour,
Praying to Fortune, for a Kingly power;
Then mounting on their snorting coursers proud,
Darius lusty stallion neighed full loud;
The Nobles all alight, their King to greet,
And after Persian manner, kiss his feet.
His happy wishes now does no man spare,
But acclamations echoes in the air;
A thousand times, God save the King, they cry,
Let tyranny now with Cambyses dye.
They then attend him, to his royal room,
Thanks for all this to's crafty Stable-groome.
Darius Hyslapses.
Darius by election made a King,
His title to make strong omits no thing;
He two of Cyrus Daughters now does wed,
Two of his Neeces takes to nuptial bed;
By which he cuts their hopes (for future times)
That by such steps to Kingdoms often climbs.
And now a King, by marriage, choice, and blood,
Three strings to's bow, the least of which is good;
Yet more the peoples hearts firmly to bind,
Made wholesome gentle Laws, which pleased each mind.
His affability, and mild aspect,
Did win him loyalty, and all respect;
Yet notwithstanding he did all so well,
The Babylonians against their Prince rebel;
An Host he raised, the City to reduce,
But strength against those walls was of no use;
For twice ten months before the town he lay,
And feared, he now with scorn must march away:
Then brave Zopirus, for his Masters good,
His manly face dis-figures, spares no blood,
With his own hands cuts off his ears, and nose,
And with a faithful fraud to'th' town he goes,
Tells them, how harshly the proud King had dealt,
That for their sakes, his cruelty he felt;
Desiring of the Prince to raise the siege,
This violence was done him by his Liege;
This told, for entrance he stood not long,
For they believed his nose, more then his tongue;
With all the Cities strength they him betrust,
If he command, obey the greatest must:
When opportunity he saw was fit,
Delivers up the town, and all in it.
To loose a nose, to win a Town's no shame,
But who dare venture such a stake for the game;
Then thy disgrace, thine honor's manifold,
Who does deserve a Statue made of gold;
Nor can Darius in his Monarchy,
Scarce find enough to thank thy loyalty;
But yet thou have sufficient recompense,
In that thy fame shall sound whilst men have sense;
Yet over thy glory we must cast this veil,
Thy falsehood, not thy valor did prevail;
Thy wit was more then was thine honesty,
Thou lov'dst thy Master more then verity.
Darius in the second of his reign,
An Edict for the Jews published again,
The temple to re-build, for that did rest
Since Cyrus time, Cambyses did molest;
He like a King, now grants a Charter large,
Out of his own revenues bears the charge;
Gives sacrifices, wheat, wine, oil, and salt,
Threats punishment to him, that through default
Shall let the work, or keep back any thing,
Of what is freely granted by the King;
And on all Kings he poures out execrations,
That shall, but dare raze those firm foundations;
They thus backed of the King, in spite of foes,
Built on, and prosper'd, till their walls did close;
And in the sixth year of his friendly reign
Set up a Temple (though, a less) again.
Darius on the Sythians made a war,
Entering that large and barren country far;
A bridge he made, which served for boat, and barge,
Over fair Ister, at a mighty charge;
But in that Desert, amongst his barbarous foes,
Sharp wants, not swords, his valor did oppose;
His Army fought with Hunger, and with Cold,
Which two then to assail, his Camp was bold:
By these alone his Host was pinched so sore,
He warred defensive, not offensive, more;
The Salvages did laugh at his distress,
Their minds by Hieroglyphics they express;
A Frog, a Mouse, a Bird, an Arrow sent,
The King will needs interpret their intent;
Possession of water, earth, and air,
But wise Gobrias reads not half so far:
Quoth he, like Frogs, in water we must dive,
Or like to Mice, under the earth must live;
Or fly like birds, in unknown ways full quick,
Or Sythian arrows in our fides must stick.
The King, seeing his men, and victual spent,
His fruitless war, began late to repent;
Returned with little honor, and less gain,
His enemies scarce seen, then much less, slain;
He after this, intends Greece to invade,
But troubles in less Asia him stayed;
Which hushed, he straight so orders his affairs,
For Attica an Army he prepares;
But as before, so now with ill success,
Returned with wondrous loss, and honor less.
Athens perceiving now their desperate state,
Armed all they could, which elev'n thousand make;
By brave Miltiades (their chief) being led,
Darius multitude before them fled;
At Marathon this bloody field was fought,
Where Grecians proved themselves right Soldiers, stout;
The Persians to their Galleys post with speed,
Where an Athenian showed a valiant deed,
Pursues his flying-foes, and on the strand,
He stays a landing Gally with his hand;
Which soon cut off, he with the left
Renews his hold; but when of that bereft,
His whetted teeth he sticks in the firm wood,
Off flies his head, down showers his frolic blood.
Go Persians, carry home that angry piece,
As the best trophe that ye won in Greece.
Darius light, he heavy, home returns,
And for revenge his heart still restless burns;
His Queen Attossa, caused all this stir,
For Grecian Maids ('it is said) to wait on her;
She lost her aim; her Husband, he lost more,
His men, his coin, his honor, and his store;
And the ensuing year ended his life,
('It Is thought) through grief of his successesse strife.
Thirty six years this royal Prince did reign,
Unto his eldest Son, all did remain.
Xerxes.
XErxes, Darius, and Attossa's Son,
Grandchild to Cyrus, now sits on the throne;
The Father not so full of lenity,
As is the Son, of pride, and cruelty;
He with his Crown, receives a double war,
The Egyptians to reduce, and Greece to mar;
The first begun, and finished in such have,
None write by whom, nor how, 'twas over-past;
But for the last he made such preparation,
As if to dust he meant to grind that Nation;
Yet all his men, and instruments of slaughter,
Produced but derision, and laughter;
Sage Artabanus counsel, had he taken,
And's cosen, young Mardonius forsaken,
His Soldiers, credit, wealth, at home had stayed,
And Greece such wondrous triumphs never had made.
The first deports, and lays before his eyes,
His Fathers ill success in's enterprise,
Against the Sythians, and Grecians too,
What infamy to's honor did accrue.
Flattering Mardonius on the other side,
With certainty of Europe feeds his pride;
Vain Xerxes thinks his counsel has most wit,
That his ambitious humor best can fit;
And by this choice, unwarily posts on,
To present loss, future subversion;
Although he hasted, yet four years was spent,
In great provisions, for this great intent;
His Army of all Nations, was compounded,
That the large Persian government surrounded;
His Foot was seventeen hundred thousand strong,
Eight hundred thousand Horse to them belong;
His Camels, beasts, for carriage numberless,
For truth's ashamed how many to express;
The charge of all he severally commended,
To Princes of the Persian blood descended,
But the command of these Commanders all,
To Mardonius, Captain General;
He was the Son of the fore-nam'd Gobrias,
Who married the sister of Darius:
These his Land Forces were, then next, a Fleet
Of two and twenty thousand Galleys meet,
Manned by Phenisians, and Pamphilians,
Cipriots, Dorians, and Cilicians,
Lycians, Carians, and Ionians,
Eolians, and the Helispontines;
Besides, the Vessels for his transportation,
Three thousand (or more) by best relation,
Artemesia, Halicarna's Queen,
In person there, now for his help was seen;
Whose Galleys all the rest in neatness pass,
Save the Zidonians, where Xerxes was.
Hers she kept still, separate from the rest,
For to command alone, she thought was best.
O noble Queen, thy valor I commend,
But pity 'twas, thine aid that here did lend,
At Sardis, in Lidia, these all do meet,
Whither rich Pithyus comes, Xerxes to greet;
Feasts all this multitude, of his own charge,
Then gives the King, a King-like gift, most large;
Three thousand Tallents of the purest gold;
Which mighty s^m, all wondered to behold.
He humbly to the King then makes request,
One of his five Sons there, might be relead;
To be to's age a comfort, and a stay,
The other four he freely gave away:
The King calls for the Youth, who being brought,
Cuts him in twain, for whom his Sire besought.
O most inhumain incivility!
Nay, more then monstrous barbarous cruelty!
For his great love, is this thy recompense?
Is this to do like Xerxes, or a Prince?
Thou shame of Kings, of men the detestation,
I Rhetoric want, to pour out execration:
First thing, Xerxes did worthy recount,
A Sea passage cuts, behind Orthos Mount.
Next, over the Hellispont a bridge he made,
Of Boats, together coupled, and there laid;
But winds, and waves, these couples soon dissever'd,
Yet Xerxes in his enterprise persever'd;
Seven thousand Galleys chained, by Tyrians skill,
Firmly at length, accomplished his will;
Seven days and nights, his Host without least stay,
Was marching over this interrupting Bay;
And in Abidus Plains, must ring his Forces,
He glories in his Squadrens, and his Horses;
Long viewing them, thought it great happiness,
One King, so many Subjects should possess;
But yet this goodly sight produced tears,
That none of these should live a hundred years:
What after did ensue, had he foreseen.
Of so long time, his thoughts had never been.
Of Artabanus he again demands,
How of this enterprise his thoughts now stands;
His answer was, both Land and Sea he feared,
Which was not vain, as it soon appeared:
But Xerxes resolute, to Thrace goes first,
His Host, who Lissus drinks to quench their thirst,
And for his Cattle, all Pissirus Lake
Was scarce enough, for each a draught to take.
Then marching to the straight Thermopyle,
The Spartan meets him, brave Leonade,
This 'twixt the Mountains lies (half Acre wide)
That pleasant Thessaly, from Greece divide;
Two days and nights a fight they there maintain,
Till twenty thousand Persians falls down slain;
And all that Army, then dismayed, had fled,
But that a Fugative discovered,
How part, might over the Mountains go about,
And wound the backs of those bold Warriors stout.
They thus behemm'd with multitude of foes,
Laid on more fiercely, their deep mortal blows;
None cries for quarter, nor yet seeks to run,
But on their ground they dye, each Mothers Son.
O noble Greeks, how now, degenerate?
Where is the valor, of your ancient State?
When as one thousand, could some Millions daunt;
Alas, it is Leonades you want!
This shameful Victory cost Xerxes dear,
Amongst the rest, two brothers he lost there;
And as at Land, so he at Sea was crossed,
Four hundred stately Ships by storms was lost,
Of Vessels small almost innumerable,
Them to receive, the Harbor was not able;
Yet thinking to out-match his foes at Sea,
Enclosed their Fleet in the streights of Eubea;
But they as valiant by Sea, as Land,
In this Straight, as the other, firmly stand.
And Xerxes mighty Galleys battered so,
That their split sides, witnessed his overthrow;
Yet in the Streights of Salamis he tried,
If that small number his great force could bide;
But he, in daring of his forward foe,
Received there, a shameful overthrow.
Twice beaten thus by Sea, he warred no more:
But Phocians Land, he then wasted sore:
They no way able to withstand his force,
That brave Thymistocles takes this wise course,
In secret manner word to Xerxes sends,
That Greeks to break his bridge shortly intends;
And as a friend, warns him, what e're he do,
For his retreat, to have an eye thereto:
He hearing this, his thoughts, and course home bended,
Much, that which never was intended!
Yet before he went, to help out his expense,
Part of his Host to Delphos sent from thence,
To rob the wealthy Temple of Apollo,
But mischief, Sacrilege does ever follow;
Two mighty Rocks, brake from Parnassus Hill,
And many thousands of these men did kill;
Which accident, the rest affrighted so,
With empty hands they to their Master go;
He seeing all thus tend unto decay,
Thought it his best, no longer for to stay;
Three hundred thousand yet he left behind,
With his Mardon'us, judex of his mind;
Who for his sake, he knew, would venture far,
(Chief instigater of this hopeless War;)
He instantly to Athens sends for peace,
That all Hostility might thence-forth cease;
And that with Xerxes they would be at one,
So should all favor to their State be shown.
The Spartans, fearing Athens would agree,
As had Macedon, Thebes, and Thessalie,
And leave them out, the shock for to sustain,
By their Ambassador they thus complain;
That Xerxes quarrel was against Athens State,
And they had helped them, as confederate;
If now in need, they should thus fail their friends,
Their infamy would last till all things ends:
But the Athenians, this peace detest,
And thus replied unto Mardon's request;
That whilst the Sun did run his endless course,
Against the Persians they would use their force.
Nor could the brave Ambassador be sent,
With Rhetoric, to gain better complement:
Though of this Nation borne a great Commander,
No less then Grand-sire to great Alexander.
Mardonius proud, hearing this answer stout,
To add unto his numbers, lays about,
And of those Greeks, which by his skill he would won,
He fifty thousand joins unto his own;
The other Greeks, which were confederate,
One hundred thousand, and ten thousand make.
The Beotian Fields, of war, the seats,
Where both sides exercised their manly feats;
But all their controversies to decide,
For one maine Battle shortly, both provide;
The Athenians could but forty thousand arm,
For other Weapons, they had none would harm;
But that which helped defects, and made them bold,
Was Victory, by Oracle foretold:
Ten days these Armies did each other face,
Mardonius finding victuals wast apace,
No longer dared, but fiercely onset gave,
The other not a hand, nor sword will wave,
Till in the entrails of their Sacrifice,
The signal of their victory does rise;
Which found, like Greeks they fight, the Persians fly,
And troublesome Mardonius now must dye:
All Is lost, and of three hundred thousand men,
Three thousand scapes, for to run home again;
For pity, let those few to Xerxes go,
To c^rtifie this final overthrow.
Same day, the small remainder of his Fleet,
The Grecians at Mytale in Asia meet,
And there so utterly they wracked the same,
Scarce one was left, to carry home the fame;
Thus did the Greeks destroy, consume, disperce,
That Army, which did fright the Universe;
Scorned Xerxes, hated for his cruelty.
Yet ceases not to act his villainy:
His brothers wife, sollicites to his will;
The chaste, and beauteous Dame, refuses still.
Some years by him in this vain suit was spent,
Yet words, nor gifts, could win him least content:
Nor matching of her daughter; to his son:
But she was still, as when it first begun.
When jealous Queen Amestris, of this knew,
She Harpy-like, upon the Lady flew:
Cut off her lilly breasts, her nose, and ears;
And leaves her thus, besmeared with blood, and tears
Straight comes her Lord, and finds his wife thus lie,
The sorrow of his heart, did close his eye:
He dying to behold, that wounding sight;
Where he had sometime gazed with great delight.
To see that face, where Rose and Lilly stood,
O're-flown with torrent of her ruby blood.
To see those breasts, where chastity did dwell,
Thus cut, and mangled by a hag of hell.
With laden heart unto the King he goes,
Tells as he could, his unexpressed woes,
But for his deep complaints; and showers of tears,
His brothers recompense was naught but jears:
The grieved Prince finding nor right, nor l^ve,
To Bactria his household did remove.
His wicked brother, after sent a crew,
Which him, and his, most barbarously there slew,
Unto such height did grow his cruelty,
Of life, no man had least security.
At last his Uncle, did his death conspire,
And for that end, his Eunuch he d^d hire.
Which wretch, him privately smothered in's bed,
But yet by search, he was found murdered,
The Artacanus hirer of this deed,
That from suspicion he might be freed,
Accused Darius, Xerxes eldest son,
To be the Author of the deed was done,
And by his craft, ordered the matter so,
That the poor innocent, to death must go.
But in short time, this wickedness was known,
For which he dyed, and not he alone.
But all his family was likewise slain,
Such Justice then, in Persia did remain,
The eldest son, thus immaturely dead,
The second was enthroned, in's fathers stead.
Artaxerxes Longimanus.
AMongst the Monarchs next, this Prince had place
The best that ever sprang of Cyrus race.
He first, war with revolting Egypt made.
To whom the perjured Grecians lent their aid,
Although to Xerxes, they not long before,
A league of amity, had sworn before.
Which had they kept, Greece had more nobly done,
Then when the world, they after overrun:
Greeks and Egyptians both, he overthrows,
And pays them now, according as he owes,
Which done, a sumptuous feast; makes like a King
Where ninescore days, are spent in banqueting,
His Princes, Nobles, and his Captains calls,
To be partakers in these festivalls.
His hangings, white, and green, and purple dye;
With gold and silver beds, most gorgiously.
The royal wine, in golden cups does pass,
To drink more then he list, none bidden was:
Queen Vashty also feasts, but before it is ended,
Alas, she from her Royalty's suspended.
And a more worthy, placed in her room,
By Memucan's advice, this was the doom.
What Hester was, and did, her story reed,
And how her Countrymen from spoil she freed.
Of Hamans fall, and Mordica's great rise;
The might of the Prince, the tribute on the Isles.
Unto this King Thymistocles did fly.
When under Ostracisme he did lie.
For such ingratitude, did Athens show
This valiant Knight, whom they so much did owe;
Such entertainment with this Prince he found,
That in all Loyalty his heart was bound;
The King not little joyful of this chance,
Thinking his Grecian wars now to advance.
And for that end, great preparation made,
Fair Attica, a third time to invade.
His Grand-sires old disgrace, did vex him sore,
His father Xerxes loss, and shame, much more,
For punishment, their breach of oath did call,
The noble Greek, now fit for general.
Who for his wrong, he could not choose but deem,
His Country, nor his Kindred would esteem,
Provisions, and season now being fit,
TO Thymistecles he does his war commit,
But he all injury, had soon forgate,
And to his Countrymen could bear no hate.
Nor yet disloyal to his Prince would prove,
To whom obliged, by favor, and by love;
Either to wrong, did wound his heart so sore,
To wrong himself by death, he chose before:
In this sad conflict, marching on his ways,
Strong poison took, and put an end to's days.
The King this noble Captain having lost,
Again dispersed, his new levied host.
'Rest of his time in peace he did remain;
And died the two and fortieth of his reign.
Daryus Nothus.
THree sons great Artaxerxes left behind;
The eldest to succeed, that was his mind.
But he, with his next brother fell at strife,
That naught appeased him, but his brothers life.
Then the surviver is by Nothus slain;
Who now sole Monarch, does of all remain,
These two lewd sons, are by hystorians thought,
To be by Hester, to her husband brought.
If they were hers, the greater was her moon;
That for such graceless wretches she did groan,
Disquiet Egypt, against this King rebels,
Drives out his garrison that therein dwells.
Joins with the Greeks, and so maintains their right,
For sixty years maugre the Persians might.
A second trouble, after this succeeds.
Which from remissness, in Asia proceeds
Amerges, whom their Viceroy he ordained
Revolts, having treasure, and people gained:
Invades the Country, and much trouble wrought,
Before to quietness things could be brought,
The King was glad, with Sparta to make peace,
So that he might, these tumults soon appease.
But they in Asia, must first restore
All Towns, held by his Ancestors before.
The King much profit reapeth, by these leagues,
Re-gaines his own, and then the Rebel breaks:
Whose forces by their help were overthrown,
And so each man again possessed his own.
The King, his sister, like Cambyses, wed;
More by his pride, then lust, thereunto led.
(For Persian Kings, did deem themselves so good,
No match was high enough, but their own blood,)
Two sons she bore, the youngest Cyrus named,
A hopeful Prince, whose worth is ever famed.
His father would no notice of that take;
Prefers his brother, for his birthrights sake.
But Cyrus scorns, his brothers feeble wit;
And takes more on him, then was judged fit.
The King provoked, sends for him to the Court,
Meaning to chastise him, in sharpest sort,
But in his slow approach, ere he came there;
His fathers death, did put an end to's fear.
Nothus reigned nineteen years, which run,
His large Dominions left, to's eldest son.
Artaxerxes Mnemon.
MNemon now fits upon his fathers Throne,
Yet doubts, all he injoyes, is not his own.
Still on his brother, casts a jealous eye,
Judging all is actions, tends to's injury.
Cyrus of the other side, weighs in his mind,
What helps, in's enterprise he is like to find,
His interest, in the Kingdom, now next heir,
More dear to's mother, then his brother far.
His brothers little love, like to be gone,
Held by his mothers intercession.
These and like motives, hurry him amain,
To win by force, what right could not obtain.
And thought 'it best, now in his mothers time,
By lesser steps, toward the top to climb;
If in his enterprise he should fall short,
She to the King, would make a fair report:
He hoped, if fraud, nor force the Crown could gain;
Her prevailence, a pardon might obtain.
From the Lieutenant first, he takes away,
Some Towns commodious in less Asia,
Pretending still, the profit of the King,
Whose rents and customs, duly he sent in.
The King finding, revenues now amended;
For what was done, seemed no whit offended.
Then next, the Lacedemons he takes to pay;
(One Greek could make ten Persians run away)
Great care was his pretense, those Soldiers stout,
The Rovers in Pisidia, should drive out.
But least some worser news should fly to Court,
He meant himself to carry the report.
And for that end, five hundred Horse he chose,
With posting speed toward the King he goes;
But fame more quick, arrives ere he came there,
And fills the Court with tumult, and with fear.
The young Queen, and old, at bitter jars:
The one accused the other, for these wars:
The wife, against the mother, still does cry
To be the Author of conspiracy.
The King dismayed, a mighty Host does raise;
Which Cyrus hears, and so fore-slowes his pace:
But as he goes, his Forces still augments,
Seven hundred Greeks now further his intents:
And others to be warmed by this new sun,
In numbers from his brother daily run.
The fearful King, at last, musters his Forces;
And counts nine hundred thousand foot and horses:
And yet with these, had neither heart, nor grace;
To lo^k his manly brother in the face.
Three hundred thousand, yet to Syria sent;
To keep those streights, to hinder his intent.
Their Captain hearing, but of Cyrus name.
Ran back, and quire abandoned the same,
Abrccomes, was this base cowards name,
Not worthy to be known, but for his shame:
This place was made, by nature, and by art;
Few might have kept it, had they but a heart.
Cyrus dispair'd, a passage there to gain;
So hired a fleet, to waft him ore the Maine,
The mazed King, was now about to fly;
To the utmost parts of Bactr'a, and there lie.
Had not a Captain; sore against his will;
By reason, and by force, detained him still.
Up then with speed, a mighty trench he throws,
For his security, against his foes.
Six yards the depth, and forty miles the length,
Some fifty, or else sixty foot in breadth.
Yet for his brothers coming, durst not stay,
He surest was, when furthest out of the way.
Cyrus finding his camp, and no man there;
Rejoiced not a little at his fear.
On this, he and his Soldiers cuelesse grow,
And here, and there, in carts their Arms they throw,
When suddenly their Scouts come in and cry,
Arm, arm, the King is now approaching nigh;
In this confusion, each man as he might,
Gets on his arms, arayes himself for fight;
And ranged stood, by great Euphrates side,
The brunt of that huge multitude to bide.
Of whose great numbers, their intelligence,
Was gathered by the dust that rose from thence:
Which like a mighty cloud darkened the sky;
And black and blacker grew, as they drew nigh
But when their order, and silence they saw;
That, more then multitudes, their hearts did awe:
For tumult and confusion they expected,
And all good discipline to be neglected.
But long under their fears, they did not stay,
For at first charge the Persians ran away.
Which did such courage to the Grecians bring,
They straight adored Cyrus for their King,
So had he been, and got the victory,
Had not his too much valor put him by.
He with six hundred, on a squadron set,
Of six thousand, wherein the King was yet;
And brought his Soldiers on so gallantly,
They were about to leave their King and fly,
Whom Cyrus spied, cries cut, I see the man,
And with a full career, at him he ran.
But in his speed a Dart hit him in the eye,
Down Cyrus falls, and yields to destiny;
His Host in chase, knows not of his disaster,
But treads down all, for to advance their Master;
At last his head they spy upon a Lance,
Who knows the sudden change made by this chance;
Senseless and mute they stand, yet breath out groans,
Nor Gorgons like to this, transformed to stones.
After this trance, revenge, new spirits blew,
And now more eagerly their foes pursue,
And heaps on heaps, such multitudes they laid,
Their arms grew weak, through slaughters that they made.
The King unto a country Village flies,
And for a while unkingly there he lies;
At last, displayes his Ensign on a Hill,
Hoping with that to make the Greeks stand still,
But was deceived; to it they make amain,
The King upon the spur, runs back again;
But they too faint, still to pursue their game,
Being Victors often, now to their Camp they came;
Nor lackt they any of their number small,
Nor wound received, but one among them all:
The King with his dispersed also incampt.
With infamy upon each forehead stamped;
After a while his thoughts he re-collects,
Of this days cowardice, he fears the effects;
If Greeks unto their Countrymen declare,
What dastards in the field the persians are;
They soon may come, and place one in his Throne,
And rob him both of Scepter, and of Crown;
That their return be stopped, he judged was best,
That so Europians might no more molest;
Forthwith he sends to's Tent, they straight address,
And there all wait his mercy, weaponlesse;
The Greeks with scorn reject his proud commands;
Asking no favor, where they feared no bands.
The troubled King, his Herald sends again,
And sues for peace, that they his friends remain;
The smiling Greeks reply, they first must bait,
They were too hungry to capitulate;
The King great store of all provision sends,
And courtesy to the utmost he pretends;
Such terror on the Persians then did fall,
They quaked, to hear them, to each other call.
The King's perplexed, there dares not let them stay,
And fears as much to let them march away;
But Kings never want such as can serve their will,
Fit instruments to accomplish what is ill;
As Tyssaphern, knowing his Masters mind,
Invites their chief Commander, as most kind;
And with all Oaths, and deepest flattery,
Gets them to treat with him in privacy,
But violates his honor, and his word,
And Villaine-like, there puts them to the sword.
The Greeks, having their valiant Captains slain,
Chose Xenophon, to lead them home again;
But Tyssaphern did what he could devise,
To stop the way in this their enterprise;
But when through difficulties still they brake,
He sought all sustinance from them to take,
Before them burnt the country as they went,
So to deprive them of all nourishment;
But on they march, through hunger, and through cold,
Over mountains, rocks, and hills, as Lions bold;
Nor rivers course, nor Persians force could stay,
But on to Trabezond they kept their way;
There was of Greeks, settled a Colony,
These after all, received them joyfully:
There for some time they were, but whilst they staid,
Into Bithynia often in rodes made;
The King afraid what further they might do,
Unto the Spartan Admiral did sue,
Straight to transport them to the other side,
For these incursions he durst not abide;
So after all their travel, danger, pain,
In peace they saw their Native soil again.
The Greeks now (as the Persian King suspects)
The Asiatiques, cowardice detects;
The many victories themselves did gain,
The many thousand Persians they had slain;
And now their Nation with facility,
Might win the universal Monarchy;
They then Dercilladas, send with an Host,
Who with his Spartans on the Asian coast;
Town after town, with small resistance take,
Which rumor makes great Artaxerxes quake;
The Greeks by this success, encouraged so,
Agesilaus himself does over-goe,
By the Kings Lieutenant is encountered,
But Tyssaphernes with his Army fled;
Which overthrow incensed the King so sore,
That Tyssapherne must be Viceroy no more;
Tythraustes now is placed in his stead,
And has command, to take the others head,
Of that false perjured wretch, this was the last,
Who of his cruelty made many taste,
Tythraustes trusts more to his wit then Arms,
And hopes by craft to quit his Masters harms;
He knows that many towns in Greece envies
The Spartans height, which now apace does rise;
To these he thirty thousand Tallents sent,
With suit, their force, against his foes be bent;
They to their discontent, receiving hire,
With broyls, and quarrels, sets all Greece on fire.
Agestilaus is called home with speed,
To defend, more then oflend, he had need.
They now lost all, and were a peace to make,
The Kings conditions they are forced to take;
Dissension in Greece continued long,
Til many a Captain fell, both wise, and strong,
Whose courage naught but death could ever tame,
Amongst these Epimanondas wants no fame;
Who had (as noble Raleigh does evince)
All the peculiar virtues of a Prince:
But let us leave these Greeks, to discord bent,
And turn to Persia, as is pertinent;
The King from foreign foes, and all at ease,
His homebred troubles seeks to appease;
The two Queens, by his means, 'gin to abate
Their former envy, and inveterate hare;
Then in voluptuousness he leads his life,
And weds his Daughter for a second wife;
His Mothers wicked counsel was the cause,
Who sooths him up, his own desires are Laws:
But yet for all his greatness, and long reign,
He must leave all, and in the pit remain;
Forty three years he rules, then turns to dust,
As all the mighty ones, have done, and must:
But this of him is worth the memory,
He was the Master of good Nehemie.
Darius Ochus.
GReat Artexerxes dead, Ochus succeeds,
Of whom no Record's extant of his deeds;
Was it because the Grecians now at war,
Made Writers work at home, they sought not far?
Or dealing with the Persian, now no more
Their Acts recorded not, as heretofore?
Or else, perhaps the deeds of Persian Kings
In after wars were burnt, amongst other things?
That three and twenty years he reigned, I find,
The rest is but conjecture of my mind.
Arsames, or Arses.
WHy Arsames his brother should succeed,
I can no reason give, cause none I read;
It may be thought, surely he had no Son,
So fell to him, which else it had not done:
What Acts he did, time has not now left pend,
But as it is thought, in him had Cyrus end:
Whose race long time had worn the Diadem,
But now is divolved, to another Stem.
Three years he reigned, as Chronicles express,
Then Natures debt he paid, quite Issue-lesse.
Darius Codomanus.
HOw this Darius did attain the Crown,
By favor, force, or fraud, is not set down:
If not (as is before) of Cyrus race,
By one of these, he must obtain the place.
Some writers say, that he was Arses son,
And that great Cyrus line, yet was not run,
That Ochus unto Arsames was father,
Which by some probabilities (seems rather;)
That son, and father, both were murdered
By one Bagoas, an Eunuch (as is sed.)
Thus learned Pemble, whom we may not slight,
But as before does (well read) Raleigh write,
Antd he that story reads, shall often find;
That several men, will have their several mind;
Yet in these differences, we may behold;
With our judicious learned Knight to hold.
And this amongst all is no controverted thing,
That this Darius was last Persian King,
Whose wars and losses we may better tell;
In Alexanders reign who did him quell,
How from the top of worlds felicity;
He fell to depth of greatest misery,
Whose honors, treasures, pleasures, had short s^ay;
One deluge came, and swept them all away;
And in the sixth year of his hapless reign,
Of all, did scarce his winding sheet retain.
And last; a sad catastrophe to end,
Him, to the grave, did ^raytor Bessus send.
The end of the Persian Monarchy.
The third Monarchy was the Grecian, beginning under Alexander the Great, in
the 112 Olimpiad.
GReat Alexander, was wise Phillips son,
He, to Amyntas, Kings of Macedon;
The cruel, proud, Olimpias, was his mother,
She to the rich Molossians King, was daughter.
This Prince (his father by Pausanias slain)
The twenty first of 's age, began to reign.
Great were the gifts of nature, which be had;
His Education, much to these did add.
By Art, and Nature both, he was made fit,
T'accomplish that, which long before was writ.
The very day of his nativity,
To the ground was burnt, Diana's Temple high,
An Omen, to their near approaching woe;
Whose glory to the Earth, this Prince did throw,
His rule to Greece, he scorned should be confined:
The universe, scarce bounds his large vast mind;
This is the hee-goat, which from Grecia came,
Who ran in fury, on the Persian Ram,
That broke his horns, that threw him on the ground,
To save him from his might, no man was found.
Phillip, on this great conquest had an eye;
But death did terminate, those thoughts so high.
The Greeks had chose him Captain General,
Which honor to his son, now did befall.
(For as worlds Monarch, now we speak not on,
But as the King of little Macedon)
Restless both day and night, his heart now was,
His high resolves which way to bring to pass:
Yet for a while, in Grecce is forced to stay,
Which makes each moment seem, more then a day:
Thebes, and old Athens, both against him rebel,
But he their mutinies, full soon does quell.
This done, against all right, and natures laws,
His kinsmen puts to death without least cause;
That no combustion in his absence be,
In seeking after Soveraignity:
And many more, whom he suspects will climb,
Now taste of death, (least they deserv't in time)
Nor wonder is it, if he in blood begin,
For cruelty, was his parentall sin.
Thus eased now, of troubles, and of fears;
His course to Asi^, next Spring he steers.
Leaves sage Antipater at home to sway,
And through the Hellispont, his ships make way.
Coming to land, his dart on shear he throws,
Then with alacrity he after goes:
Thirty two thousand made up his foot force,
To these were joined, five thousand goodly horse.
Then on he marched, in's way he veiw'd old Troy;
And on Achillis Tomb, with wondrous joy,
He offered, and for good success did pray
To him, his mothers Ancestor (men say.)
When news of Alexander, came to the Court,
To scorn at him, Darius had good sport:
Sends him a frothy, and contemptuous letter,
Styles him disloyal servant, and no better;
Reproves him, for his proud audacity;
To lift his hand, against such a Monarchy.
Then to his Lieutenant, in Asia sends,
That he be taken alive, (for he intends)
To whip him well with rods, and then to bring,
That boy so mallepart, before the King.
Ah! fond vain man, whose pen was taught ere while,
In lower terms to write a higher style,
To the river Granicke, Alexander hyes,
Which twixt Phrigia, and Propontis lies.
The Persians for encounter ready sland,
And think to keep his men from off the land,
Those banks so steep, the Greeks, now scramble up
And beat the coward Persians from the top,
And twenty thousand, of their lives bereave,
Who in their backs did all their wounds receive
This Victory did Alexander gain;
With loss of thirty sour, of his there slain:
Sardis, then he, and Ephesus, did gain,
Where stood of late Diana's, wondrous Phane,
And by Parmenio (of renowned fame)
Miletus, and Pamphilia overcame,
Hallicarnassus and Pisidia
He for his master takes, with Lycia,
Next Alexander marched, toward the black sea;
And easily takes old Gordium in his way;
(Of Asse-eard) Midas, once the regal seat,
Whose touch turned all to gold, yea even his meat:
There the Prophetic knot, he cuts in twain;
Which who so did, must Lord of all remain,
Now news, of Memnons death (the Kings Viceroy)
To Alexanders heart's no little joy.
For in that Peer, more valor did abide;
Then in Darius multitudes beside:
There Arsemes was placed, yet durst not stay;
But sets one in his room, and ran away.
His substitute, as fearful as his master,
Goes after too, and leaves all to disaster.
Now Alexander all Cilicia takes:
No stroke for it he struck, their hearts so quakes.
To Greece he thirty thousand talents sends;
To raise more force, for what he yet intends.
And on he goes Darius for to meet;
Who came with thousand thousands at his feet,
Though some there be, and that more likely, write;
He but four hundred thousand had to fight,
The rest attendants, which made up no less;
(Both sexes there) was almost numberless.
For this wise King, had brought to see the sport;
Along with him, the Ladies of the Court.
His mother old, beauteous wife, and daughters,
It seems to see the Macedonians slaughters.
Sure its beyond my time, and little Art;
To show, how great Darius played his part:
The splendour, and the pomp, he marched in,
For since the world, was no such Pageant seen.
Oh 'twas a goodly sight, there to behold;
The Persians clad in silk, and glittering gold;
The stately Horses trapt, the lances guilt;
As if they were, now all to run at tilt.
The Holy fire, was borne before the Host:
(For Sun and Fire the Persians worship most)
The Priests in their strange habit follow after;
An object not so much of fear, as laughter.
The King sat in a chariot made of gold,
With Robes and Crown, most glorious to behold.
And over his head, his golden gods on high;
Support a party colored canopy.
A number of spare horses next were led,
Least he should need them, in his chariots stead.
But they that saw him in this state to lie;
Would think he neither thought to fight nor fly,
He fifteen hundred had like women dressed,
For so to fright the Greeks he judged was best,
Their golden Ornaments so to set forth,
Would ask more time, then were their bodies worth.
Great Sisigambis, she brought up the Rear;
Then such a world of Wagons did appear,
Like several houses moving upon wheels:
As if she would drawn, whole Sushan at her heels.
This brave Virago, to the King was mother;
And as much good she did, as any other.
Now least this Gold, and all this goodly stuff,
Had not been spoil, and booty rich enough,
A thousand Mules, and Came^ls ready wait.
Laden with gold, with Jewels and with Plate,
For sure Darius thought, at the first sight,
The Greeks would all adore, and would none fight.
But when both Armies met, he might behold,
That valor was more worth then Pearls, or gold,
And how his wealth served but for baits to allure,
Which made his overthrow more fierce, and sure.
The Greeks come on, and with a gallant grace,
Let fly their Arrows, in the Persians face;
The cowards feeling this sharp stinging charge,
Most basely run, and left their King at large,
Who from his golden Coach is glad to alight,
And cast away his Crown, for swifter flight;
Of late-like some immovable he lay,
Now finds both legs, and Horse, to run away;
Two hundred thousand men that day were slain,
And forty thousand Prisoners also taken;
Besides, the Queens, and Ladies of the Court,
If Curtius be true, in his report.
The Regal ornaments now lost, the treasure
Divided at the Macedomans pleasure.
Yet all this grief, this loss, this overthrow,
Was but beginning of his future woe;
The Royal Captives, brought to Alexander,
T'ward them, demeaned himself like a Commander;
For though their beauties were unparalled
Conquered himself (now he had conquered)
Preserved their honor, used them courteously,
Commands, no man should do them injury,
And this to A'exander is more a fame,
Then that the Persian King he over-came;
Two hundred eighty Greeks he lost in fight,
By too much heat, not wounds (as Authors write)
No sooner had this Captain won the field,
But all Th^nicia to his pleasures yield;
Of which, the Government he does commit
Unto Parmenio, of all, most fit;
Darius now, more humble then before,
Writes unto Alexander, to restore
Those mournful Ladies, from captivity,
For whom he offers him a ransom high;
But down his haughty stomach could not bring,
To give this Conqueror, the style of King;
His Letter Alexander does disdain,
And in short terms, sends this reply again;
A King he was, and that not only so,
But of Darius King, as he should know.
Now Alexander unto Tire does go,
(His valor, and his victories they know)
To gain his love, the Tyrians do intend,
Therefore a Crown, and great provisions send;
Their present he receives with thankfulness,
Desires to offer unto Hercules,
Protector of their Town; by whom defended,
And from whom also, lineally descended:
But they accept not this, in any wise,
Least he intend more fraud, then sacrifice,
Sent word, that Hercules his Temple stood,
In the old town (which now lay like a wood)
With this reply, he was so sore enraged,
To win their town, his honor he engaged;
And now, as Babels King did once before,
He leaves not, till he makes the sea firm sho^r;
But far less cost, and time, he does expend,
The former ruins, help to him now lend;
Besides, he had a Navy at command,
The other by his men fetched all by Land;
In seven months space he takes this lofty town,
Whose glory, now a second time's brought down;
Two thousand of the chief he crucified,
Eight thousand by the sword now also died,
And thirteen thousand Gally-slaves he made,
And thus the Tyrians for mistrust were paid,
The rule of this he to Philotas gave,
Who was the Son of that Parmenio brave;
Cilicia he to Socrates does give,
For now is the time, Captains like Kings may live;
For that which ea^ily comes, as freely goes;
Zidon he on Ephestion bestows:
He scorns to have one worse then had the other,
And therefore gives this Lord-ship to another.
Ephestion now, has the command of the Fleet,
And must at Gaza, Alexander meet;
Darius finding troubles still increase,
By his Ambassadors now sues for peace:
And lays before great Alexanders eyes,
The dangers, difficulties, like to rise;
First, at Euphrates, what he is like to abide,
And then at Tigris, and Araxis side:
These he may escape, and if he so desire,
A league of friendship make, firm, and entire;
His eldest Daughter, (him) in marriage offers,
And a most Princely Dowry with her proffers;
All those rich Kingdoms large, which do abide
Betwixt the H^lles^ont, and Hallis side;
But he with scorn, his courtesy rejects,
And the distressed King no way respects;
Tells him, these proffers great (in truth were none)
For all he offered now, was but his own;
But, quoth Parmenio, (that brave Commander)
Was I as great, as is great Alexander,
Darius offers I would not reject,
But the Kingdoms, and the Ladies, soon accept;
To which, brave Alexander did reply,
And so if I Parmenio were, would I.
He now to Gaza goes, and there does meet
His favorite Ephestion, with his fleet;
Where valiant Betis, does defend the town,
(A loyal Subject to Darius Crown)
For more repulse, the Grecians here abide,
Then in the Persian Monarchy beside;
And by these walls, so many men were slain,
That Greece must yield a fresh supply again;
But yet, this well defended town is taken,
(For 'twas decreed, that Empire should be shaken)
The Captain taken, had holes bored through his feet,
And by command was drawn through every street,
To imitate Achilies (in his shame)
Who did the like to Hector (of more fame)
What, have thou lost thy late magnanimity?
Can Alexander deal thus c^uelly?
Since valor, with Heroyicks is renowned,
Though in an enemy it should be found;
If of thy future fame thou had regard,
Why did not heap up honor, and reward?
From Gaza, to Jerusalem he goes,
But in no hostile way (as I suppose)
Him in his Priestly Robes, high Jaddus meets,
Whom with great reverence Alexander greets;
The Priest shows him good Daniels Prophecy,
How he should overthrow this Monarchy;
By which he was so much encouraged,
No future dangers he did ever dread.
From thence, to fruitful Egypt marched with speed,
Where happily in's wars he did succeed;
To see how fast he gained, is no small wonder,
For in few days he brought that Kingdom under.
Then to the Phane of Jupiter, he went,
For to be called a god, was his intent;
The Pagan Priest through hire, or else mistake,
The Son of Jupiter did straight him make:
He Diabolical must needs remain,
That his humanity will not retain;
Now back to Egypt goes, and in few days,
Fair Alexandria from the ground does raise;
Then settling all things in less Asia,
In Syria, Egypt, and Phoenicia;
Unto Euphrates marched, and over goes,
For no man to resist his valor shows;
Had Betis now been there, but with his Band,
Great Alexander had been kept from Land;
But as the King is, so's the multitude,
And now of valor both were destitute;
Yet he (poor Prince) another Host does muster,
Of Persians, Scithians, Indians, in a cluster;
Men but in shape, and name, of valor none,
Fit for to blunt the swords of Macedon;
Two hundred fifty thousand by account,
Of Horse, and Foot, this Army did amount;
For in his multitudes his trust still lay,
But on their fortitude he had small stay;
Yet had some hope, that on that eeven plain,
His numbers might the victory obtain.
About this time, Darius beauteous Queen,
Who had long travail, and much sorrow seen,
Now bids the world adieu, her time being spent,
And leaves her woeful Lord for to lament.
Great Alexander mourns, as well as he,
For this lost Queen (though in captivity)
When this sad news (at first) Darius hears,
Some injury was offered, he fears;
But when informed, how royally the King
Had used her, and hers, in every thing,
He prays the immortal gods, for to reward
Great Alexander, for this good regard;
And if they down, his Monarchy will throw,
Let them on him, that dignity bestow:
And now for peace he sues, as once before,
And offers all he did, and Kingdoms more;
His eldest Daughter, for his Princely Bride,
(Nor was such match, in all the world beside)
And all those Countries, which (betwixt) did lie,
Phenisian Sea, and great Euphrates high,
With fertile Egypt, and rich Syria,
And all those Kingdoms in less Asia;
With thirty thousand Tallents, to be paid
For his Queen Mother, and the royal Maid;
And till all this be well performed, and sure,
Ochus his Son a hostage shall endure.
To this, stout Alexander, gives no ear,
No, though Parmenio plead, he will not hear;
Which had he done (perhaps) his fame had kept,
Nor infamy had waked, when he had slept;
For his unlimited prosperity,
Him boundless made, in vice, and cruelty;
Thus to Darius he writes back again,
The Firmament two Suns cannot contain;
Two Monarchies on Earth cannot abide,
Nor yet two Monarchs in one World reside;
The afflicted King, finding him set to jar,
Prepares against to morrow for the war;
Parmenio, Alexander wished, that night,
To force his Camp, so put them all to flight;
For tumult in the dark does cause most dread,
And weakness of a foe is covered;
But he disdained to steal a victory,
The Sun should witness of his valor be:
Both Armies meet, Greeks fight, the Persians run,
So make an end, before they well begun;
Forty five thousand Alexander had,
But it is not known what slaughters here they made,
Some write, the other had a million, some more,
But Quintus Curtius, as was said before.
At Arbela, this victory was gained,
And now with it, the town also obtained.
Darius stripped of all, to Media came,
Accompanied with sorrow, fear, and shame;
At Arbela left, his ornaments, and treasure,
Which Alexander deals, as suits his pleasure.
This Conqueror now goes to Babylon,
Is entertained with joy, and pompous train,
With showers of Flowers, the streets along are strown,
And Insence burnt, the silver Altars on;
The glory of the Castle he admires,
The firm foundations, and the lofty spires;
In this a mass of gold, and treasure lay,
Which in few hours was carried all away;
With greedy eyes, he views this City round,
Whose fame throughout the world, was so renowned;
And to possess, he counts no little bliss,
The Towers, and Bowers, of proud Semiramis:
Though worn by time, and razed by foes full sore,
Yet old foundations showed, and somewhat more;
With all the pleasures that on earth was found,
This City did abundantly abound;
Where four and thirty days he now does stay,
And gives himself to banqueting, and play:
He, and his Soldiers, wax effeminate,
And former Discipline begins to hate;
Whilst revelling at Babylon, he lies,
Antipater, from Greece, sends great supplies;
He then to Sushan goes, with his fresh bands,
But needs no force, it is rendered to his hands;
He likewise here a world of treasure found,
For 'twas the seat of Persian Kings renowned;
Here stood the Royal houses of delight,
Where Kings have shown their glory, wealth, and might;
The sumptuous Palace of Queen Hester here,
And of good Mordecai, her Kinsman dear;
Those purple hangings, mixed with green, and white,
Those beds of gold, and couches of delight,
And furniture, the richest of all Lands,
Now falls into the Macedonians hands.
From Sushan, to Persapolis he goes,
Which news does still augment Darius woes;
In his approach, the Governor sends word,
For his receipt with joy, they all accord;
With open Gates, the wealthy town did stand,
And all in it was at his high command;
Of all the Cities, that on Earth was found;
None like to this in riches did abound.
Though Babylon was rich, and Sushan too;
Y^^ to compare with this, they might not do.
Here lay the bulk, of all those precious things;
Which did pertain unto the Persian Kings.
For when the Soldiers, had rifled their pleasure,
And taken money, plate, and golden treasure;
Statues of gold, and silver numberless,
Yet after all, as stories do express.
The share of Alexander did amount,
To a hundred thousand Tallents by account.
Here of his own, he sets a Garrison,
(As first at Sushan, and at Babylon)
On their old Governors, titles he laid;
But on their faithfulness, he never staid:
Their charge, gave to his Captains (as most just)
For such revolters false, what Prince will trust:
The pleasures and the riches of this town,
Now makes this King, his virtues all to drown.
He walloweth now, in all licenciousnesse,
In pride, and cruelty, to the highest excess.
Being inflamed with wine upon a season,
(Filled with madness, and quite void of reason)
He at a bold, base Strumpets, lewd desire;
Commands to set this goodly town on fire.
Parmenio wise, entreats him to desist,
And lays before his eyes, if he persist
His names dishonor, loss unto his State.
And just procuring of the Persians hate.
But deaf to reason, (bent to have his will;)
Those stately streets with raging flames does sil,
Now to Darius, he directs his way,
Who was retired, and gone to Media.
(And there with sorrows, fears, and cares surrounded)
Had now his fourth, and last Army compounded,
Which forty thousand made; but his intent,
Was straight in Bactria these to augment,
But hearing, Alexander was so near;
Thought now this once, to try his fortunes here,
Choosing rather an honorable death:
Then still with infamy, to draw his breath.
But Bessus false, who was his chief Commander;
Persuades him not to fight, with Alexander.
With sage advice, he lays before his eyes,
The little hope, of profit like to rise.
If when h^'d multitudes, the day he lost;
Then with so few, how likely to be crossed.
This counsel, for his safety, he pretended,
But to deliver him to's foes, intended.
Next day this treason, to Darius known,
Transported fore, with grief and passion;
Grinding his teeth, and plucking off his hair,
Sat down overwhelmed, with sorrow, and despair,
Bidding his servant Artabassus true;
Look to himself, and leave him to that crew;
Who was of hopes, and comfort quite bereft;
And of his Guard, and Servitors now left.
Straight Bessus comes, and with his traitorous hands,
Lays hold on's Lord, and binding him with bands.
Into a cart him throws, covered with hides;
Who wanting means t'resi^^, these wrong's a bides.
Then draws the Cart along, with chains of gold;
In more dispight, the thrawled Prince to hold.
And thus to Alexander, on he goes,
Great recompense, in's thoughts, he did propose;
But some detesting, this his wicked fact,
To Alexander fly, and told this act;
Who doubling of his march, posts on amain,
Darius from those Traitors han^s to gain;
Bessus gets knowledge, his disloyalty,
Had Alexanders wrath incensed high;
Whose Army now, was almost within sight,
His hopes being dashed, prepares himself for flight:
Unto Darius, first he brings a Horse,
And bids him, save himself, by speedy course:
This w^full King, his courtesy refuses,
Whom thus the execrable wretch abuses:
By throwing Darts, gives him his mortal wound,
Then slew his servants, that were faithful found;
Yea, wounds the beasts (that drew him) unto death,
And leaves him thus, to gasp our his last breath.
( Bessus, his Partn^r in this Tragedy,
Was the false Governor of ^edia)
This done, they with their Host, soon speed away,
To hide themselves, remote, in Bactria;
Da^ius b^th'd in blood, sends out his groans,
Invokes the heavens, and earth, to hear his moanes;
His lost felicity did greive him sore,
But this unheard of injury much more;
Yea, above all, that neither ear, nor eye,
Should hear, nor see, his groans, and misery:
As thus he lay, Pol stratus a Greek,
Wearied with his long march, did water seek,
So chanced these bloody Horses to espy,
Whose wounds had made their skins of purple dye;
To them he goes, and looking in the Cart,
Finds poor Darius, peirced to the heart;
Who not a little cheered, to have some eye,
The witness of his dying misery:
Prays him, to Alexander to commend,
The just revenge of this his woeful end;
And not to pardon such disloyalty,
Of treason, murder, and base cruelty.
If not, because Darius thus did pray,
Yet that succeeding Kings in safety may
Their lives enjoy, their crowns, and dignity,
And not by Traitors hands untimely dye.
He also sends his humble thankfulness,
For all that Kingly Grace he did expre^^e,
To's Mother, Children dear, and Wife now gone,
Which made their long restraint, seem to be none;
Praying the immortal gods, that Sea, and Land,
Might be subjected to his royal hand;
And that his rule as far extended be,
As men, the rising, setting Sun shall see.
This said, the Greek for water does entreat,
To quench his thirst, and to allay his heat;
Of all good things (quoth he) once in my power,
I Have nothing left, at this my dying hour;
Thy pity, and compassion to reward,
Wherefore the gods requite thy kind regard.
This said, his fainting breath did fleet away,
And though a Monarch once, now lies like clay;
Yea, thus must every Son of Adam lie,
Though gods on earth, like Sons of men shall dye.
Now to the East great Alexander goes,
To see if any dare his might oppose;
(For scarce the world, or any bounds thereon,
Could bound his boundless, fond ambition)
Such as submits, he does again restore,
And makes their riches, and their honors more;
On Artabasus more then all bestowed,
For his fidelity to 's Master showed;
Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons, now brought
Her train to Alexander (as it is thought)
Though some of reading best, and soundest mind,
Such country there, nor yet such people find.
Then tell her errand, we had better spare
To the ignorant, her title may declare.
As Alexander in his greatness grows,
So daily of his virtues does he lose;
He baseness counts his former clemency,
And not beseeming such a dignity;
His past sobriety does also hate,
As most incompatible to his stare;
His temperance, is but a sordid thing,
No ways becoming such a mighty King;
His greatness now he takes, to represent,
His fancied gods, above the firmament,
And such as showed but reverence before,
Are strictly now commanded to adore;
With Fersian Robes, himself does dignifie,
Charging the same on his Nobility;
His manners, habit, gestures, now does fashion,
After that conquered, and luxurious Nation;
His Captains, that were virtuously inclined,
Grieved at this change of manners, and of mind:
The ruder sort, did openly deride
His fained Deity, and foolish pride:
The certainty of both comes to his ears,
But yet no notice takes, of what he hears;
With those of worth, he still desires esteem,
So heaps up gifts, his credit to redeem;
And for the rest new wars, and travels finds,
That other matters may take up their minds.
Then hearing, Bessus makes himself a King,
Intends with speed, that Traitor down to bring;
Now that his Host from luggage might be free,
And no man with his burden, burdened be,
Commands forthwith, each man his fardle bring,
Into the Marketplace, before the King;
Which done, sets fire upon those costly spoils
The recompense of travels, wars, and toyls;
And thus unwisely, in one raging fume,
The wealth of many Cities does consume:
But marvel it is, that without muteny,
The Soldiers should let pass this injury;
Nor wonder less, to Readers may it bring,
For to observe the rashness of the King.
Now with his Anny, does he have away,
False Bessus to find out, in Bactria;
But fore distressed for water, in their march,
The drought, and heat, their bodies much does parch;
At length, they came to the River Oxus brink,
Where most immoderatly these thirsty drink;
This more mortality to them did bring,
Then did their wars, against the Persian King.
Here Alexmder's almost at a stand,
How to pass over, and gain the other Land;
For Boats here is none, nor near it any wood,
To make them rafes, to waft them over the flood;
But he that was resolved in his mind,
Would by some means a transportation find;
So from his carriages the Hides he takes,
And stuffing them with straw, he bundles makes;
On these, together tied, in fix days space,
They all pass over, to the other place;
Had Bessus had but valor to his will,
He easily might have made them stay there still;
But coward, durst not fight, nor could he fly,
Hated of all, for's former treachery,
Is by his own, now bound in Iron chains,
(A collar of the same his neck contains)
And in this sort, they rather drag, then bring,
This Malefactor vild, before the King,
Who to Darius Brother gives the wretch,
With wra^ks, and tortures, every limb to stretch.
Here was of Greeks, a town in Bactria,
Whom Xerxes from their country led away;
These not a little joy'd, this day to see,
Wherein their own had soveraignity.
And now revived with hopes, held up their head,
From bondage, long to be infranchised;
But Alexander puts them to the sword,
Without cause, given by them, in deed, or word:
Nor sex, nor age, nor one, nor other spared,
But in his cruelty alike they shared;
Nor could he reason give, for this great wrong,
But that they had forgot their Mother Tongue.
Whilst thus he spent some time in Bactria,
And in his Camp strong, and securely lay,
Down from the mountains twenty thousand came,
And there most fiercely set upon the same;
Repelling these two marks of honor got,
Imprinted deep in's leg, by Arrows shot;
And now the Bactrians against him rebel,
But he their stubbornness full soon does quel;
From hence he to Jaxartis river goes,
Where Scithians rude, his valor does oppose,
And with their our cries, in a hideous sort,
Besets his Camp, or Military Court;
Of Darts, and Arrows, made so little spare,
They flew so thick they seemed to dark the air:
But soon the ^recians forced them to a flight,
Whose nokednesse could not endure their might;
Upon this Rivers banck in seventeen days,
A goodly City does completely raise;
Which Alexandria he does also name,
And furlongs sixty could not round the same.
His third supply, Antipa^er now sent,
Which did his former Army much augment,
And being an hund ed twenty thousand strong,
He enters now the India^ Kings among;
Those that submit, he does restore again.
Those that do not, both they, and theirs, are slain;
To age, nor sex, no pity does express,
But all fall by his sword, most merciless.
He to Nisa goes, by Bacchus built long since,
Whose feasts are celebrated by this Prince;
Nor had that drunken god, one that would take
His liquors more devoutly in, for's sake.
When thus, ten days, his brain with wine he would soaked,
And with delicious meats, his Pallat choked,
To the river Indus next, his course he bends,
Boats to prepare, Ephestion first he sends,
Who coming thither, long before his Lord;
Had to his mind, made all things now accord:
The Vessels ready were, at his command;
And Omphis, King of that part of the land:
Through his persuasion Alexander meets;
And as his Sovereign Lord, him humbly greets.
Fifty six Elephants he brings to's hands:
And tenders him the strength of all his lands,
Presents himself, there with a golden Crown,
And eighty Tallents to his Captains down.
But Alexander, caused him to behold;
He glory sought, no silver, nor yet gold;
His presents all, with thanks he does restore;
And of his own, a thousand Tallents more.
Thus all the Indian Kings, to him submit;
But Porus stout, who will not yield as yet;
To him does Alexander thus declare,
His pleasure is, that forthwith he repair
Unto his Kingdoms borders, and as due,
His Homage unto him as Sovereign do.
But Kingly Porus this brave answer sent,
That to attend him there, was his intent;
And come as well provided as be could,
But for the rest, his sword advise him should.
Great Alexander vexed at this reply,
Did more his valor then his Crown envy;
Is now resolved to pass Hilaspes flood,
And there his Sovereignty for to make good;
But on the banks does Porus ready stand,
For to receive him, when he comes to land;
A potent Army with him, like a King,
And ninety Elephants for war did bring;
Had Alexander such resistance seen,
On Tygris side, here now he had not been;
Within this spacious river, deep, and wide,
Did here, and there, Isles full of trees abide;
His Army Alexander does divide,
With Ptolomy, sends part of the the other side.
Porus encounters them, thinking all is there,
Then covertly, the rest gets over elsewhere;
But whilst the first he valiantly assayl'd,
The last set on his back, and so prevailed:
Yet work enough, here Alexander found,
For to the last, stout Porus kept his ground.
Nor was it dishonor, at the length to yield,
When Alexander strives to win the field,
His fortitude his Kingly foe commends;
Restores him, and his bounds further extends;
Eastward, now Alexander would go still,
But so to do, his Soldiers had no will;
Long with excessive travailes wearied,
Could by no means be further drawn, or led:
Yet that his fame might to posterity,
Be had in everlasting memory,
Does for his Camp a greater circuit take,
And for his Soldiers larger Cabins make;
His Maungers he erected up so high,
As never Horse his Provender could eye;
Huge Bridles made, which here, and there, he left,
Which might be found, and so for wonders kept:
Twelve Altars, he for Monuments then rears,
Whereon his acts, and travels, long appears;
But doubting, wearing Time would these decay,
And so his memory might fade away,
He on the fair Hidaspis pleasant side,
Two Cities built, his fame might there abide;
The first Nicea, the next ^u^ephalon,
Where he ^ntomb'd his st^tely stallion.
His fourth, and last supply, was hither sent,
Then down to Hidaspis with his Fleet he went;
Some time he after pent upon that shore,
Where one hundred Embissadours, or more,
Came with submission, from the Indian Kings
Bringing their Presents, rare, and precious things:
These, all he feasts in stare, on beds of gold,
His furniture most sumptuous to behold;
The meat, and drink, attendants, every thing,
To the utmost showed, the glory of a King;
With rich rewards, he sent them home again,
Acknowledged for their Masters Sovereign;
Then sailing South, and coming to the shore,
These obscure Nations yielded as before;
A City here he built, called by his name,
Which could not sound too often, with too much fame;
Hence sailing down by the mouth of Indus flood,
His Galleys stuck upon the sand, and mud;
Which the stout Macedonians mazed sore
Deprived ar once, the use of Sail, and Oar;
But well observing the nature of the ti^e,
Upon those Flats they did not long abide;
Passing fair Indus mouth, his course he stear'd,
To the coast which by Eu^hra^es mouth appeared;
Whose inlers near unto, he winter spent,
Unto his starved Soldiers small c^ntent;
By hunger, and by cold, so many slain,
That of them all, the fourth did scarce remain.
Thus Winter, Soldiers, and provision spent,
From hence he to Gedrosia went,
And thence he marched into Carmania,
So he at length drew near to Persia;
Now through these goodly countries as he past,
Much time in feasts, and ryoting does wast;
Then visits Cyrus Sepulcher in's way,
Who now obscure at Passagardis lay;
Upon his Monument his Robes he spread,
And set his Crown on his supposed head;
From hence to Babylon, some time there spent,
He at the last to royal Sushan went;
A Wedding Feast to's Nobles then he makes,
And Statirah, Darius daughter takes,
Her Sister gives to his Ephestion dear,
That by this match he might be yet more near.
He fourscore Persian Ladies also gave,
At the same time, unto his Captains brave;
Six thousand Guests he to this feast invites,
Whose Senses all, were glutted with delights:
It far exceeds my mean abilities,
To shadow forth these short felicities:
Spectators here, could scarce relate the story,
They were so wrapped with this external glory.
If an Ideall Paradise, a man should frame,
He might this feast imagine by the same.
To every Guest, a cup of gold he sends,
So after many days this Banquet ends.
Now, Alexanders conquests, all are done,
And his long travells past, and over-gone;
His virtues dead, buried, and all forgot,
But vice remains, to his eternal blot.
Amongst those, that of his cruelty did taste,
Philotas was not least, nor yet the last;
Accused, because he did not certify
The King of treason, and conspiracy;
Upon suspicion being apprehended,
Nothing was found, wherein he had offended;
His silence, guilt was, of such consequence,
He death deserved, for this so high offense;
But for his Fathers great deserts, the King,
His Royal pardon gave, for this same thing;
Yet is Philotas unto Judgment brought,
Must suffer, not for what he did, but thought:
His Master is Accuser, Judge, and King,
Who to the height does aggravate each thing;
Enveighs against his Father, now absent,
And's Brethren, whom for him their lives had spent;
But Philotas, his unpardonable crime,
Which no merit could obliterate, or time:
He did the Oracle of Jupiter deride,
By which his Majesty was deifi'd.
Philotas thus o're-charg'd, with wrong, and grief,
Sunk in despair, without hope of releif;
Feign would have spoke, and made his own defense,
The King would give no ear, but went from thence;
To his malicious foes delivers him,
To wreak their spite, and hate, on every limb.
Philotas after him sends out this cry,
Oh, Alexander, thy free clemency,
My foes exceeds in malice, and their hate,
Thy Kingly word can easily terminate;
Such torments great, as wit could first invent,
Or flesh, or life could bear, till both were spent
Are now inflicted on Parmenio's Son,
For to accuse himself, as they had done;
At last he did: So they were justified,
And told the world, that for desert he dyed.
But how these Captains should, or yet their Master,
Look on Parmenie, after this disaster,
They knew not; wherefore, best now to be done,
Was to dispatch the Father, as the Son.
This sound advice, at heart, pleased Alexander,
Who was so much engaged, to this Commander,
As he would never confess, nor could reward,
Nor could his Captains bear so great regard;
Wherefore at once all these to satisfy,
It was decreed Parmenio should dye:
Polidamus, who seemed Parmenio's friend,
To do this deed, they into Media send;
He walking in his Garden, too and fro,
Thinking no harm, because he none did owe,
Most wickedly was slain, without least crime,
(The most renowned Captain of his time)
This is Parmenio, which so much had done,
For Philip dead, and his surviving Son,
Who from a petty King of Macedon,
By him was set upon the Persian Throne:
This that Parmenio, who still over-came,
Yet gave his Master the immortal fame;
Who for his prudence, valor, care, and trust,
Had this reward most cruel, and unjust.
The next that in untimely death had part,
Was one of more esteem, but less desert;
Clitus, beloved next to Ephestion,
And in his cups, his chief Companion;
When both were drunk, Clitus was wont to jeere;
Alexander, to rage, to kill, and swear,
Nothing more pleasing to mad Clitus tongue,
Then Is Masters godhead, to defy, and wrong;
Nothing touched Alexander to the quick
Like this, against his deity to kick:
Upon a time, when both had drunken well,
Upon this dangerous theme fond Clitus fell;
From jest, to earnest, and at last so bold,
That of Parmenio's death him plainly told.
Alexander now no longer could contain,
But instantly commands him to be slain;
Next day, he tore his face, for what he would done,
And would have slain himself, for Clitus gone,
This pot companion he did more bemoan,
Then all the wrong to brave Parmenio done.
The next of worth, that suffered after these,
Was virtuous, learned, wise Calist^ines,
Who loved his Master more then did the rest,
As did appear, in flattering him the least:
In his esteem, a God he could not be,
Nor would adore him for a Deity:
For this alone, and for no other cause,
Against his Sovereigne, or against his Laws,
He on the wrack, his limbs in pieces vent,
Thus was he tortured, till his life was spent.
Of this unkingly deed, does Sene^a
This censure pass, and not unwisely, say,
Of Alexander, this the eternal crime,
Which shall not be obliterate by time,
Which virtues fame can never redeem by far,
Nor all felicity, of his in war;
When e're it is said, he thousand thousands slew,
Yea, and Calisthines to death he drew,
The mighty Persian King he over-came,
Yea and he killed Calisthines by name;
All Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces, he won,
From Hellispont, to the furthest Ocean;
All this he did, who knows not to be true,
But yet withal, Calisthines he slew;
From Macedon his Empire did extend,
Unto the furthest bounds of the orient;
All this he did, yea, and much more, it is true,
But yet withal, Calisthines he slew.
Now Alexander goes to Media,
Finds there the want of wise Parmenio,
Here his chief favorite Ephestion dies,
He celebrates his mournful obsequies;
For him erects a stately Monument,
Twelve thousand Tallents on it franckly spent;
Hangs his Physician, the reason why,
Because he let Ephestion to dye.
This act (me thinks) his god head should ashame,
To punish, where himself deserved blame:
Or of necessity, he must imply,
The other was the greatest Deity.
From Media to Babylon he went,
To meet him there, to Antipater had sent,
That he might next now act upon the Stage,
And in a Tragedy there end his age.
The Queen Olimpias, bears him deadly hate,
(Not suffering her to meddle in the State)
And by her Letters did her Son incite,
This great indignity for to requite.
His doing so, no whit displeased the King,
Though to his Mother he disproved the thing;
But now, Antipater had lived thus long,
He might well dye, though he had done no wrong;
His service great now is suddenly forgot,
Or if remembered, yet regarded not;
The King does intimate 'twas his intent,
His honors, and his riches, to augment
Of larger Provinces, the rule to give,
And for his Counsel, never the King to live.
So to be caught, Antipater's too wise,
Parmenio's death's too fresh before his eyes;
He was too subtle for his crafty foe,
Nor by his baits could be ensnared so:
But his excuse with humb^e thanks he sends,
His age, and journey long, he now pretends;
And pardon craves, for his unwilling stay,
He shows his grief, he is forced to disobey:
Before his answer came to Babylon,
The thread of Alexanders life was spun;
Poison had put an end to's days 'twas thought,
By Philip, and Cassander, to him brought,
Sons to Antipater, bearers of his Cup,
Least of such like, their Father chance to sup:
By others thought, and that more generally,
That through excessive drinking he did dye.
The thirty third of 's age do all agree,
This Conqueror did yield to destiny;
Whose famous Acts must last, whilst world shall stand
And Conquests be talked of, whilst there is Land;
Hit Princely qualities, had he retained
Unparalleled, for ever had remained;
But with the world his virtues overcame,
And so with black, be-clouded all his fame.
Wise Aristotle, tutour to his youth,
Had so instructed him in moral truth.
The principles of what he then had learned
Might to the last (when sober) be discerned.
Learning, and learned men, he much regarded,
And curious Artists evermore rewarded.
The Illiads of Homer he still kept,
And under's pillow laid them when he slept.
Achille's happiness he did envy,
'Cause Homer kept his Acts to memory;
Profusely bountiful, without desert,
For those that pleased him: had both wealth and heart:
Cruel by nature, and by custom too,
As often his Acts throughout his reign did show:
More boundles in ambition then the sky,
Vain thirsting after immortality:
Still fearing that his Name might hap to die,
And fame not last unto Eternity:
This conqueror did often lament ('it is sed)
There was no worlds, more, to be conquered:
This folly great Augustus did deride,
For had he had but wisdom to his pride,
He would have found enough for to be done,
To govern that he had already won:
His thoughts are perished he aspires no more,
Nor can he kill, or save as heretofore,
A God alive him all must Idolize;
Now like a mortal helpless man he lies;
Of all those kingdoms large which he had got,
To his posterity remained no jot,
For by that hand, which still revengeth blood,
None of his Kindred, or his Race, long stood;
And as he took delight, much blood to spill,
So the same cup to his, did others fill.
Four of his Captains, all do now divide,
As Daniel, before had Prophesied;
The Leopard down, his four wings 'gan to rise,
The great Horn broke, the less did tytannize;
What troubles, and contentions did ensue,
We may hereafter show, in season due.
Aridaeus.
GReat Alexander dead, his Army's left,
Like to that Giant, of his eye bereft;
When of his monstrous bulk it was the guide,
His matchless force no Creature could abide;
But by Ulysses, having lost his sight,
Each man began for to contemn his might;
For aiming still amiss, his dreadful blows
Did harm himself, but never reached his foes:
Now Court, and Camp, all in confusion be,
A King they will have, but who, none can agree:
Each Captain wished this prize to bear away,
Yet none so hardy found as so durst say.
Great Alexander had left issue none,
Except by Artabasus daughter one;
And Roxan fair, whom late he married,
Was near her time to be delivered;
By Natures right, these had enough to claim,
But meannesse of their Mothers bard the same:
Alleged by those, which by their subtle plea
Had hope themselves, to bear the Crown away;
A Sister Alexander had, but she
Claimed not, perhaps her Sex might hindrance be.
After much tumult, they at last proclaimed
His base born Brother, Aridaeus named,
That so under his feeble wit, and reign,
Their ends they might the better still attain.
This choice Perdicas, vehemently disclaimed,
And the unborn babe of Roxan he proclaimed;
Some wished him, to take the style of King,
Because his Master gave to him his Ring,
And had to him, still since Ephestion dyed,
More then to the rest, his favor testified:
But he refused, with fained modesty,
Hoping to be elect more generally;
He hold of this occasion should have laid,
For second offers there were never made;
Amongst these contentions, tumul^s, jealousies,
Seven days the Corpse of their great Master lies
Untoucht, uncovered, slighted, and neglected,
So much these Princes their own ends respected.
A contemplation to astonish Kings,
That he, who late, possessed all earthly things,
And yet not so content, unless that he
Might be esteemed for a Deity;
Now lay a spectacle, to testify
The wretchedness of man's mortality.
After this time, when stirs began to calm,
The Egyptians, his body did enbalme;
On which, no sign of poison could be found,
But all his bowels, colored well, and sound.
Perdicas, seeing Aridaeus must be King,
Under his name begins to rule each thing.
His chief opponents who kept off the Crown,
Was stiff Meleager, whom he would take down,
Him by a wile he got within his power,
And took his life unworthily that hour:
Using the name, and the command of the King
To authorize his Acts in every thing.
The Princes seeing Perdica's power and Pride,
Thought timely for themselves, now to provide.
Antigonus, for his share Asia takes,
And Ptolomy, next sure of Egypt makes.
Seleuchus afterward held Babylon;
Amipater, had long ruled Macedon,
These now to govern for the King pretends,
But nothing less: each one himself intends.
Perdicas took no Province; like the rest,
But held command of the Armies which was best;
And had a higher project in his head,
Which was his Masters sister for to wed:
So, to the Lady secretly he sent,
That none might know, to frustrate his intent;
But Cleopatra, this suitour did deny,
For Leonatus, more lovely in her eye,
To whom she sent a message of her mind,
That if he came, good welcome he should find:
In these tumultuous days, the thralled Greeks
Their ancient liberty, afresh now seeks,
Shakes off the yoke, sometimes before laid on
By warlike Philip, and his conquering son.
The Athenians, force Antipater to fly
To Lamia, where he shut up does ly;
To brave Craterus, then, he sends with speed,
To come and to release him in his need,
The like of Leonatus, he requires,
(Which at this time well suited his desires)
For to Antipater he now might go,
His Lady take in the way, and no man know.
Antiphilus the Athenian General,
With speed his forces does together call,
Striving to stop Leonatus, that so
He join not with Antipater, that foe.
The Athenian Army was the greater far,
(Which did his match with Cleopatra mar)
For fighting still, whilst there did hope remain,
The valiant Chief, amidst his foes was slain,
Amongst all the Captains of great Alexander,
For personage, none was like this Commander:
Now to Antipater, ^raterus goes,
Blockt up in Lamia, still by his foes;
Long marches through Cilicia he makes,
And the remains of Leonatus takes;
With them and his, he into Grecia went,
Antipater released from's prisonment,
After this time, the Grecks did never more
Act any thing of worth, as heretofore,
But under servitude, their necks remained,
Nor former liberty, or glory gained;
Now died (about the end of the Lamian war)
Dimosthencs, that sweet tongued orator.
Craverus, that Antipater now join
In love, and in affiaity combine:
Crete^us does his daughter Phisa wed,
Their friendship may the more be strengthened:
Whilst they in Macedon do thus agree,
In Asia they all asunder be.
Perdicas grieved, to see the Princes bold,
So many Kingdoms in their power to hold,
Yet to regain them, how he did not know,
For's Soldiers against those Captains would not go;
To suffer them go on, as they begun,
Was to give way, himself might be undone;
With Antipater to join, sometimes he thought,
That by his help, the rest might low be brought:
But this again dislikes, and would remain,
If not in word, in deed a Sovereign.
Desires the King, to go to Macedon,
Which of his Ancestors was once the throne,
And by his presence there, to nullify
The Acts of his Vice-royes, now grown so high:
Antigonus of Treason first attaints,
And summons him, to answer these complaints;
This he avoyds, and ships himself, and's Son,
Goes to Antipater, and tells what is done;
He, and Craterus, both with him now join,
And against Perdicas, all their strength combine.
Brave Ptolomy, to make a fourth now sent,
To save himself from dangers eminent;
In midst of these, Garboyles, with wondrous state,
His Masters Funerals does celebrate;
At Alexandria, in Egypt Land,
His sumptuous monument long time did stand;
Two years and more since, Natures debt he paid,
And yet till now, at quiet was not laid.
Great love did Ptolomy by this act gain.
And made the Soldiers on his side remain;
Perdicas hears, his foes are now combined,
('Against which to go, is troubled in his mind;)
With Ptolomy for to begin was best,
Near'st unto him, and farthest from the rest.
Leaves Eumenes, the Asian coast to free,
From the invasions of the other three;
And with his Army into Egypt goes,
Brave Ptolomy to the utmost to oppose.
Perdicas surly carriage, and his pride,
Did alienate the Soldiers from his side;
But Ptolomy by affability,
His sweet demeanor, and his courtesy,
Did make his own firm to his cause remain,
And from the other, daily some did gain.
Pithon, next Perdicas, a Captain high,
Being entreated by him scornfully,
Some of the Soldiers enters Perdica's tent,
Knocks out his brains, to Ptolomy then went,
And offers him his Honors, and his place,
With style of the Protector, would him grace;
Next day into the Camp comes Ptolomy,
And is of all received joyfully;
Their proffers he refused, with modesty
Confers them Pithon on, for's courtesy;
With what he held, he now was well content,
Then by more trouble to grow eminent.
Now comes there news of a great victory,
That Eumenes got of the other three,
H^d it but in Perdicas life arrived,
With greater joy it would have been received;
Thus Ptolomy rich Egypt did retain,
And Pithon turned to Asia again.
Whilst Perdicas thus staid in Africa,
Antigonus did enter Asia,
And fain would draw Eumenes to their side,
But he alone now faithful did abide:
The other all, had kingdoms in their eye,
But he was true to's masters family,
Nor could Craterus (whom he much did love)
From his fidelity make him once move.
Two battles now he fought, and had the best,
And brave Craterus slew, amongst the rest,
For this great strife, he pours out his complaints,
And his beloved foe, full sore laments.
I should but snip a story into verse,
And much eclipse his glory to rehearse
The difficulties Eumenes befell,
His stratagems, wherein he did excel,
His policies, how he did extricate
Himself from out of labyrinths intricate.
For all that should be said, let this suffice,
He was both valiant, faithful, patient, wise.
Python now chose protector of the State,
His rule Queen Euridice begins to hate,
Perceives Aridaeus must not king it long,
If once young Alexander grow more strong,
But that her Husband serve for supplement,
To warm the seat, was never her intent,
She knew her birthright gave her Macedon,
Grandchild to him, who once sat on that throne,
Who was Perdicas, Philips elder brother,
She daughter to his son, who had no other;
Her mother Cyna sister to Alexander,
Who h^d an Army, like a great Commander.
Ceria the Phrigian Queen for to withstand,
And in a Battle slew her hand to hand;
Her Daughter she instructed in that Art,
Which made her now begin to play her part;
Pithons commands, She ever countermands
What he appoints, She purposely withstands.
He wearied out, at last, would needs be gone,
Resigned his place, and so let all alone;
In's stead, the Soldiers chose Antipater,
Who vexed the Queen more then the other far;
He placed, displaced, controld, ruled, as he list,
And this no man durst question, or resist;
For all the Princes of great Alexander
Acknowledged for chief, this old Commander:
After a while, to Macedon he makes;
The King, and Queen, along with him he takes.
Two Sons of Alexander, and the rest,
All to be ordered there as he thought best:
The Army with Antigonus did leave,
And government of Asia to him gave;
And thus Antipater the groundwork lays,
On which Antigonus his height does raise:
Who in few years the rest so over-tops,
For universal Monarchy he hopes;
With Eumenes he diverse Battles fought,
And by his sleights to circumvent him sought;
But vain it was to use his policy,
Against him, that all deceits could scan, and try:
In this Epitomy, too long to tell
How neatly Eumenes did here excel,
That by the selfsame traps the other laid,
He to his cost was righteously repaid.
Now great Antipater, the world does leave
To Polisperchon, then his place he gave,
Fearing his Son Cassander was unstay'd,
Too young to bear that charge, if on him laid;
Antigonus hearing of his decease,
On most part of Assyria does seize,
And Ptolomy, now to encroach begins,
All Syria, and, Phenicia he wins;
Now Polisperchon 'gins to act in's place,
Recals Olimpias, the Court to grace;
Antipater had banished her from thence,
Into Epire, for her great turbulence;
This new Protector's of another mind,
Thinks by her Majesty much help to find;
Cassander could not (like his father) see
This Polisperchons great ability,
Slights his commands, his actions he disclaimes,
And to be great himself now bends his aims;
Such as his father had advanced to place,
Or by his favor any way did grace,
Are now at the devotion of the Son,
Pressed to accomplish what he would have done;
Besides, he was the young Queens favorite,
On whom ('it was thought) the set her chief delight;
Unto these helps, in Greece, he seeks out more,
Goes to Antigonus, and does implore,
By all the Bonds 'twixt him and's father past,
And for that great gift, which he gave him last;
By these, and all, to grant him some supply,
To take down Polisperchon grown so high;
For this Antigonus needed no spurs,
Hoping still more to gain by these new stirs;
Straight furnished him with a sufficient aid,
Cassander for return all speed now made:
Polisperchon, knowing he did rely
Upon those friends, his father raised on high,
Those absent, banished, or else he slew
All such as he suspected to him true.
Cassander with his Host to Grecia goes,
Whom Polisperchon labors to oppose,
But had the worst at Sea, as well as Land,
And his opponent still got upper hand,
Athens, with many Towns in Greece besides,
Firm to Cassander at this time abides:
Whilst hot in wars these two in Greece remain,
Antigonus does all in Asia gain;
Still labors Eumenes might with him side,
But to the last he faithful did abide;
Nor could Mother, nor Sons of Alexander,
Put trust in any, but in this Commander;
The great ones now began to show their mind,
And act, as opportunity they find:
Aridaeus the scorned, and simple King,
More then he bidden was, could act no thing;
Polisperchon hoping for's office long,
Thinks to enthrone the Prince when riper grown;
Euridice this injury disdaines,
And to Cassander of this wrong complains;
Hateful the Name, and House of Alexander,
Was to this proud, vindicative Cassander,
He still hep^ fresh within his memory,
His Fathers danger, with his Family;
Nor counts he that indignity but small,
When Alexander knocked his head to the wall:
These, with his love, unto the amorous Queen
Did make him vow her servant to be seen.
Olimpias, Aridaeus deadly hates,
As all her Husbands children by his Mates;
She gave him poison formerly ('it is thought)
Which damage both to mind and body brought:
She now with Polisperchon does combine,
To make the King by force his seat resign;
And her young Nephew in his stead to inthrone,
That under him she might rule all alone.
For aid goes to Epire, among her friends,
The better to accomplish these her ends;
Euridice hearing what she intends,
In have unto her dear Cassander sends,
To leave his Seige at Tagra, and with speed
To come and succor her, in this great need;
Then by entreaties, promises, and coin,
Some Forces did procure, with her to join.
Olimpias now enters Macedon,
The Queen to meet her, bravely marched on;
But when her Soldiers saw their ancient Queen,
Remembering what sometime she had been,
The Wife, and Mother, of their famous Kings,
Nor Darts, nor Arrows now, none shoots, nor flings;
Then King, and Queen, to Amphipolis do fly,
But soon are brought into captivity;
The King by extreme torments had his end,
And to the Queen, these presents she does send;
A Halter, cup of Poison, and a Sword,
Bids choose her death, such kindness she will afford:
The Queen with many a curse, and bitter check,
At length yields to the Halter, her fair neck;
Praying, that fatal day might quickly haste,
On which Olimpias of the like might taste.
This done, the cruel Queen rests not content,
Till all that loved Cassander was nigh spent;
His Brethren, Kinsfolk, and his chiefest friends,
That were within her reach, came to their ends;
Dug up his brother dead, against natures right,
And throws his bones about, to show her spite.
The Courtiers wondering at her furious mind,
Wished in Epire she still had been confined;
In Pelloponesus then Cassander lay,
Where hearing of this news he speeds away,
With rage, and with revenge, he is hurried on,
So goes to find this Queen in Macedon;
But being stopped, at Straight Tharmipoley
Sea passage gets, and lands in Thessaly;
His Army he divides, sends part away,
Polisperchou to hold a while in play,
And with the rest Olimpias pursues,
To give her for all cruelties her dues:
She with the flower o'th Court to Pidna flies,
Well fortified, and on the Sea it lies;
There by Cassander she is blocked up, so long,
Until the Famine grows exceeding strong.
Her Cosen of Epire did what he might,
To raise the Seige, and put her foes to flight;
Cassander is resolved, there to remain,
So succors, and endeavors proves but vain:
Feign would she come now to capitulate,
Cassander will not hear, such is his hate.
The Soldiers pinched with this scarcity,
By stealth unto Casander daily fly;
Olimpias wills to keep it, to the last,
Expecting nothing, but of death to taste;
But he unwilling longer there to stay,
Gives promise for her life, and wins the day:
No sooner had he got her in his hands,
But made in Judgment her Accusers stand,
And plead the blood of their dear Kindred spilt,
Desiring Justice might be done for guilt;
And so was he acquitted of his word,
For Justice sake she being put to the sword.
This was the end of this most cruel Queen,
Whose fury yet unparalleld has been;
The Daughter, Sister, Mother, Wife to Kings,
But Royalty no good conditions brings;
So boundless was her pride, and cruelty,
She often forgot bounds of Humanity.
To Husbands death ('it was thought) she gave consent,
The Authors death she did so much lament,
With Garlands crowned his head, bemoaned his Fates,
His sword unto Apollo consecrates:
Her outrages too tedious to relate,
How for no cause, but her inveterate hate;
Her Husbands Wife, and Children, after's death
Some flew, some fried, of others, stopped the breath;
Now in her age she is forced to taste that Cup,
Which she had often made others to sup:
Now many Towns in Macedon suppressed,
And Pellas feign to yield amongst the rest;
The Funerals Cassandra celebrates,
Of Aridaeus, and his Queen, with state;
Among their Ancestors by him there laid,
And shows of lamentation for them made.
Old Thebes he then rebuilt (so much of fame)
And raised Cassandria after his name,
But leave him building, others in their urn,
And for a while, let us into Asia turn,
True Eumenes endeavors by all skill,
To keep Antigonus from Susha still,
Having Command o'th treasure he can hire,
Such as nor threats, nor favor could acquire;
In diverse battles, he had good success,
Antigonus came off still honourlesse,
When victor often had been, and so might still,
Pencestas did betray him by a wile,
Antigonus, then takes his life unjust,
Because he never would let go his trust:
Thus lost he all for his fidelity,
Striving to uphold h^s Masters family,
But as that to a period did haste,
So Eumenes of destiny must taste.
Antigonus, all Persia now gains,
And Master of the treasure he remains;
Then with Seleuchus straight at ods does fall,
But he for aid to Ptolomy does call.
The Princes all begin now to envy
Antigonus, his growing up so hye,
Fearing their state, and what might hap ere long,
Enter into a combination strong:
Selcuchus, Ptolomy, Cassander joins,
Ly^^mac us to make a fourth combines:
Antigonus, desirous of the Greeks,
To make Cassander odious to them, seeks,
Sends forth his declaration from a far,
And shows what cause they had to take up war.
The Mother of their King to death he would put,
His Wife, and Son, in prison close had shut;
And how he aims to make himself a King,
And that some title he might seem to bring,
Thessalonica he had newly wed,
Daughter to Phillip, their renowned head;
Had built, and called a City by his name,
Which none e're did but those of royal fame;
And in despite of their two famous Kings,
The hateful Olinthians to Greece re-brings;
Rebellious Thebs he had re-edified,
Which their late King in dust had-damnified;
Requires them therefore to take up their Arms,
And to requite this Traitor for those harms:
Now Ptolomy would gain the Greeks likewise,
For he declares against his injuries;
First, how he held the Empire in his hands,
Seleuchus drove from government, and lands;
Had valiant Eumenes unjustly slain,
And Lord of the City Susha did remain.
So therefore craves their help to take him down,
Before he wear the universal Crown;
Antigonus at Sea soon had a fight,
Where Ptolomy, and the rest put him to flight.
His Son at Gaza likewise lost the field,
So Syria to Ptolomy did yield;
And Sclcuchus recovers Babylon,
Still gaining Countries Eastward goes he on.
Demetrius again with Ptolomy did fight,
And coming unawares put him to slight;
But bravely sends the Priseners back again,
And all the spoil and booty they had taken;
Curtius, as noble Ptolomy, or more,
Who at Gaza did the like to him before.
Antigonus did much rejoice his son,
His lost repute with victory had won;
At last these Princes tired out with wars,
Sought for a peace, and laid aside their jarres:
The terms of their agreement thus express,
That each shall hold what he does now possess,
Till Alexander unto age was grown,
Who then shall be installed in the throne:
This touched Cassander sore, for what he would done,
Imprisoning both the mother, and her son,
He sees the Greeks now favor their young Prince,
Whom he in durance held, now and long since,
That in few years he must be forced or glad
To render up such kingdoms as he had
Resolves to quit his fears by one deed done,
And put to death, the mother and her son,
This Rexane for her beauty all commend,
But for one act she did, just was her end,
No sooner was great Alexander dead,
But she Dariu's daughters murdered,
Both thrown into a well to hide her blot,
Perdicas was her partner in this plot:
The Heavens seemed slow in paying her the same,
But yet at last the hand of vengeance came,
And for that double fact which she had done,
The life of her must go, and of her son
Perdicas had before, for his amiss,
But from their hands, who thought not once of this.
Gassander's dead, the Princes all detest,
But 'twas in show, in heart it pleased them best.
That he was odious to the world, they are glad,
And now they are, free Lords, of what they had,
When this foul tragedy was past, and done,
Polisperchon brings up the other son,
Called Hercules, and elder then his brother,
(Bur, Olymptas, thought to prefer the other:)
The Greeks touched with the murder done so late,
This Prince began for to compassionate.
Begin to mutter much against proud Cassander,
And place their hopes o'th heir of Alexander,
Cassander feared what might of this ensue,
So Polisperchon to his Counsel drew,
Gives Peloponesus unto him for hire,
Who slew the prince according to desire:
Thus was the race, and house of Alexander
Extinct, by this inhumane wretch Cassander;
Antigonus for all this does not mourn,
He knows to's profit, all in the end will turn,
But that some title he might now pretend,
For marriage to Cleopatra, does send
Lysimachus and Ptolomy, the same,
And vile Cassander too, sticks not for shame,
She now in Lydia at Sardis lay,
Where, by Embassage, all these Princes pray,
Choice above all, of Ptolomy she makes
With his Ambassador, her journey takes,
Antigonu's Lieutenant stays her still,
Until he further know his Masters will;
To let her go; or hold her still, he fears,
Antigonus thus had a wolf by the ^a^s,
Resolves at last the Princess then'd be stain,
So hinders him of her, he could not gain.
Her women are appointed to this deed,
They for their great reward no better speed,
For straight way by command they are put to death,
As vile conspiratours that took her breath,
And now he thinks, he is ordered all so well,
The world must needs believe what he does tell:
Thus Philips house was quite extinguished,
Except Cassanders wife, who yet not dead,
And by their means, who thought of nothing less
Then vengeance just, against the same to express;
Now blood was paid with blood, for what was done
By cruel father, mother, cruel son,
Who did erect their cruelty in guilt,
And wronging innocents whose blood they spilt,
Philip and Olympias both were slain,
Aridaeus and his Queen by slaughters taken;
Two other children by Olympias killed,
And Cleopatra's blood, now likewise spilled,
If Alexander was not poisoned,
Yet in the flower of's age, he must lie dead,
His wise and sons then slain by this Cassander,
And's kingdoms rent away by each Commander:
Thus may we hear, and fear, and ever say,
That hand is righteous still which does repay:
These Captains now, the style of Kings do take,
For to their Crowns, there is none can title make.
Demetrius is first, that so assumes,
To do as he, the rest full soon presumes,
To Athens then he goes, is entertained,
Not like a King, but like some God they feigned;
Most grossly base, was this great adulation,
Who incense burnt, and offered oblation.
These Kings fall now afresh to wars again,
Demetrius of Ptolomy does gain;
'Twould be an endless story to relate
Their several battles, and their several fate,
Antigonus and Seleuchus, now fight
Near Ephesus, each bringing all their might,
And he that conqueror shall now remain,
Of Asia the Lordship shall retain.
This day twixt these two foes ends all the strife,
For here Antigonus lost rule, and life,
Nor to his son did there one foot remain,
Of those dominions he did sometimes gain,
Demetrius with his troops to Athens flies,
Hoping to find succor in miseries.
But they adoring in prosperity,
Now shut their gates in his adversity,
He sorely grieved at this his desperate state,
Tries foes, since friends will not compassionate,
His peace he then with old Seleuchus makes,
Who his fair daughter Stratonica takes,
Antiochus, Seleuchus dear loved son,
Is for this fresh young Lady-half undone,
Falls so extremely sick, all fear his life,
Yet dares not say, he loves his fathers wife;
When his disease the skillful Physician found,
He wittily his fathers mind did sound,
Who did no sooner understand the same,
But willingly resigned the beauteous dame:
Cassander now must die, his race is run,
And leaves the ill got kingdoms he had won,
Two sons he left, born of King Philips daughter,
Who had an end put to their days by slaughter.
Which should succeed, at variance they fell,
The mother would the youngest should excel,
The eld'st enraged did play the vipers part,
And with his Sword did pierce his mothers heart,
(Rather then Philips child must longer live)
He, whom she gave his life, her death must give)
This by Lysimachus soon after slain,
(Whose daughter unto wife, he would newly ta'n)
The youngest by Demetrius killed in fight,
Who took away his now pretended right:
Thus Philips, and Cassander's race is gone,
And so falls out to be extinct in one,
Yea though Cassander died in his bed,
His seed to be extirpt, was destined,
For blood which was decreed, that he should spill,
Yet must his children pay for fathers ill.
Jehu in killing Ahabs house did well,
Yet be avenged, must the blood of Jesreel.
Demetrius, Cassanders kingdoms gains,
And now as King, in Macedon he reigns;
Seleuchus, Asia holds, that grieves him sore,
Those (...) untries large, his father got before,
These to recover, musters all his might,
And with his son in law, will needs go fight:
There was he taken and imprisoned
Within an Isle that was with pleasures fed,
Enjoyed what so beseem'd his Royalty,
Only restrained of his liberty;
After three years he dyed, left what he would won
In Greece, unto Antigonus, his son,
For h s posterity unto this day,
Did n^'r regain one foot in Asia.
Now dyed the brave and noble Ptolomy,
Renowned for bounty, valor, clemency,
Rich Egypt left, and what else he had won
To Philadelphus, his more worthy Son.
Of the old Heroes, now but two remain,
Seleuchus, and Lysimachus; those twain
Must needs go try their fortune, and their might,
And so Lysimachus was slain in fight.
'Twas no small joy, unto Seleuchus breast,
That now he had outlived all the rest:
Possession he of Europe thinks to take,
And so himself the only Monarch make;
Whilst with these hopes, in Greece he did remain,
He was by Ptolomy Cerannus slain.
The second Son of the first Ptolomy,
Who for rebellion unto him did sly,
Selencbus was as Father, and a friend,
Yet by him had this most unworthy end.
Thus with these Kingly Captains have we done,
A little now, how the Succession run:
Antigonus, Seleuchus, and Cassander,
With Ptolomy, reigned after Alexander;
Cassanders Sons, soon after's death were slain,
So three Successors only did remain;
Antigonus his Kingdoms lost, and's life,
Unto Seleuchus, author of that strife.
His Son Demetrius, all Cassanders gains,
And his posterity, the same retains,
Demetrius Son was called Awigonus,
And his again, also Demetrius.
I must let pass those many battles fought,
Between those Kings, and noble Fyrrus stout,
And his son Alexander of Epire,
Whereby immortal honor they acquire.
Demetrius had Philip to his son,
He Perseus, from him the kingdom's won,
Emillius the Roman General,
Did take his rule, his sons, himself and all.
This of Antigonus, his seed's the fate,
Whose kingdoms were subdued by the Roman state.
Longer Seleuchus held the Royalty
In Syria by his posterity,
Awiochus Soter his son was named,
To whom Ancient Berosus (To much famed)
His book of Assurs Monarchs dedicates,
Tells of their wars, their names, their riches, fates;
But this is perished with many more,
Which we often wish were extant as before.
Antiochus Theos was Soters son,
Who a long war with Egypts King begun.
The affinities and wars Daniel set forth,
And calls them there, the Kings of South, and North;
This ^^cos he was murdered by his wife,
Seleuchus reigned, when he had lost his life,
A third Seleuchus next sit^ on the seat,
And then Antiochus surnamed the great,
Seleuchus next Anttiochus succeeds,
And then Epiphanes, whole wicked deeds,
Horrid massacres, murders, cruelties,
Against the Jews, we read in Macchabees,
By him was set up the abomination
In The holy place, which caused desolation;
Antiochus Eupator was the next,
By Rebels and imposters daily vexed;
So many Princes still were murdered,
The Royal blood was quite extinguished.
That Tygranes the great Armenian King,
To take the government was called in,
Him Lucullus, the Roman General
Vanquished in fight, and took those kingdoms all,
Of Greece, and Syria thus the rule did end,
In Egypt now a little time we will spend.
First Ptolomy being dead, his famous son,
Called Philadelphus, next sat on the throne,
The Library at Alexandria built,
With seven hundred thousand volumes filled,
The seventy two interpreters did seek,
They might translate the Bible into Greek,
His son was Evergetes the last Prince
That valor showed, virtue or excellence.
Philopater was Evergete's son,
After Epiphanes, sat on the Throne
Philometer: then Evergetes again.
And next to him, did false Lathurus reign,
Alexander, then Lathurus in's stead,
Next Auletes, who cut off Pompey's head:
To all these names we Ptolomy must add,
For since the first, that title still they had,
Fair Cleopatra next, last of that race,
Whom Julius Caesar set in Royal place,
Her brother by him, lost his traiterous head
For Pompey's life, then placed her in his stead,
She with her Paramour Mark Antony,
Held for a time the Egyptian Monarchy:
Till great Augustus had with him a fight,
At Actium slain, his Navy put to flight.
Then poisonous Aspes she sets unto her Arms,
To take her life, and quit her from all harms;
For 'twas not death, nor danger, she did dread,
But some disgrace, in triumph to be led.
Here ends at last the Grecian Monarchy,
Which by the Romans had its destiny.
Thus Kings, and Kingdoms, have their times, and dates,
Their standings, over-turnings, bounds, and fates;
Now up, now down, now chief, and then brought under,
The Heavens thus rule, to fill the earth with wonder.
The Assyrian Monarchy long time did stand,
But yet the Persian got the upper hand;
The Grecian, them did utterly subdue,
And Millions were subjected unto few:
The Grecian longer then the Persian stood,
Then came the Roman, like a raging flood,
And with the torrent of his rapid course,
Their Crowns, their Titles, riches bears by force.
The first, was likened to a head of gold,
Next, arms and breast, of silver to behold;
The third, belly and thighs of brass in sight,
And last was Iron, which breaks all with might.
The Stone out of the Mountain then did rise,
And smote those feet, those legs, those arms and thighs;
Then gold, silver, brass, iron, and all that store,
Became like chafe upon the threshing floor;
The first a Lion, second was a Bear,
The third a Leopard, which four wings did rear;
The last more strong, and dreadful, then the rest,
Whose Iron teeth devoured every beast;
And when he had no appetite to eat,
The residue he stamped under's feet:
But yet this Lion, Bear, this Leopard, Ram,
All trembling stand, before that powerful Lamb.
With these three Monarchies, now have I done,
But how the fourth, their Kingdoms from them won;
And how from small beginnings it did grow,
To fill the world with terror, and with woe:
My tired brain, leaves to a better pen,
This task befits not women, like to men:
For what is past I blush, excuse to make,
But humbly stand, some grave reproof to take:
Pardon to crave, for errors, is but vain,
The Subject was too high, beyond my strain;
To frame Apology for some offense,
Converts our boldness, into impudence.
This my presumption (some now) to requite,
Ne suter ultra crepidum, may write.
AFter some days of rest, my restless heart,
To finish what begun, new thoughts impart
And maugre all resolves, my fancy Wrought
This fourth to the other three, now might be brought.
Shortness of time, and inability,
Will force me to a confused brevity;
Yet in this Chaos, one shall easily spy,
The vast limbs of a mighty Monarchy.
What e're is found amiss, take in best part,
As faults preceding from my head, not heart.
The Roman Monarchy, being the Fourth, and last, beginning, Anno Mundi, 3213.
STout Romulus, Romes Founder, and first King,
Whom vestall Rhea, into the world did bring
His Father was not Mars, as some devised,
But Aemulus, in Armor all disguised.
Thus he deceived his Niece, she might not know
The double injury, he then did do:
Where Shepherds once had Coats, and Sheep their Folds,
Where Swains, and rustic Peasants made their Holds.
A City fair did Romulus erect:
The Mistress of the World, in each respect.
His Brother Remus there, by him was slain,
For leaping over the Walls with some disdain;
The Stones at first was cimented with blood,
And bloody has it proy'd, since first it stood:
This City built, and Sacrifices done,
A form of Government he next begun;
A hundred Senators he likewise chose,
And with the style of Patres honored those;
His City to replenish, men he wants,
Great privileges then, to all he grants,
That will within these strong built walls reside,
And this new gentle Government abide:
Of Wives there was so great a scarsity,
They to their neighbors sue, for a supply;
But all disdain alliance then to make,
So Romulus was forced this course to take.
Great shows he makes at Tilt, and Turnament,
To see these sports, the Sabins all are bent;
Their Daughters by the Romans then were caught,
For to recover them, a Field was fought;
But in the en^, to final peace they come,
And Sabins, as one people, dwelt in Rome.
The Romans now more potent 'gin to grow,
And Fedinates they wholly overthrow:
But Romulus then comes unto his end,
Some faining say, to heaven he did ascend;
Others, the seven and thirtyeth of his reign
Affirm, that by the Senate he was slain.
Numa Pompilius.
NVmt Pompilius, is next chosen King,
Held for his Piety, some sacred thing;
To Janus, he that famous Temple built,
Kept shut in peace, but open when blond was spilt,
Religious Rites, and Customs instituted,
And Priests, and Flamines likewise he deputed;
Their Augurs strange, their habit, and attire,
And vestall Maids to keep the holy fire.
Goddess Aegeria this to him told,
So to delude the people he was bold:
Forty three veares he ruled with general praise,
Accounted for some god in after days.
Tullus Hostilius.
TUllus Hostilius, was third Roman King,
Who Martial Discipline in use did bring;
War with the ancient Albans he does wage,
The strife to end, six Brothers do engage;
Three called Horatii, on Romans side,
And Curiatii, three Albans provide;
The Romans Conquereth, others yield the day,
Yet for their compact, after false they play:
The Romans sore incensed, their General slay,
And from old Alba fetch the wealth away;
Of Latin Kings this was long since the Seat,
But now demolished, to make Rome great.
Thirty two years does Tullus reign, then dye,
Leaves Rome, in wealth and power, still growing high.
Ancus Martius.
NExt, Ancus Martius sits upon the Throne,
Nephew unto Pomphilius dead, and gone;
Rome he enlarged, new built again the wall,
Much stronger, and more beautiful withal;
A stately Bridge he over Tyber made,
Of Boats, and Oars, no more they need the aid;
Fair Ostia he built, this Town, it stood,
Close by the mouth of famous Tyber flood:
Twenty four year, the time of his royal race,
Then unto death unwillingly gives place.
Tarquinius Priscus.
TArquin, a Greek, at Corinth borne, and bred,
Who for sedition from his Country fled;
Is entertained at Rome, and in short time,
By wealth, and favor, does to honor climb;
He after Martius death the Kingdom had,
A hundred Senators he more did add;
Wars with the Latins he again renewes,
And Nations twelve, of Tuscany subdues:
To such rude triumphs, as young Rome then had,
Much state, and glory, did this Priscus add:
Thirty eight years (this Stranger borne) did reign,
And after all, by Ancus Sons was slain.
Servius Tullius.
NExt, Servius Tullius sits upon the Throne,
Ascends not up, by merits of his own,
But by the favor, and the special grace
Of Tanaquil, late Queen, obtaines the place;
He ranks the people, into each degree,
As wealth had made them of ability;
A general Muster takes, which by account,
To eighty thousand souls then did amount:
Forty four years did Servius Tullius reign,
And then by Tarquin, Priscus Son, was slain.
Tarquinius Superbus, the last Roman King.
TArquin the proud, from manners called so,
Sat on the Throne, when he had slain his so;
Sextus his Son, does (most unworthily)
Lucretia force, mirror of chastety;
She loathed so the fact, she loathed her life,
And shed her guiltless blood, with guilty knife.
Her Husband sore incensed, to quit this wrong,
With Junius Brutus rose, and being strong,
The Tarquins they from Rome with speed expel,
In banishment perpetual, to dwell;
The Government they change, a new one bring,
And people swear, never to accept of King.
The end of the Roman Monarchy; being the fourth and last.
A Dialogue between Old England and New, concerning their present troubles.
Anno 1642.
New England.
ALas, dear Mother, fairest Queen, and best,
With honor, wealth, and peace, happy and blessed,
What ails thee hang thy head, and cross thine arms?
And sit in the dust, to sigh these sad alarms?
What deluge of new woes thus over-whelme
The glories of thy ever famous Realm?
What means this wailing tone, this mourning guise?
Ah, tell thy Daughter, she may simpathize.
Old England.
Art ignorant indeed, of these my woes?
Or must my forc^d tongue these grief^s disclose?
And must my self dissect my tattered state,
Which 'mazed Christendom^ stands wondering at?
And thou a child, a Limb, and do not feel
My weakened fainting body now to reele?
This Phisick-purging-potion I have taken,
Will bring Consumption, or an Ague quaking,
Unless some Cordial thou fetch from high,
Which present help may ease this malady.
If I decease, do think thou shall survive?
Or by my wasting state, do think to thrive?
Then weigh our case, if it be not justly sad,
Let me lament alone, while thou art glad.
New England.
And thus, alas, your state you much deplore,
In general terms, but will not say wherefore:
What Medicine shall I seek to cure this woe,
If the wound's so dangerous I may not know?
But you perhaps would have me guess it out,
What, has some Hengist, like that Saxon stout,
By fraud, and force, usurped thy flowring crown,
And by tempestuous Wars thy fields trod down?
Or has Canutus, that brave valiant Dane,
The regal, peaceful Scepter from thee taken?
Or is it a Norman, whose victorious hand
With English blood bedews thy conquered Land?
Or is it intestine Wars that thus offend?
Do Maud, and Stephen for the Crown contend?
Do Barons rise, and side against their King?
And call in Foreign aid, to help the thing?
Must Edward be deposed, or is it the hour
That second Richard must be clapped in the Tower?
Or is the fatal jarre again begun,
That from the red, white pricking Roses sprung?
Must Richmonds aid, the Nobles now implore,
To come, and break the tushes of the Boar?
If none of these, dear Mother, what is your woe?
Pray, do not fear Spaines bragging Armado?
Does your Allye, fair France, conspire your wrack?
Or, does the Scots play false behind your back?
Does Holland quit you ill, for all your love?
Whence is this storm, from Earth, or Heaven above?
Is It Drought, is it Famine, or is it Pestilence?
Do feel the smart, or fear the consequence?
Your humble Child entreats you, show your grief,
Though Arms, nor Purse she has, for your releif:
Such is her poverty, yet shall be found
A supplyant for your help, as she is bound.
Old England.
I must confess, some of those Sores you name,
My beau^eous Body at this present maime;
But foreign Foe, nor fained friend I fear,
For they have work enough (thou know) elsewhere;
Nor is it Alcies Son, and Henry's Daughter,
Whose proud contention cause this slaughter;
Nor Nobles si^ing, to make John no King
French Lewis unjustly to the Crown to bring;
No Edward, Richard, to l^se rule, and life,
Nor no Lancastrians, to renew old strife;
No Crook-backt Tyrant, now usurps the Seat,
Whose tearing tusks did wound, and kill, and threat:
No Duke of York, nor Earl of March, to soil
Their hands in Kindreds blood, whom they did foil:
No need of Teder, Roses to unite,
None knows which is the Red, or which the White:
Spaines braving Fleet a second time is sunk,
France knows, how of my sury she has drunk;
By Edward third, and Henry fifth of fame,
Her Lillies in mine Arms avouch the same.
My Sister Scotland hurts me now no more,
Though she has bin injurious heretofore.
What Holland is, I am in some suspense,
But trust not much unto his Excellence;
For wants, sure some I feel, but more I fear,
And for the Pestilence, who knows how near;
Famine, and Plague, two sisters of the Sword,
Destruction to a Land does soon afford;
They Are for my punishments ordained on high,
Unless thy tears prevent it speedily.
But yet, I answer not what you demand,
To show the grievance of my troubled Land;
Before I tell the effect, i will show the cause,
Which are my Sins, the breach of sacred Laws;
Idolatry, supplanter of a Nation,
With foolish superstitious adoration;
And liked, and countenanced by men of might,
The Gospel is trod down, and has no right;
Church Offices are sold, and bought, for gain,
That Pope, had hope, to find Rome here again;
For Oaths, and Blasphemies did ever ear
From Beelzebub himself, such language hear?
What scorning of the Saints of the most high,
What injuries did daily on them lie;
What false reports, what nicknames did they take,
Not for their own, but for their Masters sake;
And thou, poor soul, wast jeered among the rest,
Thy flying for the Truth I made a jest;
For Sabbath-breaking, and for Drunkenness,
Did ever Land prophannesse more express?
From crying bloods, yet cleansed am not I,
Martyrs, and others, dying causelessly:
How many Princely heads on blocks laid down,
For naught, but title to a fading Crown?
Amongst all the cruelties which I have done,
Oh, Edwards Babes, and Clare^ce hapless Son,
O Jane, why did thou dye in flowring prime,
Because of Royal Stem, that was thy crime;
For Bribery, Adultery, for Thefts, and Lies,
Where is the Nation, I cannot paralize;
With Usury, Extortion, and Oppression,
These be the Hydra's of my stout transgression;
These be the bitter fountains, heads, and roots,
Whence flowed the source, the sprigs, the boughs, and fruits;
Of more then thou can hear, or I relate,
That with high hand I still did perpetrate;
For these, were threatened the woeful day,
I mocked the Preachers, put it far away;
The Sermons yet upon record do stand,
That cried, destruction to my wicked Land:
These Prophets mouths (al^s the while) was stopped,
Unworthily, some backs whipped, and ears crept;
Their reverent checks, did bear the glorious marks
Of stinking, stigmatizing, Romish Clerks;
Some lost their livings, some in prison pent,
Some grossly fined, from friends to exile went:
Their silent tongues to heaven did vengeance cry,
Who heard their cause, and wrongs judged righteously,
And will repay it sevenfold in my lap,
This is forerunner of my after clap,
Not took I warning by my neighbors falls,
I saw sad Germanie's dismantled walls.
I saw her people famished, Nobles slain,
Her fruitful land, a barren heath remain.
I saw (unmoved) her Armies foiled and fled,
Wives forced, babes tossed, her houses calcined,
I saw strong Rochel yielding to her foe,
Thousands of starved Christi ns there also.
I saw poor Ireland bleeding out her last,
Such cruelty as all reports have past.
My heart obdurate, stood not yet aghast.
Now sip I of that cup, and just 't may be,
The bottom dregs reserved are for me.
New England.
To all you have said, sad mother, I assent
Your fearful sins, great cause there is to lament,
My guilty hands (in part) hold up with you,
A sharer in your punishment's my due,
But all you say, amounts to this effect,
Not what you feel, but what you do expect.
Pray in plain terms, what is your present grief,
Then let us join heads, and hands for your relief.
Old England.
Well, to the matter then, there is grown of late,
'Twixt King and Peers a question of state,
Which is the chief, the law, or else the King,
One says its he, the other no such thing.
My better part in Court of Parliament,
To ease my groaning land show their intent,
To crush the proud, and right to each man deal.
To help the Church, and stay the Commonweal,
So many obstacles comes in their way,
As puts me to a stand what I should say,
Old customs, new Prerogatives stood on,
Had they not held law fast, all had been gone,
Which by their prudence stood them in such stead,
They took high Strafford lower by the head,
And to their Laud be it spoke, they held in the Tower,
All Englands Metropolitan that hour,
This done, an Act they would have passed fain,
No prelate should his Bishopric retain;
Here tugged they hard indeed, for all men saw,
This must be done by Gospel, not by law.
Next the Militia they urged sore,
This was denied, I need not say wherefore.
The King displeased, at York himself absents,
They humbly beg return, show their intents,
The writing, printing, posting to and fro,
Shows all was done, I Will therefore let it go.
But now I come to speak of my disaster,
Contention's grown 'twixt Subjects and their Master:
They worded it so long, they fell to blows,
That thousands lay on heaps, here bleeds my woes.
I that no wars, so many years have known,
Am now destroyed, and slaughtered by mine own,
But could the field alone this cause decide,
One battle, two or three I might abide,
But these may be beginnings of more woe,
Who knows, the worst, the best may overthrow;
Religion, Gospel, here lies at the stake,
Pray now dear child, for sacred Zions sake,
Oh pity me, in this sad perturbation,
My plundered Towns, my houses devastation,
My ravished virgins, and my young men slain,
My wealthy trading fallen, my dearth of grain,
The seed time's come, but Ploughman has no hope,
Because he knows not, who shall inn his crop:
The poor they want their pay, their children bread,
Their woeful mother's tears unpitied.
If any pity in thy heart remain,
Or any child-like love thou do retain,
For my relief now use thy utmost skill,
And recompense me good, for all my ill.
New England.
Dear mother cease complaints, and wipe your eyes,
Shake off your dust, cheer up, and now arise,
You are my mother, nurse, I once your flesh,
Your sunken bowels gladly would refresh:
Your griefs I pity much, but should do wrong,
To weep for that we both have prayed for long,
To see these latter days of hoped for good,
That Right may have its right, though it be with blood;
After dark Popery the day did clear,
But now the Sun in's brightness shall appear,
Blessed be the Nobles of thy Noble Land,
With (ventured lives) for truths defense that stand,
Blessed be thy Commons, who for Common good,
And thine infringed Laws have boldly stood.
Blessed be thy Counties which do aid thee still
With hearts and states, to testify their will.
Blessed be thy Preachers, who do cheer thee on,
O cry: the sword of God, and Gidem:
And shall I not on those wish Mero's curse,
That help thee not with prayers, arms, and purse,
And for my self, let miseries abound,
If mindlesse of thy state I ever be found.
These are the days, the Churches foes to crush,
To root out Prelates, head, tail, branch, and rush.
Let Us bring Baals vestments out, to make a fire,
Their Myters, Surplices, and all their tire,
Copes, Rochets, Crossiers, and such trash,
And let their names consume, but let the flash
Light Christendom, and all the world to see,
We hate Romes Whore, with all her trumperie.
Go on brave Essex, show whose son thou art,
Not false to King, nor Country in thy heart,
But those that hurt his people and his Crown,
By force expel, destroy, and tread them down:
Let Gaoles be filled with th'remnant of that pack,
And sturdy Tyburn loaded till it crack,
And ye brave Nobles, chase away all fear,
And to this blessed Cause closely adhere
O mother, can you weep, and have such Peers.
When they are gone, then drown your self in tears.
If now you weep so much, that then no more,
The briny Ocean will o'rflow your shore,
These, these, are they ( I trust) with Charles our King,
Out of all mists, such glorious days will bring,
That dazzled eyes beholding much shall wonder
At that thy settled Peace, thy wealth and splendor,
Thy Church and Weal, established in such manner,
That all shall joy that thou display'dst thy banner,
And discipline erected, so I trust,
That nursing Kings, shall come and lick thy dust:
Then Justice shall in all thy Courts take place,
Without respect of persons, or of case,
Then bribes shall cease, and suits shall not stick long,
Patience, and purse of Clients for to wrong:
Then High Commissions shall fall to decay,
And Pursevants and Catchpoles want their pay,
So shall thy happy Nation ever flourish,
When truth and righteousness they thus shall nourish.
When thus in Peace: thine Armies brave send out,
To sack proud Rome, and all her vassalls rout:
There let thy name, thy fame, thy valor shine,
As did thine Ancestors in Palestine,
And let her spo^ls, full pay, with interest be,
Of what unjustly once she poll'd from thee,
Of all the woes thou can let her be sped,
Execute toth' full the vengeance threatened.
Bring forth the beast that ruled the world with his beck,
And tear his flesh, and set your feet on's neck,
And make his filthy den so desolate,
To the 'stonishment of all that knew his state.
This done, with brandished swords, to Turkey go,
(For then what is it, but English blades dare do)
And lay her wast, for so's the sacred doom;
And do to Gog, as thou have done to Rome.
Oh Abraham's seed lift up your heads on high.
For sure the day of your redemption's nigh;
The scales shall fall from your long blinded eyes,
And him you shall adore, who now despise,
Then fulness of the Nations in shall flow,
And Jew and Gentile, to one worship go,
Then follows days of happiness and rest,
Whose lot does fall to live therein is blessed:
No Canaanite shall then be found in the land,
And holiness, on horses bells shall stand,
If this make way thereto, then sigh no more,
But if at all, thou did not see it before.
Farewell dear mother, Parliament, prevail,
And in a while you will tell another tale.
An Elegy upon that Honorable and renowned Knight, Sir Philip Sidney, who was
untimely slain at the Seige of Zutphon, Anno 1586.
By A. B. in the year, 1638.
WHen England did enjoy her Halsion days,
Her noble Sidney wore the Crown of Bays;
No less an Honor to our British Land,
Then she that swayed the Scepter with her hand:
Mars and Minerva did in one agree,
Of Arms, and Arts, thou should a pattern be.
Calliope with Terpsecher did sing,
Of Poesy, and of Music thou were King;
Thy Rhethorick it struck Polimnia dead,
Thine Eloquence made Mercury wax red;
Thy Logic from Euterpe won the Crown,
More worth was thine, then Clio could set down.
Thalia, and Melpomene, say the truth,
(Witness Arcadia, penned in his youth)
Are not his Tragic Comedies so acted,
As if your nine-fold wit had been compacted;
To show the woe ld, they never saw before,
That this one Volumne should exhaust your store.
I praise thee not for this, it is unfit,
This was thy shame, O miracle of wit:
Yet does thy shame (with all) purchase renown,
What do thy virtues then? Oh, honors crown!
In all records, thy Name I ever see,
Put with an Epithet of dignity;
Which shows, thy worth was great, thine honor such,
The love thy Country ought thee, was as much.
Let then, none dis-allow of these my strains,
Which have the self-same blood yet in my veins;
Who honors thee for what was honorable,
But leaves the rest, as most unprofitable:
Thy wiser days, condemned thy witty works,
Who knows the Spells that in thy Rethroick lurks?
But some infatuate fools soon caught therein,
Found Cupids Dam, had never such a Gin;
Which makes severer eyes but scorn thy Story,
And mode^ Maids, and Wives, blush at thy glory;
Yet, he is a beetle head, that cannot discry
A world of treasure, in that rubbish lie;
And does thy self, thy work, and honor wrong,
(O brave Refiner of our B^iuish Tongue;)
That sees not learning, valor, and morality,
Justice, friendship, and kind hospitality;
Yea, and Divinity within thy Book,
Such were prejudicate, and did not look:
But to say truth, thy worth I shall but stain,
Thy fame, and praise, is far beyond my strain;
Yet great Augustus was content (we know)
To be saluted by a silly Crow;
Then let such Crows as I, thy praises sing,
A Crow's a Crow, and Caesar is a King.
O brave Achilles, I wish some Homer would
Engrave on Marble, in characters of Gold,
What famous feats thou did, on Flanders coast,
Of which, this day, fair Belgia does boast.
O Zutphon, Zutphon, that most fatal City,
Made famous by thy fall, much more's the pity;
Ah, in his blooming prime, death plucked this Rose,
E're he was ripe; his thread cut Atropos.
Thus man is borne to dye, and dead is he,
Brave Hector by the walls of Troy, we see:
Oh, who was near thee, but did sore repine;
He rescued not with life, that life of thine,
But yet impartial Death this Boon did give,
Though Sidney died, his valiant name should live;
And live it does, in spite of death, through fame,
Thus being overcome, he over-came.
Where is that envious tongue, but can afford,
Of this our noble Scipio some good word?
Noble Bartas, this to thy praise adds more,
In sad, sweet verse, thou did his death deplore;
Illustrious Stella, thou did thine full well,
If thine aspect was mild to Astrophell;
I fear thou were a Commet, did portend
Such prince as he, his race should shortly end:
If such Stars as these, sad presages be,
I wish no more such Blazers we may see;
But thou art gone, such Meteors never last,
And as thy beauty, so thy name would wast,
But that it is record by Philips hand,
That such an omen once was in our land,
O Princely Philip, rather Alexander,
Who were of honors band, the chief Commander.
How could that Stella, so confine thy will?
To wait till she, her influence distill,
I rather judged thee of his mind that wept,
To be within the bounds of one world kept,
But Omphala, set Hercules to spin,
And Mars himself was ta'n by Venus gin;
Then wonder less, if warlike Philip yield,
When such a Hero shoots him out of the field,
Yet this pre-eminence thou have above,
That thine was true, but theirs adult'rate love.
Fain would I show, how thou fame's path did tread,
But now into such Lab'rinths am I led
With end less turns, the way I find not out,
For to persist, my muse is more in doubt:
Calls me ambitious fool, that durst aspire,
Enough for me to look, and so admire.
And makes me now with Sylvester confess,
But Sydney's Muse, can sing his worthiness.
Too late my error see, that durst presume
To fix my faltring lines upon his tomb:
Which are in worth, as far short of his due,
As Vulcan is, of Venus native hue.
Goodwill, did make my headlong pen to run,
Like unwise Phaeton his ill guided son,
Till taught to's cost, for his too hasty hand,
He left that charge by Phoebus to be manned:
So proudly foolish I, with Phaeton strive,
Fame's flaming Chariot for to drive.
Till terrour-struck for my too weighty charge.
I leave't in brief, Apollo do it at large.
Apollo laughed to patch up what is begun,
He bad me drive, and he would hold the Sun,
Better my hap, then was his darlings fate,
For dear regard he had of Sydney's state,
Who in his Deity, had so deep share,
That those that name his fame, he needs must spare,
He Promised much, but the muses had no will,
To give to their detractor any quill.
With high disdain, they said they gave no more,
Since Sydney had exhausted all their store,
That this contempt it did the more perplex,
In being done by one of their own sex;
They took from me, the scribbling pen I had,
I to be eased of such a task was glad.
For to revenge his wrong, themselves engage,
And drove me from Parnassus in a rage,
Not because, sweet Sydney's fame was not dear,
But I had blemished theirs, to make 't appear:
I pensive for my fault, sat down, and then,
Errata, through their leave threw me my pen,
For to conclude my poem two lines they daigne,
Which writ, she bad return't to them again.
So Sydney's fame, I leave to England's Rolls,
His bones do lie interred in stately Paul's.
His Epitaph.
Here lies entombed in fame, under this stone,
Philip and Alexander both in one.
Heir to the Muses, the Son of Mars in truth,
Learning, valor, beauty, all in virtuous youth:
His praise is much, this shall suffice my pen,
That Sidney died the quintessence of men.
In honor of Du Bartas. 1641.
A. B.
AMongst the happy wits this Age has shown,
Great, dear, sweet Bartas, thou art marchlesse known;
My ravished eyes, and heart, with faltering tongue,
In humble wise have vowed their service long;
But knowing the task so great, and strength but small,
Gave over the work, before begun withal:
My dazzled sight of late, reviewed thy lines,
Where Art, and more then Art in Nature shines;
Reflection from their beaming altitude,
Did thaw my frozen hearts ingratitude;
Which Rays, datting upon some richer ground,
Had caused flowers, and fruits, soon to abound,
But barren I, my Day sey here do bring,
A homely flower in this my latter spring:
If Summer, or my Au^umne age, do yield
^^ewers, sruits, in garden, orchard, or in sield;
They shall be consecrated in my Verse,
And prostrate off'red at great Bartas Hearse.
My Muse unto a Child, I fitly may compare,
Who sees the riches of some famous Fair;
He feeds his eyes, but understanding lacks,
To comprehend the worth of all those knacks;
The glittering Plate, and Jewels, he admires,
The Hats, and Fans, the Plumes, and Ladies tires,
And thousand times his mazed mind does wish
Some part, at least, of that brave wealth was his;
But seeing empty wishes naught obtain,
At night turns to his Mothers cor again,
And tells her tales; (his full heart over-glad)
Of all the glorious sights his eyes have had:
But finds too soon his want of Eloquence,
The silly Pratler speaks no word of sense;
And seeing utterance fail his great desires,
Sits down in filence, deeply he admires:
Thus weak brained I, reading thy lofty style,
Thy profound Learning; viewing other while
Thy Art, in Natural Philosophy:
Thy Saint-like mind in grave Divinity,
Thy peircing skill in high Astronomy,
And curious in-sight in Anatomy;
Thy Physic, Music, and State policy,
Valor in War, in Peace good Husbandry.
Sure liberal Nature, did with Art not small,
In all the Arts make thee most liberal;
A thousand thousand times my senseless Senses,
Movelesse, stand charmed by thy sweet influences,
More senseless then the Stones to Amphions Lute,
Mine eyes are sightlesse, and my tongue is mute;
My full astonished heart does pant to break,
Through grief it wants a faculty to speak,
Vollies of praises could I echo then,
Had I an Angels voice, or Barta's pen,
But wishes cannot accomplish my de sire,
Pardon, if I adore, when I admire.
O France, in him thou did more glory gain,
Then in thy Pippin, M^rtell, Charlemain.
Then in Saint Lewis, or thy last Henry great,
Who tamed his foes, in blood, in skarres and sweat,
Thy fame is spread as far, I dare be bold,
In all the Zones, the temperate, hot and cold,
Their trophies were but heaps of wounded slain,
Thine the quintessence of an Heroic brain.
The Oaken garland ought to deck their brows,
Immortal bays, all men to thee allows.
Who in thy tryumphs (never won by wrongs)
Leadst millions chaind by eyes, by ears, by tongues,
Often have I wondered at the hand of heaven,
In giving one, what would have served seven.
If ever this golden gift was show^'d on anv,
Thy double portion would have served many.
Unto each man his riches are assigned,
Of names, of state, of body, or of mind,
Thou have thy part of all, but of the last,
Oh pregnant brain, Oh comprehension vast:
Thy haughty style, and rapted wit sublime,
All ages wondering at, shall never clime.
Thy sacred works are not for imitation,
But monuments for future admiration:
Thus Bartas fame shall last while stars do sland,
And whilst there is air, or fire, or sea or land.
But lest my ignorance should do thee wrong,
To celebrate thy merits in my Song,
I Will leave thy praise, to those shall do thee right,
Good will, not skill, did cause me bring my mite.
His Epitaph.
HEre lies the pearl of France, Parnassus glory,
The world rejoiced at's birth, at's death was sorry;
Art and Nature joined, by heavens high decree,
Now showed what once they ought, Humanity,
And Natures Law; had it been revocable,
To rescue him from death, Art had been able:
But Nature vanquished Art, so Bartas died,
But Fame, out-living both, he is revived.
In honor of that High and Mighty Princess, Queen ELIZABETH, of most happy
memory.
The Proem.
ALthough great Queen, thou now in silence lie,
Yet thy loud Herald Fame, does to the sky
Thy wondrous worth proclaim, in every clime,
And so has vowed, whilst there is world, or time;
So great's thy glory, and thine excellence,
The sound thereof raps every humane sense;
That men account it no impiety,
To say, thou were a fleshly Deity:
Thousands bring offerings, (though out of date)
Thy world of honors to accumulate,
Among hundred Hecatombs of roaring Verse,
'Mine bleating stands before thy royal Hearse:
Thou never did, nor can thou now disdain,
TO accept the tribute of a loyal Brain;
Thy clemency did yerst esteem as much
The acclamations of the poor, as rich;
Which makes me deem, my rudeness is no wrong,
Though I resound thy greatness amongst the throng.
The Poem.
NO Phoenix Pen, nor Spencers Poetry,
No Speeds, nor Chamdens learned History;
Eliza's works, wars, praise, can e're compact,
The World's the Theater where she did act;
No memories, nor volumes can contain,
The nine Olimp'ades of her happy reign;
Who was so good, so just, so learned, so wise,
From all the Kings on earth she won the prize;
Nor say I more then duly is her due,
Millions will restifie that th^s is true;
She has wiped off the aspersion of her Sex,
That women wisdom lack to play the R^x;
Spaines Monarch sa's not so; nor yet his H^^st,
She taught them better manners to their cost.
The Salique Law had not in force now been,
If France had ever hoped for such a Queen;
But can you Doctors now this point dispute,
She Is argument enough to make you mute;
Since first the Sun did run, his never ^unn'd race,
And earth had twice a year, a new old face:
Sin^e time was time, and man unmanly man,
Come show me such a Phoenix if you can;
Was ever people better ruled then hers?
Was ever Land more happy, freed from stirs?
Did ever wealth in England so abound?
Her Victories in foreign Coasts resound?
Ships more invincible then Spaines, her foe
She ract, she sacked, she sunk his Armadoe;
Her stately Troops advanced to Lisbons wall,
Don Anthony in's right for to install;
She frankly helped Franks (brave) distressed King,
The States united now her fame do sing;
She their Protectrix was, they well do know,
Unto our dread Virago, what they owe:
Her Nobles sacrisic'd their noble blood,
Nor men, nor coin she spa^'d, to do them good;
The rude untamed Irish she did quell,
And Tiron bound, before her picture fell.
Had ever Prince such Counselors as she?
Her self Minerva, caused them so to be;
Such Soldiers, and such Captains never seen,
As were the subjects of our (Pallas) Queen:
Her Seamen through all straights the world did round,
Terra incognitae might know her sound;
Her Drake came laded home with Spanish gold,
Her Essex took Cades, their Herculean hold:
But time would fail me, so my wit would to,
To tell of half she did, or she could do;
Semiramis to her is but obscure,
More infamy then fame she did procure;
She placed her glory but on Babels walls,
Worlds wonder for a time, but yet it falls;
Feirce Tomris (Cirus Heads-man, Sythians Queen)
Had put her Harness off, had she but seen
Our Amazon ^' the Camp at Tilberry:
(Judging all valor, and all Majesty)
Within that Princess to have residence,
And prostrate yielded to her Excellence:
Dido first Foundresse of proud Carthage walls,
(Who living consummates her Funerals)
A great Eliza, but compared with ours,
How vanishes her glory, wealth, and powers;
Proud profuse Cleopalra, whose wrong name,
Instead of glory proved her Countries shame:
Of her what worth in Story's to be seen,
But that she was a rich Egyptian Queen;
Zenobia, potent Empress of the East,
And of all these without compare the best;
(Whom none but great Au^clius could quell)
Yet for our Queen is no sit parallel:
She was a Phoenix Queen, so shall she be,
Her ashes not revived more Phoenix she;
Her personal perfections, who would tell,
Must dip his Pen in the Heliconian Well;
Which I may not, my pride does but aspire,
To read what others write, and then admire.
Now say, have women worth, or have they none?
Or had they some, but with our Queen is it gone?
Nay Masculines, you have thus taxed us long,
But she though dead, will vindicate our wrong.
Let such, as say our sex is void of reason,
Know it is a slander now, but once was treason.
But happy England, which had such a Queen,
O happy, happy, had those days still been,
But happiness, lies in a higher sphere,
Then wonder not, Eliza moves not here.
Full fraught with honor, riches, and with days:
She set, she set, like Titan in his rays,
No more shall rise or set such glorious Sun,
Until the heavens great revolution:
If then new things, their old form must retain,
Eliza shall rule Albian once again.
Her Epitaph.
Here sleeps THE Queen, this is the reyall bed
Of The Damask Rose, sprung from the white and red,
Whose sweet perfume fills the all-filling air,
This Rose is withered, once so lovely fair,
On neither tree did grow such Rose before,
The greater was our gain, our loss the more.
Another.
Here lies the pride of Queens, pattern of Kings,
So blaze it fame, here is feathers for thy wings,
Here lies the envied, yet unparralell'd Prince,
Whose living virtues speak (though dead long since)
If many worlds, as that fantastic framed,
In every one, be ber great glory famed.
David's Lamentation for Saul, and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.19.
ALas, slain is the head of Israel,
Illustrious Saul, whose beauty did excel
Upon thy places, mountan'ous and high,
How did the mighty fall, and falling dye?
In Gath, let not this thing be spoken on,
Nor published in streets of Askelon,
Lest Daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
Lest the uncircumsised lift up their voice:
O! Gilbo Mounts, let never pearled dew,
Nor fruitful showers your barren tops bestrew,
Nor fields of offerings e're on you grow,
Nor any pleasant thing e're may you show;
For the mighty ones did soon decay,
The Shield of Saul was vilely cast away;
There had his dignity so fore a foil,
As if his head never felt the sacred Oil:
Sometimes from crimson blood of ghastly slain,
The bow of Jonathan never turned in vain,
Nor from the far, and spoils, of mighty men,
Did Saul with bloodlesse Sword turn back again:
Pleasant and lovely were they both in life,
And in their deaths was found no parting strife;
Swifter then swiftest Eagles, so were they,
Stronger then Lions, ramping for their prey.
O Isreal's Dames, o're-flow your beauteous eyes,
For valiant Saul, who on Mount Gilbo lies;
Who clothed you in cloth of richest dye,
And choice delights, full of variety.
On your array put ornaments of gold,
Which made you yet more beauteous to behold.
O! how in battle did the mighty fall,
In midst of strength not succored at all:
O! lovely Jonathan, how were thou slain,
In places high, full low thou do remain;
Distressed I am, for thee, dear Jonathan,
Thy love was wonderful, passing a man;
Exceeding all the Love that is Feminine,
So pleasant have thou been, dear brother mine:
How are the mighty fallen into decay,
And warlike weapons perished away.
Of the vanity of all worldly creatures.
AS he said vanity, so vain say I,
O vanity, O vain all under sky,
Where is the man can say, lo, I have found
On brittle earth, a consolation sound?
What is 't in honor, to be set on high?
No, they like beasts, and sons of men shall die,
And whilst they live, how often does turn their State?
He Is now a slave, that was a Prince of late.
What is it in wealth, great treasures for to gain?
No, that is but labor anxious, care and pain.
He heaps up riches, and he heaps up sorrow,
Its his to day, but who 's his heir to morrow?
What then? content in pleasures can thou find?
More vain then all, that is but to grasp the wind.
The sensual senses for a time they please,
Mean while the conscience rage, who shall appease?
What is it in beauty? no, that is but a snare,
They Are foul enough to day, that once was fair,
What, Is It in flowring youth, or manly age?
The first is prone to vice, the last to rage.
Where is it then? in wisdom, learning, arts?
Sure if on earth, it must be in those parts;
Yet these, the wisest man of men did find,
But vanity, vexation of the mind,
And he that knows the most does still bemoan,
He knows not all, that here is to be known,
What is it then? to do as Stoics tell,
Nor laugh, nor weep, let things go ill or well*
Such stoics are but stocks, such teaching vain:
While man is man, he shall have ease or pain.
If not in honor, beauty, age, nor treasure,
Nor yet in learning, wisdom, youth nor pleasure?
Where shall I climb, sound, seek, search or find,
That summum Bonum which may stay my mind?
There is a path, no vultures eye has seen.
Where lions fierce, nor lions whelps has been,
Which leads unto that living Crystal fount,
Who drinks thereof, the world does naught account.
The depth, and sea, has said its not in me,
With pearl and gold it shall not valued be:
For Saphyre, Onix, Topas, who will change,
Its hid from eyes of men, they count it strange,
Death and destruction, the fame has heard,
But where, and what it is, from heaven's declared,
It brings to honor, which shall not decay,
It steeres with wealth, which time cannot wear away.
It yields pleasures, fair beyond conceit,
And truly beautifies without deceit.
Nor strength nor wisdom, nor fresh youth shall fade,
Nor death shall see, but are immortal made,
This pearl of price, this tree of life, this spring,
Who is possessed of, shall reign a King.
Nor change of state, nor cares shall ever see,
But wear his Crown unto eternity,
This satiat^s the soul, this stays the mind,
The rest's but vanity, and vain we find.
FINIS.

