Principiis Obsta.

THE Ready Way TO PREVENT SIN.

By William Bagshaw.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside. 1671.

THE READY WAY TO Prevent Sin.
Prove. 30.32. Or if thou have thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.


THat thoughts are free, is a Proverb, but it is none of Solomon's. It is nigh
to many (even in their mouths) but it is far from truth; as is evident from
other Texts, and shall (the Lord assisting) be evidenced from this Text, which
calls aloud on man to call himself in question, for his very thoughts.

Herein notice is to be taken.

1. Of an Antecedent, which has the form or face of a Supposition.

If thou have thought evil.
2. Of a Consequent, which has the force and authority of an Imposition.

Lay thine hand upon thy mouth.
I say, the first words have the face of a Supposition, because I think they
have no more than so, in the respect which I shall next name.

It is not to be supposed, that the highest attainers, or closest walkers, on
earth, are wholly exempt and free from evil in their thoughts.

Who can say, (and say true) I have made my heart clean? Prove. 20.9


The If in the beginning of the Text may be there, Si ratiocinantis.
as it is elsewhere, argumentative, and may import the Reason or Cause why men
should lay their hands upon their mouths, to wit, because they have thought
evil. Such a kind of If is found in sundry Scriptures, particularly in that
speech of Haman's Wife and Friends, Esther 6.13: Romans 8.31
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, thou shall not prevail against him.
Sure it was, and sure they might be, that he was of that seed, and they
intimate to Haman in a prudential (I will not say prophetical) way, that
because he had begun to fall before one of that stock, there would now be no
standing before him.

Or the If which I am treating of may be looked at as determining, Si
determinantis.
setting down the season or nick of time when the hand is to be laid upon the
mouth, See Taylo^ upon Pro. 1.10.
to wit, as soon as ever an evil thought is risen in the heart; and it is
observed, that the Hebrew Particle translated if in this place, is translated
When, in another place, quoted in the Margent. Amos 7.2.
When they had made an end of eating the grass of the Land, I said, O Lord God
forgive.

Laying the hand upon the mouth is a Rite or Ceremony several times mentioned
in holy Writ, which seems to have its foundation in Nature, and is apt to
signify the sorrow and shame of him that is the user and observer of it.
Concerning the significancy of it here, I shall speak more at large in the
handling of that Doctrine, unto which I shall now address my self.


Thoughts have been (and may be) distinguished. ^y Doctor ^urstow in Sermon
(...) St. Ma^es upon sai. 55.7.


We may treat of thoughts in a larger acception, as taking in all the
affections and inward workings of the Soul, as differenced from outward actions
and works of the Body. In this sense we read of them, where the Lord says of
Idolaters, Isai. 66.13.
that He knows their works and their thoughts.

I shall especially consider them as they are considered more strictly and
narrowly, Cogitatio est actio mentis. (...) Luke 11.17. (...), Acts 8.22
as taken for the actings or musings of the mind, and it is clear, that the
words which are used by the Greeks for thoughts do imply, that they are things
of the minds making or framing.

As for the phrase of thinking evil.
I am not ignorant that some Interpreters, comparing the Text with the Context,
incline to think, that some special notorious evils are hinted and pointed at.

Some refer it to the evil mentioned in the former part of the verse, and judge
that proud and self-exalting thoughts are understood.

Others look still further back to the former verse, English Annota^ ons in
(...)
and apprehend that seditious thoughts, thoughts against the King are intended.

Others would carry the evil here mentioned, Dutch Annot.
to the wrath mentioned in the verse following, as if wrathful thoughts were
principally struck at.

I no way doubt, but thoughts so vile as these instanced in are comprehended,
and I will not gainsay them who say, that such thoughts are first aimed at; yet
I see no reason to restrain the Text to evil thoughts of one sort, or to vary
from those who expound it of evil thoughts of all sorts.

If we think any evil, our hands are to be laid on our mouths, and so I shall
endeavor to resolve these two Questions.
1. What may laying the hand on the mouth import?

2. Why should we lay our hands on our mouths when we have thought evil?

As for the former, the phrase I ^umbly conceive may be conceived as looking
backwards, and ^s looking forwards.

1. As it looks backwards on ^he thought which has been evil, ^t may imply
conviction in the head, contrition in the heart, and ^onfusion in the face.

1. Laying the hand on the mouth intimates, that the person who uses it is
under a true and ^ull conviction of the sinfulness of thought-sins, See Biscoe
on the thoughts, Page 278.
freely voting with ^he law in condemning them, and himself for them,
despairing of making satisfaction to God for the injury offered to his
righteousness ^y them. Romans 3.19.
In this sense does blessed Paul speak of every mouth ^eing stopped. It was the
fault of our first Parents, to open their mouths in excuse of their fault, this
sin is too too much heredita^y, and followed by their children, but the Text
shows an excellent way.

2. Laying the hand on the mouth is to testify, that he wh^ has thought evil,
has his hear^ so full of sorrow for his so thinking, that he cannot easily
vent it As smiting on the thigh, and a^ laying the mouth in the dust, (...)
laying the hand on the mouth (...) (as one says) a penitential ge^sture;
Re^ner's Rule.
thus we may understand tha^ phrase of Job, where the holy man having
acknowledged himself vile (even to wonderment) professes his purpose to lay
his han^ on his mouth, Job 40.4.
as betokening the depth of his self-abasement.

3. Manum ori imponere, est coram hominibus confundi Pelican in loc.
As the posture under consideration denotes the depth o^ self-abasement, so it
withal de^noteth the height of shame, an^ thus the phrase is used, where the
Lord tells us, that Israel shall b^^ confounded, and never open he^ mouth
more, because of her shame when he is pacified toward her (...) Thus Job bids
his small friends la^^ Job 21.5.
their hands on their mouths (for ^^me that they had so misplaced ^^ir words)
and be astonished. ^^ce sin entered into the world, ^^ld-like shame has been
one of (...) best attendants, and it is that ^^ich aggravateth the injustice of
^^e unjust, he knows no shame; Zeph. 3.5:
(...) has not so much of the color (...) virtue, as blushing is, to be seen
(...) him.

2. As laying the hand on the ^outh looks forward, so it ^ldeth forth a
staying and stoping of sins progress. Principiis obsta. See the Dutch Annotat.
If sin have ^ade its way into the thought, it (...) high time that such a bad
be^inning should be withstood, that ^uch a Cockatrice should be crush^d in the
egg. When Job had ^id, Job 40.4, 5.
he would lay his hand on his ^outh, that we may better reach ^is meaning, he
adds, Once have (...) spoken, yea twice, but I will pro^eed no further, that
is, to speak (as he had done) that he understood not, things too wonderful
(...) him, which he knew not. Sin (...) the heart will quickly be an^^ break
out of the mouth, if it (...) not opposed; and therefo^^ there must be a rising
against th^^ first risings of it. It is no mo^^ than enough, that there has
be^^ a thinking of evil, all care must (...) had that it be not spoken, or p^^^
in practice.

The reasons or reasonablene^^ of this Doctrine I sha^^ now touch on.
1. Thought-sins are the immediate issues of original sin.

Thought-sins are (as one phra^ seth it) the Reubens of man's corrupted nature,
the strength there of appears in them. The Spirit speaks expressly, Mat. 15.9.
that out of the heart (not as created, but as corrupted) proceed evil thoughts
these proceed first. Seeing the^^ that when one of these streams is ^^sight,
the filthy fountain may (...) seen in it, shall not this sight ^use sorrow and
shame? Seeing ^is inbred enemy is at work, we ^^d need with might and main to
^^fist it, especially considering that follows.

2. The worst of other sins are ^e issues of thought-sins.

When evil thoughts have pro^eded out of the heart, Mat. 15.19.
then from ^em do proceed murders, adul^ries, yea, and blasphemies.

The greatest actual evil that ^ver man committed was first a ^ttle thought.
Thoughts are to ^he soul, as boughs are to a tree, ^he fruit of a tree grows
immeditely on the boughs, and so the ^ctions and outward works which ^re from
the soul, do flow immedi^tely from the thoughts. Surely ^hen there is all
reason, when we ^ave thought evil, that we should forthwith be humbled, and
beware of any further process; (...) who knows what evil an e^^ thought may
bring forth? It truly observed, that sin is acti^ and when it is acting (if not
p^vented) it would act to its u^ most; See Doctor Owen of Mortification.
every wrathful thoug^ tends toward murder, and eve^ unclean thought would be
adu^tery.

The reason which I shall nam^ last I might have named first.

3. The order which is given (...) the Text, was given from Heaven Laying the
hand on the mouth when evil is arisen in the heart, is (...) course which has
Gods Command for its footing. Shall no^ we observe what God appoints (...)
Shall not our wills in obeying follow Gods will in enjoining? (...) was the man
after Gods heart, who fulfilled all his wills. Acts 13.20.
We have violated Divine laws in thinking evil, and shall we add iniquity t^^
iniquity? Shall we slight Divine authority further in neglecting that abasing
of our selves, that re^sting of our sins, which under ^his notion of laying our
hands on ^ur mouths is required? Surely ^he words which God speaks are spirit
and life, and to those of ^is, who conscientiously comply with this word,
eminent power against sin will be communicated. Isai. 40. last.
They who herein wait on the Lord shall renew their strength.

The good Lord help you and me to make a right application of this Point, and
to lay to our hearts:
1. First Inserence.
That sin is of an exceeding odious nature.

Sin when it is but framing or fashioning in the thought of a person, is (as
you have heard) matter of the deepest abasement. Sin admits of several
degrees, and the very least and lowest degree of it bespeaketh the swelling up
of godly sorrow, to a very great height. Not only sin when it is James 1.15.
See Dickson in loc.
perfected and put into outward act, but when it is conceived in the heart, is
bitterly to be bewailed.

Oh that I could, and when (...) cannot, that God would show sin to Readers in
its own colors, that they might dread approaches to, and shun the appearance
of such an evil!

2. The second Inserence. Vide Davenantium in Coloss. p. 284.
Our Divines are in the right, who maintain against the Papists, that
concupiscence, lust, or the first motion and stirring of the heart toward that
which God has forbidden, is sin. An evil thought (though the Soul do not give
its full consent to the evil which is thought) has in it the nature of
transgression, and not of affliction only.

1. The Commandment of God is exceeding broad, and binds the most secret
thoughts and motions of the heart. As one Commandment does say in so many
words, Thou shall not lust, Romans 7.7.
so all the Commandments, which do expressly forbid the acting of sin, do
virtually and by consequence forbid that thinking of it, which has any
tendency to it.

2. Lust, concupiscence, Col. 3.5. Cur mortificandum dicit Apostolus? non sic
de p^nis loqui solet. Davenant.
or the first stirring of the heart sinwards, is such an evil as is to be
mortified. If it had in it only the nature of suffering, and not of sin, it was
then to be endured, and not to be abhorred.

3. The third Inference.
We may from my Doctrine be informed of one reason, why sins prevalency over
persons is so great. There are not a few that make large complaints of sin, and
seemingly strong vows against it, who yet lie lamentably under the power of it.
This sovereign Remedy which my Text prescribes, is by too too few applied. The
thoughts of sin (or sin of thoughts) the most make light of. These are counted
(as the Papists speak) venial sins, sins, which if they need a pardon, will
obtain one of course, or without serious asking it. Sin is a fire which will
burn down to the nethermost hell, and the smoke of it should be trembled at. It
is a Serpent which will sting to eternal death, and at the first view it should
be fled from. Whilst persons do play upon the hole of this Asp, and on the
mouth of this Cockatrices den, whilst they hug this Traitor in their bosoms,
and please themselves with the thoughts of it, it has (and will have) dominion
over them.

4. The fourth Inference.
Surely there is great ground we should all be found with our hands on our
mouths. I mean, that we should be found freely and deeply humbling our selves.
We cannot possibly be unfurnished with matter for mourning, if an evil thought
be sufficient matter for it. The more to affect our hearts, let our eyes be
fixed on three particulars.

1. Our evil thoughts have been various.

2. Our evil thoughts have been numerous.

3. The evil which has been in our thoughts has not staid or stopped there.

1. Have we not broken both the Tables of Gods Law, yea, and the several
Commandments of those Tables in our thoughts?

1. Have we wholly escaped Atheism in our thoughts? What the thought or
heart-language of the Fool (of him who has no wisdom to salvation) is, we are
plainly told, Psalm. 14.1.10.4.
God as God (as unsearchably and inconceivably great and good) is not in all
his thoughts. His inward thoughts (the thoughts which he would fainest have to
be true) is, that there is no such God. Psalm. 50.21
Did not persons think that God was such a one as themselves, they durst not
partake with Adulterers, eat and drink with the drunken, and say to their Gold,
thou art our hope. Sure I am, sundry of Gods choice Servants would kiss the
feet of him that could assure them, that no Atheistical thought should ever
arise in them, or be thrown into them. To them those thoughts are matter of
abhorrence, which others trouble not at.

2. Have we not thought some of the Institutions and appointed ways of Gods
Word unnecessary, unprofitable and wearisom? Have we not said in our hearts,
Mal. 3.14, 15.
It is in vain to serve God, apart from others, in secret Prayer, Meditation
and Self-examination, and as partners with others in Morningservice, in
Church Service. If the Table of the Lord be not contemptible to us, do we not
live, as if we could well live without it?

3. Have not the services which we have performed to God been attended with
much distraction? Have we not sung one thing, Aliud can to, aliud cogito.
and thought another thing. Some have said, that notwithstanding the multitude
of Sacrifices in the Temple, there never came Fly there, but sad experience
tells us, that it is otherwise in the Temples of our hearts. Oh the flies of
roving thoughts, that have buzzed and been busy there, whilst spiritual
Sacrifices have been offered! Mat. 15.9.
Thus far we have taken Gods Name in vain, and worshipped him in vain, our
hearts which should have been broken ones, have been cloven ones; Mal. 1.13
we have brought the lame, and the torn, and offered it to God as sacrifice.

5. Have we not found our own pleasures on Gods holy day, and that eminently in
the thoughts which we have then entertained, ^sai. 58, 13.
which have been, if not unlawful on other days, yet unsuitable to that day?
Have we not thought what others have said? Amos 8.5.
When will the new Moon be gone, and the Sabbath? Have not earthly thoughts
gotten early admittance into our Souls? Has not this been one of the ways
whereby Satan has stolen the Word heard out of our hearts, by filling us with
thoughts about affairs of another nature.

5. Are we all clean from seditious thoughts against our Rulers, when they have
(as we judged) held an hard hand over us? Some (as I acquainted you) interpret
the Text especially of an evil thought of this nature. ^ccles. 10.^0.
The King may be by some (not without their grievous sin) cursed in a more
secret Room than that of their Bedchamber. Have we not thought hardly of our
Parents for their chiding and smiting us, when deserved by us? Have we paid
them the honor of inward reverence, as well as outward obedience? Filius a^^
te diem, etc.
Have no Children in their thoughts or wishes reached at their Parents estates
over their heads?

6. Have not thoughts of a furious wrathful nature arisen in us upon small
neglects and provocations? Have not we, who should have been to occasions of
anger, as wet moist wood is to sparks, hardly kindled, been as dry tinder is to
them, quickly on a flame? 1 Samuel 22.
David himself was a great Offender, as he afterward saw, when he thought for
Nabal's harshness to have put all the men in his house to the sword. Ephesians. ^
Have we put away from us all bitterness and wrath, as well as clamor and evil
speaking?

7. ^om. 13. ^^.
Have we not made provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof? Have we
not sent out our thoughts as ^ee Do^tor Good^yn on ^oughts.
Caterers to fetch in matter for the gratifying of our corrupt desires? The
Adulterer, who waits for the twilight, that he may commit his uncleanness,
does at midday defile his spirit with musings thereon. Have young Persons kept
their breasts as well as their beds undefiled?

8. Have none of us been pleased with thoughts of getting gain over the left
shoulder? Have we not thought that won which has been put in purse, though
upon overreaching our Brother, or taking advantage of his ignorance to make
him an hard bargain? Have we not with delight heard of damage that has
befallen such who have injured us? Have we not envied the outward welfare of
wicked men, as if God had been overseen in bestowing so much ^^on them. Psalm.
73, 2, 3.


9. Have we not too soon re^ived and entertained in our ^oughts evil reports,
which have ^^en raised of others? have we ^^t rather through uncharitable^ess
believed them true at first ^earing, than out of charity sus^ended our belief,
1 Cor. 13.5
till the truth ^ereof has been made apparent? ^hen others gifts and good
parts ^^ve been praised, have we not ^ought amiss of it, and secretly ^ished
they had not outshone us? ^ave we not thought meanly of ^or betters in Grace,
because in ^orldly estate we have something ^vertopped them?

10. Have we not thought our ^elves still on the wrong side, or ^ut of the
right place? Have we ^^t with Ahab thought that Na^^th's Vineyard lay so
commodi^usly for us, that we could not be ^t ease except it was purchased? Have
we not conceived disc^^tent, because we apprehended o^ selves short as to some
outwa^ convenience? Esth. 5.13.
Have not some be^ under a spice of Haman's disea^ whose honors and abundan^
signified nothing to his conte^ment, whilst Mordecai the J^^ was in the Kings
gate? Was (...) Jonah (as some speak) a stra^^ man of a good man, a very gl^^
of humors, who was in a p^ against God himself, Jonah 4.
for his mer^^ful dispensation, and preferred the poor business of his own
repu^ before the lives of the Inhabita^ of Nineveh that great City?

If we had but sinned once (...) against every Command in o^ thoughts, we should
think su^^ sinning did (...) bespeak our s^ row, sure then our sorrow is mo^
required, seeing that our e^ thoughts have been numerou^ yea, Psalm. 19.12
innumerable. Who can (...) searching fully find out and und^^stand all his
errors in thinking? ^ultitudes, multitudes, of these ^ils have compassed us
about, ^ey are more than the hairs of ^^r heads, they abound in our ^^uls, and
if our eyes have been ^iritually anointed, we have seen ^^em there as we see
Moats in or (...) the Sun: This string I may ^uch on again, and therefore
^roceed to show, in order to the ^reaking of mine own and others ^earts.

That much of the evil which ^^ath been in our thoughts has ^ot been staid
there, but has been ^rought forth in our expressions and actions. From these
Cocka^rices eggs have fiery flying Ser^ents been hatched, actual
trans^ressions, the sting whereof has ^^tred into our fouls. Have not ^ome of
our evil deeds received such fearful aggravations, that the Lord may charge us
to have done as evil as we could? Jer: 3.5.
Have they not been as scarlet, yea, red crimson?

If our hearts be not like a pie^ of the nether Millstone, the con^ deration of
the extreme sinfulne^^ of our thought-sins will fetch o^ hands to our mouths;
and that might be an Instrument in the hand of God to work upon the most
hard-hearted, I shall com^ with the rod of reproof to sever^ sorts of persons.

1. The fifth Inference.
They are justly reproved who, though as guilty of think^ ing evil as others,
are so far from laying their hands on their mouths, that they open them t^
plead for (at least to excuse an^ extenuate) their guilt, as if i^ was
inconsiderable. What say they, It was but in thought tha^ we have offended;
such Moat^ the Lords eye will overlook: Le^ them know from his Word, that his
thoughts are not as their thoughts. What they will scarce call offenses, Prove
6.18.15.26.
he does expressly call ^ominations, and reckons an ^eart that devises wicked
imanations, as one of the six things which he hates.

2. They also fall deservedly under reproof, who instead of lay^ng their hands
on their mouths, ^hen they have thought evil, open their mouths to speak of
their ^vil thoughts, in a rejoicing way. The poor rich Fool mentioned in ^he
Gospel, who had had covetous ^houghts within himself, Luke 12.17, 18, 19.
could not hold, but declares his great designs, which when he has
accomplished, he will sing a requiem to his Soul, all the while reckoning
without his Host, and not foreseeing how soon his life and pleasant thoughts
were to perish. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, Prove. 20.14.
who would beat down the price of a commodity, but when he is gone he boasts.
They that are sensual are apt to glory in their shame, and to say we will fill
(...) selves with strong drink, and (...) morrow shall be as this day, (...)
much more abundant.

Lastly, The lash of reproof fa^leth upon those, who, when th^^ have conceived
in their though^ cease not till they have brough^ them forth, and put them in
exec^tion. Prove. 4.16,
Some sleep not except the have done mischief, their sleep not so sweet, till
they have reven^ ged themselves of such who have crossed them. Simeon and Lev^
herein showed themselves brethren in iniquity, not stopping till their fierce
fiery wrath had consumed all the men of Shechem Absalom thought the Crown would
fit his own head better than his Fathers, and this vile thought he pursued till
Divine Justice stopped him. David himself went too far toward cutting off
Nabal's Family, and avenging himself with his own hands.

That these reproofs may take ^^re place, and that evil, whilst ^^thought, may
be more lamented ^^d resisted, the ensuing Conside^^tions are presented as
conside^ble.

You can never evidence that ^u have real and special Grace, ^ll you have a
prime regard unto ^our thoughts. This is one of ^he Touchstones of true
Conver^ion. The true Convert forsakes ^ot only his wicked way, but also ^his
former thoughts, and to this ^ourse are wicked ones directed ^y the Finger and
Spirit of God. Isai. 55.7.
It is truly said, Mr. Caryl.
He that is a Saint in thought, he is a Saint indeed. The thoughts of the
righteous are right: Prove. 12.5
But he that is heedless what he thinks, has the black brand of unregeneracy
upon him. When the people of Israel walked after their own thoughts, their way
was not good. There are Principles that are short of regeneration, which may
restrain m^^ from open and external evils. T^^ awe and law of men may cha^^
their hands, whose hearts are u^^ changed. He may be tender (...) his own
disgrace, who is not tender of Gods dishonor. Education and Examples may have
(...) great influence upon men's ou^ ward carriage. 2 Kings 12.2.
Jehoash demean himself civilly whilst Jehojad^ was his Tutor. Cogitationis
paenam ne^o patitur. Rogers on Luke 12.
Good words an^ actions may be counterfeited, bu^ the projects of this heart
lie no^ within the walk of humane Justice. Men suffer not in these lower Courts
merely for their thoughts, these things of a man^ knows no other man
immediately; and therefore thoughts have something of peculiarity i^ them to
discover the bent and byas of the inward man, Prove. 23.7
and as a man thinks in his heart, so is he.

2. As light as many make of evil thoughts, it is very evident (and has been
hinted) that what they seem to want of other ^evils, as to their weight, is
over and over made up as to their number. It is said of Aholah, Ezekiel. 23.19.
That she multiplied her whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of her
youth, wherein she had played the harlot. Thought-sins may be speedily and
frequently repeated. He that never has his hand in his Neighbors blood, may
hate him, and so murder him many times over. If men should compare an evil
thought to a little sand, yet they may know, that if all their evil thoughts
were laid together, they would make a whole Mountain of this sand, and how
heavy must that needs be.

3. It may not prove so easy as most imagine to obtain the pardon of
thought-sins. Acts 8.21.
Simon Peter urged Simon Magus to pray, if perhaps the thought of his heart may
be forgiven; which implies, that o^ all the great evil whereof tha^ Sorcerer
was guilty, the though^ of his heart was in some sor^ greatest; and withal
that it was an huge hazard, it was at a perhaps, whether that thought of his
heart fell within the compass of a pardon. Certainly wicked men's thoughts are
in this respect more wicked, because natural conscience does less gainsay them,
and corrupt nature does more delight in them, they being (as has been touched)
its firstborn.

4. If evil thoughts be not matter of your humiliation, they will be matter of
condemnation. Even in this life the Lord does not seldom bring upon people the
bitter fruit of their thoughts. Jer. 6.19.
When he resolved to destroy man from the face of the earth, he renders this
as one reason of his resolution, Genesis 6.5.
Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was only evil continually.
This we may write of, that forbearance of those in whom evil thoughts lodge,
will be no acquittance of them. The secrets of men shall be produced and laid
open. Eccles. 12. last.
He who will bring every work into judgment, will therewith proceed upon every
secret thing. Male judicata, non judicata. Mr. Burgess on the day of judgment.
Two sorts of things, God will be sure to judge, things that on earth were
mis-judged, and things which there were not judged. Will not men's faces gather
blackness, and their hearts be filled with horror, at the great day, if all
their evil thoughts be charged on them?

Supposing and hoping that the hearts of some will smite them, whose hearts
used to entertain thoughts of the worst sort, without remorse, yea, with
delight, and that they begin to cry out, What shall we do? What course should
persons in our case take? I shall leave with them the ensuing Directions.

1. Humble your selves as i^ the fight of the Lord, Psalm. 139, 2, 3.
who hat^ seen your evil thoughts afar of^ even when they were but fir^ forming
and conceiving, Pu^ your mouths in the dust, seein^ there is yet hope. Let you^
mourning be free, full and constant, not a fit only, but a fram^ That you may
nourish your so^row, let the streams of ev^thoughts lead you to the spring
(...) your most evil and pollute^ hearts; cry out, that you are unclean,
unclean, guilty and filth^^ beyond expression. Oh wretche^ men and women that
you are, b^ reason of a whole body of sin^ whereof evil musings are members!

2. Do not imagine that yo^ can in the least by your greate^ sorrows, services
or sufferings, s^ your selves right in the account (...) the Law and Justice of
God. Can the poor finite payments of your tears answer the demands of Gods
infinite Justice, which by your thinking evil you have engaged against you? It
was not washing in Abanah and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus, that could cure
Naaman of his Leprosy. Neither can any such waters as your weepings (though
very good in their proper place) cure your souls and free them from the guilt
of sin. Your unrighteousness makes you to need a Mediator; your own
righteousness (if set up in the place of this one and only Mediator) makes you
incapable of benefit by him. See M^rton's Orthodox Evangelis^ on Justification.
Isai. 64.6.
All your righteousnesses are but as filthy rags, if compared with the
exactness of the Law and first Covenant. Can rags cover you? Can filthy rags
cleanse you?

3. Run, yea, fly to the Refuge set before you. Cleave to and clasp the arm of
Faith about the^ Lord Jesus Christ, and present your selves to his Father
through^ him. He never thought amiss, and he has made such complete satis
faction for those who have thought amiss, that upon their union to him, and
interest in his merit, they shall be acquitted. His blood cleanses those who
by consent and covenant are his peculiar ones, from all sins, and so from
thought-sins. 1 John 1.7, 9.
Whereas convinced humbled persons, because they have multiplied sins of that
sort, are apt to question, whether upon their forsaking them, they shall find
mercy; he has given them assurance that he will abundantly pardon, Isai. 55.7,
8.
and that as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his thoughts higher
than their thoughts.

4. Wait and beg hard that the blessed Spirit of God would renew you in the
spirit of your minds, and having renewed you, that he would rest upon you.
Thoughts and musings do call the Mind Mother. Mat. 12.35.
Whilst there is an evil treasure, there will be a bringing forth of evil
thoughts. If the root be unholy, such will the branches be. Till the mind be
sound and pure, the thoughts will be rotten and impure; till the mind be humble
and heavenly, the prevailing thoughts will be proud and earthly: And until the
heart be the Temple wherein the Holy Ghost does reside and reign, vain evil
thoughts will lodge within you.

I shall in the last place apply my Doctrine to those, who though they have
daily and sad experience of their offending in thought, yet they can say, and
say truly, that

Vain thoughts are intruders, and not invited and welcome guests; Psalm. 119.
though they have them, yet they hate them, and dare not harbor them; though
they sometimes (...) make a through-fare, and pass through their hearts, they
dare not lodge them at any time; they have a prime care of their first and
last, their morning and evening thoughts, they would (as a worthy one prased
it) shut their hearts with a golden bolt, when they sleep, and open them with a
silver key when they awake, they are afraid of thinking their own thoughts on
Gods holy day, they make conscience of keeping their hearts above all keeping,
and withal have respect as to this, so to all the rest of Gods Commandments.

Such persons as I have last described, may and should cheer themselves, and
whilst they do well in their humiliations, they should not do ill in giving
way to those dejections which lead to desperation.

1. Wherein their case is sad, yet it is not singular. Evil was present with
blessed Paul, Romans 7.
even when he would do good. Holy David, who hated vain thoughts, did not say
that he had none of them. As the Fowls came down upon the Carcases, when the
Father of the Faithful was sacrificing, so do flying and wandering thoughts come
down upon, or rise up in the spirits of the faithful, whilst they are offering
spiritual Sacrifices.

2. Though others thought-sins are more and greater than theirs, yet they are
without a sight and sense thereof; their thinking evil is sin, but their
bewailing and watching against evil thoughts, is from Grace. A room is as full
of dust in the night as in the day, but it is the day or Sun-light that makes
discovery thereof: The hearts of godly Mourners abounded with vain and vile
thoughts, whilst they were in their unregeneracy, but their groaning under
them, and going to the God of Grace for power against them, (other things being
suitable thereto) is a consequent of their rege^^^ition.

(...) Though evil thoughts do (...) and disturb them, yet (...) Lord has
provided a state ^^herein they shall be wholly rid of them. Heaven is that
privileged place, where no thing, no thought that is unclean, can enter. The
spirits of just men are there made (in all points) perfect. (...) 12.^3.


Because comfort and duty go best hand in hand, and it is by sundry observed,
that the same word in the Greek does signify both; though I cannot promise to
any that they shall never think evil, I shall present before all you, whose
hearts are set against such thinking, several helps which (through Grace) will
prove highly helpful to you.

Meditate on the infinite Glory and Perfection of God, First Help.
who has forbidden evil thoughts.

In Heaven, where the Face of the Lord is most seen, there is not one wrong
thought, and certainly the more the heart is under the ^^we and affecting
apprehensions of his Presence and Excelency here on earth, the less (...) evil
thoughts get admittance in^^ it. God is not in all a wick^ man's thoughts, and
therefore sin ^ so much in them. Shall the thing framed entertain thoughts
dishonorable to him that framed it? Shall the mind work wickedness whilst its
Maker stands by observing it? Shall you, before whom his goodness in his Son
has so eminently and evidently passed, no more fear the Lord and his Goodness,
than to give way to thoughts that wander from, and war against him? Jo^ ^1, 1,
2, 3.
Joh would not think unchastly of a Maid, for God saw all his ways, even the
inward ways of his heart.

2. Second Help.
Take a true measure of the exceeding evil and sinfulness o^ sin.

It is said of learning, that if i^ could be beheld with bodily eyes, all men
would love it; surely if sin were seen with spiritual eyes, all the beholders
would loath it. How can you find in your hearts to think evil, and so sin?
Judge of the cause by the effects. The burning of Sodom, the drowning of the
World, the torments of Hell (yea, the sufferings of the Son of God) are all the
fruits of sin. Judge of the Malady by the Remedy. The stain of one evil thought
is so deep, that nothing short of blood, no blood short of that which is called
the Blood of God (being the blood of that Person, who was and is God) can fetch
it out. There is no such thing as a sin that is absolutely little.

3 Abandon and abhor that false, but frequently recited Principle, That
thoughts are free.

The Commandment of God is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96.
binding the mind and inward. There is so much more evil in evil thoughts,
because they are less bewailed and resisted. And without controversy one
reason why men so easily persuade themselves, that their thoughts do not
displease God, is, because they so highly please them. Facile credimus quod
volumus.
They soon believe what they would have to be true.

4. Bear still in mind the corruption of your natures, whence evil thoughts
have their rise.

This impure spring will not run less (it is likely to run more) when you lose
the sight of it. This root of bitterness is still ready to send forth its
branches. The more you trust your own deceived and deceitful hearts, Prove.
28.2.6.
the more you incur the black brand of folly. This should keep yo^ humble,
watchful and dependan^ on Divine Grace for healing. The lust which is in you is
still apt to conceiv^ and bring forth tha^ which is dishonorable to God (...)
your hearts are not only infected, James 1.13, 14.
but withal infectious.

5. Consider the dreadfulness of Divine displeasure, which for your former evil
thoughts might in justice have been executed on you.

The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. last.
even that death which is opposed to eternal life. That which is due to sin, as
sin, is due to every sin, even to thought-sins. Have you not already too too
often laid your selves in the mouth of ruin? If Gods Patience and Grace had
not interposed, you had long ago been where the Worm never dies, but ever
gnaweth. Dare you still give way to those thoughts, against which the wrath of
God is revealed?

6. Keep a strict and constant guard over your senses.

Evil communications corrupt good manners, and draw forth the seeds of evil,
which are in the hearts of those who hear them. If you cannot stop others
mouths from vain and vile speeches, yet stop your own ears from giving audience
to them. Learn at holy Job, Job 31.1.
to make a covenant with your eyes. Pray with holy David, Psalm. 119.
that God would turn away your eyes from beholding vanity. What troops of evil
did enter in by his eyes, when he suffered them to gaze on a Woman that was
washing her self? 2 Samuel 11.


7. Above all keeping keep your hearts.

At the door of every room (or faculty) set a careful Porter. See that the
light that is in your understandings be clear, representing to you, the
gloriousness of God, the loveliness of heart-purity, the hatefulness of
filthine^ of spirit. See that your memories set before you your holy
profession, and high obligations, tha^ your Consciences are truly tender,
rising against the first risings o^ sin, that your wills stand fully ben^
toward conformity to God, tha^ your affections be pitched, Gol. 3.1.
and fixed on things above.

8. Get an addition to, and increase of your stock of habitual Grace.

The more strong and vigorous the new Man is, the less can thoughts which are
contrary thereunto get admittance. Mat. 12.35.
When there is a good treasure in the heart, good things will be brought forth
most plentifully, and evil things be stifled most successfully. Covet earnest
as the best gifts, so the highest degree of graces attainable. The more you
love, fear and delight in the Lord, the less can vain thoughts lodge within you.

9. Inure and accustom your selves to holy Meditation.

Your thoughts will be at work. Find them still fit edifying subjects to dwell
upon. Have you not a large field to walk in? Let the Attributes, Works and Word
of God be much in your minds. Psalm. 104.34.
So shall your meditation be sweet, and you will neither be at leisure for, nor
yet have an allowance of evil musings.

10. Maintain communion with and dependence on the Holy Ghost.

Though you are not sufficient as of your selves to think well, or to prevent
evil thinking, 2 Cor. 3.^.
yet he who proceeds from the Father and the Son, to be a Sanctifier of the
very thoughts of the heart, is Alsufficient. You may do all things, and in
particular resist evil thoughts, Phil. 4.13.
so as to find favor with God, through the Spirit strengthening you.

I am apprehensive that learned and diligent Readers are furnished with
excellent and enlarged Treatises about the ordering of their thoughts, yet I
living near to thousands, into whose hands these elaborat pieces are not likely
to come, and believing that small vessels have their use, and that the way of
the plain is fittest for dim-sighted ones to travel in, have communicated these
slender thoughts, which I shall follow with my prayers, that the Lord, who
sees men's thoughts, would help men to see the evil which has already been in
them, and the absolute necessity their Souls stand in of being washed from that
wickedness, of being supplied from the free full Grace of God in Christ Jesus,
that their thoughts may carry a sutableness to their profession of
Christianity, and to their expectation of glory.

A BRIDLE FOR THE TONGUE.
Matthew 12.36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.


SEntences and Sayings do usually obtain regard, according to the wisdom, worth
and authority of the persons that utter them. That this Sentence, with which I
have to do, should therefore be more regarded, because i^ was uttered by the
Lord Jesus appears evidently, in that h^ ushereth in his Assertion with a^
Asseveration, I say unto you.

I who cannot lie, would have you to receive and write on this a^ a great
Truth; I who am to b^ your Judge, give you to understand how strict my
proceeding will be in judgment; I will ca^^ you to account, not only for you^
notoriously evil actions, but with all for all your idle and empty expressions.

It is fathered upon some of the Fathers, that they were startle^ with this
Text: One is said to cr^ out, St. Augustine.
Which of Gods faithful one does not Christ affright when (...) says, That
every idle word shall b^ accounted for? And another i^ brought in with these
words, St. Ambrose
Is i^ I that must give account of ever

If that word that startled them do not stir us, we may fear it is because our
hearts are more hard, or less under a firm belief of the future state, that
state to come, which shall begin, but shall never end.

The parts or particulars whereof I shall take notice are,

1. A Crime or Fault supposed, for which a Bill of Indictment will be drawn up,
to wit, words, idle talking.

2. Intelligendum hoc de impiis and damnatis. Gradocks Harmony in locum. See
Causes of decay, p. 174.
The parties indictable for Crime, to wit, Men and Women. The Learned do
interpret this of persons that live and dye Christless. Though idle words are
sins damnable, sins in all, yet unto the truly and thoroughly penitent, who have
a Mediator to stand in and answer for them, who would not willingly utter one
idle word, sins shall not be imputed.

3. The proceeding which shall be for this Crime, and on these Persons, They
shall give account, that is, with grief, and to their shame, they shall so give
account, as upon giving it to receive that dreadful doom, Mat. 25.41. See
Ieanes his second part, page 50, 51.
Go ye cursed: The Antecedent of accounting, is here (as elsewhere) put for the
sad consequent of it being condemned to eternal punishment. This tended most
directly to rouse the sleepy Consciences of those blasphemous Pharisees, with
whom our blessed Savior was now arguing.

4. The time when idle words shall be found so extremely faulty, In D^^ judicii
extremi. Grad. from L. Burgonsis. Acts 17.31.
and the speakers of them so sharply handled; and that will be when time will
be no more. The day of account will be that great day, when the general Assizes
shall be held, when God shall judge all the World of Angels and Men in
Righteousness.

The Doctrine to be treated of, is as follows,

At the great day of account idle words shall be accounted for.

Or thus:

Idle words do carry in them sufficient matter for men's eternal condemnation.

My first work shall be to resolve this Quere, What words are to be esteemed
idle words?

For the better resolving of this Question.

I shall first remove out of the way that gloss which (as I with others judge)
is too narrow, and does not take in the full mind of the Lord, and that is the
gloss of those who would restrain this phrase, Quae very soliditate carent.
if not to malicious and blasphemous words, yet at least to false and lying
words, as if those only were struck at under the notion of idle or empty words,
which do want the fitting and weight of truth.

But as some eminently learned have noted,

1. The stream of Interpreters runs quite another way, and they judge generally
that our blessed Savior arguing with the Pharisees, does argue in an
aggravating way, Videatur Christus aliquo exaggerationis genere uti. Maldonate.
from the lesser to the greater. He lets them know, that they were running to
everlasting ruin. If they had only the guilt of idle words upon them, that
might sink them into Hell; and what defense could they then make for such
monstrously evil words as they had uttered, in charging him to cast out Devils
by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils?

2. Our Savior seems to teach them a Doctrine somewhat new and strange in the
Pharisees Schools. Moldonate.
They in their Expositions did straiten the Law, but he came to fulfill and
explain it. It can scarce be doubted, Jeanes his second part, page ^0.
though they were lax, loose Expositors, that they thought or taught that lies
and blasphemies should not be accounted for. But now our dear Lord goes
further, and assures them in the word of a King (the King of Glory) that they
shall be called to account for their idle expressions.

It is marked, and is remarkable, that elsewhere, when he will recover the
Truth from the false glosses which the Pharisees did put upon it, (...). Mat.
5.20, 22, 28, 32, 39.44.
he uses the very Preface which is used in this Text, But I say unto you.

Having thus cleared my way, I shall go on to show,

1. What words are not to be charged with idleness.

2. What words are chargeable therewith.

1. Negatively.
All words referring to these lower earthly affairs are not to be accused as
idle words. The Lord, who has appointed for us particular Callings, and has
allowed us six days in seven to labor in, Exodus 20.9.
does as well approve of the labor of our tongues about them, as that of our
hands. On the Sabbath we should not speak our own words. Isai 58.13.
God forbid that even on week-dayes our whole discourse should be of an^
earthly complexion! we should learn of our blessed Master to raise heavenly
conference out of earthly occasions. Yet undoubtedly what words, soever are
requisite for the better management of our lawful trades or businesses, we may
use not only lawfully, but laudably. The Scripture records without the least
disallowance the formalities and passages of a purchase between Father Abraham
and the Children of Heth, Genesis 23.4, etc.
and between holy Jeremiah and his Uncles Son.

2. All words favoring of great civility and courtisie do not justly fall
under the censure of being idle. Among other duties urged by the Apostle Peter,
Pet. 3.8.
being courteous is one. Our blessed Savior did not stick to style Judas
Friend; Mat. 26.50
^or did Saint Paul scruple to give ^o Festus the title of Most noble. Acts
26.25
They who can, may defend those usual expressions of, Your Servant Sir, Your
most humble Servant, when used to those for whom there is neither service nor
love ready; Gratiam affabilitatis non excludit o^is custodia. Bernardi Flores,
page 712.
I do not look upon them as in that ease defensible. Yet I am clear that it is
for the honor of Christianity, when Christians are not morose and austere, but
of affable inviting obliging carriage.

3. All speeches that are recreational, and tend to the chearing of those with
whom we converse, must not have idleness laid to their charge. Judges 14.12.
Sampson had sundry faults, but his putting forth a Riddle to his Companions
was none. I know very many need a bridle to curb them, not a spur to hasten
them in this particular. It is not an ordinary thing for persons to be both
merry and wise at once. Jesting does usually border upon foolish talking, and
accordingl^ the holy Ghost by the Pen of Pa^^ does draw a black line over the^
both; Ephesians. 5;4.
See Bishop Davenant on the Colossi^^, page 297, 390.
and one of the Fathers i^ quoted as holding Jests in the whole kind abhorrent
from the rule of the Church, and another affirming, Nugae in ore facerdotis
sunt blasphemiae. See Reyner's Rules page 224, 225 Romans 15.2, 3.
that trifles when in the mouth of a Priest are blasphemies. Yet I question
not, but pleasan^ speeches may carry profit in them, when used sparingly and
warily. As Pills may be wrapped up in Sugar, so wholesome advices and reproofs
may be given to some in more delightful language, who would not otherwise take
them; and we may please our neighbors so far as may be to their profit and
edification.

Having showed on what words the brand of idleness is not to be set, Positively.
I shall show what words do deserve that brand, to wit,

Words that have no worth in them, Maldonate.
neither can it be reasonably expected, that any good effect should flow from
them. Quae nullam aut audienti aut dicent edificationis utilitatem afferunt.
Doctor Spurstow. (...) quasi (...),
Words that are apparently worse than silence; words that neither advantage him
that speaks nor them that hear them. A learned man observed, in mine hearing,
many years ago, that the Greek word translated idle, was used among the Jews to
denote the year of release, the year wherein they neither sowed nor reaped, and
withal to signify money which lay by and brought no profit to the owner.
Though some words considered in the general may be counted indifferent, Ieanes
second part. page 51.
yet if in their particular use they be not referred to some good end, if they
be not in some sort needful, or helpful, they will be found idle.

My next work is to evidence, that Gods proceeding in judgment against persons
for idle words, is very reasonable and equitable.

1.

1. In speaking them, person forget (and do not intend) tha^ noble end, for
which they were created, and created with such (...) choice capacity and
ability as tha^ of speaking is. See Doctor Roberts upon Psalm. 16.9.
It is usually noted, that the same word in the original which signifies
tongue, does signify glory. A man's tongue should be his glory and not his
shame, and then it is his glory, when in its use it is directed to Gods glory.

2. In idle speaking there is no little loss or mispending of precious time;
Ephesians. 5.16.
that golden sand should not run out at waste. Time is not to be wasted, but
wared and husbanded carefully. What I have said will serve to justify the
Almighty in his judging men for their idle speeches. That which ^s sin (though
men count it a small sin) has death due to it. Romans 6. ult.
There is moisture in a little drop of water, and heat in a little spark of
fire; so there is contrariety to the nature and will of God in that which is
esteemed a lesser sin. Causes of decay of Pity, page 140.
An elegant Pen has written, that sin is so mortal a venom, that the least
dose of it is deadly. Hell is as certainly acquired, and Heaven as certainly
forfeited by one sin as many.

2. Mat. 12.34, 35.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Words are truly said to
be to the heart, what an Index is to a Book, they show the principal things
that are contained in it. Si trabs in oculo, silva in cord. Doctor Spurstow.
Who can contradict him who cried out, If there be a Beam of evil in the
tongue, there is a Wood in the heart? It is said, That diseases in the body may
be discovered by spots on the tongue; to be sure diseases an^ distempers of the
soul may b^ thereby discerned. Vanity i^ speaking is fathered upon strang^
children, Psalm. 144.11.
upon such as are not savingly acquainted with God.

3. Ephesians. 4.29.
must take care that their speech communicate grace to those that hear it. Sin
is (as on^ says) a speedy graduate. Causes of decay, page 127.
Little Thieves put in at the window se^ the doors open to all the rest. Sin is
as a precipice or steep place^ where if we once begin to fall, Leviter volat,
Bern^^di flo^es, p. 709.
i^ will not be easy for us to stop. I^ once the tongue be let loose, God only
knows how far it will run.

4. Idle words tend to the hurt of those who hear them. The heart of fallen man
is very prone to gather vanity to it self, and vain discourse does greatly
further it in that bad way; it does draw forth that sin, which in the seeds of
it before lay hid. They who come or talk not together for the better, do it for
the worse. They who gain not by conference, are in danger to lose by it.



be afraid to lie or lean on it. Adam when he was in innocence was not to be
out of employment. Genesis 2.15.
Idleness was one of the sins of Sodom. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Idle persons do even tempt the Tempter. The Sun shining, the Heavens moving,
the Earth bearing, the Waters flowing, do all of them accuse the slothful. In
the sweat of their faces (either of their brows or of their brains) are all men
to eat their bread. See the Gentleman's Calling. 1 These. 4.11. 2 These. 3.11.
The Gentleman is by a most neat hand lead unto the discharge of his calling.
Every one should mind his own business; and they will be sure to be
busybodies in evil, who do nothing which is good. Standing waters will gather
filth, Gospel glass, page 232, 233.
and Birds that are not flying are in the greatest danger of being shot.

An idle lazy way of Religion carries matter of condemnation in the face of
it. Callings, so those who under pretense of following them slight (or are
slightly in) their general Calling, are out of the way of life. It is dangerous
to stand idle elsewhere, but most dangerous to stand idle in the Lords
Vineyard. Mat. 20.3, 6.
The Lord will not own any idle servants. He is for laborers, and not for
loyterers. John 4.14.
Where true Grace is, it is a well of water springing up. The very word
Religion implies that it is a binder; Glavil's Philosophia pia. page 155. A
religando.
it binds to duties in Church and Families, to secret prayer, ^f-searching,
serious meditating, constant watching against sin, over the inward and outward
man, 1 Cor. 15. ult.
to the filling up of every relation and condition with proper services.
Sluggish hearts are very unlike to win Heaven.

men's words be weighed, when they who are but dust and ashes take upon them to
speak to the King of Kings? Eccles. 5.2.
Whether persons in prayer use the same words which they have used before, or
vary their expressions, they should see to this, Psalm. 62.8.
that they pour out their hearts unto the Lord, and do not draw near to him
with their lips only. Mat. 15.8.
Though uponextraordinary occasions prayer may be long continued in, See Doctor
Spurstow's Meditations, page 17, 18.
yet strength in prayer is always to be preferred before length in prayer.
Faith is more excellent than natural fervor. The Spirit may help in sighs and
groans, when the stretching out of the voice is of little value.



1. What shall be done unto the false tongue? Psalm. 120.3 Doctor Arrowsmith's
Tacita sacra, page 14, 16, Linguae, Daemomp. vernacula est mendacitas.
How can persons answer for words which want truth, when they cannot answer for
words which want weight? There are some footsteps whereby the Devil may be
traced in other sins, but the sin of lying carries the very face of the Devil
in it. Liars do aloud call him Father. John 8.44.
The Scripture (which cannot be broken) does shut him that makes a lie out of
the City of God. Revel. 21. ult.
God has given this testimony of his Children, that they are Children that
will not lie. Isa. 63.8.
It was the determination of a Father, Bishop. Davenant on the Colossians. page
298.
That a lie should not be told under pretense of saving a world. Lies which are
called officious, are indeed very pernicious.

2. How will they look God in the face, who inure their tongues to filthy
speeches? Ephesians. 5.^.4.29.
How far is filthiness from being convenient, or becoming those who are called
to be Saints? ^i ofiosus ^ermo re^prehendi^ur, quan^o magis ^purcus and ^oxius.
^ishop ^avenant, page 297.
What modest language would people speak, if they would make Scripture the
Master and measure of their speaking? An unsavory breath does not so much show
the unsoundness of the lungs, as obscene scurrilous discourse does show the
unsoundness of the heart. Shall men put their mouths into the most noisome
dunghils?

3. Will not they be far from making a good defense, who at the great day shall
be charged with hard speeches and censures, and those against such who have
desired to fear God? Number. 12.8.
Were ye not afraid to speak against my Servants, ^ Kings ^.23.
will the Lord say? It went ill with Children that called the Prophet
Bald-pate. Bitter words are Arrows that will fall upon their heads who shoot
them. They who slander, reproach, and bear false witness against their
neighbors, will find to their sorrow, that God has chains of wrath which will
hold them, when those of his Commands are broken by them.

4. Do not they heap and treasure up wrath, whose mouths are full of cursing,
swearing, profaning, Zech. 5.2, 3.
and even blaspheming the holy Name of God? May not such foresee a whole roll
of judgments coming upon them, yea, flying against them? But I go on to a fifth
Inference.

Eccles. the last.
God will bring every secret work into open view. Sins which now obtain the
favor to be called little, Numb. 32.23.
will then appear in their own colors, damnably great. To be sure, men's faults
will then find them out. Judicabit non male judicata. Burgess of judgment. page
60,
Those things which escaped men's judgment shall abide Gods judgment. The
fore-thoughts of this have driven some friends and lawful delights, to spend
their times in dens and wildernesses; I desire not that it should have any such
effect on my hearers, but that it should drive them to Jesus Christ, and that
not only as a shelter, but also as a Sanctifier; that he who is to be their
Judge may be their Advocate. Oh that men walked as if they heard the sound of
the last Trumpet, and the voice of the Archangel, saying, Arise ye dead, and
come to judgment.

6. Seeing idle words are to be reckoned for, this will justify the care,
Ephesians. 5.15 (...). Leigh Cr. Sacra.
and study, and stritness of those who are most for walking circumspectly,
precisely, not only according, but (as much as is possible) up to rule. Should
not they be afraid of running on the score, who are sure to be called to a
reckoning. It is a wonder that good men are not much more wary.

The tongue is an huge slippery piece, it falls into empty unedifying
discourse before a person is well aware. It is usually observed, that Nature
has set a double guard upon it, and clear it is, that Grace will not leave it
unguarded, but will guide men to beg of God, that he would set a watch before
their mouths, Psalm. 14 ^3
and keep the doors of their lips.

Job, Job 40.3, 4. Isai. 6.5.
Behold I am vile; and with Isaiah, Woe is me, I am a man of unclean lips. To
bring us sooner to our knees, be it considered,

1. Our vain words have been, Multitudes, Multitudes. Psalm. 19:12.
Who can understand all his errors of this sort? Who can by searching find out
all his tongue-slips? Idl^ words have issued from us a^ streams from a
fountain. Were no^ our childhood and youth vanity i^ self? Eccles. 11. last.
Have not innumerable evils of this kind compassed us about?

2. Our sins in this kind are in this respect more sinful, because herein God
appeared exceeding merciful, in that he created us not only with that excellent
power of speaking, Corruption optimi est pessima.
but also with wisdom to order our speech to his honor. What glory might man
have given to his Creator, if he had kept that government and rule of his
tongue, Isai. 7. ult.
wherewith he was first entrusted? That our mouths utter vanity, is not from
our creation, but from our corruption. That the thing framed should move in the
least to the dishonor of him that formed it, this is a lamentation.

3. Those who have been Gods choice ones, have had their hearts affected and
afflicted upon this account. Not only Job and Isaiah ^yed mainly out for their
speaking amiss, Psalm. 73 22.
but David styles himself ^oolish, and ignorant, yea, a very ^east for this
fault.

4. If idle speeches be not matter of our humiliation, they will be matter of
our condemnation, if we do not judge our selves, we shall be judged of the
Lord, yea, and condemned with the world.

5. The Lord has showed himself gracious to those, who being humbled for their
offenses of this nature, have through his Son addressed themselves to him.
Isai. 6 7,
When Isaiah had bewailed bitterly the uncleanness of his lips, Illi quibus
ante diem illum remissa fuerint verba otiosa, rationis loco remissio nem
adserent. Crad. from L. Brugensis.
he had assurance given him, that his iniquity was taken a way, and his sin
purged. Neither is it the scope of that terrible Text, with which I have to do,
to drive persons from God, but to drive them in a way of sinlamenting,
self-disclaiming, and Saviour-accepting unto him. Rationem reddent, nisi
interim paeniteant. Carthusian.


If notwithstanding what is sa^ some continue their course of id^ unedifying
discourse, and resol^ so to do, for such the followin Use is most proper, which
is

An Use of Reproof to all such who are not careful to set an^ keep up the good
government (...) their tongues. Do not many i^ effect say, Psalm. 12.4.
Our tongues are ou^ own? What Lord shall controu^ us? They (...) talk at
random and not by rule. Whilst some by lying, swearing, slandering and
reviling break out, others think i^ fair, if they keep in and forbea^ these
abominations; barrennes^ in, and backwardness to holy heavenly conferrings is
no fault in their account. Oh that such would seriously consider,

1. They have upon them the black brand of unregeneracy. If Grace have its
throne in the heart, ^t will have a great command and influence upon the
tongue. Zeph. 3 9.
When the Lord gives persons a thorough turn to himself, he turns to them a
pure lip or language. Psalm. 45.2.
Grace was poured into the lips of Christ the Head, and in some measure it is
poured into the lips of Christians his Members. Speaking the language of
Canaan, is so sure an effect of sound conversion, that when the conversion of
five Cities in the Land of Egypt is foretold, Isai. 19.18.
it is said expressly, They shall speak the language of Canaan.

2. God will not for the sake of any rank or sort of men, vary from his word of
truth, or suffer a tittle of it to pass away. They cannot escape who live and
dye in neglect of warnings of Heaven. Woe, woe, woe, will be to those, Mat. 5.18,
who having not their tongues tied to their good behavior, have n^ hopes of
being acquitted in judgment, except the Lord alter wha^ he has in my Text
written.

May I prevail with the guilty to give a sober Answer to these serious
Questions.

1. Do you think that my Text was spoken and written only t^ scare and affright
men, and not t^ inform them truly in what an exact way the Lord will proceed a^
the last day? Is not this to charge him falshhood who is truth it self*

2. Will you say that God is merciful? God forbid I should gainsay you, or in
the least represent that blessed hand as narrower than indeed it is! yet all
may and must know, that though it be said, Gods tender mercies are over or upon
all his works; Psalm. 145.9.
yet it is not said, that they are above or against all his other Attributes.
His truth revealed in my Text will stand together with his mercy. His wisdom is
showed in showing the greatest mercy (even his salvation) to those who will
give him the glory of it.

And though (as that excellent Pen, Causes of decay, page 169.
to whom I have formerly referred, has written) we are apt to proportion Gods
justice, not according to its infiniteness, but our own concerns, making it
serve only as a cipher to advance his mercy; yet it will appear, that the
divine Attributes are not in strife but perfect harmony, and rather than the
justice of God shall suffer, men and women shall suffer everlastingly.

3. With what terror and trembling of heart will they, who get not a Bridle
for the Tongue, 2 Cor. 5.
appear before the Judge of all the world? What an amazing sight will it be to
see their other sins, and with them their idle words, 10, 11.
set as an Army in rank and file before them? They cannot possibly stand right
and upright in tha^ high Court, Recti in curia.
their Consciences wi^^ second and set in with the sentenc^ which God shall
pass against them It will be evident upon what honorable terms forgiveness wa^
offered to them, and that upon their having recourse to the Grace and Spirit of
God, they might have had their speech seasone and sanctified. How dreadful wi^^
every word in their doom be^ Depart from me. That is, say some the hell of
hell. The punist (...) of sense is beyond what (...) conceived; yet great
Divines say that it is not absolutely infinite^ The damned (say they) suffe^
finite wrath in an infinite duration; See Norton of Christ's sufferings.
but the punishment of loss i^ infinite, it is the loss of an infinit^ God.
That men and women mu^ never come in (or near) God gracious comforting presenc^
more; Mat. 25.
oh how dreadful is this seeing they must depart with curse, with Gods curse,
and that into fire, which all know is of a tormenting nature, yea, into
everlasting fire, a fire that cannot be quenched, yea, a fire prepared for that
worst of Apostates, the Devil, and his Angels.

Hoping that some who were secure may be by Grace awakened, and crying out,
What shall we do? How shall we ever come to read and weigh this Text with
comfort? How shall we obtain the right rule of our tongues? To (...) direct my
first Exhortation.

John 16.8, 9.
showing you as the sins of your lives, so the sinfulness of your hearts. How
bitter is that root, whereof idle speaking is but one branch?

2. Having mused on the greatness of your sins, beware of carnal confidence and
trusting to your selves. Makeful account of this, that if you were only
chargeable with the sin of speaking idly, this sin has so violated the Law,
and wronged the Justice of God, that though you should fast and pray, sorrow
and suffer to your utmost, yet could you not thereby satisfy for, or deserve
the pardon of tha^ sin; there is no Balm save that o^ Gilead (or rather of the
Gospel) that is sovereign; neither is there any Physician save him that is in
Israel that can heal in this case. When blessed Paul thought of the search
which the Law and Justice of God might make for him, Philip. 3. 7, 8.
his desire was, to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, not
for having it as to set it up in the room of Christ's Righteousness.

3. Bless not your selves in any state which is short of saving union with the
Lord Jesus Christ. John 1.7, 9.
His blood cleanses from all sin, and so from tongue-sins; but it only
cleanses those to whom it is applied; neither is it applied to or by any save
those that are in him. Happy are they for whom he will plead, John 1.2.
who have this Advocate with the Father, in whose lips no guile, no guilt,
nothing of idleness was found, whose righteousness will cover those, whose
nakedness would otherwise appear shameful. Though the fig leaves of your own
doings will not hide you from the wrath of God, yet the leaves of the Tree of
Life will do it thoroughly.

4. Beg and wait for new renewed hearts, and for the residence and influence of
the Holy Ghost in and on your hearts. Psalm. 45.1. Mat. 62.35.
The tree must be good before the fruit can be so: Your hearts must indite good
matters before your tongue^ can be as the pens of ready Writers to express
them. Psalm. 139.2, 3.
Get knowing hearts, apprehensive that there is not a word in your tongues bu^
God knows it altogether. Ge^ tender hearts, that will be loath to affront and
provoke him in misplacing a word, and that your hearts may be preserved in a
watchful frame, pray down the assistance of Gods blessed Spirit on all
occasions.

My next word shall be to those whose hearts are principled with Grace, James
3.2.
and I doubt not but they will suffer a word of exhortation: Though others
leave their tongues unbridled, you should not do so.

1. You have too often already let down your watch over your mouths. I know
your Consciences will tell you, that at such a time, and in such a company,
your tongues slipped, your discourse was little worth. Should not the time past
be sufficient to have offended in?

2. Without care (eminent care) your tongues will not be duly governed. Psalm.
116.106.33.
Did not holy David speak in his haste what he ought not? Did not meek Moses
speak unadvisedly? Who are you, that you should think tongue-slips less
incident to you? You have probably heard of him, who having by a Tutor the
resolution of David, Psalm. 39.1.
To take heed lest be offend with his tongue, given him for his first Lesson,
and being enquired of, why he came not for a new one? answered, that he had not
learned that perfectly, you may be learning, whilst you are living, to speak
to purpose.

3. You have that power to rule your tongues which many want. If Gods Garden be
full of weeds (of idle words) what can be looked for in the Wilderness? The
lips of Christ's Spouse do drop sweetly, Cant. 4.11.
even as an Honeycomb. If Vines bear not Grapes, where should they grow? If
you have not Jacob's voice, how will you prove your selves to be of Jacob's
seed? How can it appear that you belong to that better Country, which is
above, if you do not speak the language of it?

4. The honor of Religion is deeply concerned in your speeches. Jer. 20.10.
Many will watch for your halting in your words; they who would make you
offenders for a good word, will be sure to make ill use of your offending i^
you utter an idle word. As you should not be vicious, so you should not be
scandalous. Are not you loath that the profession of godliness should be wounded
through your sides.

5. The more afraid you are not to offend in words, James 3.2.
the more you have of sincerity, and the more near you come to perfection.
Though the tongue be a little member, much Grace goes to the ruling of it.

That I may be an helper of your holiness, and so of your joy, I shall offer
you the ensuing helps.

1. Directions
Renew your humiliation for your former failures in your speech. 2 Cor. 7.10.
Godly sorrow for sin tends to work repentance and returning from sin. The
softer the heart is, the better governed will the tongue be.

2. Observe well how ill idle words do become others. Can you not soon espy the
nakedness of your brethren, when they let their tongues loose. Faelix quem
faciunt, etc.
Will you practice your selves, what you condemn in others? Shall not others
harms be your warnings? Shall not their falls make you to stand more carefully
upon your watch?

3. Engage some true trusty friends to admonish you when they hear you speaking
amiss. Your sins may lie so near you, Psalm. 141.^
that you cannot so easily see them. Who does not stand in need of an Overseer?
The wounds of a friend that does faithfully reprove are of an healing nature.

4. Do not affect talking more than your part. The wise man has long ago
determined, that in the multitude of words there wants not sin. Prove. 10.14.
If the tongue move too frequently, its motion is less like to be regular. If
your words be few, they are likely to be better placed.

5. Often call your selves to an account about your speeches. They that cast up
their books frequently will be loath to run into debt. You that are to give a
strict account to God, ought to take a strict account of your selves. If you
would stand in awe and not sin, Psalm. 4.4.
commune much with your own hearts.

6. Shun the society of vain persons. You have the seeds of in remaining in
your own hearts, Psalm. 26.4.
and if you be with idle companions, they will quickly draw them out into your
tongues. You may as soon walk in the scorching Sun, and not be tanned, as
converse unnecessarily with foolish talkers, and not be prejudiced.

7. Beware of being transported with your passions, particularly that of anger.
I^a furor brevis.
Anger has been long called a madness, and it is less wonder if mad men talk
idly.

8. Weigh your words before you speak them. Bis ad l^^am, semel ad linguam.
Psalm. 105.
They who shoot their bolts soonest are least likely to hit the mark. Can it be
expected, that they who speak rashly should speak in print. When Moses himself
spoke unadvisedly, (and in haste) he had leisure to repent o^ it.

9. Keep your hearts above all keeping. Prove. 4.23
There is a string betwixt the tongue and the heart. Out of the heart are the
issues of life. If your hearts be in an humble, holy, heavenly frame, your
tongues will be as trees of life. The stream will savor of the fountain.

10. Bind your tongues (with fresh and firm cords of resolution) to their good
behavior: Lay a Law upon them. If you do misplace a word, be sure that it be
not on purpose, but against purpose. Psalm. 39.1.
Holy David said in his heart, he would take heed in this respect.

11. Have store of spiritual and profitable subjects at hand to discourse of.
Col. 3.16
Let the Word of God dwell richly in you: Guide your tongues into a large,
spacious and sweet field, where they may walk with profit and comfort. Inure
and accustom your selves to ^^lifying conference.

12. In the exercise of humble, earnest, believing prayers, depend on God for
the guidance of your lips. Cry to him as the sweet Psalmist did, (...).
that he would keep this door. Prove. 16 1
The answer of the tongue is from the Lord.

My last Word shall be by way of Consolation to those with whom these
directions take place. The last Use.
You who can say, and say truly, you fall on your knees to mourn daily for the
slips of your tongues, you desire to be filled with the Spirit, that you may
speak to the honor of God, you would have your tongues to be as choice silver,
comfort ye, comfort ye.

Your tongues that set forth Gods glory here, shall be fully fitted to sing
Hallelujah; hallelujah, Salvation, blessing and praise to the most High for
ever hereafter. Though tongues shall cease in Heaven, that is, as some
interpret it, there shall be no use of several languages, yet as the Seraphims
do, so the Saints shall cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbaths! the
highest praises of God will be in their mouths, world without end.

FINIS.

