A LETTER To His EXCELLENCY SIR Thomas Fairfax From Captain Leiutenant BRAY,
concerning the Charge and proceedings against him at a Council of War, about
the late di^^erences in the ARMY.

With some strange discoveries or Predictions by the said Capt. Leiut. BRAY, in
relation to the General, and some eminent Commanders of the ARMY.

Also a Letter of the Parliaments Commissioners, presenting the 4. Bills to his
Majesty, at the Isle of Wight, and, his Majesty's Answer to the same. Together
with the Declaration of the Commissioners of SCOTLAND to his Majesty, against
the 4. Bills presented by the PARLIAMENTS COMMISSIONERS.

Also a true relation of the design and mutynie in the Isle of Wight, for
carrying away of the King, the prevention thereof, and the Order of Parliament
for securing hi^ Majesty's person in Carisbrook Castle.

LONDON Printed By Francis Leach Anno Dom. 1647.

A Letter to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, from Captain Lieutenant Bray
etc.
May it please your Excellency
I Can give you the title, but so that I must superlatively acknowledge the
highest I, have written to you in the integrity of my heart, I honor you so
far as the Lord will make me to honor you, In the business for which I was
imprisoned, this is my comfort, that I have the testimony of a clear
conscience, and I did continue with the Regiment in their distempretures and
dissatisfactions out of received and acknowledged conscientious grounds, and
principles, according to my Letter to your Excellency in the time of the
distempature, I have made my last plea to you and your present Counsel of War,
and in it I have demonstrated (as in my judgment) that the present dealings
with me, passes an inevitable censure upon your self, I have yet a little
hopes that you have a mind or desire to be subject unto truth, for indeed
truth and righteousenesse is as purely Lord of you as it is of me, or any one
else to judge and condemn: I was almost three weeks imprisoned before I had
any charge exhibited, which is contrary to the form of your own proceedings,
I have declared in my narrative, the explanations and natural causes of the
Regiments distemper which if you or any godly impartial man do well weigh, you
will find that fawning temporizing person had no just cause to father the
distemper upon me, because I own the Agreement of the people in my judgment,
which some Officers of the Regiment subscribed at St Albans, and such who have
carried themselves ^^strously, perfideously and treacherously toward me in
charging me with A private discours^, and judgment, as in my plea is
expressed, and who did not carry themselves in an honest conscientious care to
your Excellency and the Regiment as is expressed in my plea God has appointed
a day wherein he will judge the word in righteousness at which time wicked
deeds shall have no glory in power and rules, God will destroy Machavell more
and more even by a Law which is like unto fire which shall enter into the
inmost parts. God will recompense vengeance into the bosom of oppressers or of
those that conspire in power, [nay indeed your power] to persecute, defame and
destroy, I am, and have been very much troubled [not so much in relation to my
self, for the Lord upholds me in integrity and much comfort in more then an
ordinary care] for you and the Lord has acquainted me in my conversation with
him in an inward testimony. That I must tell you these words. viz. That unles
his hand be against some that are about you, and his understandings be against
their understandings and his mouth against their mouth your power shall not be
established in righteousness. I did desire of God, whither it should be so
with you, and I heard an absolute voice answearing in these words. It is the
pure and and un-defiled voice, and he said further how would thou have
comfort if my voice were not near thee, But I fear to write it so positively,
but God said, fear not, for this shall be a token to thee that I give thee
power in particular to call thee my God.

But I said I am weak and sinful as considered in the flesh, but he said thou
art certainly refining and to be gloriously refined, what a sad thing will it
be when the Lord will make inquisition for them that have been hurt unjustly by
the unrighteousness of men who are suffered to walk in diverse pleasurable
ways to the destruction of others: This is my comfort that I can reasonably,
really say whatsoever men or Devils may think of me, though I am not without
temptation, that I had rather be ^^d to the slaughter, then betray my judgment
and understanding to my own or any man's lust. I have read of certain
Alsachins chief Judges in Italy that were to determine causes, and were to
have one only Cause set down, and were never to know the person as Plaintiff
and Defendant, that they might do judgment without partiality; How excellently
would you appear if you would or could declare your self positively to own
the God of Shadrach Meshach, and Abednego, and not to own faces countenances,
titles and persons, but truth equally and impartially to all; you should as
well hear the meanest Soldier or Officer as well as your own heart, or any
person about you, suredlie you cannot chose but think you may (as well as other
powers of old) have Astrologers, Magitians, Southsayers, that would betray all
those that would not submit to their subscription, or to the Image that they
have set up, and they would have the furnace heat seven times hotter then
before, rather then to loose the design, and J cannot read that they could
find out 3. men in the province of Babylon that looked another way: I have
desired you to hear my business your self in a former Letter but I am satisfied
that God has not made you free to it, I also desired a public audience
(though not on a Scaffold as some have faied) God condiscends in some nature or
other to the meanest creature, your highest glory will be (if God shall make
you free) to condescend to hear any one, and see to come down from your
throne or power and manifest you own the God of the whole earth who will
certainly judge the world, I have read of a heathen King Artaxerxes who had a
Hammon with him that took in hand to practice against those that did the King
good, that were most faithful to him, and at length God made the King see and
confess the practices of Haman, that he was lifted up with the glorious words
of lewd persons (that were never good) who thought to have escaped the justice
of God (because they were great] who sees all things and hates evil which
causes many in authority to be partakers in innocent blood, and to be
enwrapped in remediles calamities beguiling with falsh^^d and deceit the
innocence and goodness of Princes and therefore Artaxerxes did take care that
his Kingdom might be quiet and peaceable by changing purposes, judging things
that are evident by more equal proceedings, This Haman was a Stranger and a
Macedonian descended from the Persian blood yet by many cunning deceipts sought
the destruction of poor Mordecai, so I leave you to God before whom you, and I
are equally naked and bare and shall appear before his judgment seat with this
sincere acclamation, Justice, Justice [for my self and others] impartially and
so I rest your

Faithful Servant in the service of love (which is the best service) during
the will of God William Bray.
From the custody of the Marshall General, 22. December. 1647.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax these present.
A Letter of the presenting the 4 Bills to his Majesty at the Isle of Wight by
the Parliaments Commisioners.
MY LORD
IN persuance of the Instructions, and Commands from the Parliament, I did with
the other Commissioners, present the Bills and Propositians to His Majesty at
two of the clock this afternoon. The King was then pleased to say

He was assured that we could not expect a present answer, but he would take
the same into consideration, and give his Answer within few days.

This is all the account I can return your Lordship at present, which I desire
you will be pleased to communicate to the House of Peers, from

From Newport December 24 1647. Your most humble and affectionate servant B.
DENBIGH

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Manches^^r Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro^^^pore.
A Declaration of the Commissioners of Scotland presented to his Majesty
against the 4. Bills delivered ^o his Majesty by the Parliaments Commissioners.
THere is nothing which we have more constantly endeavored, and do more
earnestly desire, then a good agreement and happy peace between your Majesty
and your Parliaments of of both Kingdoms, neither have we left any means
unassayed that which united Counsels with the Houses of Parliament of England
by making joint applycation to your Majesty, there might be a composure of all
differences. But the new Propositions communicated to us by the Houses, and the
Bills therewith presented to your Majesty, are so preiuditiall to Religion,
the Crown and the Union and Interest of the Kingdoms, and so far different
from the former proceedings and engagements betwixt the Kingdoms, as we cannot
concur therein, T^erefore we do in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland
dissent from these Propositions and Bills now tendered to your Majesty.

Landerdaile, ^. Erskin, Hen. Kennedy. To. Barkley


The Parliaments Commissioners and also the Commissioners for Scotland are
returned back from his Majesty to London, But bring no safisfactorie answer to
the 4. Bills prese^^ed to his Majesty.

But on the contrary information was given to the Parliament and Army of a new
design to remove the Kings person from the ^^e of Wight [we know not whether]
and this design was put in execution upon the Commissioners leaving his
Majesty, and a Mutiny put in practice the same day to seize on Carisbrook
castle and his Majesty, but was prevented, the Mutiny allayed, and the chief
actors now in custody by Col, Hammond.

The Parliament upon full information and debate hereupon, have sent Orders to
the General and the Governor of the Jsle of Wight to secure his Majesty's
person where he now is in ^arisbrook Castle which is accordingly done, and some
other chief Officers of the army sent thither to assist the Governor, and his
^^jesty is not gone thence (as some reported) but is assuredly at Carisbro^^
Castle.

January 1. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbt. Malbot.

FINIS

