A DIALOGUE between the DEVIL and Prince RVPERT, Written at the Leaguer before
Chester upon RUPERTS coming to relieve the said City.

Published, that those that now are, or hereafter shall engage, as Caterers,
for the same master, might by this general debenter be the better assured to
receive all their Arrears both old and new.

Written by E. B.

London, Printed for T. B.

The Devil and Prince Rupert; OR Prince RUPERT the Devils Caterer, for the
insatiable gulf or belly of hell; his invitement thereof after Breakfast and
Dinner, now at last to Supper; with the Devils Answers and his Replies, as
follows.
GApe hungry Hell, thou'l never be satisfied,
Thy belly's bottomless and wondrous wide,
Else it could never contain so much at onst;
I therefore think it was made for the nonst:
Thou had a Breakfast dressed thee at Edghill,
One would have thought thou there had eat thy fill.
Likewise I cater'd and prepared again
At York a Dinner of five thousand men:
And now again I have a multitude
Of brutish, swinish, wicked, base and rude,
They Will soon be fat and fitted for the slaughter,
I give such breadth for plunder and for pasture,
And mean to dress and fit them all for supper,
But then let cater who that will for Rupert.
The Devils Answer to his Cater Rupert.
Well Rupert, well, but will thou serve us so?
Will thou disband thy self, and from us go,
When, well thou know, we stand in greatest need,
And want of men my hungry belly to feed?
Know therefore then, if thus thou from us go,
Thou shall be paid with endless, easless woe:
If ere thou cease to rob, and wrong, and spoil,
Thou shall thy self be robbed, wronged, foild:
Or cease thy murder, and thy treachery,
And some man shall betray and butcher thee:
For so from God above they have commission,
Papists themselves will do it by his permission:
Though thou dares trust them; yet if thou them leave,
Of life and honor they will thee bereave:
And deal far worse with thee, then any other,
By how much deeper thou art sworn their brother:
Then think not thou, at least, to serve us so,
Lest it procure thy present endless woe:
For Hell mouth gapes, for thee as well as others,
Nay for thee rather, thou and I are brothers.
Be therefore wife, and serve me out thy time,
And all the Papists shall with thee combine;
Yea all the Atheists sure will take thy part,
And guard thy life, and never from the start:
So shall thou escape from Hell, as long as they,
And when thou comes, receive thy double pay.
Prince Ruperts Reply.
My pay, says Rupert, what now do thou mean,
Thou damned Devil? when did I complain
For want of pay? I am a Volunteer
Thou never heard, I want of pay did fear:
I serve for love of thee, and just thy cause,
And therefore look I should have thy applause;
And that the Papists should not from me sever,
But that we might approach thy Court together,
And there be entertaind with royal honors,
That have for Antichrist displayed our Banners:
Papists and Athiests, all the damned rabble,
I Will bring them home as soon as I am able.
Lets therefore know what desperate royal honors
Thou will afford according to thy manners,
When we approach thy presence and thy palace,
By sword or famine, pestilence or gallows:
And if I like thy devilish damned honors,
I Will serve my time, and still display thy banners.
The Devils Answer to his Caterer Rupert, for his fuller satisfaction in his
proud humor.
Well Rupert, harken, since thou art so stout,
I Will tell thee truth, and put thee out of doubt;
These are my Royal, Courtly, Kingly Honors,
To all that constantly display my Banners.
When first they enter my infernal palace
By Sword or Famine, Pestilence or Gallows,
Yea thus it is, and thou shall find it so,
Though both to thine, and mine eternal woe.
Lucifer or Belzebubs welcome to his new guests or inmates, at their first
entrance, or dragging of them down, to his infernal palace, amongst his
rough-hewn Courtiers, as follows.
Oh brave infernals, welcome now to me,
It does me much rejoice, you here to see:
Who has you held thus long? Why have you staid,
As though you should not have your wages paid?
Why are you grown so fearful to approach
My utmost palace? sent I not a coach
To fetch you in, and to show ye'are welcome Friends?
Come in, come in, I Will make you all amends;
You need not doubt, you shall not want your pay,
I Will give you interest double for your stay:
What you have lost in time, I Will pay't in measure
For all your pains and care, with hellish treasure:
I am not poor nor sore of hellish coin,
My Subjects do what ever I enjoin.
I need not budg, nor call a Parliament
To furnish me with coin for my intent.
I can maintain my Soldiers all with pay,
And lodge them warm in Winter, night or day:
I have both choice and store of gold and coin,
Of wine and beer; you need not to purloyn:
I can and will requite and retribute
Your pains and minds with what thereto does suit.
You shall not want a mite of your deserts,
Your just proportions, nor your equal parts:
He that has earned more, shall more receive,
He that has earned less, the less shall have.
He that with zeal and valor has employed,
And spent his strength and wits, and has annoyd
And hurt them most, that have my cause withstood,
I will with zeal requite him and his brood.
He shall drink deep of mixed and hellish wine
Flaming in cups of zeal and fury fine;
As Captain chief, he shall have brave attendants,
Such whom he liked, that were his dependants.
These shall enclose and compass him about,
Clothed with fire, and fury on a rout,
Whereby they shall increase, not quench his flame,
But heap on wood and brimston to the same;
Each one as faggots shall about him stand,
He in the midst, and all at my command.
There shall the fire, yea breath and wrath of God
Seize or, and burn, as on a heap of wood.
There shall they cry and yell with hiddeous noyce,
At which my highness laughing, shall rejoice:
Though I must with them be tormented then,
Yet needs I must rejoice, to torture them.
For had I not been wickedly disposd,
I never had in this my pit been closd.
Prince Ruperts desperate Reply, as follows.
Oh wicked, damned, desperate, cursed Devil,
Can thou rejoice, to know our case so evil?
And do not shame, to tell it us before,
What we and thou must bide for evermore.
Nay, what both thou, and we, with all our power,
Can neither help, nor mitigate an hour:
And is it true, that thou will then rejoice,
To hear our cries, and yelling hiddious noise;
Though thou thy self must be tormented too,
Together with us, as is justly due.
Yea though thou wast the first that led us wide,
And made us break that Law that should us guide
To Heavenward, and keep us back from Hell,
Where thou, for doing so, must ever dwell;
And yet thou can rejoice, that thou and we
Must there for evermore tormented be.
What good can that do thee to see us broyl
In hellish flames, who knows it was thy guile
That brought us thither, and for which thou must
Be more tormented, and more deeply cursed:
Yea thou that knows this to be just and true,
And that it is no more but what is due,
That thou and we, look how much more we sin,
So much more torment we augment and win,
And heap on faggots to increase our flame,
Else they that writ the Scripture are to blame;
And yet thou still can instigate to sin,
And put us on, vainglory but to win,
And make us toil and moyl, yea sweat and chafe,
To heap up wrath against the day of wrath:
Thou damned Devil, thou art worse then I,
I never could have dealt so ill with thee:
Though yet it may be thou herein but lies,
There Is no such matters, Heaven and Hell are toys.
I never yet regarded such reports,
But chose to follow honor, wealth, and sports
Whiles this life lasts, and then let come what will,
God has they say decreed both good and ill:
Whatever has been, is, or shall be done
Against both God the Father and the Son:
Why then should I relinquish all my pleasure,
My way to honor, yea, to wealth and treasure,
And go about to serve and worship God,
Which never yet methinks with honor stood,
In sight of men to humble so my self,
They would but think me some base-minded elf:
Besides, I should but play the Hypocrite,
If I should seem therein to take delight,
By making show of holiness within,
When well I know my heart is fraught with sin:
Yea, God and man would call me hypocrite,
Unless my heart therein did take delight:
For that which is within would sometimes out,
I should appear so devilish proud and stout,
That all would know I were not so indeed,
Nor would such shows stand me in any steed,
Unless I first of all could cleanse my heart,
And from my sins and wickedness depart,
God would not hear my prayer, nor accord
To what I do in act or speak in word:
And this I know I cannot frame to do,
Its therefore vain to set my self thereto,
For love of sin has so possessed my heart,
That I can never freely with it part:
Then come what will, I must seclude all care,
It spoils my honor, pleasure, dainty fair;
And all my worldly hopes it swallows up,
When I but think of drinking such a cup
As thou have told me of, thou damned Devil,
Come lets to the wine, I Will drink no cup so evil.
Do thou thy worst, I Will escape thy gaping mouth,
I can retire East, West, yea North and South;
I shall make sure before I battle give
To pass and repass, 'cause I mean to live:
Gape therefore hell, and let me see thy mouth,
I know not where to find it North or South:
But gape, I come, I Will bring them up amain,
And drive them headlong to eternal pain:
For what care I, the blame shall light on thee,
And on themselves because they cannot see,
But flunder down, and fall into thy mouth,
Because they will not part from sins of youth;
But are grown desperate in God-damning ways,
And neither care what God nor Scripture says;
And as for me, I cannot blame them much,
Lest of my own sins they give me some touch:
And how should I find fault and blame them for
What I in heart do love, or not abhor,
For they and I, and I and they together
Are ripe for ruin, reap when God sends weather,
And spare not me, so thou may reap us all;
Gape wide enough for horse, and man, and all:
I Will troop them up with full carrier together;
I Will either choke thee or thy breath I Will smother.
The Answer of the Devil and the insatiable gulf
Well, desperate wicked RUPERT, spare not me,
I much rejoice thy desperate mind to see:
For thou and I, and many thousand others
Were long since desperate, therein we are brothers:
However yet I am your proper father,
You are my sons and heirs, come all together,
You shall be welcome, come on when you please;
Throng in amain, you shall not me displease:
I much rejoice in hopes of such a supper,
Yet if the Roundheads do, I Will spare Prince RUPERT:
For were it not for thee, as I am told,
I could not get my mouth full scarce for gold:
But desperate RUPERT thou do threat to choke me,
I would I had my mouth full, Rupert look thee,
Its two miles wide, as 'twas at York in the battle,
Fill it and take it thee, thou proves desperate metal.
FINIS,
April 1. 1645.
Upon the Princes coming down for Cheshire,
Discovered, overheard, disclosd by me,
Whose name and surname 'gins with E and B,
But cause some think my name I dare not show,
Its Ellis Bradshaw, tell Prince RUPERT so.

