A Practical Discourse CONCERNING GODS DECREES.

In Two parts.

The First concerning man's unfitness to dispute against the Decrees of God:
out of Romans 9.20.

The Second tending to Assert and Clear Gods Absolute Election of a Limited
and certain Number unto Eternal Life: out of Acts 13.48.

By EDWARD BAGSHAVVE St. of Chapter Chapter

OXFORD, Printed by Hen. Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY for Tho. Robinson, 1659.

TO THE HONORABLE MY Lord BRADSHAWE Lord Chief Justice of Chester.
My Noble Lord,
A Late Author in his several Treatises wherein he endeavors to defend (I
will not say the Arminian Tenets, Mr Pierce.
because he is unwilling to have them so styled, but, which is all one)
Freewill and Conditional election, whether because he was touched with
compunction for his former errors, as he thinks them; or else to make his
present opinions more taking and plausible (as if he had not fell into them by
chance, but got them after much and serious study) I find that he frequently
does usher them in, by professing that he was once a Calvinist (for that it
seems must be the Name of Obloquie to those, who, according to Scripture (of
which Calvin was the best Interpreter, that God has yet vouchsafed his Church)
do maintain Absolute Predestination) but he was frighted into his wits (for so
he is pleased to play upon himsefe) by considering the Horrible consequences of
Absolute Reprobation.

Were I willing to make my self work in this time of my retirement here, by
engaging with a Person, who is, as some think very able, I am sure very
confident, and very Angry; I would not desire greater advantage then these few
words of his might give me: for to be an Arminian, I mean an Asserter of
Universal Redemption, and of those other Tenets which lead to it or flow from
it, a very little pains will serve the turn; and every man is so Naturally
apt to make himself a sharer with God, and to cozen himself with hopes of
mercy, that it is a much harder matter to escape those opinions, then to
attain them. Besides for any to be deferred from the maintenance of any truth
in Thesi, because it seems attended with unanswerable difficulties, and many
ill consequences, is to my thinking very unreasonable: since if that may be
admitted, all the mysterious part of our Religion which contains the Credenda
must never expect either to be entertained or defended. I might add farther,
that for any to be frighted into his wits, is a thing altogether unusual: and
if it has indeed in this matter so fared with that Gentleman, he is the first
who can boast of the Experiment.

But, my Lord, I am not desirous to dispute at all in these matters, much less
with one, who is so taken up with abusing persons of greater worth, that he
cannot find leisure to take notice of one so Inconsiderable as my self: only
entending to handle some part of that question which is now in contest, I must
crave leave to profess, that I never yet was satisfied, but that those fatal
consequences, whatever they are, which are thought to attend Absolute
Reprobation, they do as far as I can see equally Accompany Gods Prescience,
of which yet this Gentleman is a zealous assertour. For if God foresees who
will refuse the means of Grace, he foresees likewise that he will assist one
and not another: and that without such particular Divine assistance, it is
impossible any should believe and be saved. Now what is this else, but for men
at long run, after much time misspent in wrangling, to have recourse unto Gods
Absolute but yet discriminating Will and Power, which at their first setting
out they were desirous to decline.

As for those Tragical stories and dreadful Nothings, wherewith that
Gentleman's writings, and before him Acta Synodalia are stuffed, concerning
God's cruelty, Tyranny and I know not what else -- As also the vain and
impertinent declaiming from the common places of Gods Justice, and mercy,
thereby to enervate or at least to Enveigh against Gods Absolute, Irresistible,
and Unaccountable Sovereignty. All this terrible talk is nothing but Noise and
Flourish, fit indeed to amuse a country Auditory, or to impose upon a lazy and
superficial reader; but certainly of very little weight with them, who dare
not be frighted from, nor talked out of their faith, and who think Scripture
truths are to be embraced and followed, in spite of all men's corrupt and empty
reasonings against them.

Out of the Scriptures therefore I have undertaken briefly to demonstrate these
two things,

First, That whatever opinion is manifestly revealed in Scripture, (such as I
take Absolute Reprobation to be) to argue against it, and by Artifices of
Humane Wit, and Eloquence to seek to overthrow and disgrace it, this is nothing
else but to dispute against God, and impiously to be wise above what is written.

Secondly, That God has from all Eternity designed a particular Number unto
Eternal life, and that this Election is Absolute. From whence it follows,
that all those who are not by God in that Act of Absolute Election appointed to
life, they are reprobated, i. Designed for destruction; which Decree is
Absolute, made by Sovereign Will, but Executed in justice.

And this my Lord, is the sum of the Ensuing Treatises; for the publishing of
which, next to the care, every Christian should have to see the Truths of God,
so far as they are revealed to him asserted and freed from cavil, especially
in a contradicting, and every way too quarrel some Age; I have no one outward
motive more prevailing with me, then my, perhaps too great, Ambition of
presenting something to your Lordship, whereby I might testify to the World,
not only that real esteem I have of your Lordship's singular worth and
eminence in general, but likewise to manifest in particular how mindful I am
of those many signal and Unparallelled marks of Favor, which You have been
pleased to confer upon my self; for which, though the service of my whole
life will be too poor and mean a sacrifice, and no endeavor can amount to
deserve the name of requital, yet I could not but think it my duty to study
an acknowledgment: which Zeal of mine, if your Lordship pleases either to
accept or pardon, I have atteined my end; For I aim at nothing more then the
Honor of being owned for

My Noble Lord Your Lordship's most Obliged, most thankful, and most Humble
devoted Servant EDW. BAGSHAVVE.
Chapter Chapter December. 20.
Romans 9.20. Nay but O man who art thou that reply against God.


THe Apostle in this Chapter handling that great question, why the Jews, who
were, by the Apostles own confession, heirs and Children of the Promises,
should now be omitted and cast off; and the Gentiles, that before were Aliens,
should now be admitted and taken into the Covenant of Grace in Christ; he
fixes it upon God's Election: who being a most free Agent chooses one and
refuses another, according to His good pleasure, and not out of any foresight
of their Works, whether good or bad; for Jacob was loved and Esau hated, even
before they had done either good or Evil -- verse. 11.

This Doctrine so much detracting from the merit, and thereby abasing the pride
of man, the Apostle foresaw would not be easily digested, and therefore he
Repeats and Answers the most obvious of those objections, which were likely
upon a rational account to be made against it; and which in short do contain
the sum of whatever can be urged in this point.

The first Objection is couched verse. 14. What shall we say then is there
unrighteousness with God --?

As if the Apostle had said. -- You may object: if it be so, that the reason
why one man believes, and another does not; and consequently that one man shall
be saved and another damned be only from God's Election, and not from their
merit, does not this argue some unrighteousness in God? a kind of injust
(...), or respect of Persons, thus to prefer one man before another? For as
all men are equal by nature, so it seems to be most just and reasonable, that
they should be equal in condition too; and not this vast difference, as to
their final estate, to be put between the^, without any desert or merit of the
parties.

To the Objection thus framed, the Apostle returns a double Answer.

1. In a phrase of abhorrency- Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid;
let not such a thought enter into our hearts; for whatever the issue of Gods
dealings may be, yet, as to the cause of the^, this foundation stands sure,
that God is righteous in all his doings; and will be justified when he is
judged.

2. By instancing in the example of Pharaoh, whom, God says, he raised for
this very purpose, to manifest His Glory; from whence the Apostle concludes --
v. 18. That God has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens -- i. that we are not to look for any outward cause of Gods actings;
for he is not tied to man's endeavor, since all our good is from him, and
therefore can merit nothing at his hands: He ordaines happiness, and bestows
holiness on whom he pleases; they are both freegifts, we cannot naturally
deserve the one, nor are we willing to desire the other -- God therefore
hardens -- i.He lets the sinner be a sinner still; he does not remove the
stone, but lets men persist and go on in their natural hardness; for he is
not obliged to his creature, but acts all things, both in mercy or otherwise,
according to the Dictates of his Absolute, Sovereign and Unaccountable Will.

This Answer being so strict and severe, as leaving the greatest part of
mankind in an hopeless and irrecoverable condition, it is objected again. v.
19 -- Thou will then say unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who has
resisted his will? i. If it be so, that it is not in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but only in God that shows mercy: if by any action of ours, barely
as such, we can neither merit Heaven, nor escape Hell; if our wills are tied up
so close to the will of God, that like lesser wheels they move only as that
great mover does guide them? -- then, why is God so Angry with sin and sinners?
Why does he forbid, dehort, and threaten by his Prophets! To what end serve all
those examples of vengeance, which we tremble to read of? for if it be so with
us, we may be miserable, but we cannot be sinful; if our spirits be put into
an unsuitable frame, so as that we walk contrary to God, it is our sad
necessity and not our fault; since none can alter, much less resist the will
of God, which alone has made us so.

And now the Objection being pressed to such a degree of impiety, that it does
tacitly lay the guilt of all men's Transgressions upon God, the Apostle thinks
it high time to cut off all farther Arguing, which he does in these words --
Nay, but what art thou, O man, who reply against God? As if he had said --
Do thou know who thou art, thou bold inquisitive creature, or who it is thou
dealest with? Consider that thou art but a man, and will thou question thy
Maker's Justice? Forbear vain presumptuous man, stand off, and lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, for God is in the Bush, God is at the bottom of this dispute,
and therefore admire with reverence, what thou can not comprehend with reason.

So that the words are a short, but yet sharp, confutation of all carnal
reasonings in the matters of God: such Debates are evinced not only to be
sinful, but likewise unreasonable, by a threefold Argument lying in these
words.

1. The first is taken from the meannesse and contemptiblenesse of the person
disputing; and that is man: The Apostle brings him in with a Quis Tu! What art
Thou! as if he was of so slight a make and value, that he fell under no
definition. What art thou O man!

2. From the Greatness and Incomprehensible Excellence of the Person disputed
against, and that is God -- a name able to strike dumb and coufound the most
exalted reason. -- What art thou O man who disputes against God?

3. From the Absurd, Saucy and Malapert manner of carrying on the Dispute; it
is not modestly making an Objection, or proposing a doubt and so away; but a
resolved persisting in the Cavil; a kind of challenging God to vy Arguments
with him. The word is -- (...) -- To answer again and again; never to give
over; to chop Logic with God, to seek to nonplus him, and to drive his
Almighty Power and Wisdom to an absurdity.

So that here is man, vain man, not disputing but Cavilling, and that not with
his fellow creature but with God -- put all this together -- Empty, Ignorant,
Wretched Man, contesting with a Perfect, Wise and Allmighty God; and that in
such a way too, as if Man were the better, and the wiser of the too. Strange
folly, madness and impudence, this! and yet whoever gives his reason the
reins, and will resolve to dispute when he should obey, must needs be guilty
of it.

The words thus explained and divided may be summed up in this one Proposition
-- or Doctrine -- viz.

Man, in whatever Capacity considered, is not a Competent Judge, of the Equity
and Justice of the proceedings, ways and Counsels of God, in the dispesing
and Ordering of his Creatures.

This may be demonstrated two ways

1. First, from the quality and nature of the Person Judging, and that is Man.

2. Secondly, from the Quality and nature of the things to be judged. The Ways
and Counsels of God.

In the First I shall prove that man is not fit to Judge.

In the Second I shall prove that the Counsels of God, neither do nor can fall
under man's Judgment.

For the First, viz. That Man is not fit to Judge, it will be clear, if we
consider that there are Two things, especially requisite to qualify a man to be
a Judge.

1. Ability or Skill.

2. Authority or Power. And Man wants both in this Case.

1. First, Man wants Ability or Skill. Vain man, cap. 11.12.
says Job, would be wise, though he be borne like the wild ass Colt. -- i. e.
Man would still retain his Ambitious Humor of pretending to know Good and
Evil; he would still exalt himself, and be like God; although that very
Desire has made him become, like the Beasts which perish, Rash, Heady, and
Impertinent. For since our Fall, Pride has taken up the Place of Reason; and
Arrogance fills that Room, which Knowledge possessed before. As in a vessel,
when Water, or the more solid body goes out, presently Air comes in.

To take a Brief Survey of man's Weakness and Inability, we will consider him
1 In Himself. 2 As compared to God.


1 First, Consider Man in himself, and then I may ask the Question, which our
Apostle does here, What art then O Man? Declare us thy Original, discover thy
Excellence; where lies thy Worth? whence comes thy Pre-eminence? Survey thy
Outside, and tell me what see thou? a rotten perishing Carcass! As our
Savior said of the Tombs, how glorious soever they seemed; yet they were but
Tombs, i.e. Charnell-houses; Fair without, but Rotten within. So the most
Beautiful and Specious outside, Deck it, Disguise, Trim and Adorn it how
you will, yet it is still but Dust; you may change and vary its shape, you
cannot change and alter its substance. Genesis 11.19.
Dust thou art, said God to Adam, and to dust shall thou return. Was not this
a sad story for Adam to hear; when he thought of nothing else, but of being,
as the Devil had promised him, like unto God knowing goood and evil: God does
presently undeceive him, by minding him of his Original, and telling him what
would be the Exit of all his Borrowed Glory. This no doubt did level his
Thoughts, and lay low those Proud Imaginations, which otherwise might have
ceazed him; since a Casket of so mean a value, can scarce be conceived to
contain in it a Jewel of any Excellent Price.

I will not, Genesis 6.3.
says God, always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: which may be
interpreted, for that he is of the same weak, Frail, and Infirm Nature with
other Creatures. Wherein God seems to make it as an Argument of his Bearing
with man, because Man was Flesh, i.e. unable to bear what God was able to lay
upon him. But if God draws an Argument of Compassion from Man's Frailty, ought
not we from thence likewise to draw an Argument of Submission? If God is
pleased to forbear punishing and striving with us, because we are but Flesh,
ought not we for the same Reason much more to forbear judging of, Genesis 18.27.
and contending with him? This use did Abraham make of it. Behold, says he, I
have now taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but Dust and Ashes:
Abraham looks upon it as a Boldness, for which he seems to ask Pardon, that
he undertook so much as to speak to God, since he was but Dust and Ashes; how
much less do we think for the same reason would he have offered to have
disputed with him? But

Secondly, look into man a little nearer, and search his Inward and Hidden
worth: what is that Principle which men ordinarily do so much boast of and
magnify? They call it Reason! and pray what is Reason? Is it not that (...)
that Carnal or Animal man, 1 Cor. 11.14.
which cannot conceive the things of God, and looks upon all the Actings of the
Holy Spirit as Folly! Certainly a small wind will fill our Sail, if such a
Principle of knowledge as this can puff us up: little cause have we to boast
of that, which cost us so dear, and is so little worth: for as to get Reason,
we lost Paradise; so till we renounce our Reasons, we can never recover it.

But take Reason at its best and highest Elevation, Prove. 20.27.
Solomon says it is the Candle of the Lord: and shall the Candle say to the
Sun, thou have no Light in thee? Shall our Faint, Glimmering, and Derivative
Luster, prefer or oppose it self to the Fountain, from which it issued?
There is a Spirit in man, says Job, cap. 32.8.
but the Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding: and do we think he
gave it for these purposes, to argue and dispute his doings? so much to abuse
and misimploy our Talent, is certainly a greater sin, and will bring down a
greater Punishment, then barely not to use it.

In short, man's Reason at its best and utmost extent, is a Narrow, Shrunk, and
Limited thing; in Spiritual things altogether blind and perverse: in Natural
things either Ignorant, or only changing Ignorance into Uncertainty: and shall
a man so much stretch this Principle, as by it to condemn his Maker? shall we
with this scantling measure Infinity? or set our selves Judges in the highest
administrations of Providence, who cannot demonstratively prove the Motion of
the smallest Atome? what is this but to darken Counsel by words without
knowledge; Job 38.2.
to put a False Comment upon a Clear Text, and to blurre the beauty of
Providence with our Perverse and short-sighted Interpretations.

Secondly, Man's Inability does yet farther appear, if you consider him as
compared to God. It is not for nothing here that the Apostle does put this
Question, Who art thou, O Man, that replyest against God? but he does it,
thereby to aggravate the Sinful Presumption of the Disputer; it was against
God, therefore the more heinous. And indeed a man can never know his own
Weakness and Imperfection aright, till he has lost himself in contemplating
the Vast Abyss and Ocean of Gods Perfection: as if we would exactly know
whether a thing be little or not, we do not use to set it by something that is
less, but to compare it unto something Greater, as a Spark to the Flame, a
Drop to the Ocean, and the like. So in this case, while a man Centers in
himself, and draws all his Lines inward; he may perhaps please himself with
some thoughts of Selfe-sufficiency; but when he once goes out of himself, and
takes a strict view of the Amazing Greatness and Majesty, which God discovers
even in his works of Providence, then does a man presently begin to perceive
his own Emptiness. For suppose a man were kept up close imprisoned in a
Dungeon all his days, and if after some time of Durance there in that Horror
and Darkness, he should by chance have a little Glimpse of light let in to
him at a small Cranny, how infinitely would he be delighted and pleased with
it; but if afterward he were taken from thence, and by degrees fitted to
endure, and then placed in full Sunshine, how strangely would he loath his
former place of Restraint and Bondage? It is just so with a man, who by degrees
is taken off from himself, and prepared to a gracious Discovery of Gods
excellence. When I consider, says the Psalmist, the Heavens, which are the
work of thy hand -- it follows presently, what is man that thou art mindful
of him, Ps. 18. v. 3, 4.
or the Son of Man that thou considerest him? Look upon God in the Glory and
Brightness of his Appearance, and then all Conceits of Humane Excellence will
presently vanish, as Stars do disappeare at Noonday.

Certain it is, that if men were more frequent and serious in the
contemplating of Gods Power and Wisdom, they would not be so taken up with
thoughts of their own; a want of comparing our own emptiness to Gods
fulness, is the only thing that does most puff us up and swell us. A
pregnant Instance of this may be seen in the Case of Job; he finding himself
under a great Pressure, and feeling, as he thought, hard measure from God,
grows Impatient, and seems to long for nothing more, then that he might dispute
with God; thinking no doubt but he had so much to say in his own behalf, as
would pose even God himself to answer. Hence are those Passionate Expressions,
-- Oh that a man might plead with God, as a man pleades for his Neighbor; and
Oh! cap. 16. cap. 32.3, 4.
that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his Seat! I
would order my Cause before him, and fill my mouth with Arguments. i.e. I would
Dispute and Argue the Case with him: his Friends dissuade him from this Attempt
all they can, they tell him over and over, that he forgets himself in turning
his Spirit against God, cap. 15.13.
and in letting such words go out of his mouth. And when that would not take
him off, Elihu undertakes to answer in Gods behalf, and urges against him,
that God is greater than Man, and gives no account of his Matters. cap. 34.23.
That his Counsels are Inscrutable, for touching the Almighty who can know
him, or search him out unto Perfection. cap. 37.23.
With many other arguments to the same purpose; yet still Job remains
unsatisfied, and nothing but disputing with God himself will content him.
Well! at last God does condescend to answer his Curiosity: and what is the
Issue? when once God does mind him of his Power, that all we see or feel is
only an Effect and Product of his Goodness: when even the most common and
ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, viz. Job. 38.
Hail, Snow, Rain, etc. are evinced to be beyond the reach of man's Reason to
comprehend, then Job presently alters his Note, he is not now for Disputing any
longer, but sinkes into an humble Acknowledgment. Behold I am vile, cap. 40.2,
3, 4.
says he, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. -- A
dejected sense of our own vileness is most likely to be the Result of
comparing our selves to Gods Excellence.

Thus man wants Ability to Judge.

2o. Secondly, as man wants Ability, so likewise he wants Authority, which is
the Especial Requisite to constitute a Judge. When one came to our Savior to
ask his Resolution in a case of a Civil concernment; our Savior, though he
had all power in him, yet acting as Man, refused to meddle, Luc. 12.14.
and asks him, Who made me a Judge? So I ask thee, thou Bold Disputer,
whoever thou art, who made thee a Judge? and by what Authority do thou argue
these things? if thou have no Warrant, nothing in the Word of God to show to
justify thy Confidence, thou art not only a Rash and Ignorant Censurer, but an
Impudent Intruder. I find in Scripture murmuring reproved, Disputing forbidden,
and nothing but Obedience required. Will thou then upon no better a Ground,
then because thou art unsatisfied with the Justice or Reasonableness of such
and such a Proceeding, take upon thee to sound the Depths of God, and to call
him to thy Tribunal? what? shall the Judge of all the Earth be now arraigned
at thy Bar, and give the Account of his Matters? or else thou will charge
upon him Folly, Injustice or Cruelty, with other things, which I Tremble to
Think of. Quo jure! how comes this about, let us know when God parted with his
Prerogative, and made you his Overseer?

The Apostle James commanding those to whom he writes, not to speak evil one
of another, he gives this Reason for it, because thereby they should judge the
Law, which forbids all Uncharitable Backbitings. But, says he, if thou Judge
the Law, thou art no longer a Doer of the Law, Jac. 4.11.
but a Judge, i.e. Thou art a Thing which God never intended thee; he gives his
Law to be a Rule of thy Obedience, and not a Subject of thy Reasoning. So say I
here, if any takes upon him to Judge Gods proceedings, i.e. if thou weighest
his ways in thy Balance, if thou measurest him by thy Line, if thou do
Limit and circumscribe him by thy Compass, and so proceedest to pass Sentence
upon him; in this case thou art no longer a Servant of the Lords, but a Judge:
and then thou may expect and fear what will follow; for if so many perished
at one time barely for looking into the Arc; and if he that judges another,
though his fellow creature, is threatened to be Judged, how much sorer
Punishment, how much severer Judgment shall he expect, who thus provokes the
Lord by Judging, Censuring, and even Condemning him?

So much for the first Reason: that Man is not fit to Judge.

The second Reason is taken from the Nature and Quality of the things Judged,
they are the Ways, Counsels, and proceedings of God, and so cannot fall under
Man's Judgment. Thus the Apostle does argue a pari: As no man can know the
things of man, but the Spirit of man that is in him; so none can know the
things of God, 1 Cor. 11.11.
but the Spirit of God. Shall God be God, and not have peculiar ways and
Methods of Acting, not to be fathomed or understood by man? He himself has
told us to prevent our search, that his ways are not as our ways, Is. 4.8.
nor his thoughts as our thoughts. He is not tied to our Narrow Definitions of
Just and Injust, they are words only that bind us, but can lay no constraint
upon him, who acts, like himself, in a Sovereign and Unlimited manner. Now,
as in an Engine, if we do not see the Springs and Wheels that move it, it is
impossible we should know how or which way it will turn; so since we cannot
discern or discover the Principle, upon which the Great Mover and Disposer of
all things acts, this being locked up and hid in the Cabinet of his own Will,
to which only his Son and Spirit have a key, we have nothing to do but to
submit in Silence. Whatever God does, says the Preacher, however it may
appear outwardly Deformed or Misshapen, yet nothing can be added to it or
taken from it: Eccl. 3.14.
it has in it self an Entire and Absolute Perfection; and the reason why God
does sometimes bring strange and perplexing things to pass, is, that men might
dispute! no, but that they might fear before him.

The use is, no man is a Competent Judge of the Equity and Justice of Gods
Proceedings, then it should Teach us, to silence our Vain Reasonings in the
Matters of God: we should look upon them as Mysteries beyond our Reach, and
therefore infinitely above our Cavil. Perhaps it is not a Rational, I am sure
it is not a Christian way of Arguing, Non intelligo, ergo non Credo. This I do
not understand, I cannot perceive how such or such a point can be made out by
Reason, or can consist with those Conclusions which I have embraced, therefore
I will not believe it. It is the Task, and it should be the Triumph of Faith,
to break through all such Difficulties, and to remove even Mountains of
seeming Contradictions. 1 John 5.4:
The Apostle calls Faith our Victory, by which we overcome the World; and if
Faith overcomes the World, how much more ought it to overcome our Doubts, and
our Reasonings, which are but as it were the Clouds and Misty part of the
World. When our Savior had discoursed concerning that great Mystery of Living
and Feeding upon him by Faith; John 6.60.
the Apostles presently cry out, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? this
is so Absurd and Irrational, that there is no enduring it. Our Savior
perceiving how they staggered, he does gently acquaint them with the Reason of
their Erroneous Apprehension, viz. because they judged according to flesh, and
humane appearance, the Spirit, says he quickneth, the flesh profits nothing,
my words they are spirit and they are life. v. 63.

To apply this -- does any dealing of God, put thee into an Anxious and a
disputing State, by all means suspend thy censure, least thou should charge
God foolishly; and search first into the principle by which thou proceedest,
whether it be Flesh or Spirit: for reason it self, till it be purged, till the
dreggs be taken off and refined by the spirit of God, it is still but Flesh, a
weak, low and carnal Principle, not at all fit for a Christian to own: but is
indeed one of those earthly members, which we are commanded to subdue and
Mortify. To distrust our own understandings, not to pass sentence upon the
first blush and offer of things, nor in spiritual concernments to be led by
Humane appearance, this is the first and most Necessary part of self-denial.

This use may be improved in many Particulars, but there are two things I
mainly intend it for.

1. First, to fix, and settle our spirits, in that great, and so much
Controverted Doctrine, concerning Gods decrees of eternal Election and
Reprobation.

2. Secondly To suppress and silence our murmurings, and repinings against
God, in his Acts of Providence and outward dealings with us.

First the consideration of man's unfitness to Judge in the matters of God,
ought to settle and fix us in the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation. That
God has from all eternity chosen some, on whom he will have mercy: and has,
out of his good pleasure, reprobated others, is clear from this and many other
places of Scripture. But to reconcile this to Humane reason, or to satisfy all
the Objections which may be brought from Philosophy against it, I think the
Apostle himself did not pretend to do. Here in this verse, he seems to
Imply, that the best way to decide this controversy, is not to dispute it and
in another place, when in a kind of Ecstasy he cries out (...); -- Oh the
Depth, of the Riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God: How inscrutable are
his Judgments, and his ways unsearchable? Romans 11.33. certainly he did thereby
intend to put a stop unto our enquiry, that we might not venture into a depth,
which we could not fathom.

What is said by all sides in this dispute, I have often, as far as my
weakness would give me leave, considered, but yet could never find
satisfaction in any thing, but in that question of the Apostles, and in
bringing my reason to a Non plusse.

For whatever the Arminians pretend that the Doctrine of Absolute
Predestination is Blasphemous, and I know not what, because it seems to make
God the Author of Sin; yet indeed it does no more do it, if it be well weighed,
then their Doctrine of Prescience does: for which reason, Socinus, who very
well understood the Controversy, did not fear to deny even Prescience it
self: since whatever is infallibly fore-known, must infallibly come to pass,
that is necessarily. For to distinguish between the necessity of the event, and
the necessity of that which causes the event, is, I confess a subtilty that I
understand not, and am hopeless ever to be satisfied in.

Leaving therefore the Disputers of this Age, to the merciless Fury of one
another Penns, I shall give some few Practical rules, whereby whoever guides
himself, will be freed from all those perplexities which his reason otherwise
would engage him in.

First, In all doubts never enquire what is rational, but what is revealed:
the Word of God alone, which is the ground of our Faith, ought to be the object
of our search. If you find this Doctrine, that God has prepared some, even for
everlasting destruction, whilst he has compassion on others, and that merely
to manifest his own Glory -- if this Doctrine be plainly laid down thee, then
farewell Reason, and set your Faith on work, to find out carefully of which
number you your selves are. For there are the (...) and the (...) the Saved and
the Lost, whose condition is as sure and Irreversible as if they were in
Possession of it already.

Secondly, Let no doubts or Perplexities take you off from your obedience. As
no man needs fear to embrace Gospell-Truth upon its own terms, so neither
ought he by any consequences of vain and Carnal reasoning to be withdrawn
from the doing of his duty. He that finds in himself such a frame, that he is
resolved to go on, and leave the Issue to God; though he perish yet he will
trust in him; he will find at last all his darkness and doubtings cleared up
and scattered: for then we believe indeed, when with Abraham we act even
against and beyondall Humane Probability.

Thirdly -- Be often asking your selves this Question with the Apostle -- what
am I, that I should limit the Almighty, or Judge the Holy one of Israel? What
are we, poor dust and ashes, that we should look up to God except it be with
trembling and amazement: to admire and not to dispute his doings? For what are
we, that we should be prescribing rules to him, and finding out new ways and
methods of salvation, others then God himself has been pleased to discover?
What are we, that we should sit upon the Decrees of God, and stain the
wisdom of his counsels, with the dirt and mire of our own fancies? This
Impartial self examination will serve to cure, or at least to allay our
Curiosity.

Lastly -- In all disputes and doubts: ever think that part of the tenet
safest, which does least Humor man's Pride, and does most advance Gods Glory: we
cannot think too meanly and humbly of our selves, nor can we too much advance
and exalt Gods Sovereignty. It Is this on which the Justice of all Gods
proceedings is grounded: iet God be Great and Glorious, though every man be
miserable. To make God all in all, besides that it is our duty, is likewise
nothing else but an Anticipation of happiness, and is by the Apostle recorded
-- to be the Blessed Posture, of our suture state. 1 Cor. 15.28.

Secondly, Incompetence to Judge the equity of Gods proceedings, serves to
suppress and moderate all repinings at the Providence of God in his outward
dispensations. No one thing is so great an inducement to Atheism, and direct
denial of God; as to distrust the wisdom and equity of his Providence. David
confesses that the temptation arising from hence, did so far prevail upon
him, that his feet had at most slipped -- i. he was just then sliding, I was
envious at the foolish-saith he, v. 3. when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Cur malis been sit, has been a question that much puzzled the Heathen world, and
some of them have many excellent sayings about it: but to speak the truth, they
seem to be only things of wit, rather then of serious judgment: for this is
certain, who ever sticks long upon this question, cannot be guiltless: since
reason cannot resolve it -- When I sought to know this, says David, it was too
painful for me. v. 16. I did endeavor to debate and argue the case by my own
reason, and from thence to answer my scruples, but I could not do it, the
objection did still prevail and overmaster me. What did David then? we find
that he went into the Sanctuary of God, v. 17. he consulted the Oracle, and
there he found the reason of their Advancement -- And then he concludes that
discourse, with taxing himself of great folly, for not taking this course
sooner, but giving so much scope and latitude to his corrupt reasoning -- So
foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee. v. 22.

That which was David's practice ought to be ours, when we are set upon with the
same temptation, we have lived to see as great variety of strange providence
as any nation under Heaven; nor is the reason of this as yet revealed, we
cannot yet spell out Gods meaning, but certainly he has a great work doing,
which will in due time be accomplished.

So likewise in all particular events which concern us, let us not so much
consider and reflect upon the things we see and feel, as upon the hand which
sent them. This will either ease our burdens, or at least make us bear them
with more cheerfulness if we consider that God laid them on, whose Power we
cannot resist, whose wisdom we ought not to question.

Let us stop our mouths, and quiet our discontents with this, that God is in
the cloud, that he works all things not according to his will barely, though
that was enough, but according to the counsel of his will. There is a wisdom
and design in every thing though we cannot reach it.

Many impatient Jonahs there are in the World, who think it becomes them to
quarrel and contest with God, though they have but lost their gourd. Whose
spirit is like a troubled Sea, any small wind will raise a storm and beget a
tempest in them.

Let all such hearken to that advice of Hamah -- Talk no more so exceeding
proudly, 1 Samuel 2.2.
let not Arogancy come out of your mouth, for our God is a God of knowledge, by
him Actions are weighed -- And not Actions only, but events likewise: there
are no such things as rash, casual and unpremeditated events: but that part of
the skale, which falls to our lot, whether for good or bad, comes only,
because God is so pleased to order and turn the balance.

FINIS.
Acts 13.45. (...). And as many as were ordained to Eternall-life, believed.


THe Apostle Paul having in a large discourse deduced Christian Religion from
its very Original, and showed, how in the several ages of the World, God
still carried on the same design for the salvation of men by Jesus Christ, as
he that was not only foretold, but figured in all their Legal Worship: you
find -- v. 45. the Jews contradicting and blaspheming: -- i. either railing on
Christ, or else reviling Paul, and ignominiously slighting and traducing the
Doctrine which he had delivered.

Whereupon the Apostle (...) -- i. speaking freely, or plainly tells them that
the loss and damage by so doing would only redound to themselves for hereby,
viz. by refusing the tender of Salvation so freely offered, they evidenced that
they judged themselves unworthy so great a mercy, and therefore they being, as
it were (...) men selfe-condemned, he would have no more to do with them, but
from thence forward publish the Doctrine of the Gospel to the Gentiles:
intimating that God till then had empaled his Church, and confined it to the
narrow circuit of Judaea, thereby as it were imprisoning that sun in a
lantern: but now God would resumc his whole right, that the earth might be the
Lords and the fullness thereof: excluding no place, restreining no people from
the benefit and comfort, which would flow from the light of the Gospel
steaming in and shining amongst them.

Whereupon it follows v. 48. That when the Gentiles heard this they were glad,
and Glorisied the Word of the Lord -- And as many as were ordained to Eternal
Life believed.

From the words I entend to insist upon and clear, two Propositions.

1. First -- That there are some, and that a definite and limited number, which
are by God from all eternity ordained unto Eternal life or salvation.

2. Secondly that the reason why one man believes, i. embraces the means of
salvation, and another does not, is finally to be resolved into Gods eternal
Election of the one, and reprobation or rejection of the other.

Both these doctrines are clear from the words of the text, for this phrase --
(...) -- etc. As many as were Ordained believed implies, first that some
certain persons were ordained, whereby they are distinguished from the rest of
the common hearers; and likewise it is added as a reason, why these believed,
while the others continued in their impenitence: they were Ordained, therefore
they Believed.

Before I prove the first Proposition viz: That there are some and that a
certain number appointed unto life, -- which I think is evident in the text --
I must not omit that this Word -- (...) has been variously rendered, and many
attempts have been made to draw it from its true and native signification. The
sum of what they say is briefly this that (...) signifies Actively -- Qui se
parant Vitae aeternae, fitly disposed and qualified for the Gospel -- so that
Ordained according to them, are not -- Ordained by God, but such as are
Ordained by themselves; Thus Socinus, Grotius, his interpreter Dr Hammond. That
these men who do professedly (...) serve a side, and are unwilling to own any
thing more in Religion then they can reconcile to reason, should thus strangely
(I will not say Ignorantly, for it is too much Learning that causes this
madness) but contrary to all rules of Grammar, and Analogy of the Greek
tongue, make a passive verb signify Actively, is to me no great wonder: for if
they did not this, they would loose their cause, and then what would become of
their reputation with their followers; which, whatever becomes of the truth,
must be secured: so impossible is it to drive on those two contrary trades, of
Gospel obedience, and Humane Applause.

But since the Learned and Ingenuous Mr Mede suffered himself to be so far
gone in his Criticismes, as to render this Word -- In Procinctu -- i. such who
are in a posture to lay hold upon, and candidates of Eternal life; quot quot
de Agmine and Class fuerant credentium. So that (...) shall be not Ordained
but Ordered -- i. modo militari, In rank and file as it were, marshalled and
Embattelled unto eternal life: This is a conceit so streined, so unsuitable to
Scripture language: and withal so much misbecoming the learning of that Worthy
man, (...) I cannot pass it over without observing these two things,

1. That it is a very hard matter for the soberest and best tempered
Christians, such as I take Mr Mede to have been, to captivate their reason and
to subdue their Learning unto the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel.

2. That there is great need for all those who are students in Divinity, and
who design themselves for that Honorable, and never enough valued Profession
of Preaching the Gospel, that they make themselves worthy of it, as by all
other excellencies, so especially by careful and diligent search of the
Scriptures in their Original Languages: And that, not only because he ought
not to Prophecy who knows not how to interpret, but lest men who pretend to
skill and exactness in those Tongues, do abuse our ignorance to an Embracing
of their errors, while we are not able to distinguish between a true Text and a
bad comment. For I do not see how we can rationally refuse any Interpretation
though false, if we are not able knowingly to make out a better of our own.

But for the clearing of this Text very little skill will serve, for who knows
not, that knows any thing of Creek, that (...) was never yet taken Actively,
and that the word cannot be otherwise rendered here, then it is every where
else-viz. Ordained or Appointed. Thus Romans 13.2. the Powers that are, are (...)
-- Appointed of God. And Act. 17.26. God has bound or limited (...) -- the
fore-appointed seasons -- i. God has set a fixed and certain period unto the
duration of those several changes and scenes of time, which he himself has
preordained: so in this place (...) are those that are by God certainly and
infallibly appointed unto eternal life. God being not only (...), the
disposer of seasons, but of persons.

These are they who by the Apostle Paul are called (...): 2 Cor. 4.
-- the (...) saved allready-whose salvation is as sure and certain; as if
they were already put into full Possession of it.

In another place they are styled (...) foreordained or predestined to Grace
and Glory: and that we might not doubt, what it was that gave the birth, and
rise to such a gracious appointment -- The Apostle adds that it was (...),
Ephesians. 1.5. etc.
according to the purpose of him, who does not wait for nor depend upon outward
motives, but works all things according to the Counsel of his own will.

Romans 11.5. They are called (...), the Election of Grace i. such persons of
whose Election Grace only was the Cause; and v. 7. simply (...), the Election,
i. e. those whom God has culled and chosen out from the Rest of Mankind, and
designed for Everlasting Happiness.

The force of these and many other Texts of Scripture to the same purpose, make
all sides agree, that Some indeed are Appointed unto Life, but who these are,
that God himself does not know, so Socinns: that though some are Appointed,
yet there is a Possibility for All, so Arminius. That is in short, that Some
shall be saved is Certain; but that the Persons and their Number is unlimited
and uncertain.

Before therefore I prove the Point by Scripture, give me leave to bewail a
little the sad Condition of those men, who take a Liberty to Interpret
Revealed, Truth by Rational Notions; for in so doing, through a just Judgment
of God upon their Curiosity, they are forced to run into and maintain those
Fond and Ridiculous Errors, which a Sober man would blush to own.

As in this Case, can it be imaginable that God should design any of his
Creatures unto Eternal Life, and yet not know who they are? as Socinus
affirms, who brings in God, as the Platonists did of Old, not choosing of
Persons, but Propositions; not designing this or that man to Salvation, and so
to Faith Absolutely by virtue of his Prerogative; but only to Salvation
Indefinitely upon supposition of Faith, which whether any will embrace or not,
he does not fear to Assert, that God himself does not know. So careless are
men of Gods Honor, while they Study and Contend for their own. For if the Case
be so indeed, God does only leave himself in the Dark, and does not exercise
his Power and Prescience about his Noblest Creature, Man.

The Doctrine of Universal Redemption, though not so barefaced, yet labors
with the same Absurdity: for if God knows who shall be saved, then it is
certain there is no Possibility for all; or else we must conclude Gods
Knowledge to be only Guess; and maintain a too Apparent Contradiction: for
if God knows who shall be saved, then it is evident that these only shall be
saved, who are so known: whereas if there be a Possibility left for all, then
it is Certain, that God did not infallibly know, who they were that should be
saved; but left the whole to Hazard.

I must confess I do not willingly desire to deal this way in Reproving any
Error: for had I less to say in Reason then I have, for Gods Eternal Absolute
Election, yet the Scripture being so Full and Positive in it, to that alone I
would resign and give up my Faith, and not willingly suffer my self to
partake either of their Fate, or of their Folly, who cannot endure to be
Taught, but in Spiritual, and therefore Inconceivable Things, would feign be
wise above what is written.

For that there is a Set and Limited Number appointed to Salvation, appears
from Scripture, in that God is said to Know who are his, 2 Timothy 2, 19. i.e. Not
their Natures only, but their Names also: for therefore our Savior Luc.
10.20. bids his Apostles rejoice in that their Names were written in Heaven,
put into Gods Muster-roll and Catalogue of Eternity, from whence they could
never be blotted out.

Known unto the Lord, says the Apostle, are all his works (...) from Ever,
Act. 15.18. i. e. so known as to be disposed and ordered by him; nay therefore
known, because ordered, for so to distinguish between Gods Knowledge and his
Power as in his Actions ad extra to separate one from the other, is to speak
neither Sense nor Scripture: for whom God for knew, them, all them, and only
them, not in their Qualifications, but in their Respective persons, did he
predestine to be conformable to the Image of his Son. Romans 8.29. Math. 10.30.
And if of an Elect person all the Hairs are Numbered, how much more of Christ's
Mystical Body, are all the Members numbered? which Body is already complete as
to Gods Purpose concerning it, and to Imagine that any shall fill a place
there, whom God does not already know as particularly, as if they were Actually
Existing, is to measure Eternity by time, and to make God like our selves
Frail and Fallible.

The Reason of this is, because every Act of God is Absolute: as his Nature is,
so are the Actions which flow from it, Unconditionall and Irrespective.

For the clearing of which Reason, it will be necessary to explain in the Act
of Election 1. How God, who Elects, 2. How man, who is elected, are to be
Considered.

For the First, Many there be that think God in the Act of Election, is to be
Considered as a Judge; and hence argue against this Absolute and Irrespective
Election from those Known and Obvious places of Scriptures, Genesis 18.25. and
Romans 3.5. Act. 10.30.
-- Shall not the Judge os all the Earth do right? shall God accept persons? or
prefer one before another, when all are Equal? how is this Reconcilable to
his Justice?

I answer, that in the Act of Election God is not to be considered as a Judge,
because

1. A Judge as a Judge, is tied to a Rule, which he may not Transgress; but
what Rule can be Imagined to Tie God, except what he has set himself? which
in the Act of Election, that being Eternal, and flowing only from the Will of
God, cannot rationally be supposed.

2. The Business of a Judge, as a Judge, is to Bestow Rewards and Punishments
according to Merit, but in Election the Motive only on Gods part is Grace, and
the End is Glory.

3. God is not at all Obliged to Man; he that made man, may freely appoint him
to what Ends he pleases, without doing him any Injury: for has not the Potter
power over his Clay? though for a man to plead with God in this Case is
somewhat a worse Solecisme, then for Clay to quarrel with the Potter. Since
there Matter strives only with its Fashioner, but here Nothing contends with
its Maker. There the Clay though it be not a vessel of Honor, yet remains
Clay still; but here not the Quality only, but the Substance likewise is
subject to the Pleasure of its Framer.

Lastly, The Apostle, being to give a Reason of this Difference between one man
and another, ascribes it altogether to Gods good pleasure; and for a Proof of
that Assertion, he alleges a Saying of God himself Romans 9.15. I will have
Mercy on whom I will have Mercy,

So that the Act of God in choosing some to Everlasting Life, and refusing
others, is not an Act of Justice, for they neither did nor could deserve it;
nor is it properly an Act of Mercy, for that any should be saved at all was
merely from Mercy, but that these rather then others, was not properly from
Mercy' because Mercy is Equal to all that Equally deserve it, or Equally stand
in need of it, but here between Equals a distinction is made. Election
therefore is an Act of Sovereign Will, the Apostle calls it (...) Ephesians. 1.5.
The good pleasure of Gods will, which as none can resist, so none ought to
Question; for neither is Man stronger than God, nor ought he to think himself
Wiser. Thus God in the Act of Election is not to be Considered ut Judex, sed ut
Dominus; as a Judge, but as a Sovereign.

For the second, viz. how the Persons, who are Elected, are to be Considered.
Some affirm they are to be looked upon as Believers, viz. That God foreseeing
some would embrace Faith and Salvation, when it was offered them, he did
therefore choose some unto Everlasting Life. And this Conceit is not only
maintained by our Modern Arminians, but, that I may not seem to mince the
matter, was in general the opinion of almost all the Greek and Latin
Fathers, except only Austine of the Primitive and Purer Times. They who have
read them, will affirm as much, and they who doubt may read their Sayings to
this Purpose, faithfully Collected by Vossius in his Historia Pelagiana.

But this Supposition, however Plausible (as indeed what is not, that gives man
a Power) and though backed with so much Authority, yet seems to me to be
directly contrary both to Reason and Scripture.

First to Reason, because

1. This puts something as a Cause to move Gods will: for if Faith foreseen in
man were the Cause why God chose him, then something without God shall have an
Influence upon him: which certainly is very Absurd, if not Blasphemus: for if
God shall be supposed to take a Reason of his Actings from something without
himself, that thing must needs alter him, and consequently be greater than he.

Secondly, because this very Faith thus foreseen is the Gift of God, as the
Apostle affirms Ephesians. 2.8. and none that I know deny it: so that if Faith
foreseen were the Cause of choosing any, the Decree of God must thus be ordered,
-- I foresee that I will give such a one Faith, therefore I decree that I will
save him, i.e. I decree to give the means, before I have yet appointed the
End: which is a Method of Marshalling Gods Decrees, that a knowing Heathen
would be ashamed to think of.

More might be urged, but I hasten to Scripture Confutation: we find our
Savior says of his Disciples (which who sees not how Applicable it is to all
the Elect) that he chose them, they had not chosen him, Joh. 15.16. but if
Faith foreseen were a Cause, he must have said the clean contrary, for then he
would have chosen them, because they had first chose him.

And the Apostle John 1 Ep. 4.10. says, this is love, not that we loved God
first, but that he loved us, and for that reason sent his Son, not as
foreseeing our Affection, but as pursuing the Intent, and procuring in us the
Effects of his own.

And the Apostle Paul does every where assert Faith to be a Fruit and not a
Cause of Election; that we are chosen unto Good Works, not for them; i. e, that
they who are Predestined, shall certainly Believe, not they who Believe were
therefore Predestined; which is the sum of his Discourse Ephesians. 1.

So that in the Act of Election, men are to be considered as merely Passive,
i.e, as Creatures, not as Believers; as such who were liable to be disposed by
God how he pleased, but had no Possibility of meriting any thing from him.

This is affirmed of the Israelites in General, Deuteronomy. 7. that God chose them,
not because they were better, or more Righteous then other People, but because
he set his Heart upon them. And lest they should perhaps pride themselves with
a Conceit, that for their own worth and Excellence this Privilege was given
them, they are expressly told there was no such matter, for they were a
stiffenecked and Rebellious People, Deuteronomy. 9.6. Able rather to thwart, and, if
possible, to undo Gods Election, then to procure it.

Thus we find Math. 11. that Christ preached the Gospel to Bethsaida, and to
them of Capernaum, who were so far from meriting, that our Savior affirms of
them, Sodom and Gomorrah had they enjoyed the like Favor, would have been much
more repentantant then they.

And to conclude in Particulars, the Apostle Paul handling this very Argument,
and intending for ever, so far as Scripture evidence will reach, to silence the
Disputer of this World, that God alone may have the Glory of his Grace, he
instances in Jacob, who was by Virtue of this Absolute Election preferred
before Esau, (the Temporal Condition serving to shadow out the Eternal) for
lest any Imagination should arise, as if Jacob in himself were the more
deserving of the Two, he says it was done before any of them had done either
Good or Evil, Romans 9.11. And if it should be Asked, how it came to pass that
one was taken, and the other left; what did induce God to put such a Difference
between Two, who were Morally Equal, and Naturally Esau was to have the
Advantage, the Apostle adds, that it was done to this End, that the Purpose of
God according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls.
Wherein the Apostle pleading the Cause of Gods Honor, and being Jealous of his
Prerogative, resolves all things into Gods Purpose, and referres us thither to
seek the Ultimate Difference of men's either Temporal or Eternal Condition.
And he that will not acquiesce, when he thus finds it written, but will bring
his Wit to strive and Wrestle against the Will of God, he cannot alter that,
but only does unhappily evince to himself, that while he continues that
Humor, he is not of the Number of Gods Elect, for all that are, a Willing;
Humble, and Obedient People.

Against this which has been urged, there is that I know of but one
Considerable Objection; and that is, if the Number of those which shall be
saved be limited and Certain, so that there is no Possibility for more, how
comes it to pass that the Prophets and Apostles, are so Importunate, with all
indifferently to Come in, and Repent, that they might be saved: and God
himself is often brought in in Scripture chiding and Expostulating with
Sinners for destroying themselves, and for refusing Salvation; which seems to
be a Vain and Ludicrous thing, if the Number be so Set already, that there is
no Room for more.

This Objection is yet made more Tragical by the many Heavy charges and
Enditements, which are drawn up against this, as some style it, Partial and
Cruel dealing, from the Common Places of Gods Justice and Mercy, which men who
love themselves are very willing to Enlarge, and therefore easily hearken to
those who dare declaime upon such Subjects: But these Vain and Empty
Flourishes, however insoluble they may seem to some, who are guided by the
first Impression and sound of Words, are of no Importance, if we fix Election
only upon Gods Will; for this will presently cut off all Witty Cavills, if we
can prove that God will indeed have it so; and therefore I look upon the former
Objection as their maine strength, because it immediately tends to Practice,
and seems to beget this Opinion, that Gods Secret and Revealed will do Thwart
and Contradict each other. Therefore I answer

1. That though few shall be saved, and those Few determined, yet because they
are unknown to us, we are to look upon all as in a saveable Condition. Thus the
Prophets and Apostles did in their so frequent and Repeated Instances with
those to whom they preached, and their Example we are to follow: For
peremptorily to conclude against any, and to deny them the means of Salvation,
because they are not Elected, is an Uncharitable Presumption in us, which we
shall more heavily account for, then they will do for their Disobedience and
Unbelief.

2. There is no other way for those who are Elected, to come to the Knowledge
of the Truth, but by a General Proposal of it Indifferently to all, which is
our Saviors meaning in those many Parables, which intimate a Promiscuous Call;
from whence he concludes, that though many are Called, yet few are Chosen; and
we may invert the Proposition thus, though Few are Chosen, yet many must be
called. In this World the Tares and the Wheat must be equally Tended, and
though they grow together with some discernable Difference, yet it is not the
Ministers business to make a Final Sepatation.

Lastly, There is a Twofold end in Preaching the Gospel, the first and
principal is to bring in Gods Elect, but Secondarily it serves to condemn the
Reprobate, and to make their Damnation Just.. For what can they plead at the
last day to Justify their Unbelief; since when they were Called as it were by
name, yet they did willingly exclude themselves, and thereby, as the Apostle
says of the Jews here, judged themselves Unworthy of Eternal Life.

Thus the Apostle says that Gods Divinity and Spiritual Being was discovered
in the Creation: and if it was asked to what Purpose, since so few did either
Believe or Worship him as they ought, he answers, that it was for this End --
(...), Romans 1.20. That they might have nothing to Plead, no quirke nor Apology
left to Excuse their Atheism and Idolatry.

And if our Gospel be hid, says he, it is Hid to those which are lost; 2 Cor.
4.3. discovered to them, but hid in them, because they do not take pains, as
they should, to search out its inward and Spiritual meaning.

So we are, says he, (...), a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God, 2 Cor. 11.13.
both (...), and (...), in the saved and in the lost. i. e. We do God good and
acceptable Service, when we preach the Word, whether it serves to Save or to
Condemn; for in the one Gods Mercy, in the other Gods Justice is manifested.
Those that come in will find mercy, for thereto they were appointed: those that
stand out, shall be sure of Justice, because when they were summoned as well as
others, yet they would not, because they would not: They did voluntarily
contemn the Word of Life, and therefore can blame none but themselves, if at
last they find it a Word of Death.

If any think this Harsh and Severe, I cannot deny but it is so, and thus the
Apostle thought it Romans 9.22. when he says, that God herein did manifest (...)
his Anger as well as his Power. Nay, he goes somewhat farther, and speaking of
the same Decree, Romans 11.22. he calls it (...), the Extreme Rigor and sharp
Severity of God, but from thence he does not take occasion to enveigh against
it, as our Bold and Blasphemous disputers do, but concludes as it were in a
Rapture, v. 33. (...) -- Oh the Depth etc.

As for those many Expressions wherein God is said to declare his willingness
that All should be saved, (as 1 Timothy 2.4. etc.) they may either be Interpreted
of Gods will as declared by the Preachers of it; which is Indefinite to All
that Believe and Repent: or else, they may be understood (...), and spoken
after the manner of men, in the same sense that God is said to have Eyes and
Ears and other Bodily Parts, whereby he is pleased to render himself
Intelligible by us. For if God did indeed Will the Salvation of All, then it is
Certain that All would be saved, for God can do whatever he wills: but since
it is manifest that All are not Saved, it is evident likewise that God did not
will All should be saved, for who has resisted his Will?

As for that Velleity, i.e. a kind of Longing, Wishing, or Woulding disposition
in God, which some rashly bring in to salve their Phenomena by, since it is
Ineffectuall and consequently Imperfect, it is altogether unfit to be ascribed
to God, for it is nothing else but Infirmity and Want of Power in Man.

So much for the First Observation.

D. 2. The second Observation was this, that the Reason why one man believes,
i. e. embraces the means of Salvation, and another does not, is finally to be
resolved into Gods eternal Election of the one, and Reprobation of the other:
or more briefly thus, that only those who are ordained unto eternal Life,
either do or can believe.

And the Reason is briefly this, because only those who are designed to the
End, shall be made effectual Partakers of the Means which leads unto it.

Thus our Savior Math. 13. rendering a Reason why some did not understand his
Doctrine, he gives this, because to them it was not given: and the Apostle
calls the Gospel a Savor of Life, only (...) to the Saved. 1 Cor. 1 (i. e.)
Actually designed to Salvation. And the same Apostle exhorting the
Thessalonians to Faith and Love, he gives this as a Motive, 1 These. 9. because
they were not appointed to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ.
Where by the way, we may take notice, that a Certain Knowledge of our Eternal
Election is so far from hindering any in the Practice of Godliness, that it is
by the Apostle used as an Argument to quicken their Endeavor; as if he had
said, because God has Appointed you unto Eternal Life, therefore labor after
the Means which leads unto it.

There is a settled Chain and Connection of Causes, which do immutably infer
one another: To be saved presupposes Obedience, That, Faith; That, the Gift of
God, and that runs up to the Highest Link, which is the Grace and Favor of God
to every poor believer. It is certain that (...), all have not the Grace,
because they want the Gift of Faith: that being not thrown at Random on all,
but reserved as a Peculiar Blessing for Gods chosen ones; and them he calls,
while he leaves others to their Natural Hardness and Impenitence.

It is not in Vain or Figuratively spoken only 2 Cor. 5.17. that every
Believer is (...), said to be newborn, again created and Fashioned etc. but
these Phrases imply this Necessary Truth, that as none but those who are
created men, can put forth the Acts of men, and such Creation they could not
procure nor contribute to themselves, because as yet they were not; so none but
those who are Created unto Good Works, can live in them, because Naturally
they want a Principle, whereby they should understand or Relish them. And this
is the Benefit of that Eternal Election, whereby God works in all that he
loves all their works both in them and for them, Phil. 2.13. that they might
know and Confess to the praise of his Glorious Grace, that it is not in him
that Wills, nor in him that Runs, but only in God that shows Mercy, Romans 9.16.

Before I make any Use, I must prevent an Objection, which every man Naturally
is ready to Urge, and not to take Notice of it, were to prevaricate with the
Truth. The Objection is this, if it be so that Some, and that a Limited Number
are Appointed to Life, and only such can believe, then it follows that we may
live as we list, for if we are Appointed to Life we shall be saved, God will in
his good time Accomplish his Purpose concerning us, which all our Endeavor can
neither Promote nor Alter.

To this Objection which most Carnal Minds do not only Reason but Live by, I
may Answer as the Apostle did, when having asserted the Freeness of Grace, and
how altogether undeserved it was on our part, he brings in a profane person
asking this Question, shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may Abound? Romans 6.
i.e. what shall we put God to it, and Try if we can Out-sin the Riches of his
Mercy? To this the Apostle replies only (...), let it not be, or it may not be
such a Thought can never arise in any ones Heart, who does Truly understand
what Mercy means.

So may I say here, if any who conceives himself Elected, shall draw this
Conclusion from hence, because God has chosen me, and I am sure of my
Salvation, therefore I will run on and provoke him daiely, and strive as it
were, to blot out and Cross his Decree: (...), Thou can not do it, thou
can not apprehend that God loved thee with an everlasting loves, and singled
thee out from the lump of mankind when so many millions were to be undone
eternally, but it will work upon thee, and melt all thy affections into a
grateful return of service unto that God, to whom thou art obliged for so
infinite and undeserved mercy.

But if any who has a mind to live wickedly shall Argue -- If If I am not
designed to life I shall be damned, let me do what I can -- I answer

First, that there is no possibylity for any truth to be so clear, but that
evil men may abuse it to their own destruction: and I believe every one sees
how the making Gods decrees conditional will lead a corrupt mind to the same
Inference, For he may as well say -- If God foresee, that I shall believe, I
shall believe; and so in the mean while take his liberty; But

Secondly, Consider that as Gods decree of Election has no influence to
Necessitate the will of any, but he that believes though ordained to it, yet
believes freely and willingly; so the Decree of Reprobation has no influence
at all to the Damning of any: because though those who are Reprobated shall
certainly be damned, yet sentence shall not pass upon them according to the
act of Gods Reprobation, but according to the merit of their works. Gods decree
is made by power, but it is executed by Law; and therefore while thy damnation
is yet uncertain, do not dispute thy self into such a state, as to endeavor
to make it just.

Lastly, The Rule of our Obedince is not Gods decree but Gods command. Moses
when he had given the Law, exhorts them to walk according to it, and to check
their Inquisitivenesse, tells them that they were not to Ascend into Heaven,
there to pry and search into Gods Decree concerning themselves, but the word
was nigh them, in their hearts that they might do it, Deuteronomy. 11.12.

And the reason is bottomed upon that eternal and unanswerable truth -- Secret
things belong to God, but things revealed to us -- that they may be our rule to
walk by.

So that in short we are so to ascribe all Power and Praise to God, as to look
upon and acknowledge him the great and supreme disposer of all things -- but
yet we are so to live in our obedience and submission to his command, as if
nothing was at all decreed concerning us, but that we were wholly left to the
counsel and power of our own will.

For if we conclude against our selves, and live like reprobates, we are sure
to perish.

But if with hearty and zealous endeavor we strive to do the will of God, and
leave the event unto his merciful providence, against such, I dare boldly
affirm it, there is no condemnation, and the world shall sooner perish then
such a soul miscarry.

Therefore the Use I shall make of this discourse, so necessary for these
cavilling times, is to exhort us all that we would leave off disputing and fall
to practice.

Since it is certain that the foundation of God stands sure which is this,
that God knows who are his, -- i. knows them definitely, we may vex and
distemper our selves by wrangling, but we shall not be able to shake or alter
that.

All the while we are disputing we are like Abraham's Ram caught by the horns
in the Thicket, when we should be offered up in sacrifice, we are vainly
struggling to entangle and snare our selves with our own Dilemmas.

It would be counted madness in a Traveller, who has a great way to go, and
but a little time to perform his Journies in, if he should leave his road, and
needlessely run into a wood, where, besides the troublesomenesse of the
passage, he is sure to loose his time, if not himself, and in the end sit down
to lament his folly.

No less unwise are we if we leave the safe and known path of Gods
Commandments, to wander in the endless maze and Labyrinth of Gods decrees.

If in worship, when a man strives to serve God more strictly or in a more
specious manner then the rule warrants him, his whole devotion is slighted with
a Quis Requisivit haec? who bad you trouble your self with these things? how
much more severely shall he be reproved, who ventures upon a forbidden as well
as undoing curiosity?

In short all the while we are arguing, we are out of Gods way; and in the way
only of our own inventions; and till we get out of it, we may justly fear
that the issue will be, confusion, amazement, doubting, and at last despair.

If men would but once (...) be sober in their reasonings, it would appear but
a modest request, that God and his word alone should have the honor, above and
beyond our private conceptions. For he will be found just, when he comes to
Judgment, but woe be to that man who daires arraign him?

Whatever vain men may anogate to themselves, and upon the confidence of
superficial and empty Rhetoric, venture to entern edle with, and to pass
their censure upon matters so infinitely above their reach, yet they will find
at last, that obedience is better then knowledge, that self denial is the
only Gospell-sacrifice, and of all Christians, the humblest Christian is the
best. Therefore

Secondly, Since there are certain Number appointed unto Eternal Life, let us
give our selves no rest, till we can comfortably pronounce to our selves that
we are of that Number.

Many are the signs by which a man may judge of his eternal condition, and
one of them is expressed here in the Text -- That who were Ordained unto
Eternal life believed -- i. Believed the word of the Lord, concerning
salvation by Christ.

So that go presently and ask your selves this question, do I believe? i. Am
I willing to receive Christ, and Salvation? Yes, perhaps you will say, I am
willing.

Then go on farther and ask, but am I willing to receive Christ upon his own
Terms, to acknowledge my own wretchedness without him, to fly to him, as I
would to Shore out of a Tempest? Do I see my self in so Undone and lost a
Condition, that nothing but his satisfaction can relieve me? then go to
Christ, he calls thee, he calls thee as effectually, as if thou heardst a voice
from Heaven saying Come: Come unto me thou weary and laden Soul and I will
give thee rest, Mat: 2.28. Come with all thy Sins, nay with all thy Fears upon
thee; and I will take thy Burden, I will settle thy Distractions, and speak to
thy soul in the midst of its Disquiets, Soul be at peace, I can make up all
thy Wants, and am able to save to the uttermost.

If after this thou can be content with nothing but Christ, if thou art
willing to quit all for him, and to count the world only as a stage, where
either thy Faith or Patience must be daily exercised: if thou do find that
sweetness in the Face of a Reconciled God, as no earthly enjoyment could bribe
thee to a willing commission of any known sin against him, then go and enter
into thy Rest, and take an earnest of thy future joy. For if the case be thus
with thee, and thou perseverest in it, Heaven and Happiness are as surely
thine as if thou were already there and even while thou live, thou art
placed in so high a sphere of Felicity and content, as all the labored and
perishing comforts of this world, cannot amount to fill up one minute of thy
entire satisfaction.

This deserves to be more particularly insisted upon, and some motives likewise
might be used to press all unto this duty of examining their future state.

But certainly they who know what Eternity is, and how near they are to it,
how every minute, for ought they know, may wast them thither, they will not
long put off or defer the enquiry: for all the while they do so, they evince
to themselves that they have no lot nor portion in the Heavenly Inheritance.
For though both Grace and Glory are bestowed Freely, yet we may sadly
conclude, that they are not designed for those who look not after them.

FINIS.

