An Answer To M. Cawdry's two Books of the Sabbath, Lately come forth.

Wherein the Author does two things: 1. He vindicates himself from Mr
Cawdrie's unfriendly abuse of him, in fathering upon him three Texts of
Scripture, and three Arguments deduced from them, to prove the perpetuity of
the ancient Sabbath, which the Author does in no case own. 2. He vindicates the
fourth Commandment from M. Cawdry's false Exposition of it.

Wherein the Author has 1. Answered and confuted all that Mr Cawdry has wrote
to corrupt the sense and meaning of the Commandment. 2. He has restored the
ancient, genuine, and proper sense of the Commandment: and confirmed it by
sundry undeniable Arguments.

By Theophilus Brabourne.

Mat. 5 18, 19. Until heaven and earth pass away, one jot, or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be least in the
kingdom of heaven.

London, Printed for William Franklin, and are to be sold at Norwich. 16^4.

To the Reader.
SAint Jude exhorts us, that we should earnestly contend for the truth, which
was once delivered unto the Saints. And the Prophet Jeremiah complains of men
in his time, who bent their tongues like Bows for lies: but they were not
valiant or courageous for the Truth, Jer. 9.3. If ever St Jude's Exhortation
was needful in the Church, it is now needful: when the truth, or true
doctrine of the Sabbath, once delivered to the Saints, is so shamefully
corrupted and abused. If ever there was a time when the Prophet Jeremiah's
complaint was verified, now is the time: Do not men now, yea, Ministers, and of
all ministers those accounted the most forward, hot, and zealous, do not these
bend their tongues like bows for lies? And does not Mr Cawdry appear in the
front, by his three books of about twelve shillings price, though to little
purpose? Whether these expositions of the fourth Commandment be truths or
falsities, I leave my Reader to judge, after he has read this little Book.
They say, first, So be it we give God a day for his Sabbath, it matters not
what day, be it Saturday or Sunday: As if God had never made choi^e of his day:
They might as well say, So be it we have a man to dispense the Sacraments, it
matters not what man, be he Minister or Layman. Secondly, They say, God did
not command in his fourth Commandment the Sabbath day, as of a certain day
definitely, but a Sabbath day, as of some uncertain day indefinitely; as if
God delivered his Commandments in ambiguous terms, and doubtful words; as if
no man could know by the Commandment what day God meant his people should keep
for his Sabbath day. Thirdly, They say, by the ordinall word seventh in the
fourth Commandment, we need not understand Saturday the seventh and last day
of the week; but any one day of the s^ven, as Sunday the first day of the
week; as if when God commanded the last day of the week we may understand him
of the first day of the week. Fourthly, whereas God rested at the Creation on
Saturday the seventh day for our imitation; they say, we may imitate Gods
example if we rest on Sunday the first day; as if we imitated Gods example by
crossing of it: for he rested at the end of the week, and we rest at the
beginning of the week. Fifthly, They say, the fourth Commandment enjoined the
Jews to keep Saturday; and the same fourth Commandment enjoynes Christians to
keep Sunday; as if one and the same Commandment should enjoins contrary
things: as the Saturday, which they call Judaisme, and the Sunday, or Lords
day, which they call their Christian Sabbath: and so it shall enjoyne both
Judaisme and Christia^isme: and so the fourth Commandment shall have one sense
and meaning yesterday, and another this day: for thousands of years till
Christ it shall have one expositition, as for Saturday; and for ever after
Christ it shall have another exposition, as for Sunday. Now to make up the
number of seven abominations Mr Cawdry will add two more as these ensuing.
Sixthly, The Sabbath day and seventh day, mentioned in the fourth Commandment,
are not the substance of the fourth Commandment, but one day in seven is the
substance: as if the words expressed in the Commandment should be no
substance, and yet one day in s^ven, which words are not expressed, should be
the substance of it. Seventhly, The Sabbath day and seventh day, mentioned in
the fourth Commandment are indirectly commanded, but one day of seven, of
which there are no such words in the Commandment, and yet these are directly
commanded, as he says. Was there ever any of God's ten Commandments thus
shattered by Jesuits? and thus wrung and wrested from the genuine and true
sense intended by God? and yet these are the expositions given by the godly
Ministers: Now may I not justly take up the Prophet Jeremiah's complaint of
these so zealous Ministers, saying, They bend their tongues like Bows to
publish false Expositions of Gods fourth Commandment? The Lord threatened old
Eli the Priest, saying, They that despise me shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2.30.
And have not these Ministers despised God by corrupting the sense of one of his
ten Commandments? And has not God of late despised them? Never did God pour
greater contempt upon Clergy men than in our days, wherein they are ashamed to
wear black Coats, and turn into colors.

These things premised, now I shall give my Reader an account how far I have
answered Mr Cawdry's Books: He has wrote three books of the Sabbath: the first
part about seven years agone, the other two parts now lately; I do not
undertake to answer all that he has wrote, for many things he has wrote, not
against me, but in confutation of the Bishop of Eli, Doctor White's Book, which
was an Answer unto my second Book of the Sabbath: and particularly against
what I wrote in it, in maintenance of the ancient Sabbath: but granting what I
wrote against the Lords day Sabbath: And diverse things he has wrote against Dr
Heyline, and against Master Primrose: Now I leave these things unto their
proper Authors: I meddle with no more than with what he has wrote against me,
as touching the ancient Sabbath, and the Lord's Day Sabbath: as touching these
two I give this account.

1. As touching the ancient Sabbath, I do not endeavor punctually to confute
any of his Answers made to diverse of my twenty four Arguments, left my books
should be cmmitted to the fire, and I should offend the State: yet I have much
ado to bridle my self so as to be silent in this quarrel: I only endeavor to
vindicate my self from Mr Cawdry's unfriendly abuse of me, by fathering upon
me the things I never wrote: and to vindicate God's fourth Commandment from
his false Expositions of it; and my hope is, that the State will permit a man
to do so much for God, and for himself.

2. As for the Lords day ^abbath, so called, but never so proved, I shall not
here allege any Scriptures against it; nor confute any of Mr Cawdry's
replies, made by him, to my answers which I made to their several Texts of
Scripture alleged for the Lords day, nor shall I need: for Mr Cawdry has
rather replied to the answers of the Bishop of Ely, to Dr Heyline, and to Mr
Primrose, than to my answers: and yet he has carried it on so cunningly, as
his Reader cannot but think he has confuted Mr Brabourne also, and this must
go among the Vulgar for an Answer to my Books; this is one piece of Mr Cawdry's
Sophistry: he cannot be content to abuse me with fathering upon me falsely
three Texts of Scripture: but also he must make the world believe that he has
answered my books against the Lord's Day Sabbath, whereas he has done no such
thing: he has indeed mentioned my name often, but never replied to my Answers:
and if he has mentioned any of them, instead of a Confutation he has
slightly passed by, and instead thereof he has fallen upon the Bishop, Dr
Heyline, or Mr. Primrose; It is usual with most that write for the Lords day
to have a fling at Mr B^abou ne; in one Page they among many things carpe at
some one, and twenty or thirty Pages after they carpe at another; and perhaps
fifty or sixty Pages after they carpe at a third, and so much for confutation
of M. Brabourne; thus have some done in their books from New England, and many
in their books in Old England; but none of them all dare undertake to confute
all my Answers to their Texts: for I have given not only one Answer, but many
Answers to every one of their Texts: So Mr Cawdry perhaps may stumble upon some
one of my many Answers: but to go Text by Text, and confute all my Answers:
answer by answer as is meet and reasonable, I have not yet seen it, nor do I
believe that ever I shall see it: his wit in passing these things by in silence
so slightly, is to me an Argument that he is at a nonplus, and therefore is
feign to make a color of an Answer, and to bluster among the people with the
wind of three great books: so thinks

Theoph. Brabourne.

Mr Brabourne's vindication of himself from the unfriendly abuse of Mr Cawdry,
fathering upon him no less than three Texts of Scripture, and three Arguments
deduced from them, to prove the morality or perpetuity of the ancient
s^venth-day-Saturday-Sabbath, the which things M. Brabourne does in no case own.
The words of Mr Cawdry.
SEE Mr Cawdries book on the Sabbath, his third part, in p. 429, 430. thus
writing: Of all that have wrote of this subject (to wit the Sabbath day) Mr.
Brabourne is the largest, and has the greatest show of Scripture and Reason
for his opinion: and therefore in confuting him we shall easily confute all the
rest; He has produced five Texts of Scripture for himself, we consider their
strength in order. Objection the first out of Genesis 2.3.

The first is taken from Genesis 2.3. whence thus he argues: An Ordinance given
in the state of innocence, not peculiar to that state is perpetual. But by
divine institution the seventh day was appointed to be the time of rest in
Innocence, and not appropriated to that state. Ergo.

To this Text, and to this Argument deduced from it, I answer; At my first
reading them my heart rose against them, saying in my self, surely Mr Cawdry
has done me wrong: then I took my first book of the Sabbath, printed 1628.
and sought among my twelve Arguments there for proof of the perpetuity of the
ancient Seventh-day Sabbath, but there I could not find these things; then I
sought in my second book of the Sabbath* printed 1632. among my twenty four
Arguments for the ancient Sabbath, and there I could not find these things;
Lastly, because I would make a through and full search, I spent some hours to
turn over both my books page by page, but neither so could I find these
things; wherefore I disclaim this first Text and Argument as none of mine.

Mr Cawdry, in charging this, and two other Texts upon me, does not say in
which of my two books the Reader might find them; nor in which of my twelve or
twenty four Arguments these things may be found, nor in what page they may be
found, so the Reader is left to seek a needle in a bottle of hay; there are
238. pages in my former book, and 632. pages in my latter book, so it is not
easy for any man to find a thing without direction, but it is too common with
some Writers, in a weak cause, wittily, I might say wickedly, to omit the
quotation of the book and page, and then to foist in what they please of their
own, the easilier to deceive the Reader, to abuse the Author, and the better
to gain credit to their weak cause, by begetting a sleighty opinion of their
Adversary.

The second Text.
Mr Cawdry in the place fore cited, and page 430. thus writes. Objection the
second. The second place of Scripture is that of Exodus 31.16. where the Sabbath
is called (An everlasting Covenant) and therefore it is still in force.

To this Text, and the Argument deduced from it, I answer as before, that I
have sought for these things in my first book, and in my twelve Arguments, and
in my second book, and in my twenty four Arguments there for the seventh-day.
Sabbath: for where else should I seek but among my Arguments for this Text and
Argument? But there I find them not; yea, I have cursorily sought page by page
in both my books, but yet I cannot find them; wherefore I disclaim them as
none of mine.

I yet remember, that before I printed my first book I had thoughts of this
Text, Exodus 31.16. where the Sabbath is called an Everlasting Covenant, but I
then foresaw that I could not from these words frame a sound Argument to prove
the perpetuity of the ancient Sabbath, because Circumcision is called an
Everlasting Covenant also, wherefore I laid it aside; and will Mr Cawdry now
father this weak Argument upon me? What can his end of it be but to render me,
and the cause I have in hand, ridiculous and contemptible? To deceive his
Reader? And to win vain applause to himself and his cause?

The third Text.
Mr Cawdry in the place first cited, and in page 430. thus writes; Objection
the third from Isa. 66.23. The third Text is Isa. 66.23. where the Prophet,
speaking of the renewed state of the Church by Christ, says, from month to
month, and Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh should come to worship the Lord. To
this Text he answers, that the continuance and perpetuity of the S^bbath can
no more be concluded hence than of the New Moons which are mentioned with the
Sabbath, yet by himself granted to be abolished.

I have sought among my twelve Arguments in one of my books, and my twenty
four Arguments in my other book, but cannot find any where that I alleged
this text to prove the perpetuity of the seventh day-Saturday-Sabbath;
wherefore I disclaim this text also as none of mine, but of Mr Cawdry's own
devising.

As for his answer to it, does Mr Cawdry think Mr Brabourne so rash in
choosing a Text to prove the Sabbaths perpetuity, as to make choice of this
text, where the Sabbath is not preferred above the New Moons for perpetuity?
But Mr Cawdry, it seems, knew no better way to bring Mr Brabourne into contempt
with his Reader, than to forge such shallow-brain'd things as this is, and then
to father them upon Mr Brabourne.

Having spoken of the three texts severally, now I shall speak of them
jointly; Mr Cawdry places these his, and not mine, three texts in the front,
before my two texts which I own (of which too by and by) here I note his
sophistry and carnal policy, hoping by the weakness of these three Texts, and
my arguing so weakly from them, to bring me and my two texts following into a
weak estimation with his Reader, that so he may think there is no more
strength of Argument in my two following texts, than is in the three texts
going before.

The fourth and fifth Texts.
S^e Mr Cawdry in page 431. thus writing: Objection the fourth. The fourth is
taken out of the New Testament, Mat. 5.17, 18. where our Savior ratifies the
moral Law, the Decalogue till the end of the world; whence thus he argues: If
every jot and tittle of the Law be in force until the worlds end, then these
letters and words, the seventh day is the Sabbath, are in force until the
worlds end. But the former is true by the Text alleged Mat. 5.17, 18. Ergo,
etc.

Objection the fifth. The last Text is Mat. 24.20. whence thus he argues: Their
destruction was forty years after Christ's death, yet he bids them pray that
their flight might not be in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day; and therefore
Christ foresaw that the Sabbath day should be in force still, and kept after
his death.

These two texts indeed I own for mine, and the substance of the two Arguments
deduced from them, though but unhandsomly laid down by Mr Cawdry; now let the
Reader judge whether there be not better force of proof in these two texts
than there was in the three texts set before them in the front, on purpose to
disgrace me and these two texts.

As for the Text Mat. 5.17, 18. I allow it as Mr Cawdry has laid it down. As
for the other text, Mat: 24.20. Pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath
day; this flight was to be at the destruction of Jerusalem, about fifty years
after Christ's death; whence I thus argue, that Christ allowed of the ancient
Sabbath as a Christian Ordinance in the Church, all times of the Gospel after
his death; and had it been a dying Ceremony, as many fancy, Christ would not
have bidden Christians to pray to God to prevent their profanation of it, for
this had been a profanation of the sacred duty of Prayer; as if a Papist should
pray not to travel on Christmas day.

Having by these two Texts proved the perpetuity of the ancient seventh day,
and Saturday-Sabbath, it will be expected by my Reader that I should confute Mr
Cawdry's answers to them; which thing I profess I can easily do without much
study; but no provocations shall make me go beyond the bounds I have set to my
self; I have resolved to handle but two things: the one is to vindicate my
self from the abuse of the three forged Texts: the other is to vindicate God's
fourth Commandment from Mr Cawdry's false glosses, and corrupt Expositions of
it, saying, God commanded not the seventh day in order, but one day in the
seven without order; and by this false Exposition he makes his answer to many
of my twenty four Arguments.

My hope is that as our State do allow liberty of Conscience to some in some
cases, so they will allow me a liberty in these two things: first, to vindicate
my self from slanders. Secondly, to vindicate Gods fourth Commandment from
false Expositions. I dare not go farther lest I should offend the State, and
have my books burnt; one Mr Ockford about two years past wrote a book in
defense of my way against the Lords day, and for the old day the seventh day,
but, as says Mr Cawdry, it was answered by fire, being ordered to be burnt; as
I remember Mr Tyndals Translation of the New Testament long since was ordered
to be burnt too; and was not Pa^eus on the Romans burnt also in King James his
days? And I fear me so it would be with this my book if I should exceed my
bounds; Let not therefore Mr Cawdry think, that I do not reply to his answers
because I cannot, but because I dare not; if I durst, and had but this fair
dealing, to have the Press as open to me as it is to him, he should soon see
that I would make his weakness in arguing to appear unto all men. I had
rather be engaged in this quarrel than go to my dinner or supper. When two
Soldiers are to fight, the odds is too great, to give al encouragements and
conveniences to the one, and bind the hands of the other behind him, or hold a
cudgel over his head if he strikes a blow; it is my unhappy condition to
suffer this odds, to have the fire prepared for my books, and the benefit of
the Press denied me, unless I Print by stealth. So far for vindication of my
self: and now for the vindication of the fourth Commandment.

Of the vindication of Gods fourth Commandment.
Before I fall close upon this point, I shall premise five things tending to
the vindication of this Commandment.

1. What may be the reason of Mr Cawdry's wresting these words in the fourth
Commandment; The seventh day is the Sabbath, from the proper sense of the
ordinall number seventh? which signifies not only one of seven, but more, as
the l^st of seven, and that single one which follows the six d^ies labor;
and why would he instead of this bring in one day of seven indefinitely?

His tacit reason I believe is this, that having no precept for the Lords day
in the New Testament, and none but poor probable reasons ab exemplo, therefore
he would feign incorporate the Lords day into the fourth Commandment to
strengthen it: so it having no legs of its own to stand on, he would be so
friendly to it, as to borrow a pair of legs from the fourth Commandment, and
then it shall be able to stand in the opinion of the deluded multitude. As for
his Arguments ab exemplo, from example, as is the supposed practice of the
Apostles, however it go current in the Pulpit, yet Sir, if you know it not, let
me inform you, that an Argument ab exemplo in Disputation is next unto
nothing, try it when you will.

For my part, if it could be proved that the Lords day had a divine
institution, which I never saw proved, nor has Mr Cawdry proved it in any or
all of his three larger Volumes on the Sabbath; I say, if it could be proved to
be set up by Christ or his Apostles, yet I stiffely deny it to be commanded in
the fourth Commandment, for the Lords day is called in Scr^p^ure the first d^y
of the week, but the fourth Commandment is f^r the seventh and last day of
the week; and the Lords day was not known when the fourth Commandment was
given on mount Sinai.

If, as you say, Christ did institute the Lords day, is not Christ's institution
and authority sufficient for it, but that you must run unto the Old Testament,
the fourth Commandment for a Law and Commandment for it? Christ has
instituted two new Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper; now, is not
Christ's institution and authority sufficient to uphold them, but that we must
run to the Old Testament as unto the Laws and Commandments for Circumcision
and the Passover? saying, our two Sacraments stand by force of the two Laws in
the Old Testament. So if Christ had set up a third new Ordinance, as the Lords
day, what need we to run further than the New Testament, and then to Christ's
institution and authority for it.

But you will say, Circumcision and the Passover are Ceremonials, but the
fourth Commandment is Moral. I answer, if the fourth Commandment be moral,
then the time there commanded is moral too: and moral things are not
alterable: one jot or tittle shall not pass from the Law so long as heaven and
earth last, Mat. 5.18.

It is a sign the cause is naught, when the Authors of it are so put to their
shifts, and to use their wits, as to run such strange and unusual courses, as
to run from the New Testament to the Old Testament, and that for a new
Ordinance: yea, and also to wrest the proper sense of the fourth Commandment,
as if it were a nose of wax, to be bowed on this side at one time, and on the
other side at another time: to command the Saturday for thousands of years
until Christ, and the Sunday, or Lords day for ever after Christ.

2. I shall premise another thing, which is a distinction of Mr Cawdries,
saying, in his second part, page 255. The old world had the last day of the
week, the new world the first day of the week. Now by the old world he means
the Church of the Jews before Christ, and by the new world the Christian Church
since Christ; and both these have their several days from this one fourth
Commandment; now this is a Popish distinction in its application: for Papists
say of the second Commandment, that it forbade Images indeed to the Jews, that
is, to the old world, but not unto Christians, that is, to the new world: and
so says Mr Cawdry, the fourth Commandment was for the last day of the week
to the Jews of the old world, but it is not so to Christians of the new world,
for it commands us the first day of the week; might he not as well say,
Protestants are bound by the fifth Commandment to honor their Parents; and by
the same Commandment Papists are bound to honor the Pope, but not their
Parents? Never did Jesuits more abuse the second Commandment, than Mr Cawdry
does the fourth Commandment.

3. I shall premise this also; that Mr Cawdry says in his second part, page
255. That the seventh day in order was not the substance of the fourth
Commandment. In his third part, page 418. He says, The ground of all the
Sabbatarian error is, that they take for granted, that the
seventh-day-Saturday-Sabbath was commanded as the substance of the fourth
Commandment; we agree with them in this, that if it be so we must turn
Anabaptist^, who keep no day, or Sabbatarians, to keep the seventh day with the
Jews; but this is their mistake, etc. And in p. 259. of his second part he
says, one day in seven is the substance of the fourth Commandment.

To this I answer, First, if these words, The seventh day is the Sabbath, be
not the substance of the fourth Commandment, how can h^s words, one day in
seven, be the substance of the Commandment? Are they not both spoken of the
time? If the one be the substance, then the other i^ a substance also; and if
that which is not expressed in the Commandment, as one day in seven, be the
substance of it, then much rather must these words, the seventh day, which are
expressed in the Commandment, be the substance of the Commandment.

2. For this word substance, it is not used here properly; for it has neither
Circumstance nor Accident in the fourth Commadement; the substance is the duty
of rest from labor, and the worship of God; the time is the Circumstance.
Besides, few Readers understand what substance and accident are; wherefore I
would require Mr Cawdry to forbear this word substance, and state the question
by some other word which is proper, and which every Reader may understand, as
to use the word commanded; for we speak of one of Gods Commandments, and of a
day or time commanded; which also will avoid strife between the disputants
about the word substance, it being liable to be used sometime in one sense,
sometime in another; Now, if you use the word commanded, then Mr Cawdry must
say, The seventh day was not commanded, but one day of seven was commanded;
both which are manifestly f^lse: for the seventh day was expressly commanded in
so many words, saying, The seventh day is the Sabbath, in it thou shall not do
any work; but one day of seven was not commanded or expressed in the fourth
Commandment; So now Sir, they are your own words, you must turn Anabaptist,
keeping no day, or Sabbatarian, keeping the Saturday-Sabbath with the Jews, now
take your choice,

4. I shall premise this also; Mr Cawdry says in his second part, page 257. In
like manner we suppose it may be said, that the fourth Commandment says, Thou
shall sanctify one day of seven at Gods appointment, that is, in particular,
God appointed the last day of seven to the old world, and the first day of
seven to the new world.

To this I answer; H^re he makes one day of seven to be the genus, whereas
those words be no where expressed in the fourth Commandment, nor are gatherable
by consequence; and then he makes the last day of seven, the Saturday, and the
fi st day of seven, the Sunday to be the two species; the former appointed by
God to the Jews in the fourth Commandment, the latter appointed by God to
Christians in or by the fourth Commandment also; but is it not strange, that

1. God should appoint two several dai^s by one single Commandment, and never
to express any more than one? For the fourth Commandment mentions but one day
singularly, not days plurally; as the Sabbath day, not days: and the seventh
day, not days, Exodus 10 8, etc.

2. Is it not strange, that in one and the same Commandment, and in the very
same words, God should appoint both a Jewish and a Christian Sabbath? And the
one to be kept in memory of the Creation, the other of the Redemption? But such
things are nothing strange to Mr Cawdry.

3. Is it not strange, that God should appoint to the Jews their
Seventh-day Sabbath at the giving of the Law on mount Sinai, and at the same
time, and in the same words, without any difference making, appoint the Lords
day to Christians, a day not known then to the Jews, nor to have any being or
beginning, for thousands of years after, till Christ came? This Lords day was
hidden so secretly in the fourth Commandment, that had not Mr Cawdry stepped up
of late, by his more than ordinary wit and skill in Logic, to search and find
it out for us in the fourth Commandment, we should never have thought of such
a Jewel locked up in the fourth Commandment; I marvel he has not found also
the Sacrament of Baptism to be appointed by God in Circumcision, and secretly
locked up in the old Law for Circumcision: and our Lords Supper to be appointed
by G^d for us Christians in the Passover, and closely hidden in the old Law
for the Passover, and then, and there commanded to us; though these were
ceremonial, yet our Christian Sacraments in them might be moral or perpetual.

4. Is it not strange, that Law and Gospel both should be comprised in one
Commandment, and in one and the same words without any difference made by God?
Did God want words that he must express differing things in one and the same
word? had not Mr Cawdry found out this mystery, I must profess, I should have
been deeply ignorant of it; now, the old Sabbath day was Law, and a part of the
Law and Decalogue: and the feigned Lords day in the fourth Commandment was
Gospel, it being kept in memory of our Redemption by Christ; so there was both
Law and Gospel commanded by God in the fourth Commandment, according to Mr
Cawdry; these things considered, is not Gods fourth Commandment shamefully
abused by Mr Cawdry? and is it not high time to vindicate it?

5. I shall premise another thing; Mr Cawdry in his second part, page the 255,
257, 256, 265. says, that one day in seven is directly commanded in the fourth
Commandment; but the seventh day is indirectly commanded in the fourth
Commandment; now I suppose that is said to be directly which is expressed in
words; and that indirectly which is gathered from the words by consequence of
reason, and so Mr Cawdry understands it, saying in page 255. expressly and
directly, both words of the same sense; and in Page 259. not directly but by
consequence.

To this I answer; Is it not strange Sir, that you should say, one day of seven
is directly commanded, when these words, one day in seven, are not to be found
in the fourth Commandment? And to say these words The seventh day, which are
expressed, are but indirectly, and by consequence commanded? Surely, if any
thing be indirectly in the fourth Commandment it must be one in seven, because
these words are not in the Commandment. In the fifth Commandment the thing
directly and expressly commanded is, to honor our natural Parents: but to
honor Magistrates is indirectly, and by consequence commanded, it not being
expressed; why you should so cross a received distinction seems a Paradox to
me.

These five things I have premised, and now I come a little closer to the
work, as Mr Cawdry leads me on: and thus he begins to defend One day in seven
to be the true sense and meaning of the fourth Commandment, and that it is no
paradoxall exposition of it.

To hold one day of seven is the sense of the fourth Commandment is not a
Paradox.

His first instance.
Mr Cawdry in his second part, p. 257. gives for instance the place of Gods
worship, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 11. where it is said to this effect: Ye shall offer all
your sacrifices only in the place which the Lord shall choose; and the place
chosen by God afterward, was first the Tabernacle, and after it the Temple; now
it is evident that this precept did not enjoyne them directly to offer their
Sacrifices at the Tabernacle; or at the Temple, but only indirectly. In like
manner it may be said of the time of Gods worship; the fourth Commandment
says, Thou shall sanctify one day of seven at Gods appointment, as the last
day of seven to the old world, and the first day of seven to the new world, but
neither of them directly by the fourth Commandment, but indirectly.

To this I answer. 1. These cases are not alike: for as touching the place of
Gods worship, Deuteronomy 12. it was commanded only in general or ind^finitely, not
naming any particular place; and so both Tabernacle and Temple were indirectly
commanded as by consequence; but as for the time of Gods worship, Exodus 20.8,
etc. it was not commanded in general or indefinitely, but in particular and
definitely, naming the seventh day the particular and definite time; and this
is not indirectly, but directly and expressly commanded.

2. The cases are unlike in this, that as for the place of Gods worship, after
God had indefinitely commanded it, Deuteronomy. 12. it was sufficiently known to be
afterward the Tabernacle and the Temple, no man questioning it; but as for the
Lords day, or first day of the new world, considered as a Sabbath of divine
institution, has been denied by many learned and godly Divines, whose names
and words I have mentioned in my second book of the Sabbath, Page 264, etc. as
Peter Martyr, Brentius, Calvin, Z^nchie, Vrsinus, Pareus, Chemnitius, Dr.
Prideaux, Zuinglius, Melanchton, Hemingius, Bastingius, Mr Tindall, and Mr
Fryth two godly Martyrs with others there named, and many more I could name, if
it were needful, all of them holding and writing that the Lords day is but an
indifferent thing, and of the same authority with Christmas day, St Mathews
day, and the other Holy days of the Church; To these I may add that since I
wrote my second book of the Sabbath, I have seen near twenty books lately
printed all against the Lords-day-Sabbath* so it is not so clea^e a case among
us that the Lords day, the first day of the wee^e, or the first day o^ the new
world, is appointed by God, for the time of Gods worship, as it was clear to
the Jews, that the Tabernacle or Temple was appointed of God for the place of
his worship; yea, at this day among our selves it is a controversy to know
which d^y is the Sabbath day, the S^turday or the Sunday.

3. Whereas you say Sir, The fourth Commandment says, Thou shall sanctify
one day of seven. This is false: if no man had the ten Commandments but your
self, you might say what you list, as you do; but being all men have them as
well as your self, no man will believe you so long as they read no such words
in the Commandments: or if you take it for granted before you have proved it,
as here you do, that your wo^ds are the sense and meaning of the fourth
Commandment, then you do but sophistically beg the question.

Thus you have seen that this first instance proves nothing; for it shows not
that one day of seven may be the sense and meaning of the fourth Commandment,
nor that you, Sir, are freed from a Paradox in saying the fourth Commandment
enjoynes one day of seven.

His second instance.
Mr Cawdry in page 258. thus writes; We shall give light to our assertion by
comparing the time of worship, and the worship it self: comparing the fourth
Commandment with the second Commandment; the second Commandment does not
directlly and expressly command the particular services, as Sacrifices,
Circumcision, the Passover, etc. yet all these fall under the general
Obligation of the second Commandment by way of consequence, as speciales to a
general: The like may be said of the services of the New Testament Baptism
and the Lords Supper, etc. and these services are reduced to the general
morality of the second Commandment; just so (we think) it is in the fourth
Commandment; the special day, the seventh day, was not directly and expressly
commanded in the fourth Commandment, no, nor the Lords day, yet both fell
under the Obligation of the fourth Commandment as specials to a general. To
this I answer.

1. Supposing, but not granting, that Sacrifices, etc. Baptism, and the Lords
Supper were commanded in the general in the second Commandment, yet the
Saturday-seventh-day-Sabbath, and the Lords day were not both commanded in the
general in the fourth Commandment.

As for the Lords day it was not thought on at the giving of the Law on mount
Sinai in the wilderness, how should it then be commanded in the fourth
Commandment? Nor can it be understood in the fourth Commandment, for this is
for the day called by its proper name (as shall hereafter appear) Sabbath day;
Remember the Sabbath day, now the fourth Commandment binds to Saturday,
properly called Sabbath day, cannot bind to Sunday, or Lords day, the day
following.

Again the fourth Commandment says, The seventh day is the Sabbath, which is
Saturday the last day of the week, but the Lords day is Sunday the first day,
and beginning of the week following; now how should a bond of one hundred
pound to be paid on the seven^h day of May be understood to bind to the day
following the eighth day of May without a forfeiture of the Bond? Or a bond to
be paid on Saturday the seventh day of the week, but to be forfeited if it be
not paid till Sunday after the first day of the next week? When the fourth
Commandment binds to the seventh and last day of the week, it cannot bind to
the first day of the week, the Lords day; so you see that the Lords day was
not commanded in the fourth Commandment in the general, no more than in the
particular.

Now as for the Saturday-seventh-day-Sabbath, this indeed was commanded in the
fourth Commandment, but not generally, as is supposed, comprizing under it
Saturday and Sunday, both as specialls: for Saturday the seventh day was no
general but a special, single, and individual day, as is granted me, But I
suppose Mr Cawdry understands his one day in seven to be the general, and
Saturday and Sunday the specialls; but to expound the fourth Commandment of
one day in seven is a false Exposition, and as yet Mr Cawdry has not proved it
to be the sense and meaning of the fourth Commandment; yet here and before he
takes it for granted, and supposes one day of seven to be the genus or general
of the fourth Commandment; but this his supposition is but petitio principii,
a begging of the question of me before he ha^h proved it.

Thus you have seen by my answer, that Mr Cawdry has not by his second
instance vindicated himself from this Paradoxe in expounding the fourth
Commandment for one day of seven; nor has he proved that the fourth
Commandment may be expounded for one day of seven.

2. Whereas Mr Cawdry makes Sacrifices, and the Passover, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper to be specialls, under the general Obligation of the second
Commandment, what does he but mingle Ceremonials with Morals? And so confound
the moral and the ceremonial Laws; making Sacrifices, Circumcision, and
Passover to be commanded in the moral Law, as in the second Commandment?
methinks Sir, it beseemes not a Divine of your rank thus to jumble together
Morals and Ceremonials. 2 Sacrifices and the Passover were Gospel, I say.
Gospel veiled under shadows, typing out Christ; Baptism and the Lords Supper
are Gospel also, pointing to Christ; now Sir, will you mingle Law and G^spell
together? Saying, Sacrifices, and the Passover, Baptism, and the Lords Supper
fall under the Obligation of the second Commandment? Will you confound Law and
Gospel? for the second Commandment is Law, and a part of the moral Law; now
to thrust these Evangelicall things into the second Commandment, is to jumble
together the Law and the Gospel; I confess, you may as well thrust and crowd
the Lords day into the fourth Commandment as you may crowd Baptism and the
Lords Supper into the second Commandment, but both are but Carter-like done.

3. Whereas Mr Cawdry in this instance, and in two or three passages of his
before, makes the Saturday, and the Sunday or Lords day to be species, or
specialls under the genus or general of one day in seven in the fourth
Commandment; how can he make this Logic good? Suppose we that his one day of
seven were the genus, since all Logicians know that the genus must have two
species at least, these two days cannot be the species: for during the old
world, as he calls it, until Christ the fourth Commandment, under one day of
seven, had but one species, namely, the Saturday-seventh-day-Sabbath as himself
confesses oftentimes, and since Christ, if the Lords day be a Sabbath, as he
says, and be also packt, or patcht, I may rather say, into the fourth
Commandment, yet then from Christ's time unto our times there has been but one
species under his genus, of one day in seven in the fourth Commandment, as the
Sunday or Lords day; now, how can Mr Cawdry make his one day of seven to be a
genus, when it ever wanted two species? As both before Christ, and since
Christ; his divinity, in expounding the fourth Commandment for one day of
seven, is like his Logic in making a genus to subsist with but one single
species.

His third instance.
Mr Cawdry in page 260. thus writes; in Levit. 27.30. All the tithes or tenths
of the land are the Lords, etc. The tenth of the Flocks which passes under the
rod shall be the Lords; Where it is not necessary to take it for the tenth in
order, but for any part of the ten. Also Lev. 23.13. Two tenth deals of
flower, and a fourth part of an hin of oil; here any part of the ten, or any
part of the four is as much as this Law requires. So the seventh day mentioned
in the fourth Commandment does not necessarily signify the seventh day in
order, but may signify a seventh day, or one day in the seven. So this is
sufficient to take off the aspersion of novelty from our interpretation and
exposition of the fourth Commandment, and to show it to be consonant to the
Language of the Scripture.

To this I say, whereas in expounding the fourth Commandment I do insist upon
the ordinall word seventh, holding my self close to the propriety of it, which
notifies properly (as hereafter shall appear) not any one of the seven, but
the last of the seven, and that single one which next follows the sixth. As
when we say, the seventh year of the Kings Reign, we mean not one of the
seven indefinitely, that is, any one of the seven, but the last year of the
seven, that which follows next after his sixth years Reign. A bond to be paid
the seventh day of March is not to be paid upon one of the seven days of March
indefinitely, that is, upon any one day of the seven, but definitely upon the
seventh day from the first day of March; the like may be said of the eighth day
for Circumcision, and of the fourteenth day for the Passover, and of other
ordinall numbers which in our English tongue end with th. Now Mr Cawdry, to
overthrow this propriety of the ordinall number seventh, brings in this his
instance of another ordinall number, the tithe, or tenth. Hereunto I answer.

1. Whereas Mr Cawdry would understand by the Tithe or tenth, not the tenth in
order, but for any one of the ten indefinitely; hereby as he would overturne
Gods definite and fixed time, so he does an evil office to himself, and to
the rest of the Clergy for matter of Tithes; for if the Shepherd has in his
Flock a blind or lame Lamb, a sick or lean Lamb, may he not give the
Minister for tithe his blind Lamb, sick or lean Lamb? And if the Minister
thinks himself wronged, may not the Shepherd plead Scripture to him? Saying,
by the tithe or tenth God might enjoyne one of ten, that is, any one of the ten
indefinitely. Mr Cawdry would be loath the Sheppheard should so expound
Scripture to him, and yet he will so expound the fourth Commandment to us,
understanding by the seventh day any one day of the seven.

Again, God commanded Circumcision to be on the eighth; were Mr Cawdry to
expound this Commandment he could say by the eighth day may be understood any
one of the eight days. The Passover on the fourteenth day, he could expound
this ordinall fourteenth so, as they might eat it on any one of the fourteen
days.

2. Though there is not any Commandment in the New Testament for the Lords
day, yet let us suppose one made by Christ, saying, Remember the Lords day to
sanctify it; but the first day of the week is the Lords day, etc. If I should
answer to this Commandment as Mr Cawdry does to Gods fourth Commandment,
saying, the word first is an ordinall number indeed, but by the first day of
the week, or first day of the seven, we may understand one day of the week, or
one day of the seven indefinitely; for ordinall numbers, as the tenth of the
Flock, and a tenth deal of flower, are so used in Scripture; how would Mr
Cawdry and our new Sabbatarians exclaim of me for corrupting the proper sense
of this new Commandment of Christ's? and for beguiling them of their new
Sabbath day? And yet thus they deal with God, and with his fourth
Commandment, and no man may controul^ them without some heavy Censure or
other, for I run more hazard for maintaining the true exposition of Gods
Commandment than they do for corrupting it.

3. Be it so, that some few, as two or three ordinall numbers in Scripture be
used improperly: for Io. 21.14. This is the third time that Jesus appear, etc.
if this third time of Christ's apparition may be upon some one of the three
times only, and not on the last of the three, how shall we do for our new
Sabbath on the Lords day? for Christ's apparitions be brought to prove our new
Sabbath. Again, Christ rose the third day, may this be expounded of, one of,
or of any of the three days? further I answer.

1. That this particular ordinall number the seventh mentioned in the fourth
Commandment, is never used in Scripture but properly for the last of seven. As
for other ordinall numbers, some two or three, as the tenth of the Flock, and a
fourth part of a hin of oil, etc. these are used improperly, but there are an
hundred Texts of ordinalls, all used properly for one or two used improperly.

2. Where an ordinall number is used improperly, it is so understood in a case
of necessity only, when it cannot possibly be otherwise understood; as when the
things numbered have in them neither diff^rence, nor order, as a fourth part of
an hin of oil, and a tenth deal of flower; in such a case we must understand
them improperly as for any one of the number: so when Christ is called a doo^e,
and the bread his body, we must take them improperly, but not always in all
texts so: for the proper sense is ever holden for the true sense, if nothing
appear to the contrary; now there is no necessity to depart from the proper
sense of the ordinall seventh in the fourth Commandment; for among the seven
days there is both difference and order, one orderly going after another;
wherefore this ordinall seventh must be properly understood for Saturday the
last of seven; and so the Church of the Jews understood it, as appears by
their practice, keeping the Saturday Sabbath, now at Amsterdam, and elsewhere;
but this I shall at our conclusion more abundantly prove, as that God intended
in his fourth Commandment to have only the Saturday and last day of seven
definitely for his Sabbath.

Thus you see his third and last instance answered; and as yet he has not
vindicated himself from his Paradoxe, nor proved that the fourth Commandment
may be expounded for a seventh day, or for one day of seven indefinitely, that
is, for any one day of the seven.

By the way note, that I have propounded his three instances in their full
strength, as himself wrote them; the like faithfulness I shall observe in
repeating his ensuing Arguments; And though they be but trivial things, yet I
have, and shall answer every one of them punctually, although he has not been
so candid toward me; for he has not so much as mentioned, much less confuted
my best answers against the Lords day* if my things were as trivial as his,
yet since he undertakes to confute me, it had been the part of a fair disputant
to mention and confute my answers, or else never to meddle with my name and
Books, and so I return.

Now he proceeds by sundry Arguments that the seventh day, or last day of the
seven, is not enjoined in the fourth Commandment, but one day of the seven
indefinitely; we shall answer them in order.

His first Argument.
Mr Cawdry in his second part, page 261. thus reasons: If the order of the
day (first or last) in the fourth Commandment be not substantially profitable,
or being altered is no ways prejudicial to Religion, then the seventh day was
not commanded as the subject or substance of the fourth Commandment.

But the order of the day, (first, or last, or any other) is not substantially
profitable; or being altered is it any ways prejudicial to Religion.

Therefore the seventh day in order was not commanded as the subject or
substance of the fourth Commandment.

I answer first to the first proposition, and to the consequent part of it,
saying, Then the seventh day was not commanded as the subject or substance of
the fourth Commandment; To this I say, the seventh day is time and order; now
time and order are neither subject nor substance, but adjunct, accident, or
circumstance; now if I should grant your conclusion, what were I the worse, or
you the better by this Argument? For though the seventh day be not commanded as
the subject or substance, yet if it be commanded as an adjunct to the duty of
holiness, or Gods worship, or as an accident or circumstance, it is binding to
obedience: for it is a commanded adjunct, accident, or circumstance.

I answer now to the second proposition, and to the former part of it, saying,
The order of the day, as the last day of seven, is not substantially
profitable: To this I say, 1. What if it be not substantially profitable, if it
be circumstantially profitable? Is not this as much as can be expected of a
commanded time? furthermore, if one day of seven, that is, any one of seven, be
substantially profitable, as you Sir say, why should not the seventh and last
day of the seven be also substantially profitable? Is not the seventh day one
day of the seven?

I answer next to the latter part, saying, The seventh day being altered, it is
not any ways prejudicial to Religion. To this I say, 1. If this alteration be
not prejudicial to Religion, that is, to Gods worship in the day, yet it is
prejudicial to God, and to his fourth Commandment; for i^ it not prejudicial
to God to have his holy day, and the day chosen by him before all other days
of the seven, to be altered and changed, and so rejected?

Again, suppose the alteration of the seventh day be no damage to Religion
and Gods worship in the day; so say I, the taking up of another day for it, as
the Lords day, the first day of the week, this is no gain or advantage to
Religion and Gods worship; now will any wise man make a change of any thing if
it be not for a better? It is the p^^t of a fool to change one Penny for
another, or one Counter for another, both being alike. Furthermore, the
alteration of the seventh day is as prejudicial to Religion, as the setting up
of the first day is advantageous to Religion; and therefore the seventh day may
be as well the substance of the Commandment as the first day.

Again, is it not prejudicial to change the seventh day, which has a divine
institution and precept for it, and Gods example in resting on that day, for
the Lords day, or first day, which has no divine institution or precept for
it, nor Christ's example in resting on this day? For Christ made the Lords day a
traveling day, and so did two of his Disciples, traveling sixty furlongs to
Emmaus, and back again to Jerusalem, which is fifteen miles, eight Furlongs
to a mile, Luke 24.1, 23, 29, 33. Joh. 20.19. this is more than a Sabbath days
journey.

To conclude, give me leave Sir, to retort your Argument against your self on
this manner.

If one day of seven indefinitely be not substantially profitable: or being
altered is no way prejudicial to Religion; then one day of seven was not
commanded as the subject or substance of the fourth Commandment.

But one of seven indefinitely is not substantially profitable: or being
altered to the seventh day definitely, it is no way prejudicial to Religion.

Therefore one day of seven was not commanded as the subject or substance of
the fourth Commandment. My answers to his Argument will clear this Argument;
so far of his first Argument.

His second Argument.
If the seventh day was directly commanded as the subject or substance of the
fourth Commandment, then it was commanded as Ceremonial, or as Moral.

But the seventh day was neither commanded as Ceremonial, nor as Moral.

Therefore the seventh day was not commanded at all in the fourth Commandment.

Answer.
I have heard Country people say, Scholars can by Logic prove the Moon was
made of a green cheese; now is not Mr Cawdry such a Logician? for his
conclusion says, The seventh day was not commanded at all in the fourth
Commandment, when with our eyes we see and read the contrary in the
Commandment.

Further I answer, whereas he thinks there is no third thing besides Moral
and Ceremonial, I give him this for a third thing, a perpetual positive; and
then though the seventh day was not commanded as Moral or Ceremonial, yet it
might be commanded as a perpetual positive Ordinance.

Here again Sir give me leave to retort your Argument upon your self on this
manner.

If one day of seven indefinitely was directly commanded as the subject or
substance of the fourth Commandment, then it was commanded as Ceremonial or
as Moral.

But one day of seven indefinitely was neither commanded as Ceremonial, nor as
Moral; for there are no such words in the fourth Commandment as one day in
seven; neither can they be gathered by consequence from it: and to suppose it
is but to beg the question.

Therefore one day of seven was not commanded at all in the fourth
Commandment.

If the seventh day, which is expressed in the fourth Commandment, be not
commanded as the subject of the fourth Commandment, how should one day of
seven, which is not expressed be the subject of it? And if there be no such thing
in the fourth Commandment as one day of seven indefinitely, then it is neither
Moral, nor Ceremonial, but a fantasy of man's brain.

His third Argument.
If the principal reasons in the fourth Commandment be directly for one day
in seven, and indirectly for that seventh and last day of the we^ke; then the
fourth Commandment must rather be understood of the number, for one day in
seven, then for the order, the last day of seven.

But the reasons are directly for one day in seven, and indirectly for that
seventh and last day of seven, as being the day then appointed, Ergo etc.

Answer.
I see all along hitherto that Mr Cawdry sticks much at this ordinall number
seventh in the fourth Commandment, and will nor endure this word order; it
seems to me he had rather be out of order than in order, fearing that Gods
order may make him turn Jew and keep the Saturday-Sabbath: for rather than he
will admit of Gods order, the ordinall seventh, which implies the days put
into order, he will invent an Exposition of his own, which is without order, as
one day of seven.

Furthermore, I have this one thing against his Argument, that he disputes
comparatively, noted by the word rather, when he should dispute absolutely, and
positively; for our question is not whether the fourth Commandment must rather
b^ expounded of one day in seven than of the seventh day; but absolutely and
positively whether it ought to be expounded of the seventh day, or not of the
seventh day; or whether it ought to be expounded of the seventh day, or of one
day in seven, uncertainely which day; wherefore Sir, I desire you to take home
this Argument again, and frame it anew, and see then if you can make any thing
or nothing of it.

I have yet another thing against this Argument; whereas you do compare these
two together, one day of seven and the seventh day, saying, the one must rather
be taken than the other; here you compare ens with non ens; a thing which has
a being in the fourth Commandment, as the seventh day expressed, with that
which has no being in the fourth Commandment, as one day of seven
indefinitely, which is neither expressed nor implied, but is a mere fiction of
your own; remember Sir, that this is the place where you are to prove, if you
can, that one day of seven indefinitly, that is, any one day of the seven is
the sense and meaning of the fourth Commandment; but instead of proving it,
you slightly take it for granted you in a comparison rather, etc. and is not
this petere principium, plainly to beg the question? for the comparative degree
does suppose the positive as granted; As for the Bishop, Dr H^ylin, and Mr
Primrose, you often tax some of them for begging the question, and are you,
Sir, so frequent in the use of this piece of Sophistry? This is not the first
time I have taken you guilty, nor will it be the last time.

Again, whereas you say, the reasons in the fourth Commandment are directly
for one day in seven, and but indirectly for the seventh day.

1. Is it not strange that what is expressed should be indirectly in the
Commandment, and what is not expressed should be directly in it?

2. As for the two reasons mentioned by him, the farmer is the six days
labor, whereby God persuades us to give him the seventh day, because he has
allowed us six days for our selves; now forasmuch as our six days labor
must go together in labor, therefore this reason must be for the seventh and
last day, not for one day of seven, or any one day of seven: for the six
laboring days going together, these are the reasons; now a reason cannot
prove it self but another thing.

The latter reason, mentioned by him in page 268. and page 42. is Gods example
in resting the seventh day, which example leads us to the seventh day also,
not unto one day of the seven indefinitely: for examples lead us to follow them
as nearely, as closely, and as exactly as we can, as Copies set to Scholars,
and Samplers for Girls to sew by; and so Moses was to make the Tabernacle
after the pattern which God showed him in the Mount, Exodus 25.40. now we then
imitate God, and follow his example when we keep the seventh and last day of
the week, for it is as near to God as possibly we can come; so you see the
reasons of the Commandment are plainly for the seventh day only.

But Mr Cawdry would have one day, or any one day of the seven for his Sabbath,
and is this to imitate God? Or rather to cross God? For when God rested on the
seventh and last day of the week we will rest on the first day, at the
beginning of the week, and yet not ashamed to say we imitate God, and follow
his Example; yet, but says Mr Cawdry, God rest d one day of seven, and if we
do so we imitate God. I Sir, but do you imitate God as nearly, as closely, and
as exactly as you can, or as is possible? And as S^holars do, or ought their
Cop^es? And as Moses did about the T^bernacle? Surely, it is no impossible
thing for us to keep the Saturday for our Sabbath; but as Mr Cawdry loves not
Gods ordinall number, the seventh, lest he should fall into Gods order, and so
turn Jew: so he loves not to imitate God, lest he should turn Sabbatarian; if
he should follow Gods example so exactly and closely as he may or can do, then
he should be too too like God, and resemble God too much.

For conclusion, here again, Sir, give me leave to retort this your Argument
on this manner.

If the principal reasons in the fourth Commandment be directly for the
seventh day, and indirectly for one day in seven, then the fourth Commandment
must rather be understood of the seventh day than of one day in seven.

But the reasons are directly for the seventh day, and indirectly for one day
in seven, as you have seen it proved before, Ergo, etc.

His fourth Argument.
If God intended the Jews should rather sanctify the seventh part of their
time than the seventh day, then the fourth Commandment does more directly
command one day in seven than that seventh day.

But God intended that the Jews should rather sanctify the seventh part of
their time than the seventh day, Ergo, etc.

Answer.
I pray Sir, what difference make you of these two, the seventh part of the
Jews time and their seventh day? Will you compare a thing with it self? And
make a show of two things where there is but one in diverse words? Did not
Nehemiah, and others of the Jews give God both the seventh part of their time,
and also the seventh day? And does not Mr Cawdry give Christ both the first
part of his time, and also the first day? For ever since he was borne, or made
conscience of the Lords day, which is the first day of the week, has he not
given Christ both his first part of time, and also his first day? a worthy
comparison!

Again, you dispute comparatively, whereas you should dispute positively and
absolutely, as I said before; and here again you have Mr Cawdry's petitio
principii, begging his question where he should have proved it, if he could; is
this the way to prove that one day in seven is the true exposition of the
fourth Commandment? If it be, Sophistry is the way; now for these two faults
mentioned I reject your Argument, and desire you to take it home again, and
amend them, and then send it abroad again, to try if it may find any better
success.

As for your reason of the sequel, you say, it is because so it may extend to
us Gentiles also. I pray Sir, why may not the seventh and last day of the week
extend to us Gentiles as well as any one day of the seven?

But you think, Sir, that it was both uncertain whether the Jews did
precisely keep the seventh day or not, and that in some case it was impossible
to be kept. I answer, 1. It matters not whether it be certain or not that the
Jews kept the seventh day: for we dispute not de facto, but de jure, of what
they did do, but of what they ought to do. 2. Why may it not be as certain
that the Jews kept the seventh day, as that they kept your one day of seven?

As for the impossibility of their keeping it, because once the Sun stood still
in Joshuah's time; To this I say, this standing still of the Sun m^de that day
a longer day than any other day of that week, but not another day: as if it
stood still on Friday the sixth day of the week, yet Saturday next was the
seventh day, and so might possibly be kept.

I but, in regard of the Jews dispersions, as when they were carried into
captivity in remote Countries, they could not possibly keep one and the same
day for the Sabbath: for the days in places of a different Longitude begin at
different times, and as some say, the beginning of the days differ so much as
the Hollanders lost a day in surrounding the World.

To these I answer; 1. If these things be so, how do the Jews keep the Sabbath
day now at Amsterdam, and in other places of the world where they live? and how
do we in England keep the Lords day? For our days differ in their beginning
from the days at Jerusalem where Christ rose.

2. The ground of this error lies in this, that they think when God commanded
the Sabbath day at Mount Sinai he intended that whithersoever his people
traveled their Sabbath must begin at the very same point of time that it began
at mount Sinai; the which is impossible, and so God should command his people
an impossible thing; for when they traveled from Sinai to the remotest parts
in Canaan the days had some difference in beginning.

Again, the word day signifies the time of light, Genesis 1.5, God called the
light day, and so the seventh day is the seventh light; now when the seventh
light began in every horizon, then the seventh day began, be it sooner or
latter; and this is all that God intended in his fourth Commandment.

To conclude, give me leave, Sir, to retort this your Argument also, in this
manner.

If God intended the Jews should rather sanctify the seventh day than the
seventh part of their time; then the fourth Commandment does more directly
command the seventh day than one day in seven.

But God intended that the Jews should rather sanctify the seventh day than
the seventh part of their time, Ergo, etc. I shall as soon make this Argument
good, as you shall make yours good, as appears by my Answers to your Argument.

His fifth Argument.
If the fourth Commandment did directly, or as the substance of it, command
the Seventh-day Sabbath, then either we Christians must keep the same day
still, or else the fourth Commandment is utterly void and abolished.

But we must neither keep that day still, nor is the fourth Commandment, void
and abolished. E^go.

Answer.
As for his major I grant it; and himself confirms it, saying, the
Commandment is moral as well as the other Laws in the Decalogue, for our
Savior confirms it, Mat. 5.18. saying, not one jot or tittle of the Law shall
pass away, etc. Now the the Seventh-day Sabbath is more than a jot or tittle
of the fourth Commandment wherefore we must turn Sabbatarians, or else the
fourth Commandment is void and abolished; thus says Mr Cawdry.

As for his minor, I utterly deny the former part of it, saying we must not
keep that day still; meaning it of the seventh day. But why so? I pray Sir,
what hinders but that we may keep the old Sabbath day still? If it pleased you
to keep it as it pleased God to command it, Exo. 20.8. and as it pleased Christ
to ratify it, Mat. 5.18. I know nothing against our keeping it but your, and
other men's slanderous words of it, as that it is Judaisme, and we must turn
Jews to loath Gods people of his Sabbath. But do you think God commanded any
thing in his ten Commandments, the doing whereof, would make Christians turn
Jews? is any thing in the fourth Commandment Ceremonial, shadowing out Christ
as yet to come in the flesh? If in this sense we should keep the Sabbath, it
were properly called Judaisme: but where is the Christian that keeps it in this
sense, or desires to keep it in this sense?

But since he has not proved this former part of his Assumption, I may safely
deny it: and so this his fi^th Argument stands for a Cipher; so still you see
how far Mr Cawdry falls short of proving by these Arguments that the seventh
day is not commanded as the substance of the fourth Commandment, and that one
day of seven is the substance of it.

His sixth and last Argument.
If the Seventh-day Sabbath was directly commanded in the fourth Commandment,
then there can no sufficient reason be given why the fourth Commandment should
be put into the Decalogue, and not amongst other Ceremonial Commandments
peculiar to the Jews.

Answer.
1. I answer to his proposition thus: why may there not be as good reason
given, and as sufficient, for the Seventh-day Sabbath to be put into the
Decalogue, as for one day in seven indefinitely, which never was in the fourth
Commandment, or in the Decalogue, neither expressly, nor by consequence.

2. Whereas you say, the fourth Commandment must not be put into the Decalogue
among the Morals, but amongst the Ceremonials; it must be so, because you take
it for granted that the Seventh-day Sabbath was a Ceremony; and is not this to
beg a question? For you do not so much as attempt to prove it a Ceremony; and I
believe all the skill you have cannot prove it a Ceremony; so by this A gument
you do but beg a question, which you should have proved, but have not, nor can
prove it; but begging the question when, and where you should prove it, is no
rare thing with you: this is your Logic, whereby you would prove that the
fourth Commandment is to be expounded for one day of seven.

I have now made punctual answers unto all Mr Cawdry's six Arguments, whereby
he has endeavored, but all in vain, to prove that the seventh-day Sabbath is
not directly and expressly commanded in the fourth Commandment, a thing so
strangely absurd, that I never read any Author besides himself to deny it; and
besides, he has endeavored, though also in vain, to prove, that one day in
seven indefinitely, that is, any one day of the seven is directly commanded in
the fourth Commandment; and that this is the true exposition, sense, and
meaning of the fourth Commandment; but never did Jesuit more shamefully
corrupt the second Commandment about Images, or any other Scripture, than Mr
Cawdry has corrupted Gods fourth Commandment, as appears by my several
answers to his six Arguments; He has done good service to Almighty God to use
his wits to overthrow his Sabbaths, and corrupt one of his Ten Commandments:
wherefore he may expect his reward when God shall come to give every one
according as his own works have been.

Having vindicated the fourth Commandment from Mr Cawdry's corrupt glosses,
and false Exposition of it: now in the last place I shall prove against Mr
Cawdry that one day of seven is not the sense and meaning of the fourth
Commandment, but the seventh and last day of the week, which falls upon our
Saturday; in my proof whereof Mr Cawdry shall see that we have many more
Arguments out of the fourth Commandment to prove this point than the ordinall
number seventh.

By the great pains Mr Cawdry has taken to draw the fourth Commandment to
the exposition of one day in seven; and also, for that by this Exposition he
has made answer to many of my twenty four Arguments; hereby you may perceive
that the maine and chief controversy about the Sabbath will be determined by
his or n y Exposition of the fourth Commandment; wherefore I shall be the
larger in proving my Exposition for the seventh and last day of the week: and
so I come to prove this point;

That the fourth Commandment ought not to be expounded for one day of seven,
but of the seventh and last day of seven definitely.

Argument the first.
My first Argument shall be taken out of the first words of the fourth
Commandment, Remember the Sabbath day. This word Sabbath, I confess,
signifies Rest; but there is more in it than so: for it is also a proper name
for one of the days of the week, as for the seventh and last day, which is
our Saturday, like as Lords day is a proper name for the first day of the
week, which is our Sunday; and thus I prove it.

1. Wheresoever in the Old or New Testaments you read the word Sabbath, it
being spoken of a weekly day, it is never used but for a proper name for one of
the week days, as for Saturday the Seventh and last day of the week; no
instance can be given to the contrary. 2. The Jews did anciently reckon their
days of the week thus, Satu^day they called Sabbathum, Sabbath day; Sunday
they called (...), Joh. 20.1. the first day of the Sabbath; Monday the second
of the S^bbath etc. yea, the Jews now at Amsterdam call Saturday the Sabbath
day; so still it is used for a proper name for our Saturday. 3. The Latins
call our Saturday Sabbatum the Sabbath day, as is to be seen in all Latin
Dictionaries; yea, it is so in England; for when a Writ comes down from the
Superior Courts for a man's appearance, if it be for his appearance on
Saturday, it is written Sabbatum, and die Sabbati. 4. I appeal to all
Scholars, if the word Sabbatum be not used in the ancient Histories of the
Church for Saturday the seventh and last day of the week. Thus you see that
Sabbath day is a proper name for our Saturday the seventh day; now proper names
of things are definite, not indefinite* they do limit the thing named to one
certain individual thing, and leave it not at rovers and uncertainties, as
unto any one thing, or as unto any one day ^f the seven, as Mr. Cawdry's idle
fancy is. I cannot spare a man so grossly absurd in expounding Gods fourth
Commandment.

But against this it is objected, that Sabbath day is no proper name, but a
common name; for the yearly festivals were also called Sabbaths, Levit. 23.24.
To this I answer, 1. We speak of weekly days, and in relation to the fourth
Commandment, not of yearly days, in reference to ceremonial Laws. 2. It
will no more hinder the Sabbath day to be a proper name for one of the week
days, than it will hinder the names of Peter and John for proper names of two
Apostles, because other men then living, and no Apostles, have the same names;
so far of my first Argument.

Argument the second.
My second Argument shall be taken out of the middle part of the fourth
Commandment, saying, But the seventh day is the Sabbath, etc. for the right
understanding and exposition of this word seventh, we must know there are two
sorts of numbers, a Cardinal, and an O dinal; the Cardinal numbers are these,
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, etc. now these comprize all the the
things numbered without difference; the Ordinall numbers are these, first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, etc. now these notify not all,
but one of the things numbered, and considers that one in a due order for the
last of the things numbered as for the seventh which follows the sixth going in
order before it, not any one of them without difference* as when we say, the
seventh day of the month, we mean not as Mr Cawdry would, any one of the seven
days, but the last of the seven days which follow the six days in order
before it. And by the seventh year of the Kings Reign is not understood one
of the seven years indefinitely, but the last year of the seven definitely
and precisely. So this word seventh in the fourth Commandment is not a
cardinal, but an ordinall number, notifying not any one of the seven days,
but the seventh and last day of the seven, which is our Saturday.

Our Sunday or Lords day is often in Scripture called the first day of the
week, Mat. 28.1. Mar. 16.2, 9. Luke 24.1. Joh. 20.1, 19. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor.
16.2. now then reckon onwards, and Saturday will be the seventh and last day of
the week; As there is but one Lords day, or one first day of the week, so
reckoning onward there can be but one Saturday, or one seventh day of the
week, which must needs be a definite and certain day; now Saturday is no
uncertain day at rovers, or any one of the seven days, uncertain which day
it is: so the fourth Commandment is to be expounded of Saturday, and the
seventh day, or last day of the seven definitely, not of any day of the seven.

I know they use to object a tenth deal of flower, and a fourth part of an hin
of oil, but this will not make the seventh year of the Kings Reign to be any
one of the seven years: nor will it make the Lords day, which is the first day
of the week, to be any one day of the week, uncertain which day it is; but
to this I have answered fully before, in my answer to his third instance, and
shall not here repeat it; so far of my second Argument, wherein the point is
proved both by the ordinall seventh in the fourth Commandment, and also by the
ordinall first ascribed to the Lords day.

Argument the third.
My third Argument shall be taken out of the last part of the fourth
Commandment, saying, For God rested the seventh day, and sanctified the
Sabbath day: so here we have the seventh day men^ioned before in the
Commandment, Exodus 20.10. repeated, and the Sabbath day, mentioned before in
the Commandment, Exodus 20.8. repeated also; whence I gather, that the words
Sabbath day at the beginning of the Commandment, and the same words at the
ending of the Commandment speak both of one and the same revolution of time
and day; and the words seventh day in the former part of the Commandment, and
the same words repeated in the latter part of the Commandment are to be
understood of the same time and day.

For 1. In a continued speech, one word or phrase often repeated is to be
understood in one and the same sense, so as if in the latter part of the speech
the words be definite, then so they must be in the former part also. 2. Gods
rest on the seventh day, and sanctifying the Sabbath day, are brought as an
Argument, reason, or motive to persuade men to keep this seventh-day Sabbath;
now the same words in the question or conclusion, repeated in the Argument or
motive, must have one and the same sense if there be fair dealing: so as if
the one be to be understood definitely, and of a time certain, then so must
the other be understood also. 3. These words, the seventh days rest of God,
and Gods sanctifying the Sabbath day, are propounded as Gods example for us to
imitate and follow; now the Scholar must follow his Copy as near as possibly
he can; Moses was to follow Gods pattern of the Tabernacle, even to an hairs
breadth if possible: so are we to imitate Gods example by keeping the same
Seventh-day Sabbath weekly which God kept at the Creation.

By these three reasons it appears, that being the same words must have the
same sense in all the fourth Commandment, and that the day wherein God rested
at the Creation, and which then he sanctified, being it was the seventh and
last day of the week, folloWing his six days creating, it was not any one
day of the seven, but the last day of the seven definitely; therefore the
fourth Commandment is to be expounded throughout, from the beginning to the
ending of it; for the seventh and last day of the week, which is a fixed,
limited, and definite day, not a day at random, rovers, and uncertain, as any
one day of the seven. The day, I say, whereon God rested at the Creation, being
ce^tainly the seventh, and last day of the seven, or week; the whole fourth
Commandment must be expounded of the same seventh, and last day of the seven,
or week certainly, not at rovers, as appears by my three reasons given; so
far of my third Argument.

Argument the fourth.
My fourth Argument shall be taken out of the body of the fourth Commandment,
saying, Six days shall thou labor, but the seventh day thou shall rest,
Exodus 20.9, 10. For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, etc.
and he rested the seventh day, Exodus 20.11. whence I note, that the six days,
wherein God created the world, were his working days, and they all went
together, no resting or Sabbath day coming between them: and the six working
days of man went also all together, no resting or Sabbath day coming between
them; whence it follows, that of necessity the Sabbath day, in the fourth
Commandment, could not possibly be appointed for one day of seven
indefinitely, that is, for any one day of the seven indifferently; for the six
days labor ought to go together for working days; and therefore the Sabbath
day could not come in between any of the six working days, or be any one of
them; wherefore of necessity the Sabbath day must fall after the six working
days, upon the seventh and last day of the week, and not upon any one of the
seven days; so far of my fourth Argument.

Argument the fifth.
If there never was from the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai down to our
times any day known in the Churches, but one weekly day for the seventh day;
nor any day known for the Sabbath day weekly but one, namely, Saturday the
seventh and last day of the week; then the fourth Commandment ought to be
expounded of that one seventh day definitely, and of that one Sabbath day,
namely, Saturday the seventh and last d^y of the week: and not for any one of
the seven days, or for a Sabbath day at rovers and uncertainly.

But there never was from the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai down to our
times any day known in the Churches, but one weekly day for the seventh day;
nor any day known for the Sabbath day weekly but one, namely, Saturday the
seventh and last day of the week.

Therefore the fourth Commandment ought to be expounded of that one seventh
day definitely, and of that one Sabbath day, namely, Saturday the seventh and
last day of the week: and not for any one of the seven days, or for a Sabbath
day at rovers and uncertainly.

As for the first proposition, it is so clear as it needs no proof; only
remember this, that we speak of a Sabbath weekly, not of any anniversary and
yearly Sabbath, which belonged not to the fourth Commandment, but to their
several and ceremonial Commandments: but we have to do only with the fourth
Commandment, and the weekly Sabbaths in relation to it. And so I come to
prove my second Proposition in both the parts.

1. At the Creation God began to number the days of the week by these
ordinall numbers, the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and the last
was the seventh day, Genesis 1.5, 8, etc. Genesis 2.2, 3. this numbering of the week
days continued in the Church unto the giving of the Law upon Mount Sinai,
Exodus ^0.9, 10. from thence it continued in the Church until Christ's time,
Mat. 28.1. Mar. 16 2, 9. and in all these times no day was known to be the
seventh but one, namely, Saturday; and from Christ's time unto ours it is still
so known: for all Divines, Ancient, and Modern, call our Sunday, or Lords day,
the first day of the week, and so consequently Saturday if you reckon onwards
the seventh day; so there being no seventh day but one, namely Saturday, the
fourth Commandment must be expounded of Saturday the seventh day, and not of
one day in seven uncertainly.

2. As for the name Sabbath day, it began in the Church for a weekly day before
the giving of the L^w, Exodus 16.22, 23. from thence unto the giving of the Law
it continued for a weekly day, Exodus 20.8, 9 10. from the giving of the Law
unto Christ it still continued in the Church, Isa. 56.2, 6. Isa. 58.13. N^h.
13.15. Mat. 28 1. Luke 23.56. with Luke 24 1. and from Christ's time in has
continued unto our time; for Ecclesiastical H^storians anciently used the name
Sabbath day for Saturday; the Latins do so to this day, and in England, as in
the case of a Writ, we do the same, as I have shew^ before; wherefore since
there never was, nor is known in the Churches, any weekly day named Sabbath day
but one, namely Saturday; therefore the fourth Commandment must be expounded
of this one day Saturday, the seventh and last day of the week, and not of a
Sabbath day indefinitely, as uncertain which day it is; thus you have seen
this Argument proved.

But it will be said, Is not our Lords day commonly called Sabbath day in all
Pulpits, and in all Books? I answer, yea: it is so called by such as love to
miscall things, and to nickname days; so they may call if they please every
Fast day, every Thanksgiving day, and every Christmas day But sure I am, this
is but a novelty of yesterdaies standing; and as the name is novell, so is the
observation of the Lords day, as, or for a Sabbath novell also, as by and by
you shall see: For,

1. The Lords day was never called Sabbath day in any Scripture of the New
Testament; let them show us a Text for it if they can.

2. These Authors before mentioned, St Augustine, Peter Martyr, Calvin,
Zanchie, Vrsinus, Paraeus, Chemnitius, Melanchion, with many others, all these
wrote of the Lords day; that it is but an indifferent thing, and of the same
authority with Good Friday the Passion day, Christmas day, and o her holy days
of the Church; and therefore these men could not think in their times the Lords
day was a Sabbath: or call the Lords day Sabbath day, as we do in reference to
the fourth Commandment.

3. In the fifth year of Edward the sixth an Act was made for the keeping of
Holy days, as Sunday, St Matthews day, St Marks day, and the other holy days:
In which Act, both the King, the Lords spiritual the Bishops, the Lords
Temporal, and the House of Commons expressly confessed that they knew no
Scripture for Sunday, or the other Holy days, and therefore they could not
call Sunday, or St Matthews day Sabbath days, and therefore this nicknaming of
days, as to call the Sunday and Lords day Sabbath day, and to keep it as a
Sabbath, is but a novelty, and sprang up but since Edward the sixth his days.

4. I am sixty four years of Age, and so cannot remember much above fifty
years, yet I do remember such works commonly done on the Lords day, as I am
sure are no Sabbath days works: For in the City of Norwich, about fifty years
ago, the City Waits, or Musicians were wont for diverse weeks in the year to
play upon the Market Cross on the latter part of the Lords day, thousands of
people there assembled to hear them. At the new elected Majors gate they
played at Wasters or Cudgels on the latter part of the Lords day, with hundreds
of people looking on. And the Sealing Office was open, and Weavers carrying and
recarrying their S^uffs to be sealed. The Merchants bought their S^uff; on the
Lords day, and packed them in great packs the same day: and the Carts loaded
the Stuffs the same day at night, and went toward London by four a clock the
next morning; these things were done with the knowledge of all the Magistrates,
and without contradiction of the most godly Ministers. I have been credibly
informed, that about ten years before my time a religious Grocer in the City
did open his shop ordinarily on the Lords day, and Mr Moore, the most religious
Minister then in the City, has come into the Shop, seeing them buying and
selling Grocery wares, and did never rebuke them for it, or say, why do you so?
And another ancient and religious man a Shooemaker told me this day, that in
his younger time Shooemakers sold shoes on the Lords day ordinarily; wherefore
the observation of the Lords day as a Sabbath day is but a novel^y, and they
that thus kept it could not think it was a Sabbath day, or call it a Sabbath
day; so far of my fifth Argument.

Argument the sixth.
If the fourth Commandment was expounded by Moses and the Prophets for
Saturday the seventh and last day of the week, and not for Sunday the first
day of the week, or any one day of the seven; then the fourth Commandment is
now to be expounded for Saturday the seventh and last day of the we^ke, and not
for Sunday the first day of the week, or for any one day of the seven.

But the fourth Commandment was expounded by Moses and the Prophets for
Saturday the seventh and last day of the week, and not for Sunday ^he first
day of the week; or for one da^ of seven:

Therefore the fourth Commandment ought in our times to be expounded for
Saturday the seventh and last day of the week, not for Sunday the first day of
the week, or for any one day of the seven.

As for the first proposition, it stands firm by this reason; Look what was
once the true sense and meaning of Gods Laws, the same is the sense and meaning
of it for ever after: for the sense and meaning of Scripture do not vary and
change with the change of time^; as if Scripture had one exposition and meaning
to day, and another to morrow; we can find no better rule for the expounding of
any Text of Scripture in the Old Testament, than to expound it as Moses and the
Prophets did anciently; If therefore the fourth Commandment was anciently
expounded for Saturday, it must be so expounded still, and in our times. Take a
ceremonial Law, as that of Circumcision, or the Passover, and if you will
expound and open the sense of it now, you must render the same sense of it now
which Moses and the Prophets gave of it anciently, or else your exposition is
false; I do not say a ceremonial Law binds now as it did anciently, but yet I
say the exposition of it is the same now which it was anciently: as if you fall
upon exposition of the time and day of Circumcision, or the Passover, you must
expound it now of the eighth day, not of the seventh or ninth day: and of the
foureteenth day of the month, not of the foureteenth day of the year; and so
you must deal with every of the ten moral Commandments, or else you deal
falsely with them.

As for the second Preposition, it is clear that Moses and the Prophets did
expound the fourth Commandment to their people the Jews for Saturday the
seventh and last day of the week, not for Sunday the first day of the week,
or for any one day of the seven, because the Church of the Jews, who were
taught and instructed by Moses and the Prophets, kept the Saturday, and not the
Sunday by the fourth Commandment; yea, this Mr Cawdry confesses, saying, The
seventh and last day of the week was appointed to the old world. that is, to
the Jews; so far of my sixth Argument.

Argument the seventh.
If the Lords day be rightly expounded for the first day of the week, and not
for any one day of the week, uncertain which day it is, then the Sabbath day
must be expounded for the seventh and last day of the week, and not for any
one day of the seven, uncertain which day it is. The reason hereof is one and
the same; for when you read of a day called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. you
understand it of the first day of the week, and of no other day, because you
read elsewhere that Christ our Lord rose on the first day of the week, Mar.
16.9. so when we read of the Sabbath day, Exodus 20.8. and read again in the
same fourth Commandment, The seventh day is the Sabbath, Exodus 20.10. we must
understand it of the seventh and last day of the week, and of no other day; for
if the ordinall number first be understood properly for the first day of the
seven, and not improperly for any one of the seven as touching the Lords day;
so the ordinall number seventh must be understood properly also for the last of
seven, not improperly for any one of the seven as touching the ancient Sabbath
day; if the one be taken properly, so must the other; and if the one be take
improperly, so may the other; so far of my seventh Argument.

Thus I have proved by seven Arguments that the fourth Commandment must be
expounded of Saturday the seventh and last day of the week, and not of any one
of the seven days. Now for ^ further vindication of the fourth Commandment, I
shall show how absurd it is for Mr Cawdry to deny the Saturday, the seventh and
last day, to be expressly commanded in the fourth Commandment, and to expound
it of a Sabbath day indefinitely, and of one day of seven indefinitely.

Of the absurdnesse to reject the exposition of the fourth Commandment for the
Sabbath day definitely, and the seventh and last day of the seven definitely,
and to expound it of a Sabbath day indefinitely, and of a seventh day
indefinitely, or of one day in seven.

The first absurdity.
If by the word Sabbath in the fourth Commandment we may understand a Sabbath
day uncertainly, as a rest upon any of the seven days; and by the word seventh
any one of the seven days; then we may keep two Sabbath days together without
six days labor going between them: As for example, we may keep the Saturday
the last of the week, and Sunday the first of the next week; and so two
S^bbaths go together, no working days coming between them, and is not this
absurd? For Saturday is one day of the seven in the former week, and Sunday
after is one day of the seven in the latter week.

Again, If the former please nor, then take this; Christ did lie in his grave
upon Saturday, which by the Jews was kept for the Sabbath day according to the
fourth Commandment, Luke 23 56. Now if Christians kept the Sunday or Lords
day, being the next day following the Sabbath day, were not then two Sabbath
days kept together without any working days coming between them? And is not
this absurd? Furthermore, and if both days were kept by the fourth
Commandment, is not this much more absurd? So far of the first absurdity.

The second absurdity.
If by Sabbath we may understand a rest on any day of the week; and by seventh
any one of the seven days; then we may keep by the fourth Commandment Sunday
the Lords day this week in memory of Christ's Resurrection, and Good Friday in
the next week, or every other Friday in the year in memory of Christ's
Passion: for as Sunday is one day of the seven in this week, so Friday is one
day of the seven in the next week; and is not this absurd? And to keep these
two days by the fourth Commandment also, is not this much more absurd; so far
of the second absurdity.

But perhaps you will say, we have Scripture for the Lords day, but you have
none for Good Friday. I answer, If I would abuse Scripture for Friday, as you
abuse Scripture for the Lords day, I could allege a Text, having as much
color in it as the best of your Texts; see for this purpose, Zech. 12.10, etc.
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son. This Text may be applied to Good Friday, wherein
Christ was pierced for our Sins, and wrought the work of our eternal
Redemption, and said upon his Cross, now It is finished, Ioh. 19.30. So we may
keep the Lords day every other week in memory of Christ's Resurrection, and
every other Friday as our Christian Sabbath in memory of Christ's Passion and
our Redemption.

But you will say, the Sabbath day is a day of rejoicing, but Good Friday is a
day of mourning. To this I answer, the Sabbath day in the fourth Commandment
was kept in memory of the Creation, and yet you can keep the Lords day by the
fourth Commandment in memory of the Resurrection; why then may we not keep
sometimes the memory of Christ's Passion and our Redemption on Friday by the
fourth Commandment as well as Sunday, or the Lords day, in memory of the
Resurrection by the fourth Commandment? but a change in both; I know indeed
that this Text, Zech. 12.10. is liable to many just exceptions, and so is the
best Text alleged by Mr Cawdry for the Lords day; but would he be pleased to
take Good Friday into his favor as he has done the Lords day, he could with a
little of his Logic, mingled with much of his Rhetoric, and some of his
Sophistry, make this Text, Zech. 12.10. as plausible a Text before the
multitude for Good Friday, as is his best Text for the Lords day* And so I come
to the third absurdity.

The third absurdity.
If by Sabbath we may understand any day of the week wherein we rest; and by
seventh any one day of the seven; then first, The Jews were no more bound to
keep Saturday the last day of seven than to keep the Lords day, or Sunday the
first day of the seven; for the Sunday was then some one day of the seven.

Secondly, Then we Christians may keep the Saturday Sabbath; for this day is
one day of the seven; but we may not keep the Saturday, as they say, because
it is Judaisme, as they call it; and it is expired, and abolished, as they say.

Now are not these two things two absurdities? So far of this third absurdity.

The fourth absurdity.
To expound the fourth Commandment for one day of seven is absurd, because we
have but one day of six if they reject the seventh and last day of the week;
take away Saturday, the seventh day, as an abolished, or expired day, which may
not be kept for fear of Judaisme, and then you have remaining but six days
in every week; and therefore if you take any day of these six days for a
Sabbath, you take but one day out of six days, not one day out of seven
days; for one of the seven days is exempted and excepted, so as it may not be
taken. In case we were wont to choose a Major out of seven Citizens, and now
the King forbids us to choose the last man of the seven because he is sickly,
and like to dye, or dead; though anciently our choice was one out of seven, yet
now it is but one out of six.

God commands to keep the seventh day holy, but Mr Cawdry has brought it down
to one day of seven, and upon further search it is come down to one day of
six; So far of this fourth Absurdity.

The fifth Absurdity.
It is absurd, if not also impious and wicked, to alter the exposition, sense,
and meaning of the Ceremonial Commandments; and therefore it must be so to
alter the exposition of the fourth Commandment, or any of the ten moral
Commandments; take these instances: first, see Lev. 23.24. In the seventh
month, and the first day of the month ye shall have a Sabbath for the
remembrance of blowing the Trumpet, etc. were it not an impious thing to alter
the sense of this Commandment, saying, God intended no more by this ordinall
number the seventh month but this, that the people should give him a Sabbath in
any one of the seven months? Secondly, see Lev. 25.4. Six years thou shall
sow thy field, but the seventh year shall be a Sabbath, etc. Had Mr Cawdry
wrote in Moses days he could have taught the people that they might give God
but some one or other of the seven years for a Sabbath. Thirdly, the Passover
was to be kept on the fourteenth day of the month; I, could Mr Cawdry say, that
is upon some one or other of the fourteen days. Fourthly, the eighth day was
appointed for Circumcision; yet, can Mr Cawdry say, by this ordinall number the
eighth may be meant one of the eight days, as the first, or third, etc.
Fifthly, Christ rose the third day, but it may be upon some one of the three
days, as on the first day or second. God commanded Circumcision on the eighth
day; may not Mr Cawdry say, hence Christians be bound to baptize Children on
the ninth day, the day after, or on the first day? For he says, we are to keep
our Sabbath on the eighth or first day. Is not this to make the Scriptures a
Nose of Wax? If it be absurd, yea, and wickedly done to alter the sense of of
the Ceremonial Laws, is it not so too to alter the sense of a moral Law?

The sixth Absurdity.
Supposing, but not granting, that Mr Brabourne were bound in a bond to pay to
Mr Cawdry twenty pounds upon Christmas day the twenty fifth day of December,
when Mr Cawdry can make him believe that this twenty pounds is due to him upon
the first day of December, or upon any one of the twenty five days of
December; then shall he make him believe also, that when God binds men in the
bond of the fourth Commandment to sanctify the Sabbath day, the seventh day
of the week, then he binds men by his bond of the fourth Commandment to
sanctify the first day of the week the Lords day, or any one of the seven
days. Our common Lawyers in pleading a Bond before a Judge, would be ashamed
of such Law; but our eminent Divines in preaching to the people of the bond of
the fourth Commandment are ^ot ashamed of such Divinity. Again, when Mr
Cawdry will be willing to take for his tenth, or tithe Lamb any one of the
ten, be it a rotten, lame, lean, or blind Lamb, then it may be he shall
p^rswade me, that by Gods seventh day we may understand some one day of the
six working days.

The seventh Absurdity.
All Divines that I have read, confess, that the seventh day, and
Saturday-Sabbath, was commanded to the Jews in the fourth Commandment; and the
Jews now living wheresoever, do keep the Saturday by the fourth Commandment;
yea, and Mr Cawdry says often in his Books of the Sabbath, that the seventh
and last day was appointed to the old world, that is, to the Jews; but if now,
and ^ince Christ, the Saturday and sev^nth-day-Sabbath be not comamnded in the
fourth Commandment, but some other one day of seven, as the Lords day, the
first day of the week, then the sense and meaning of the fourth Commandment
is altered and changed from what it was anciently, and a new sense and meaning
is given of it; if this be not an absurdity, or rather a madness, I know not
what is.

Shall the words in the Scripture be thought to change their sense with the
times? Shall they have one sense to day, and another to morrow? Is not this the
sin of him that thought he might change times and Laws, Dan. 7.25.

That one word in diverse Texts may signify diverse things is nothing strange;
but that one and the same word in one and the same Text, the fourth
Commandment, should signify anciently one thing, and in our days another
thing, this is an absurdity matchless.

That by Sabbath, and seventh day the fourth Commandment should ^^joyne the
Saturday to the Jews, and the Sunday to the Gentiles; the Saturday for
thousands of years unto Christ, and the Sunday for ever after Christ; this may
well be called the Queen of absurdities.

Has the approach of the Gospel changed the meaning of the words in the Law?
If words in the Decalogue shall have one sense before Christ came, and another
sense after Christ's coming, there will be no certain sense of any of the ten
Commandments.

Were a Schoolmaster to construe Terence, or other profane Author to his
Scholars, he would be ashamed to give any sense diverse from an ancient known
sense; but we have Ministers not ashamed to abuse their Auditors worse than a
Schoolmaster would abuse his Scholars: wherefore Schoolemasters shall rise up
in judgment to condemn such Ministers; God never bestowed wit and learning on
such Ministers, and I may say honesty too, to corrupt his Scriptures, and to
abuse their Auditors; Is this to take charge of the Souls of the people?

For my part, laying aside the respects I bear to God, and to the Scriptures,
I care not whether you keep Saturday-Sabbath, Sunday-Sabbath, or Monday
Sabbath; and if we kept none at all it were best of all: but if we have respect
to God or to his Scriptures, let us give him the day of his own choice, not
another; let us not so shamefully and abominably corrupt his Scriptures by
notorious false expositions; it were far better for the Church and State to
have no Scriptures, than to have Scriptures falsely expounded to the people.

The eighth Absurdity
Suppose we that Christ had left a Commandment in the New Testament for the
Lords day, as certainly God left a Commandment for Saturday the seventh day in
the Old Testament; and suppose that Christ had said, Remember the Lords day to
sanctify it; the first day of the week is the Lords day, in it thou shall do
no work; for the Lord Christ re^^ed, or rose from the dead on the first day of
the week, and therefore the Lord Christ blessed the Lords day, and sanctified
it.

If now Mr Brabourne should preach on this Commandment, or write a book for
the true Exposition of it, and instruct the people of the Land, saying,

1. By the Lords day, you are to understand a Lords day, but not the Lords day,
for every day of the week is the Lord Christ's day in some sense. 2. By the
first day of the week you may understand some one day of the week or other.
3. We may imitate Christ's resting or rising from death, on the first day of the
week, if we Christians rest upon some one or other day of the week, as on
Saturday the last day of the week. 4. The Lords day was appointed to the
Grecians in the first Age of the Church, but Saturday the seventh day to us
Christians. 5. The Lords day, and first day of the week are not the substance
of Christ's Commandment, but Saturday the last of the week. 6 The Lords day,
and first day of the week, are indirectly commanded by Christ, but Saturday,
the seventh day of the week, are directly commanded.

Should I thus expound this Commandment of Christ, oh, how would the Patrons
of the Lords day rage, stamp, and storm at me? Saying, how shamefully does
this Brabourne corrupt Christ his Law for the Lords day? How abominably does he
abuse Gods people by his false Expositions? Never did Jesuit so abuse and
corrupt any Texts of Scripture as this man has abused our Lord Christ his
Commandment; the Devils themselves did never so abuse the Scriptures; it is
pity the man is suffered to live any longer, hanging is too good for him,
burn him like an Heretic, I cannot express the one half of their zeal in
this kind; and I confess all this were worthily spoken against me if I had so
done; but now I pray compare my supposed Exposition of Christ's supposed
Commandment with Mr Cawdrie's real Exposition of Gods real fourth
Commandment in the six particulars mentioned, and behold how parallel and
alike they are one to the other point by point! now if my Exposition be
abominably absurd, what then is theirs? and if Jesuits, yea, and the Devil
never did the like, what may too many of our most zealous Ministers think of
themselves who do the same d^yly, and are the most forward and stirring in this
kind of exposition? so far of the Absurdities, and now I come to my Conclusion,

The Conclusion.
HAving vindicated God's fourth Commandment from Mr Cawdrie's false
Expositions of it; now it will be expected that I should proceed in answer to
other passages of his Books, and in particular to confute his answers made unto
diverse of my twenty four Arguments for the ancient Sabbath, and to answer or
confute his Texts alleged by him in maintenance of the Lords-day-Sabbath, as
it is called now adays; touching these two I shall give this account.

First, concerning the ancient Sabbath; if I should maintain my twenty four
Arguments, Mr Cawdry, or some of his friends for him might complain to the
State, and procure my book to be answered by fire as Jewish; for so was Mr
Ockfords book of like kind; but I am resolved that no provocations shall force
me to proceed so far; again, having vindicated the fourth Commandment from
this false exposition of one day in seven, I have confuted the most of his
Answers given by him to many of my 24 Arguments, so as it is needless for me
to proceed any further.

Now as touching Mr Cawdrie's Texts, alleged by him to prove the Lords day to
be kept for a Sabbath, if I should answer them, as nothing is more facile and
easy to be done, I might so also run the hazard of having my books burnt with
fire, but I will not offend the State so far; I shall therefore satisfy my
self with this, that I have many years since discharged my conscience by
writing of two several books, wherein I have made answers plentifully to every
one of their Texts of Scripture, and given not one but many answers unto every
one of their Texts of Scripture, the which answers were never yet confuted by
any man, and yet it is about twenty six years since I wrote my first book,
and about twenty two years since I wrote my second book; nor has Mr Cawdry
now confuted those answers, albeit he has made a great flourish with three
great books, saying, he will confute all gainsayers; but it is very false, for
he has not confuted Mr Brabourne.

I observe, that albeit M. Cawdry is larger upon the Sabbath than any man, yet
has he nothing new, or more for matter than others have wrote many years
agone; new books but old matter; more words, but no more matter; the Practice
of Piety in a few leaves is as large for matter as M. Cawdries three large
books of twelve shillings price; now since Mr Cawdry has brought no new Texts
of Scripture to light, or new Arguments for the Lords day; wherefore should I
blot paper, and spend ink to answer that in him which I have fully answered
long since to others, who have wrote the same things before him?

Whilst I was in writing of my first book of the Sabbath, and in answering
the Texts of Scripture alleged for the Lords day, me thought they were such
simple and silly things for that purpose, as my thoughts often checked me for
vouchsafing an answer to them, fearing understanding Divines would secretly
think that Brabourne was some Ignoramus, or some vainglorious man, laboring
to gain credit by fighting with a shadow, and confuting what no judicious
Scholar would ^aintaine. I remember that diverse times I took off my Pen to
pause whether I should go on or not, and doubtless I had then broke off, but
that I saw so many of our most zealous Ministers so far from being ashamed of
it, as they with a deal of not zeal maintained it; but I may say of them, as
once Saint Paul said of those superstitious Jews, They have the zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. And as Christ said to the Scribes
and Pharisees, Woe be unto you blind guides, for misleading the devout people
of the Land, Mat. 23. and so I end.

FINIS.

