THE PREACHERS PLEA.

BY DAVJD BRAMLEY, a Preacher of the Gospel.

1 Cor. 14.36. What? came the Word of God out from you? or came it unto you
only?

2 Cor. 4.2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God.

Col. 2.8. Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ.

1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of science falsty so called.

Printed Anno Dom. 1647.

The Epistle to the READER.
Courteous Friend and Reader;
THou know, or may know, how this truth I here present thee with, has
been, and yet is, disapproved of by the most: yet is most true, and approved by
God in his own Word, by which I have proved it; and also by sound natural
reason, with which, two invincible Weapons of the Holy Ghost, I have put to
flight, all Objections that may be made against this Truth: So that I conceive,
he must needs declare himself an Enemy to Christ's Kingdom, void of both grace
and good reason, that is against it.

And whereas men in our days, are diverse and different, touching the Preachers
of the Gospel; some being of opinion, that some of the Saints only may preach
it; that is to say, such only as are Vniversity-Scholers: others, that none at
all may or can preach it. Whereas I, according to my small talent, do hold, and
have declared in this tract, that all, and every of the Saints are called to
preach the Gospel, according to what they have received, and do conceive of
Jesus Christ: And for the better resolving and satisfying of my disscenting
Brethren of each side; I will declare, first the nature of the promising I here
mean, and that in the Treatise following I do speak of. Secondly, I will show
the necessity that there is of such preaching, and both of them by the Word of
God. 1 The nature of the promising or preaching of the Gospel I here mean, is
no other thing then a holding out to others by the Word, that light or
knowledge, that any one apprehends from the Word to be of Christ, according to
that Exhortation, 1 Pet. 4.10 II. As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold graces of
God. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be praise and dominion,
for ever and ever, Amen.

But there is an ordinary (but an unmercinary) objection made by many against
this Doctrine, and it is this; The Gospel is preached by such as were sent to
preach it: And therefore, as there are none sent so by Christ now; so there is
no need, nor no ability in men to preach now, Romans 10.15. Now that I may answer
this the clearer, I will show, 1 what preaching means. 2 how manifold the
preaching of the Gospel is, and both of them by the Word of God. 1. Preaching
is as much as to say, publishing to others what they know not, according to
that of our Savior, Mat. 10.27. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in
light; and what ye hear in the ear that preach ye on the house tops, or publish
ye abroad. So that to declare to others what they know not, is in the Gospels
account preaching. 2 There is a twofold preaching of the Gospel. 1. There was
a preaching of the Gospel by inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3.16, which preaching
is now ceased, To: 10.15. 2. There is a preaching of that which is preached
already, Acts 15.21. Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him
(that is to say, that preach his works, or what he from God had preached
before, Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; that
is, they have the Prophesies of Moses and the Prophets: For Moses and the
Prophets were dead before Christ spoke this, and before he was born. Therefore
it was Moses his Prophesies, that of old time had in every City them that
preach them,) being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day: So that to read
the Scriptures, and to expound them to others, is preaching in the phrase of
Scripture; and thus they preached, Neh. 8.8. So they read in the book of the
Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading: thus our Savior preached, Luke 4.16. -- 21. and 24.7 32. And thus the
Gospel that has been preached by inspiration from God, is to be preached still
by the Saints, till all be perfected, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers (what to do?) for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ (for how long?) til we all
come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man (no member wanting in the body) unto the measure of the stature, or
age of the fullness of Christ, every member being perfected in grace, and for
glory. Now 2. the necessity that there is of the preaching of this Gospel,
appears to be great, as by what has been said already: So likewise by this
that follows, they that live now did not hear the Apostles, Prophets, etc.
when they preached the Gospel: Neither canall that are now alive read what they
have preached and written some having never learned Letters, others being born
blind, and could not learn to read: a third sort could read, but now cannot,
visited with blindness: all which shows the necessity of preaching the Gospel
now to be great, either by reading it, or by speaking from it, by comparing
spiritual things with spiritual things; to wit, the Scripture with it self,
text with text, 1 Cor. 2.13. To: 7.14. Joh. 6.63. Thus you have seen both the
nature and the necessity of the prophesying or preaching, of which I speak and
mean in the tract ensuing. Wherein, I have both by Scripture and Argument
cleared up this truth; that to speak with tongues, is not essential to the
being of a Prophet, or, that divine prophesying is not restrained to humane
learning; and so consequently, that all the Saints are Prophets to preach the
Gospel one to another: for which cause, I call my book, The Preachers Plea,
which I have written according to the measure of my talent, to inform the
Reader: And I do advise thee also to declare it, and thy self for it, for the
information of others with whom thou have to do; which being performed by any,
though by illiterate or unlearned men; be you so far from despising of it for
the Preachers sake, as accept and prize it for the Authors sake: to wit,
Christ: and the less thou see of man in men's preaching; be carried on to see
the more of Christ in it, to the praise of his free grace, by a gracious heart
in the words of grace; saying, Matthew. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them to Babes, even so Father, for so it seems good in thy
sight. Reader, then let it not seem evil in thy sight, that the Babes of
Christ should reveal to one another, and to others what Christ has revealed to
them: For out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings God sounds strength (Psalm.
8:3.) that he might still the Enemy and the Avenger, and that all may learn,
and all be comforted, 1 Cor. 14.30, 31. which is the will of him who is the
husband and head of his body, the Church. In whom I, (a member of his) am
thine, to serve him,

David Bramley.

THE Preachers plea.
1 CORINTHIANS. 14.^. Greater is he that Prophesies, then he that speaks with
Tongues.


THE Apostle Paul knowing the excellency of Tongues, and the benefit that might
(by the blessing of God) redound to the Churches by the right use of them;
inasmuch as they were then of diverse languages, as appears in 1 Cor. 14.26.
and so had need to be instructed every one in his own language, whereby only
they could be edified, appears in the 9.10. and 11. verses: whereupon Paul
says, I would that ye all spoke with Tongues. And this he speaks either to
the Prophets in particular, that they might be able to speak to the
understanding of the Churches ingenerall, who were then of diverse tongues; or
else to the Church ingenerall, that they might every one, as well as any one,
be able to understand the Prophets in what language soever they spoke or
prophesied.

Now Paul likewise seeing the Church ready to abuse this excellent gift of
Tongues to vain ostentation; and withal, ready to prefer it above the gift
of prophesy, the most excellent spiritual gift, being most of all necessary
for the Churches edification: he exhorts them in the first verse, to follow
after charity, and to desire spiritual gifts, but rather that they may
prophecy, and the reason he gives, verse 2, 3 4 as I before did: and then
having showed the excellency of both these gifts (that each might have their
due without offense to either) he shows the excellency of it above the other,
verse 5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye
prophesied: for greater is he that prophesies, then he that speaks with
tongues: as if he had said, to speak with tongues is the most desirable humane
gift; but yet far inferior to prophesying, which is the most excellent
spiritual gift for the Church: For greater is he that prophesies, then he
that speaks with Tongues.

So then these two are distinct gifts, the one humane, the other divine; the
one excellent, the other most excellent; the one necessary for the Churches
edification, the other of absolute necessity; the one may be in the Church, the
other must be: and as tongues may be without prophecy; so may prophecy be
without the tongues. And so the sum of all is this.

Doct. That to speak with tongues is not essential to the being of a Prophet:
Or,

That Divine Prophesying is not restrained to Humane Learning.

This is very clear from the words in the Text, Greater is he that
prophesies, etc. Intimating thus much, that they are two distinct gifts, and
that a man may have the gift of tongues without the gift of prophecy; and that
another may have the gift of prophecy without the tongues. Yea the same is
also specified in the 39. verse, where the Apostle says, Brethren, covet to
prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues. And in 1 Cor. 12.10. to
another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of
spirtts, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of
tongues. Likewise verse 28, 29, 30. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles; secondarily, Prophets; thirdly, Teachers: and after that, miracles,
then gifts of healings, helps in Government, diversities of tongues; where he
shows by way of order, both the dignity and distinction of gifts; and among
many, those of Prophecy, and speaking with Tonngues.

Then he goes on by way of quaere: Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all
Teachers? Are all workers of miracles? Have all the gifts of healing? Do all
speak with tongues? Do all interpret? So that it is very clear, that to
speak with tongues, is not essential to the being of a Prophet.

Now the reasons why divine prophesying is not restrained to humane learning,
may be these:

Reas. 1. Because prophesying is the greater gift: For, greater is he that
prophesies, etc. Now the greater may not, nor must not be restrained to the
lesser; but the lesser to the greater: the greater is not tied to the
approbation of the lesser; but the lesser to the approbation of the greater.
And without all contradiction, The less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7.
Matthew. 23.17.19.

Reas. 2. Because prophecy is one of the capital fruits and benefits of
Christ's victory and ascension, derived to his Church, as in Ephesians. 4.8.13.
Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men: And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Wherefore divine prophesying cannot be restrained unto humane learning.

Reas. 3. Because prophesying is restrained to the gift of God only, Romans
10.15. How shall they preach except they be sent? And in Heb. 5.4. No man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Reas. 4. Because no true Prophet (though never so profound a Scholar in humane
learning) ever did, or will preach, or prophecy by virtue of his humane
learning, nor will take upon him to preach the Gospel because of it; but by
virtue, and because of his spiritual illumination, and sanctification by the
Spirit thereunto; and so Paul prophesied and preached Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
14.18. there, says he, I thank God, I speak with tongues more then you all:
yet Paul prophesied not by virtue hereof, but only by the grace of God that
was in him. Compare this place with 1 Cor. 15.10. where he says, By the grace
of God I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in
vain, but I labored more abundantly then they all: (and lest any should yet
conceive he did any thing in the ministry by or of himself, he adds) yet
not I, but the grace of God which was with me: wherefore to speak with tongues,
or humane learning, is not essential to the being of a Prophet.

Reas. 5. Our own blessed experience in the times wherein we live; in which
the Lord is pleased in a very large measure to make good his promise this very
way even to us, as to his Church in former time, as was prophesied by Joel in
his second chapter, v. 16, 17. which was accomplished and fulfilled upon the
Apostles, as appears Acts 2.16, 17, 18. All which I say, is made good unto us
in our time: For do we not (or at least may we not) hear even illiterate men
speak in our own tongue, the wonderful works of God? Acts 2.11. Of whose
prophesying (in respect of what Prophets were heretofore) we may say as it was
said of Christ by the Scribes. Matthew. 7.^9. That as Christ, so his people now
teach, as having authority, and not as the Scribes. Wherefore divine
prophesying is not restrained to humane learning.

Object. We read in 2 Pet. 1.20. that no prophecy of Scripture is of any
private interpretation: wherefore private men, which are unskilled in the
Languages and Sciences, are not to preach or prophecy.

Ans. 1. If this be so expounded, then of necessity you must conclude, that
Peter has sealed up the little book, which is no other but the Gospel which
Peter's Master, and our Lord Jesus, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, has opened
to all the illiterate people, as well as to the greatest Clerks, if not more
fully: For if illiterate men may not adventure the expounding of what they
read, to gain the sense and true meaning thereof as they read, they were better
not read at all. And whosoever dares maintain this opinion, is not only guilty
of slandring the truth of Christ, but does also submit to the Pope; whose
subtilty it is (as much as in him lies) to seal up by his Chaplains and
Ministers what Christ has unsealed and opened; to the very end that all his
people, great and small, bond and free, may freely read, expound, and edify
thereby.

Secondly, that this exposition of the words of Peter is false, and they (how
profound in learning soever) do hereby discover themselves to be but private
persons, unable to interpret the prophesies of Scripture, will thus appear;
because by private interpretation of Scripture, is meant, first, that we are
not to limit or restrain the end, aim, or purpose of any scripture to any
particular private man only, but that it concerns, and speaks as well to all
and every one, as any one; as our Savior seems to hold forth in that one
expression, Mark 13.37. And what I say unto you, I say unto all. Secondly,
because by private interpretation is meant also, that the Spirit of God has no
one particular meaning only in any one prophecy of Scripture, but has many
meanings, and all truths, linked (as a golden chain) one in and with another,
as is clear by 2 Timothy 3.16. where the Apostle says, All Scripture is given by
divine inspiration of God, and is profitable (For what?) for one thing only?
Surely no: but for every thing; for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in righteousness. Thirdly, because by private interpretation of
Scripture, is meant the Interpretation thereof without the Spirit of God: For
all interpretation of Scripture (though it be by great ones, public persons
in a Commonwealth, or by learned ones, by Councels or by multitudes of them;
yet if they be but mere natural men, void of the Spirit of God, their own
interpretation of Scripture is but private, and for the most part false, 1 Cor.
2.11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a man that
is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. So
that no man that has not the Spirit of God, can know the things of God
contained in the Scripture, any more then one man can know what is the heart or
mind of another. Now as a man may by chance conjecture or guess what is the
mind or thought of another man, (as oftentimes men do;) even so by chance a
natural man, or men, may know or decern the mind of God in the Scripture, and
many times they do; yet it is by chance: and although carnal men that have
nothing of God in them at all, have preached many truths; yet it has not been
by themselves, but only by the light of gracious men that have interpreted the
Scriptures by the Spirit of God unto them. So that the interpretation of
Scripture by men public or private, learned or unlearned, without the Spirit
of God, is private interpretation; and all interpretation of Scripture by men
public or private, high or low, rich or poor, young or old, one or many, with
and by the Spirit of God, is public and warrantable interpretation: for that
Spirit is truth in whom it is, it neither deceives nor is deceived. Both of
these are true and clear, as is made clear by the same Apostle in the
following words, (verse the last) which are a reason of the former, and runs
thus: For (says he) the Prophesies came not in old time by the will of man,
(but by the will of God:) For holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy
Spirit: which holy Spirit only knows its own mind in the prophesies of
Scripture; and holy men of God only can constantly and truly interpret the
prophesies as they, are moved by the holy Spirit: wherefore to speak with
tongues, is not essential to the being of a Prophet, nor is divine prophesying
restrained to humane learning.

Object. 2. We rean in 2 Pet 3.16. where the Apostle speaking about Paul's
Epistles, says, In which are some things hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures,
to their own destruction: Therefore to speak with tongues is essential to the
being of a Prophet, and divine prophesying is restrained to humane learning.

Answer. The Apostle there speaks of some of the Church which doubted and
questioned the truth of Gods promise; as is plain verse 15. and he in this 16.
verse reproves them for it, and shows them the ground of their doubting, which
was, their weakness in grace, or faith, and then laboring to beat them off
from impatience, and to confirm them in the promise of God by faith, he sets
before them a president of their doubting condition, to wit, Those that are
unlearned, etc. that is, unsanctified and untaught of Christ. Now that it is
so, the next word (Unstable) shows. Now who are unstable, wrenching the
Scriptures to their own destruction, but only those that are unsanctified,
that had never learned Christ? Jam, 1.8. A double-minded man is unstable in all
his ways: therefore it is not the want of humane learning, but the want of
grace that is the cause of men's wrenching the Scripture to their own
destruction.

Moerover, if Peter, by unlearned, meant such as had no human learning, then he
should here have excluded himself as well as many others from the
understanding and saving use of the Scriptures; For he was unlearned in that
respect, himself, Act. 4.13. and then how durst he to have adventured upon
Paul's Epistles, and the other Scriptures (as he did in that place of the
objection) lest he should wrench them to his own destruction? Therefore by
learning, he means divine learning only, and so excludes none but natural,
unsanctified men from the right and saving use of the Scriptures.

Object. Though Peter was not bled a scholar, and had not human learning, yet
both he and the rest of the unlearned Apostles, had the tongues given them from
heaven by miracle, or miraculously, to teach us thus much, that to speak with
Tongues is essential to the being of a Prophet or a Teacher.

Answer. To speak with Tongues now, is not as it was then by the unlearned
Apostles: in them then, it was a miracle, with us, none, but is common: nor is
there now a necessity to speak with tongues (by way of miracle wrought from
heaven) as the Apostles did, because with us there is not now the same use of
it. For first, the Apostles had then to do with Heathens, who would not have
believed their report, nor their word to have been of God, unless they had
spoken miraculously: and so not the tongues, but the miraculous speaking with
them from heaven, was the very cause that made many of them to believe, and
with wonderful astonishment to acknowledge God in it, as appears in Act.
2.11, 12. We do hear them speak in our own tongues, the wonderful works of
God, and they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one unto another, What
means this? whereas, we live in a time wherein there is not that necessity
for speaking with tongues miraculously from heaven to confirm the Scripture we
preach; because all amongst us, and to whom we preach, do (at least in a
common way) believe the Scriptures which we hold out to them, to be the word of
God: and if they did not, and if there were any such necessity now as was then,
I doubt not but God would now confirm it by miracle, either by miraculous
speaking with tongues now, as he did then, or else by some other way by
miracle: wherefore, (as Saint Paul says) this manner of speaking with tongues,
is out of date, with us in this time, 1 Cor. 14.21.22. With men of other
tongues, and other lips, will I speak unto this people, and yet for all that
they will not hear me, says the Lord. Wherefore (says he) tongues are for a
sign not to them that believe, but to them that believe not; but prophesying
serves not only for them that believe not, but also for them that believe. And
therefore as the Apostles miraculously speaking with tongues from heaven, made
Infidels that believed not the Word, to believe it, and to acknowledge God in
it: so on the contrary this should be a miracle to us that do believe the
Word, to make us the more to believe and to admire and acknowledge Gods power
in the weakness of illiterate and unlearned men prophesying and preaching with
great power the glorious word of Jesus Christ. Secondly, the Apostles were to
teach all Nations, Matthew. 28.19, 20. who were of diverse Languages; and
therefore they must of necessity speak with tongues to the understanding of all
Nations; whereas we speak or preach but to our own Nation, and they all
speaking our own Language.

Answer 2. Though Peter and the rest of the Apostles that were unlearned, had
the tongues miraculously, Act. 2.4. yet they had not the Languages as an
habitual or perpetual quality imprinted in them, as the Languages are in
those that have them by study and practice; but only whiles they were speaking
or preaching to men and people of those Languages, and was only an actual
gift which showed it self when the motion of the holy Spirit came upon them.
seconding their sanctified desires, as is very probable, 1 Cor. 14.18. where
Paul says, I thank my God I speak with Tongues more then you all; yet Peter
with the rest of the unlearned Apostles, spoke with as many tongues as learned
Paul himself, Act. 2.12. But now this is a Paradox, yea, a contradiction, and
how shall these two Scriptures be reconciled, you will say? I answer thus, Paul
spoke with tongues more then they all, yet not speaking more tongues or
languages then Peter and the rest: but as speaking those tongues constantly,
without intermission, they being in him an habitual perpetual quality, gained
by hard and tedious study and practice, as they are learned in our days; which
Peter and the other unlearned Apostles, that spoke tongues by the inspiration
of the holy Spirit, did not, being at other times ignorant of them, Acts 22.3.
and understanding and speaking them only when and whilst they had to do with
people of those tongues. And as God always put the Word into their mouths
what they should speak, so he gave them the tongue or language in which they
should speak it to the understanding of the hearers of what Nation or Language
soever: And therefore the unlearned Apostles, Peter and the rest, had not the
tongues in an extraordinary way to understand the Scriptures by, but only to
speak to the understanding of those to whom they preached the Scriptures.

Answer 3. Although Peter and the rest of the unlearned Apostles amongst other
tongues, spoke also the learned tongues of the Hebrew, Greek, etc, which our
learned men now speak, yet in them these tongues were not humane, as they are
in us that learn them of men; but divine, having learned them of God only,
Acts 26.4. and 1 Cor. 12.10. Therefore those Apostles and others had not the
tongues humane, neither had they any humane learning when they could speak the
tongues Compare Acts 24. with chap. 4.13.

Answer. 4. Peter and the rest of the Apostles had not humane learning, though
they could sometimes speak the learned tongues, because humane learning
consists not so much in the Languages as in the Sciences. It is possible and
usual for men to speak the languages and tongues, and yet be no Scholars: and
again, it is possible and usual for men to be able Scholars in respect of the
learned Sciences, and Arts, and yet not able to speak with Tongues. And the
pith and marrow of humane learning, is the right understanding and knowledge of
the Arts, which I am sure Peter never learned, as he never learned the Tongues.
Therefore we cannot gather from the example of Peter, speaking with tongues
miraculously by inspiration of God, that to speak with tongues is essential to
the being of a Prophet, or that divine prophesying is restrained to humane
learning.

Object. 3.. Our Translation of the Bible is not according to the original,
but is corrupted, and in many places contrary to the Testament in the Hebrew
and the Greek; and therefore, though in the primitive times, to speak with
tongues more then wherein the Scriptures were written, was not essential to
the being of a Prophet; yet notwithstanding, now it is, because our translation
of the Bible is naught, and the Hebrew and Greek are the original, in which
the Scriptures were first written.

Answer 1. For my part, I conceive that our English translation of the Bible is
but little differing (if any thing at all) from the original Copies: for I do
believe that God that was good and careful to commit unto his people as much
of his will as was necessary for them to know and serve him by, and to bring
them (through Jesus Christ) to eternal glory, John 20.30, 31. would not be
less careful to preserve it to his people to the end, Matthew. 5.18. 1 Pet.
1.25. And to these Scriptures I will add one main Reason, proving the
Scriptures that we have and hold, to be Canonical, and by divine inspiration;
and it is because godly men would not devise or indite and write a fiction, for
truth, to delude and deceive men by. 2. Wicked men, Gods enemies, to wit,
Antichrist and others, did not devise or indite our Bible, because it yields
them no footing for their ways, but is altogether against their Tenants, so
far as they are against Jesus Christ; and it is wholly and only for Jesus
Christ: whereas if it were the study and work of wicked men, Antichrist and
others of Christ's enemies, they would have made it so, as to, serve their own
turns, as we see they have always, and do still labor with all their wits,
policy and power, to wrench and rend the Scriptures to make them for
Antichrist, and against Jesus Christ: Therefore, our Bible is the word of God.
But now, if in our Translation there be any corruption by the means of
ignorance, or malice of Antichrist, through altering, adding, or diminishing of
matters of smallest consequence (fundamentals being always so clear to the
eyes, and so clearly eyed by the Saints of all ages, that they could not be
corrupted by the cunning of the enemy. Neither do I believe God would suffer
it to be done, nor has he suffered it: for not only in our Bible, but also in
our translation of it, Christ only is exalted) yet it is clear, that the
understanding Saints are able in due time to find it out, and to discover it.
Read Psalm. 25.9. Ioh. 7.17. and 8.31, 32. and 10.4, 5, and 14.21. 1 Cor. 2.10,
12, 15, 16. And for the Saints easier and surer proceeding in their preaching,
or expounding and discovering of the truths of the Scriptures; let them always
observe this short Rule: Consider the place of Scripture thou art upon, thus;
1. Who writ it: 2. To whom it was written: 3. When it was written: 4. Why it
was written, and then expound it so, and draw such conclusions from it, as will
most of all magnify God in his several Attributes and Merits by showing man
his own nothingnesse and misery by nature, or fall in Adam, with his happiness
in or by Christ only; and with the preservation of the analogy, agreement,
harmony, and oneness of the Scriptures, that there be no jarring nor discord,
but concord by the exposition. Thus a godly man (observing this brief and
plain rule in the opening of the Scriptures) may be able to come to know and to
preach the very mind of the holy Spirit in the Scriptures.

Answer 2. It is probable, and as likely, that the Bible in all languages and
Tongues, is as corrupt as in our Translation or Tongue; and it was as easy to
corrupt the Testament in the Hebrew and Greek, as it was to corrupt the^ in our
English tongue, or in any other language. And it is as likely that Antichrist
has (as much as in him lay) poisoned the Scriptures as well in the Hebrew and
Greek tongues, as in ours or in any other tongue. Wherefore the corruption of
our or any other translation of the Bible, makes not the speaking with tongues
to be essential to the being of a Prophet: For though we may have the
original tongues of the Bible, yet we have not the original Copies.

Answer 3. If the Testaments in the Hebrew and Greek, are uncorrupted as we
have them now, then neither is the speaking with tongues essential to the
being of a Prophet, if our English translation be undoubtedly corrupt, because
we have all the Scriptures translated into English, according to the Testaments
now in the Hebrew and Greek, some by one written, and some another; and
therefore, to speak with tongues, is not essential to the being of a Prophet,
nor is divine prophesying restrained to humane learning.

Answer 4. Besides, if the Testaments in their original tongues (as is by the
most conceived we have them) are as true, divine and authentic, as the
original copies were; yet to speak with those tongues, is not essential to the
being of a Prophet; because when men do preach to the illiterate and unlearned,
they have no more ground to believe what is said from the originals, then they
have ground from what others have said from the originals before them, who have
been as honest, and as able, as men are now, and have labored faithfully to
translate the Bible out of the original tongues. And if any now amongst us, are
able to amend our translation, if they be as honest, and as able, they will do
it, or at least labor to do it, not only by parcels in the Pulpit, but also
wholly; and also for the satisfaction and benefit of all; whereby there will
then be no need of tongues to the understanding of Scripture; and if any can so
do, and account their pains too great to effect so great a good, they are not
to be accounted faithful in that which is least (to wit) in what they in a
Pulpit by parcels deliver (as they say) from the original, to the illiterate
people; and if men may not believe what able and faithful men afore-time have
spoken and written from the original tongues, how shall they believe what any
particular man says from them now in a Pulpit? wherefore, to speak with
tongues, is no more essential to the being of a Prophet, then they are to the
being of a Christian.

Answ. 5. Again, if to speak the original tongues of the Scriptures, be
essential to the being of a Prophet; then, as well any one of those tongues,
as all of them, is essential to the being of a Prophet: whence it will follow,
that there is not a true Prophet or Preacher to be found in all the world, much
less in England; for there is not one man in England, nor, in all the world,
that can speak all the original tongues, wherein all the Scriptures in the New
Testament were spoken and written: neither do men now know those tongues:
probably, they were those tongues, which the Apostles spoke by divine
revelation specified, Act. 2. which miracle of speaking with tongues, there was
not, as I conceive, only to confirm what they were to speak; but also to speak
to the understanding of all Nations, that they were to speak or preach to; that
is, that they might be able to preach to every people in their own language, as
they did; as appears, Act. 12. and that this was Saint Paul's practice,
appears in the 1 Cor. 14.18, 19 I thank God I speak with tongues more then you
all; yet in the Church, I had rather speak five words with my understanding,
that by my voice, I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an
unknown tongue; and as he spoke to the Churches, so doubtless he wrote to the
Churches in a known tongue also, that he might teach them in that way also,
which out of all question, was likewise the practice of all the rest of the
Apostles. Now who can tell me what were the tongues that Paul spoke, and
wherein he wrote to the Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians,
Philipians, Colssioans, Thessalonians, and also to Timotheus, Titus, Philemon,
and to the Hebrews; and likewise in what tongue St. James his Epistle was
written first, and St. Peter's Epistles, and St. John's 3. Epistles, and St.
Iudes? Besides, I would fain know in what tongue, or tongues, the said St. John
wrote the Revelation to the 7. Churches in Asia, Revel. 1.4. If any can
infallibly tell me, then I ask, who is that one man that can speak all those
tongues, and write the same languages, wherein those Epistles were first spoken
and written by the Apostles? but there is no such man in all the world, much
less in England: and therefore, if to speak with the tongues, wherein the
Scriptures were written and spoken by the Apostles, be essential to the being
of a Prophet, or Preacher of the Gospel in England; then is there no Prophet or
Preacher of the Gospel in England, nor yet in the world: but there are true
Prophets and Preachers in the world, and in England that have not the tongues,
as well as they that have them: therefore, to speak with tongues is not
essential to the being of a Prophet.

Obj. 6. We read in the 1 of Cor. 14.5. in the same verse, where the words run
thus, I would that you all spoke with tongues: but rather that you prophesied
for greater, is he that prophesies, then he that speaks with tongues, except
he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying; therefore, etc.

Answ. This is not at all against what is laid down; for all that St. Paul
holds forth unto us here, is briefly this: namely, that it is a good thing to
speak with tongues, but that it is far better to prophecy: and that it is best
of all to speak with tongues, and prophecy too in that sense; he there
means, as you will plainly see, if you do well ponder the words: Besides,
Paul in the 18. verse, is so far from contemning the tongues, that he blesses
God even for this, that he spoke with tongues more then they all; and in the
39. verse, he says, Brethren, covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with
tongues: So that all St. Paul holds forth, here; is, that to speak with
tongues, is excellent in his sense, and that prophesying is more excellent, and
that they are two distinct gifts, and that where they meet together, they are
most sweet and excellent and so humane learning is an excellent servant or
handmaid to prophesying, when it is rightly employed in its right station; for
as in the building of the material temple of God, he made use of humane Arts
in their time and place: so our humane learned arts may be used in their time
and place for the building of the spiritual temple; provided, that they be not
used as of necessity, but only as convenient, 2 Cor. 12.16.

Now in the building of the material temple, all humane arts and sciences were
used in the woods and quarries, in digging, felling, hewing, squaring and
fitting all materials for that building: so that when all the materials were
brought together to the place appointed, the whole Fabric was erected and
finished, without so much as the noise of a hammer, 1 Kings 6.7. and the house
when it was in building, was built of stone, made ready before it was brought
thither; so that there was neither hammer nor axe, nor any tool of Iron heard
in the house while it was building.

Even so in the building of the Spiritual Temple, let us use all our humane
Arts and Sciences (as convenient, and no more, in the quarries and woods; that
is to say, in our closets and studies, where, by the Spirit of God, let us fit
our matter or Sermons, that when we come to assay to build, and set up the
Temple of Christ thereby, there may appear nothing of man, but all of God: and
that there may appear nothing at all of our selves, but all of Christ; and that
there may not appear nor be heard so much as the blow of an hammer or axe of
humane learning, but all of the holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.18, 19. and the 1. and
the 17.20. to the 29. So that humane learning, or the Tongues and Arts
sanctified, is excellent, and prophesying much more excellent, but both
together most excellent: yet so too, that to speak with tongues is not
essential to the being of a Prophet, or that divine prophesying is not
restrained to Humane Learning.

Thus, the Doctrine being cleared; the Uses thereof, are briefly these.

Use 1.

It may be this, to tell England of her great Idol and Idolatry, in Idolizing
Humane Learning, which has been so abused; that there is great cause to cry
down the blame of our Nation in this particular: for so has Humane Learning
been abused amongst us by the idolizing of it, that we have not only made it
equal with prophecy, but prophecy it self: So that without it a man though
never so gracious and able to preach Christ, was with the consent of our whole
Nation, and with their general power restrained: Whereas another, that had
Humane Learning, though he were as black as Hell, and as profane as the
Devil; yet was ordained, entertained, and honored as the Minister and
Preacher of Jesus Christ:

And sometime, when there has been such a profane Scholar to be ordained
Minister by a Bishop, and some amongst us have been ready to except against
him, as unfit, in regard of his profaneness;

There was commonly this answer made: why? he is a Scholar, and has taken
degrees in the University, etc. as if a University profane Scholar were
without all exception a Prophet of Christ. whilst others gracious in the eyes
of Christ and his People, (...) able to hold forth the truths of God, have been
scorned, rejected, and contemned, and their graces as it were trod and
trampled upon; for no other cause, but this, that they were no scholars, and
wanted humane learning, or were not University-men, and the like.

Use 2. Is to exhort all our learned Prophets, that they be so far from
endeavoring to seal up the mouths, and suppressing the graces of our
Prophets, which speak not the tongues; that they do their diligence rather to
open their mouths, and unlose their tongues, and encourage the^ in the holding
forth of Jesus Christ, who holds himself out to all, that all that are gifted
and graced by his spirit, might also hold him forth to others; and let it not
be accounted any disgrace to any of the learned* that poor illiterate men,
which should preach and spread the glory of God our Savior, remember the
modest words and carriage of Moses, that Prophet of the Lord, in his answer to
Joshua, and the young man that brought tidings that Eldad and Medad prophesied
in the Camp, and bad Moses to forbid them, Numb. 11.26, 27, 29. and Moses said
unto him; enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them; which teaches us
thus much, that a true Prophet of the Lord will not for any by-ends envy the
gifts of God in others, nor desire the obscure, but to discover them; wishing,
all, as well as some of the Lords people were Prophets; not by putting
University, Arts but: by putting the Apostles approbation in the New Testament,
is this, 1 Cor. 14.31. Ye may prophecy all one by one, that all may learn and
all may be comforted, all may prophecy; that is, all the Prophets, to wit, all
that God has endued with the Spirit of Prophecy: for there is no restraint,
observing their time and order one by one: Wherefore, let none dare to forbid
prophecy, where God himself commands, and his Word gives both freedom and
allowance; for further proof, read Act. 8.4.

Use 3. It may serve now at length, to call England to give God the glory of
his grace, by acknowledging and approving this, that out of the mouths of very
Babes and Sucklings, God has founded strength; as it is in the Hebrew, Psalm.
8.2. And says the Apostle, it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent; where is the wise?
wheris the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? For, after that in the
wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe: because the foolishness
of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men, and
God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God
has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are
mighty, and base things of the world, and things that are despised has God
chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught, 2 Timothy 2 7.
things that are (consider what the Lord says, and the same Lord give you
understanding in all things) now the reason of all you have at last; that is,
that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 21, 25, 27, 28, 29.

Use 4. Is to confute the desperate folly of many men, if not most men, in
making prophecy a humane thing; and therefore have appointed their sons unto
it, as unto a trade, to live by as thus when their children are yet young, they
have resolved what callings or trades to put them to; the eldest happily to be
a Lawyer; the second to be a Physician, or a Surgeon; the third a Merchant,
or the like, and commonly the youngest, especially, if he were in any part
deformed, should be a Minister, that should be his trade; concluding it to be
in his power, to make him a Minister, by putting him out for a time to the
University, and paying for his learning; as if the gift of God might be bought
with money; a cursed thought indeed, and a damnable ignorant conclusion; and
let such men look back, and see the effect of it, and tremble at the example of
Simon Magus, Act, 8.20, 21, 22, and 23, v. But Peter said unto him, Thy money
perish with thee, because thou thoughtest that the gift of God may be purchased
with money, thou have neither part nor let in this business; for thine heart
is not right in the sight of God: Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and
pray God, if it be possible, if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be
forgiven thee; for I perceive, that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the bond of iniquity.

Use 5. Is for encouragement of all those to whom the Lord has given the
spirit of Prophecy, to improve their gifts for the best advantage of the
Church of Christ and his glory, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. having then gifts differing
according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry;
or he that teaches on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation,

Use 6. It is a use of excellent comfort to all the people of God; for though
outward gifts and all means thereof may fail, yet there is a spirit of
Prophecy left to all the People of God, by which they shall be made able to
know so much of the mind of God, as shall be sufficient to sanctify them here,
and to make them eternally haypy hereafter: So that to speak with tongues, is
not essential to the being of a Prophet; nor is divine prophecy restrained to
humane learning.

POSTSCRIPT.
Isaiah 29.11, 12. And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a
book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read
this I pray thee: and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed.

And the Book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I
pray thee: and he says, I am not learned.

Rev. 5, 1, 2. And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the Throne, a
Book written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.

And I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a loud voice: Who is worthy to open
the Books, and to lose the seals thereof?

FINIS.

