THE NEW EARTH, OR, The True MAGNA CHARTA OF The past AGES, and of the AGES or
World to come: CALLED The JEWS COMMONWEAL. Written by an unworthy witness of
the truth of the great God, JOHN BRAIN.

Isa. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sake: he will
magnify the law, and make it honorable. printer's device of Richard Moon,
featuring a crescent moon with a face, and seven stars Richard in Paul's Church
Yard At The



London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1653.

To the Supreme Authority, THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
THe men without law, that is, the Nations to whom God had not given the
knowledge thereof, were a law unto themselves, and made laws of their own,
wherein one man became as a God to another; but we which have the law of God,
and use it not as a law, are indeed in a kind as those Gentiles were,
altogether without it, or worse, who by our traditions (for so indeed are
humane laws) have made void the laws of God, Mat. 15.6. (...): thus the
Pharisees had unauthorized the law of God before us. Concerning the ceremonial
law, Mar. 7.8. and the moral law, v. 10, 11, 12. by which then, as now, the
word of God was made of none effect, v. 13. and was committed in many things,
besides these particulars that are set down and expressed, when man and not God
reigns: nor does God, whiles his laws judge us not, judge, but man; the law
of the Nation, and not of God: until men are judged by Gods law, judgment is
not the Lords, but Justinians, Gratians, or other men's; upon which the people
employ their time and study: but if Gods laws were set up among us, by his
Bible or Statute book, every man would easily become a lawyer; where no acts
are ever to be repealed, but outlast those of the Medes and Persians. No word
must be added or diminished; there is therein no more or less then should be;
so full has God made it, to govern by, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2, 6, 8. the Ruler of the
people was to have it always by him, and not to turn from the right hand or the
left, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. It was the excuse of the Heathens, they knew not the
law to make use thereof; it was the wickedness of the Papacy, that it was not
used therein, though they knew it, they well seeing, that both they and their
practice were under the condemnation thereof; and that they had no authority
thence to set up themselves, and Lord it over the world, putting themselves in
the place of God, without God.

But ye, O ye Princes of the people, into whose hearts God put it to give
assurances to the nation that your desire is to make it happy, which the Lord
tells you consists in setting up Gods law, Romans 9.4. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8. God has
laid engagements on you, as on his people of old, Deuteronomy. 4.24. though other
alterations in the State were troublesome, God will prosper you in this and in
your undertakings; for this, remember ye have the engagements of men upon you,
and of God on you, and of vows made to God on your own souls. O what shall or
can hinder! you need not fit a day to do it, it is done for you to a word, in
the word: until when, nationally we are not the people of God. Iam. 4.12.
tells us there is but one lawgiver; consider then what it is to give a law
that is not according to Gods, especially when we have the law by us, and are
not to go to heaven or beyond the Seas for it; and I pray consider, that the
Gentiles, Romans 2. though they had laws of their own to judge by, yet not having
Gods law, they are said to be without law: and observe well thence what God may
say of us, our law and judgment. Do, O do as Josiah did, 2 Kings 23.2, 3.
bring forth the law, do you and your people make a covenant, and all the
people, with God, to restore and obey the law in the commands, the statutes,
and judgments thereof; so shall no injustice nor oppression be used in the
land; this is the New Earth which the Saints even in the Apostles days days
looked for, in which dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. the Romans having
destroyed that government before, and has lain hid to this day in the word;
until which, the foundations of judgment and justice being out of course,
though you are never so wise, just, and willing to do the nation good, ye
cannot, for the foundations are out of course, and what can the righteous do?
says David. And let not the cry of the Prophet take hold of you, Psalm. 119.16.
Up, Lord, for men have made void thy law. Examine, I pray, if your laws have
not in some kind made void Gods laws, which is the greatest guilt of a nation
that may be, under which we have layn ever since we had the knowledge of it
amongst us. Give me leave to tell you, It is not enough you have put down the
power and authority, but you must put down the rule of the fourth Monarchy
also, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.24. O that ye might be honored of God,
to put down that, and set up the Lord, and not your own, when indeed ye shall
be healers of the nation, and restorers of the paths to walk in; on which I
beseech you to look, as on that is Gods work, and your chiefest duty to set up
judges in the right place of judgment; that they judge according to the law,
that judgment may be indeed the Lords, and they called gods; in which you
shall do more for the nation then all the Parliaments ever were; and deliver
your own souls, make prosperous the people, establish authority and rule,
compose the differences in being among us, and make the people one; for it must
be God that must make those of one house, much more those of one nation to
agree, whereby ye may only do it: to which I leave you, and pray the Lord to
help you and direct you therein, and remain

A faithful servant and well-wisher of you all in the Lord, John Brain.

THE foundation of all the gracious dealings of God with men, has always been
laid and began in or with Covenants; in which God takes a people, as a man a
woman, and espouseth them to himself, Exodus 19.8. and 24.3. and 7. where in
stead of the blood of the sacrifice, we have Christ to make it in.

1. There is the first covenant; the Mediator or Minister thereof was Moses;
which was legal, and made with all the people, That they should keep the
commandments, the Statutes, and Judgments set down in the books of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2, 3, 5. and verse. 27. The blessings of this covenant were temporal,
for this life: when it was broken, temporal blessings were withdrawn. The Kings
of Israel, as Josiah (2 Kin. 23.2, 3.) renewed it, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. 2
Kings 11.17. And another then this legal covenant, was not made with the Nation
or people of the Jews, by Moses, Jer. 7.22, 23, 24. Josh. 8. ult. 2 Cor.
3.14.15.

2. There was a new covenant; in which, not Moses, but Christ is the Mediator;
which is a better covenant, having not the law written in tables of stone, but
in the heart, Heb. 8.10. which had better promises, verse. 6. and Christ said to
be a Priest of good things to come: which was only made with believers in the
Lord Jesus Christ, in whom the law is kept only and indeed; in shadow of which,
God, after covenanting with him in the Mosaical covenant, he gave Aarons
Priesthood, from Exodus 25. to the end.

Note. As a Nation cannot subsist without rule and government, in any order,
nor be without food and raiment, nor continue or remain, if God curse them,
and bless them not; so it is necessary for these, that a National Covenant be
made with God by us, for the binding our selves to God, to keep his
commandments, Statutes, and Judgments; and is as necessary for us, as ever it
was for the Jews: by which God becomes engagedly the God of a Nation, and they
again his people, and not nationally as before: for, by the new covenant, God
is not the God of a nation, but of believers only in a nation, joined to
Christ in the way of the Gospel.

Object. The New covenant implies, God has made the first Old; and that which
decays and waxes old, is ready to vanish, Heb. 8.13.

Resp. As Christ and Moses destroyed not one another, nor the Gospel destroys
not the law: so nor does one covenant destroy another, nor is the first
covenant old, but to those only that are in the second; in which the first is
as it were swallowed up or received into: But to those that are only under the
first, To them the first is so, as if there were not a second; and those under
the second are so under that, as if the first were not.

Note. Men are to be first under the first, or Sinai; and thence come to Sion,
Heb. 12.18, 22. and so Moses is a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, Gal.
4.24. Romans 9.4. Heb. 9.15. and 12.18, 24.

Illust. As in the beginning of the government of the Jews Commonweal, there was
a rule set up for Judgment among the people, called judicial laws, to govern
them by, in which was the Kingly government of God, and the law called the
Royal: and there was likewise the Levitical Law, which appertained to the
service of the tabernal, in which Christ's Priesthood was set out, in things
appertaining to God for the people; which distinct estates are in a kind
reserved among us this day in the Church and State, As in Moses and Aaron: so
now should it be Moses and Christ.

But the Romans conquering Judea, according to the prophecy, Genesis 49.10. they
put down their rule and government, that they could put no man to death.
Judgment was now altered into the customs of the heathens, and there ever
since it has continued: and no nation in the world ever since taking God, or
God taking them to be his people, as of old; though lately we (in a wrong way)
seemed to do it: for at the renewing of the covenant, the law and the statutes
and judgments were only read, and the people engaging themselves to keep them
a never did any Gospel Church do any such thing, nor shall ever do it, nor were
they the Church-paterns. Antichrists mark is set down to be (2 These. 2.8.) one
that is (...) (...) without law; that is, he exercises not the law of God
(...) up the covenant of the law; but brings all the world and (...) to one
estate: which if he had not done, or if we do not do, we shall find the one is
as necessary among men in the world, as the other in the Church. And hence
Antichrists workings are called the mystery (...) of lawlesness, by whom the
laws administrations are destroyed.

Object. If we have this covenant, we must have circumcision.

Resp. The Apostle clears it, Gal. 3.17. The covenant that was confirmed (in
circumcision) before of God in Christ, the law which was four hundred and
thirty years after, cannot disannul. Now this covenant I speak of, is
distinguished from that, by Moses, thus, Deuteronomy. 5.3. The Lord made not this
covenant with our fathers, but with us (in Horeb) even us, who are all of us
alive this day. John 7.22. Moses gave you you circumcision, not because it is
of Moses, but of the fathers.

Quest. If this covenant be not sufficient to make men capable of baptism, and
whether men were not circumcised by this?

Resp. Men were not circumcised by this, but that other covenant spoke of Deuteronomy.
5.3. and was long before this.

2. Baptism belongs to the second, not first covenant; in which God becomes our
God, not by doing, but believing; not by works, but grace; not in Moses, but
Christ.

Object. The Apostles required not this in their time.

Resp. 2 Pet. 3.13. They looked for a New Earth, that is, a restoration of that
administration of the law to be; but not until the fall of Antichrists rule
and government, being of the fourth Monarchy.

2. The law was for the worlds government; that that they did, concerned the
Church, and the new covenant only, and not the world, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 14,
15, Nehem. 8.1, 2, 3, 4.

Note. Both covenants are necessary, when they may be had; and without the
covenants, is no promise, Ephesians. 2.12. the heathens were Aliens from the civil
estate of Israel (Beza) and strangers from the covenant of promise, speaking of
them both. And thus it is with us this day.

Of Judges.
Note. The Lord has promised he will restore Judges as at the first, Isa.
1.26. and, in them, judgment: and it was the great wrath of God, that they
were taken away out of the midst of the people, Amos 2.3. and would it not be
a mercy if this people might have them, that never had them, as at the first?
The first were of Gods institution, and best; those of other forms since, of
men, and far worse. O let our Judges be as at the first.

Moses, the first of Judges, by Jethro's advice, Exodus 18.16. dissolved
Monarchy in rule, laying it down, for his own and the peoples ease: God
consenting thereunto, gave the people laws to be governed, and Judges to govern
them by; who are described to the people, Exodus 18.22. that they choose not
amiss: who in the beginning of the government, and after, were chosen of the
people, Deuteronomy. 1.13. and 16.18. for which service men may be easily fitted, in
that the law was daily read in the Synagogues, which was expounded by the
Prophets and wise men sent of God to them; which cannot be done in our law: it
was the Sabbath-work and service of God to teach it daily in public and
private: and shall this law be thus laid aside, neglected, and not studied, for
the bramble-rule of the world? and was subverted, 1 Samuel 8.1.

Hear, ye Judges, Deuteronomy. 25.1. If the controversy come to judgment that they
may judge, they must judge; Luke 12.58. ye must judge the people with just
judgment. Judge righteously between a man and his brother, and the stranger
that is with him, Deuteronomy. 1.16. verse. 17. Ye shall not respect persons. Ye shall
not take a gift, for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the
words of the righteous, 1 Samuel 12.3, 5. Exodus 23.3. thou shall countenance a
poor man in his cause verse. 6. thou shall not wrest the judgment of thy poor
in his cause, verse. 9. thou shall not oppress the stranger, verse. 7. keep thee
far from a false matter; and the innocent and the righteous slay thou not,
Prove. 28.21.

To these Judges set up in every City, 2 Chronicles. 19.5. Deuteronomy. 16.18. seventy two,
called the Sanhedrin, were added, and joined to them.
1. While Moses lived, he supplied their place, Exodus 18.22. after him,
Deborah, Samuel, and the rest, succeeded Moses, judging Israel in the difficult
causes that others could not judge, being brought before them: God had
eminently gifted and raised up some to rule, until the time of the kings, 1 Samuel 7.16, 17. or when these failed at any time.

2. Then, as in Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11. such of the people as were thought to be
most able and fit to judge, were set a part to judge the difficult cases of the
people, Exodus 24.14. 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 10. though ordinary persons.

Those that judge justly for God,
1. He has honored before the people, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the
Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.

2. He establishes that rule is according to his word, Deuteronomy. 17.12. The man
(in the difficult case) that will do presumptuously, and not hearken to the
Priest and Judge, that man shall dye.

3. He encourages them to go on, and fear not man, because the judgment is
the Lords.

Note. Herein is the ground of courage only.

If ye judge unjustly, the curse of God and the people is on you.
Deuteronomy. 27.19. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow, verse. 25. Cursed be he takes a bribe to slay an
innocent person, verse. 26. Cursed be he confirms not all the words of this
law to do them. Look what the Law says, God fulfils.

Of Judgment.
WE are sure the judgment of God is according to truth, Romans 2.2. but not that
man's is so.

Deuteronomy. 1.7. Judgment is (...) to God, or is Gods, and is not man's: one man, of
himself, cannot assume the authority; but in the way God has ordained, and
under God: and when he has the authority, he has it not, but to put in
execution Gods law, if he have it, and his judgment; for judgment is the
Lords, Jam. 4.12. There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy. Who
art thou that judge another? Numb. 15.16.

Note. The written word given the Jews for rule and government, is indeed the
law; the rule and government of God and all Nations that rule not hereby, but
by the work of that in their hearts, Romans 2.15. As the effect depends on the
cause, so the work of the law, on the law; if there had been no law, there had
been no work of the law in men: (O distinguish between these:) our laws are but
the work of the law, though the law has wrought more strongly on us then
others, who had no knowledge of the letter of the law at all.

Judgment shall be one to the stranger, and he that is of your own country,
Lev. 24.22. and so is no place for civil law, or mixed laws of Nations with us:
the small are to be heard as well as the great, Deuteronomy. 1.17. every man's cause
heard alike, verse. 16. Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment: thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person
of the mighty; but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. They were
not to take bribe or reward. 1 Samuel 12.3. Thus Moses, Numb. 16.15. so that
tribute and custom, I suppose, arose under the government of Kings, and was not
under Judges, 1 Samuel, 8.17.

That judgment might run down as a stream, and be free to all as water, to
every man's occasions, and incorrupt,
1. It was given in the language of the people, having many promises from God
for obedience; which, by adhering to the law of Nations, men lose: and it had
many curses added to disobedience, which had place in the hearts of men, to
keep them from breaking the law, and keeping them in obedience. O what law is
like this, to do a people good, which cannot punish disobedience with curses,
nor obedience with blessings, as God does!

2. It was part of the worship of God, to have it read and expounded to the
people; which cannot be of man's laws. That none should be ignorant thereof, it
was preached and taught at home and abroad, public and private, Deuteronomy. 30. from
verse. 10. to 16. and pressed on the conscience daily, Joh. 7.49. This people
that know not the law, are accursed.

3. It was to be free, and cost nothing.

4. Exodus 18.22. It was to be (...) in all time; that is, whenever occasion
called on them to do justice: So that after the setting up of Judges, we have
only two causes for which men were committed to ward, Levit. 14.12. Numb.
15.34. which was only for the difficulty of them, when that Moses durst not
pass sentence before he had enquired of God what the judgment was; so careful
was he in the matter of judgment, that it might be Gods, and not his, Exodus
24.14.

5. This cause is taken away now from us: for then the law was not revealed,
but now it is, and we have the mind of God, so as that not a word must be
added thereunto: and the Judge must not decline from the law in judgment
neither to the right hand nor to the left, Deuteronomy. 4.12. Gal. 3.15.

6. Two Judges were appointed to be set in all the gates of the Cities in the
land, Deuteronomy. 1. so that the people were not forced to go far for law, that was
near them, in the word; nor for justice, it was at their doors.

7. Every knowing man was a lawyer, he needed none to plead his cause, it was
laid down so plain, and stated so clear in the word by God for them.

Ap. Who now would leave the pure steams of justice that came out from God, and
rise in him, for the muddy streams of Justinian, Gratian, and other blind and
ignorant men! Isa. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.

Ap. Who would not submit rather to that judgment that is Gods, then to that
that is man's; and do as Paul, appeal to the supreme judgment, which is beyond
Caesar's, and above it, if he might be tried by it, which Paul could not then be?

3. What liberty would this bring to the nation! what freedom from expense in
their estates, from imprisonments in their persons, from being deceived in
their causes, and from being overborn in their judgment! which, by delay of
judgment, great men have much advantage offered them to: corrupt judges hinder
justice, and get false witnesses; and many condemned persons escape punishment,
and innocents by long imprisonment are undone in their estates, their families,
and repute among men.

4. Gods wrath for delay of justice, lies heavy on the nations daily; and
wicked men's hearts are set in them to do evil, because that judgment is not
executed speedily on those that do wickedly, Eccles. 8.11.

5. Paul observes, Heb. 10.28. He that despised Moses law, dyed without mercy,
under two or three witnesses. Consider now, how shall we, in keeping up another
law then Moses, to Judge the Nation by, free our souls from despising Moses law!

6. Joh. 7.51. Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he
does?

7. Moses, in the higher and weightier causes he was to judge of, he would not
proceed, if he had not heard what to do in the matter from God (all the judges
of the world should take notice of this thing well) and consider if it be not a
dangerous thing to judge of any case contrary to the judgment God has
revealed in his law, or punish any man for a fault otherwise then God has set
down; and where they are not, to desist from judgment until they have
consulted with God in his word what to do therein, as Moses did. If they do
otherwise, whether they are not to give account therefore, as well as he, to
God, Romans 2.1.

For clearing of what I have before laid down, and that that follows,
consider with me four generals.
1. That those are not under the rule and government of the law, in that way
the law appoints, are those the Scripture says are without law; that is,
without the public exercise thereof and rule among them.

2. There is a being without the law; that is, all the true knowledge of the
law; as infants, ignorants, Atheists; of which Paul himself said of himself,
that he was without the law: and this is from the sense and understanding of
it. Romans 7.9.

3. There is a being under the law in the external government of it, in a
Commonweal, and in the condition of the soul, as it is in unbelief, Gal. 3.23.
before faith came, we (even Jews and Gentiles) were shut up under the law.

1. Those under the law internally, are to be under the external form of the
law, to be guided and instructed thereby, as by a Schoolmaster to bring them to
Christ.

2. Those without the law, are not freed from the law, though they are judged
by another law, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all men under sin; that
is, the law; even all those which are without law, and those under law also.

3. All which prove the law of God to be the rule to judge by, that it is
indeed the Magna Charta, Suprema Lex, and Salus Populi: and now only is
judgment the Lords.

The second General to clear that that follows, is
Deuteronomy. 6.1. These are the Commandments, the Statutes, and the Judgments.

1. By the Commandments, I understand the 10 words given in two Tables by God
to Moses on Sinai, Exodus 20. which was the ground of Statutes.

2. The Statutes are the several cases depending on each Command, and arising
out of them, and set down to direct the Judges how to Judge according unto God,
in the matters of God, laid down in the first Tables; and in matter of men, in
the second: they being the absolute decrees of God, Judges and Judged must rest
in, from whence is no appeal; and is the ground of Judgment.

3. The Judgment contains the sentence added to the breach of every law for
punishment, or to obedience of the law, for couragement therein, the promises
of good and mercy, and is only proper to Gods law: and curses added to his law,
not man's; which is an empty law.

Third General.
I. That though in the 4 last books of Moses is an often repetition of the
Statutes and Judgments, yet usually there is inserted in each of them some
weighty distinction, and not without great reason repeated: which, because of
my necessity, and brevity of time of writing, with my other employments, I have
omitted to observe, leaving it to your selves to do, as being the sole object
of your study and rule of life to live by.

II. That as in the beginning God divided government, committing some to Moses
in the judicials, and other to Aaron in the ceremonials,

1. Moses government in the law is not destroyed, Mat. 5.17. and cap. 23.2.

2. Aarons Priesthood, and with that his government, cease; and in the place
thereof, Jesus Christ, by the Fathers appointment, is set up. Heh. 7.11, 12,
15, 16.

3. So that now as first there was Moses and Aaron so now there is to be, to
the end of the World, Moses and Christ, to rule and govern the World by.

1. Moses in the World or State, under the covenant of works, also the servant
of Jesus Christ, ruling for him, because he is not of he World. 2. Christ in
the Church, among the Saints or believers, under the new covenant of grace,
among whom the Lord himself is, being one of them.
III. Those words, Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord thy God, cannot be said of, nor
applied to, any in that way as the words are delivered, but to those,

1. That have covenanted with God in the way of the law, as the Israelites did.

2. That are under the rule and government of the commands, the Statutes and
Judgments contained in that law.

Object. That was spoken only of those God brought out of Egypt, and concerns
not us.

Resp. As the Jews were under the bondage of Egypt, and were restrained from
Gods service, and were then not in covenant with him, nor had not his law to
judge by; so we have been under Antichrist, in Babel, and have been restrained
from Gods service, and were then not in covenant with the Lord, as they were
not; nor is his law set up as a rule to judge by among us: so that when God
shall have brought us out of Babel, and set up his laws, and brought us into
covenant with himself, according to Moses, it shall then be as binding to us,
that God brought us out of Babel, as to them, that he brought them out of
Egypt, Jer. 16.14.15. They shall no more say, The Lord lives that brought them
out of Egypt, but out of the north countries, Jer. 23.7, 8, 9.

Note. Under the first covenant God was (...) under the second, (...), Hos.
2.16.

In the one, God is as Abram to Hagar, whose son she had by him was to be cast
out under the Gospel-estate; which was fulfilled in the casting out of
unbelievers from the society of Saints, they being not to inherit the promise,
that is Jesus Christ, Gal. 4.30. which work was then done, and shall be most
certainly done again in this age of ours. In the other, God is as Abraham to
Sarah, whose son Isaac being born of the freewoman, signifies the state of
the Church under the Gospel, under the name of Jerusalem from above, which are
a society of believers joined to the Lord Jesus in the fellowship of the
Gospel, in whom the better promises are conferred, and made over to the Saints,
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.30.

Conclusion. The covenant of works was after the covenant made with Abraham of
grace; but being renewed in Christ, it is called new, and the new old, Gal.
3.17. The now first covenant, though it has not the best, yet, it has many
excellent promises necessary for the life annexed to it; which we wanting,
bodily are reduced to great necessities; and the breaking thereof brought ruin
and desolation suddenly to the Jews.

And though at this time it be not in esteem among men, yet the prophecy of
Isaiah 42.19, 21. incourageth me, that after Gods servant comes, who the blind
world accounts blind, though God says he is his servant, and perfect, and
which the Scripture before clearly shows was to come after the grand Apostasy
of Antichrist; I say, after he comes, the Lord will magnify the law, make it
great, though all the world have endeavored to make nothing of it, or of no
use at all a long time, when they shall again judge by it, and punish by it,
and rule by it, etc. yea, and more, the Lord will make it honorable also; they
shall never set up traditions in the place thereof again. O Parliament, This
God will do; but whether God will do this by you or not, and honor you herein
or not, I do not know: you see it is my desire, if it be his will, ye are
witnesses, and God also, that the work may be yours, who have done much of the
work of the Lord in the Nation; that the honor here, and reward thereof
hereafter, may be yours: and let me speak freely to you thus, that if you will
not do it, God in few years will not want them that will do it; upon whom, and
whose posterity, the blessings of God and the Nation will fall in great
abundance, who did that in their generation for them, was never done; it being
then, and never until then, fulfilled, that of Paul, Romans 10.19. I will
provoke you to jealousy by them that are not a people; that is, some heathens,
which none never yet did do, should, as the Jews, nationally covenant with God
in the covenant of Moses; with which the Jews, as awaked, begin to think that
people Jacob-like steal away, or God gives away his birthright from him: the
not doing whereof, delays their call. Now what Nation in all the world is like
to do this, as England! O that it might be offered them who would not refuse it.

The fourth General.
That to the Elders, Heads, and Judges, were other inferior subordinate
officers, to serve in the same rule, who have their authority from the
Seriptures, and from God, as the rest, Josh. 23.2. Deuteronomy. 16.18.

Command the First.
Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have no other gods before me.


Statutes.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.

Chap. 10.20. Fear the Lord thy God; him shall thou serve, and to him shall
thou cleave.

Exodus 34.12. Take heed to thy self, that thou make no covenant with the
inhabitants.

Verse 15. Lest thou and they go a whoring after their gods, and one call thee,
and thou eat of their sacrifice.

Deuteronomy. 11.6. Take heed to your selves, that your hearts be not deceived to turn
aside to serve other Gods, and worship them.

Deuteronomy. 8.19. If thou forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other Gods, and
serve and worship them etc.

Deuteronomy. Thou shall not go after other gods, the gods of the people round about
you.

Exodus 23.24. Thou shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do
after their works: thou shall utterly overthrow them, and quite break down
their Images.

Judgment for serving strange Gods.
I. On the earth.

Deuteronomy. 11.17. I will shut up heaven, and the land shall not give her fruit.

1 Kings 17.1. This was fulfilled in the days of Ahab.

II. On the people or Nation.

Deuteronomy. 8.19. Ye shall perish as the Nations god destroyed before your face.

III. On particular persons.

Numb. 25.3. Those joined to Baal-peor -- verse. 4. were hanged by the head
against the Sun, Deuteronomy. 4.3.

Exodus 22.20. He that sacrifices to any god save to the Lord alone, he shall
be utterly destroyed.

Deuteronomy. 17.2. If a man or woman have transgressed the covenant, and has served
other Gods, and worshipped them, either the Sun, or Moon, or any of the host
of beaven, which I have not commanded thee, verse. 4. If it be told thee (that
is, the judge) and thou have heard of it, and inquired diligently; and behold,
if it be true, and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in
Israel, verse. 5. thou shall bring him or her forth to the gates -- and stone
them with stones until they dye -- and so shall thou put away evil from amongst
you. Note, so by the executing this sentence, and not any other of thy own:
then it abides with thee; for it was not the judges condemning, but the peoples
executing Gods command, Put away evil.

IV. Deuteronomy. 13.12. Contains judgment on a City for idolatry unpunished.

1. The inhabitants and cattle are to be smitten with the sword.

2. The spoil thou shall gather into the midst of the City, and burn both
City and spoil,

3. There shall naught of the wicked thing cleave to thy hand.

V. Deuteronomy. 18.6. If thy brother, son, daughter, wife, or friend, entice thee
secretly, saying. Let us go and serve other gods which thou have not known, nor
thy fathers, verse. 7. Thou shall not consent, hear, nor pity, nor spare, nor
conceal him; verse. 9. The people shall stone him with stones, that he dye.

VI. Deuteronomy. 13.2. If a prophet or dreamer give a sign or wonder, and it comes
to pass, and he say, Let us go after other gods thou have not known (it is to
try thee) thou shall not hear him; he shall be put to death. Deuteronomy. 18.20. If a
Prophet presumes to speak in my name, that I have not spoken, or speaks in the
name of another god, he shall dye.

VII. Naboth, 1 Kings 21.13. Levit. 24.14. was stoned for and under the
pretense of blasphemy.

Rules to be observed on the judgment.
1. That God required the execution thereof only of those that had
transgressed the covenant (which Moses renewed often) as appears in that statute,
Deuteronomy. 17.2. who were to suffer the sentence of the law, and none else; and so
in most other eases.

2. Though those were hanged joined to Baal-peor, were hanged after strangled,
contrary to our custom; and was the most ignominious death, for joining
themselves to Baal-peor or Priapus, that ignomnious idol.

3. The Lord being the Lord of life, is not left to any to take away the life
of any but as God has appointed; which for idolatry is generally stoning by
the hands of all the people.

4. It is observed by some, that when it is said, His blood be on him, then
stoning is meant; or otherwise when the death is not expressed, then
strangling: but usually, though the death be not set down in one place, it is
in another.

5. In stoning, the people were to show their hatred of the evil committed,
that they and theirs might be free of the curse and judgment threatened against
them for the same; one man not being able to do the same, by that or any other
way of putting to death.

Judgment.
1. Jezebel and the Priests of Baal slain, 1 Kings 18.22. and 2 Kings 10.

2. Ahazia sends to Baal-zebub, and dies, 2 Kings 1.

3. Belshazzar slain praising his gods, Dan. 5.4, 5 30.

Numb. 25.2. The Moabites called the people to the sacrifices of their gods,
and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods; in which ( verse. 3.) they
were said to be joined to Baal-peor.

Statute.
Levit. 17.7. They shall no more offer their sacrifices to devils, after whom
they have gone a whoring.

Judgment.
Verse 9. Shall be cut off from among the people.

The command binds affirmatively, Thou shall have me to thy God.
Now the way of Gods calling a people, and becoming a God to them nationally,
is by giving them laws, and they taking them from him, and professing
subjection to them, as to their Gods commands whom they ought to serve.

To the keeping whereof, God adds by promise many blessings; as David, Psalm.
19.11. In keeping thereof is great reward.

To the breach whereof, are added many curses of body, soul, goods, name,
family, earth, and heaven; all are shut up to men for it.

The which giving of laws royally to his people, is the only work and
prerogative royal of God; and therefore is the law moral called the Royal law,
Jam. 2.8. and thus the Scripture says, There is hut one lawgiver, who is able
to save and destroy: who art thou that judge another? Jam. 4.12.

And hence are all laws of heathens said to be no laws, and they without law;
and all the ordinances, and the corrupt expositions of the law, made by ancient
expositors, and received by their children among the Jews, called traditions;
and they were such as made void the law among them that had it. In which it
appears, there is no law but Gods, nor no true lawmakers but God; law,
government, and judgment, among Gods people especially, being his.

Lastly, As we must not have another God, so we must not have other laws then
Gods: God will not govern by any other then his own laws.

Behold, I pray, by men's deelining Gods laws, what laws have been brought out
since the reforming times; as in the 6 Articles in Hen. 8. time, the book of
Sports, and many laws since repealed. What is become of the Judges, Justices,
and men, made and executed those laws so contrary to the Lord and his law?

Solomon brings in wisdom, Prove. 8.15. saying, By me kings reign, and the
princes (that is, those of the supreme council) do describe Justice (that is,
to those judges consult with them about difficult cases, without whom the
difficult cases would as well be hid to them as others.) Now if justice be so
hard a thing to be executed by men who not only have the law, but use the law,
and the help thereof to do justice, by that, without wisdom or Christ's help
they cannot describe it; how shall those describe it, that use not the law to
help them, which ought to be their help; and so tempt God not to help them
extraordinarily, for not using the ordinary help of God? And that he speaks
here of the great council, is clear, they being next to the king; and then he
speaks of the ordinary Juges in the verse following, to whom justice was to be
described: which is significantly set down, Deuteronomy. 17.11.

From Jeremiah 35.6. some there are contend to maintain the law and customs
we have in this Nation received from our fathers, because the Rechabites stuck
so close to theirs. To which I answer,

1. That the Rechabites were subject to the judicial law, as the other Jews
were.

2. These traditions of theirs were not forbid nor commanded of God, that the
magistrate could not forbid the doing what they did.

3. Nor were there any judiciary proceedings against such as should not have
observed those traditions, they being indifferent things only; it had been no
sin to them if they had drunk wine, or dwelt in houses, or planted fields with
seed.

4. So that these not standing in competition with the law of God, they were
not disabled from observing one, and doing the other also.

5. The father of a family may engage his sons and servants to suchlike
duties, as depending immediately on his rule; but it may be unlawful to a
Magistrate to impose the like ordinances on a whole Nation.

Command the Second.
Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.


Statutes against idolatry.
HAbac. 2.18. The idol is a teacher of lies.

Deuteronomy. 4.16, 17 18. Is forbid any graven image or similitude of any figure or
likeness of male or female, of beast, fowl, creeping thing or fish. Sun Moon.
or host of heaven.

Exodus 20.23. Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, nor shall ye make unto
you gods of gold.

Levit. 26.1. Ye shall make no idols nor graven images, nor rear up any
standing image, nor shall ye set up any image of stone to bow down.

Exodus 34.17. Ye shall make no molten gods,

Levit. 19.4. Turn ye not to idols, nor make to your selves molten Gods.

Dout. 4.23. Take heed to your selves lost ye forget the Covenant of the Lord
which he made with you and make you a graven image or the likeness of any thing
which the Lord thy God has for bidden thee.

Levit. 18.21. Thy seed shall not pass the fire to Moloch.

Judgments on Idolatry.
I. On the Nation or people.

Deuteronomy. 9.12. They have made them a molten calf. verse. 14. let me alone, that I
may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven, Exodus 32.27.

Deuteronomy. 4.16. If ye corrupt your selves, and make a graven image, or likeness of
any thing, Verse. 26. I call heaven and earth to witness, ye shall soon utterly
perish. Verse. 27. ye shall be scattered among the nations, Verse. 28. and serve
gods of wood and stone.

II. On a person.

Deuteronomy. 17.4. Man or woman worshipping the Sun Moon, or host of heaven, Verse. 5.
was to be brought to the gates, and stoned to death.

Lev. 20.2. If an Israelite or stranger, who ever he be, gives any of his seed
to Moloch he shall surely dye: the people of the land (not of the City only)
shall stone him with stones.

Note. Verse. 4. If the people of the land any way hide their eyes from that man
and kill him not: verse. 5. Then will I set my face against that man and his
family, and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him: I will set
my face against that soul, etc.

II. Deuteronomy. 27.15. Cursed is that man that puts any graven or molten image in a
secret place.

IV. On the idols.

Deuteronomy. 7.5. Destroy their altars, and break down their images: their groves
shall ye cut down, and burn their graven images with fire. Numb. 33.52. ye
shall destroy all their pictures and molten images, and pluck down their high
places. Numb. 32.52. and quite pluck down all their high places.

V. Judgment is on the places of idol-worship.

Deuteronomy. 12.2. Ye shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations ye
shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains and hills, and under
every green tree.

Verse. 3. Ye shall overthrow their altars, break their pillars, and burn their
groves with fire: ye shall throw down the graven images of their gods, Judge.
6.25. 2 King. 32. 2 Chronicles. 23.17.

VI. Judgments is one the names of the false gods.

Deuteronomy. 7.25. Ye shall destroy the names of them out of that place, Zech. 13.2.
the same shall be done in time to come.

VII. Judgment is on the idols of gold and silver.

Deuteronomy. 7.25. The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire. Then
shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it to thee, lest
thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.

Verse. 26. Thou shall not bring in an abomination into thy house, lest thou be
an accursed thing like it; but shall utterly detest it and abhor it; for it is
an accursed thing, Vide Joshua 6.18, and Chapter 7.1, 15, 21. to the end of the
Chapter.

Observations.
1. That metals were to be melted with fire; stone, glass, and suchlike fragil
things, were to be broken with the hammer to powder.

2. What work has God to do yet for us, were we once joined by covenant to the
Lord! names of months, days of the week, and those places we call Churches,
Altars; the names of idols, false gods, etc. are daily and hourly in our
mouths, as in our swearing by the Mass.

VIII. Judgment.

It defiles a land.

1. How this nation by worshipping of idols in the time of Antichrist has
profaned that Scripture is the covenant, is clear; and in regard he is a
jealous God, he is no less jealous of our apostatizing, then of our fathers;
especially seeing we have done hitherto the work of the Lord negligently, not
making our covenant in a right way; taking him to be our God, but not in his
laws to judge and rule over us.

2. He visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children, you may see,
without a speedy covenanting with God according to his will, what provocation
there remains: for God, whose hand is yet stretched out to destroy us, we
having been as idolatrous, superstitious, and profane a people as any in the
world: O England, remember the bloodshed for the idol of the Mass, and its
worship, and that by Statutes and Acts of Parliament; together with the other
six bloody Articles made by King and Parliament in the time of Henry the eighth.

3. It may be said, as those in Jonah 3.9. Who can tell whether the Lord will
turn and repent? so, if the King had made this covenant, and set up this law,
this had been the way for to have restored him: but it was hid from his eyes. I
beseech you, O ye Parliament of England, be admonished; do this great thing,
that the Lord lay not you aside also: and if ye hinder herein, see what a
command God has given against all hindrances, Esa. 57.14. Cast ye up, cast ye
up; prepare the way; take up the stumbling block out of the way of my people.
God has of late taken up many that were stumbling-b ocks among your selves
since ye sat, and will spare none that indeed is so this day to his peoples
freedom and deliverance.

And that the judicial law ought to be set up among us as well as the Jews,
clearly was signified in this, that the law was to be one as well to the
stranger, as to those home-born, which should not have been, if God had
intended it only to have been a law to Jews, and nor the Gentiles also; there
being the same ground for equity justice, and for fellowship with God, with
one, as with the other; with God there being no respect of persons, Levit.
24.10.22. Numb. 15.29, 33 31. Deuteronomy. 1.16. and 5.14.

Objections made by Sir H. V.
Object. 1. To restore the rule of the law, is to Judaize.

Resp. 1. To rule by our own law, is to heathenize.

2. Having Gods law, and yet to rule by that, is much worse.

3. We now Judaize, by making void the law of God by our Traditions.

4. To Judaize is properly to continue in Gods worship some ceremony Christ by
his death has put an end unto.

1. The law judicial has nothing ceremonial in it.

2. Christ put not an end to it, but established it.

3. The Law was not made for the Jew only, but All, and said indefinitely to be
made for transgressors thereof of all Nations, 1 Timothy, 1, 9, 10.

2. Object. We look for a better kind of rule from Christ.

1. Resp. As there shall never be another Gospel, so shall there never be
another law; God having shut up all.

2. As there cannot be a Gospel more full of grace, so nor can there be a law
more full of justice and righteousness.

3. How can we expect that from God, which neither by himself, his Son nor
Prophets, in all the book of God, was never promised, no not by one word?

4. If it were supposed a better law for government of the republike might be
given, as can never be, Quere, 1. Whether we might receive it without warrant
expressly given by God, whiles we have that of Gods, which he gave himself. 2.
If be that gave it be not accursed, as he that should give another Gospel, 1
Gal. 4.1, 9.


5. Whether it be not exceedingly to derogate from God, to esteem of any rule
like or above his.

Its objected by some That the Jews had several Synedries, viz. the sevnty, and
twenty three.

Resp. From Isa. 1.26. God will restore counselors as at the beginning not
councels; that is, but one; and the Synedrie is but one, Mat. 5.22. and not
Synedries: so that the Jews in setting up more then one Synedrie, did a
postatize from the rule.

Command the Third.
Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord the God in vain, etc.


Statute.
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear
by his name.

Levit. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my name falsely, nor profane the name of
thy God, Jer. 5.7. thy children swear by them are no gods.

Judgments.
I. ( Hosea 4. verse. 2.3.) on a land,

For oaths the land mourns.

II. On a family, Dan. 3.29. He that blasphemed God, his house shall be
destroyed, and himself cut in pieces.

Zech. 5.4. The flying roll entered into the house of him that swears falsely
by my name, and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and it shall
consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Jezabel swore by
her gods, and is eaten by dogs, and her familly cut off, 1 Kin. 19. 2 Kin. 9.

III. On a person.

Levit. 24.15. Whoever curses his God, and he blasphemeth the name of God,
shall surely dye, as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land: all the
Congregation shall stone him.

Levit. 24.11. The son of an Israelitish woman blasphemed the name of God, and
cursed; and they brought him to Moses, and put him in ward, until the mind of
the Lord were known.

Verse 14. He is brought out of the Camp, and stoned.

Illustr. David's child dyed, because he made the enemy blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.

Statute.
Levit. 19.31. Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
wizards to be defiled by them. I am the Lord.

Verse. 26. Ye shall not use enchantments, nor observe times.

Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be found amongst you any that uses divination,
or any observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a
consulter with familiar spirits, a wizard, or a Necromancer: all these are an
abomination before the Lord.

Judgments.
Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live.

Levit. 20.27. A man or woman that has a familiar spirit, or is a wizard,
shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones; their blood
shall be upon them.

Verse. 6. The soul that turns after such as have familiar spirits, and after
wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul,
and will cut him off from among his people.

Note. God will cut him off by some judgment: this was not to be done by the
Magistrate, but left to God himself, 1 Samuel 28.31. in Saul.

Statute.
Levit. 20.22. Ye shall keep all my Statutes and my judgments, to do them.

Verse 23. Ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations.

Levit. 18.3. After the doings of the land of Egypt shall ye not do; after the
doings of the land of Canaan where I bring you shall ye not do, neither shall
ye walk in their ordinances.

Verse 4. Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances.

Levit. 19.27. Thou shall not round the corners of thy head, nor war the
corners of thy beard, nor make cuttings in thy flesh for the dead nor print any
marks on you.

Deuteronomy. 18.9. Ye shall not do after the abominations of the heathen.

Observation. The Lord binds the people that have his Statutes, to make use of
his, and not any other ordinances, laws, or manners.

Statute.
Numb. 15.30, 31. The soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall
be cut off from among his people, because he has despised the word of the
Lord, and has broken his commandment: that soul shall utterly be cut off; his
iniquity shall be upon him.

O ye Princes and Judges of the people, if men judge by other judgments then
Gods, and have Gods judgments by them, to judge by; judge ye if they do not
presumptuously what they do, in so doing, that they were to dye for it.

Note. The Jews mixed first heathenish customs in sacrifices, in the law: the
Jews believers, in the time of the Gospel mixed Jewish rites and the
Gospel-adminstrations together; the heathens their rites and the Gospel: we
now, Antichristian superstitions, and the way of Gods worship, in the Gospel,
whose manners and customs we ought to abstain from, as the Jews from the
heathens, Rev. 14.9.10, 11. and 18.4.8. They being a like abomination before
the Lord.

1. The excellency of setting up of the commands and statutes, and the
government of God by making a covenant with God does appear most eminently in
the national preservation of the Jews from the witchcraft of Balaam, who cries
out to Balack, and says, There is no divination against Israel, nor
enchantment against Jacob, Numb. 23.23. and the reason is, the Lord is his God
(by covenant) and he is with him: and verse. 8. How shall I curse whom God has
not cursed? Chap. 24.9. Blessed is he that blesses thee, and cursed is he that
curses thee: which shows, had not God been his God, witchcrafts, enchantments,
and curses, had consumed them.

2. Balaam farther says, Numb. 23.9. The people shall dwell alone, and not be
reckoned among the Nations. When a people make a covenant with God, they are
then a people, which before were not. O that in England might be fulfilled that
of Romans 10.19.

2. They shall dwell alone, being a peculiar people to God.

3. Not reckoned among the Nations, but separated from them in their laws,
government, worship of God etc. God blessing them, when other nations are
accursed.

3. Then when we covenant rightly into the Lord, he sets his name upon us, and
we called the people of God, and not before. And to these and not others, is
the name of God a strong tower; the righteous fly unto it, and are safe: they
coming unto the Lord as to their God and refuge; God being their refuge and
hiding place; which he is not to any other nation but these.

Treason, called crimen laesae majestatis, against God, is contained in these
three commands: and many traitors there are amongst us, 1 Samuel 2.25.

Concerning the Treatise of the Sabbath.
1. From Adam to Moses the authority was by tradition, and the firstborn was
priest.

2. By tradition Christ was discovered in the promise to Adam to many nations.

2. The authority was from Scripture, in the ten commands, and other judicial
precepts.

1. Under it, the traditional authority ceased.

2. The priesthood of the firstborn ceased, and was given Aaron.

3. Now sacrifices of other were offered to devils.

4. This was only for the Seventh-day Sabbath.

5. This Sabbath was a part of, and sign to the first covenant.

3. Christ coming, was the Angel of, and Mediator to a better covenant.

1. The sign whereof is the first-day-Sabbath.

2. As this is of the second covenant, so it cannot be mixed with the first; but
are to be reserved distinct, and not confounded: for as the two covenants
cannot be one, so nor can the Sabbaths.

Appl. Hence then to force obedience of one on all, is to destroy the other.

2. To force the world to observe the first-day-Sabbath, is to destroy the use
of the day, and make void the grace of God.

3. In destroying any of the Sabbaths, is to destroy the covenant, and to take
away the very sign thereof; as at this day it is done by and amongst us.

Command the Fourth.
Exodus 20.8. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.


Statute.
Exodus 23.12. Thou shall rest the seventh day, that thy Ox and Ass may rest;
that the son of thy handmaid and stranger be refreshed.

Numb. 28.25. Jer. 17.21. Carry no burden.

Levit. 23.3. It is the Sabbath of the Lord in all their dwellings.

Exodus 16.29. Let no man go out of his place on the Sabbath.

Verse. 26. Ye shall find no manna thereon.

Deuteronomy. 31.16. The children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the
Sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual (...) continue until
Christ came, and carnal ceremonies were put to an end, Romans 4.11.

3. God in Horeb makes a covenant with all the people, Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3. and in
Exodus 31.16. The children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the
Sabbath throughout all their congregations, for a perpetual covenant: it is a
sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, Exodus 34.27.

Objected, This seems to hold out three covenants; and the Scripture holds out
but two.

Answ. That Abraham had, is the same with ours; and hence is Abraham called the
father of the faithful: only the administrations thereof differs now, from
what it had then.

1. This covenant of the Law continuing, the sign thereof must also continue,
Ezekiel. 20.20. My Sabbath, as distinct from the Lords day.

2. The Scriptures call after Christ's resurrection the seventh-dayes-Sabbath
Sabbath, as well as the first, if rightly translated.

3. The Apostles met with the Jews, and taught them that day usually.

4. No Scripture shows the abolishing thereof.

5. It is necessary those under that covenant should have a day and time to
serve God in, as those under the new.

6. The Sabbath of the new must not be to those under the old covenant, nor the
Sabbath of the old to those under the new, Mat. 9.17. Men put not new wine into
old bottles, nor piece an old garment with a new piece of cloth.

7. In the estate of the Church, all things are become new: but then it is only
with such as are of the Church: with others not of the Church, they are so
under the old covenant, as if there had never been any new. Mark, says the
Apostle, what the law says, it says to them that are under the law, Romans
3.13. so that those under the Law are commanded to work six days, and rest the
seventh only.

8. Thus not an iota or tittle of the law perishes: the morality of the
Seventh-day Sabbath is continued; and yet no Judaizing in the thing: for this
was no part of the ceremonial law; the ground of the seventh day being from the
creation; but of the ceremonies, from the redemption of Christ.

9. Thus Christ destroys not the law, but establishes it; Jesus Christ not
taking unbelievers from being under the law, in which estate they were, and
subjection thereunto.

10. God will judge them by the law, that are under the law. Now the law
requires them that are under it, to keep the seventh day Sabbath, Romans 2.12.
and those that are risen with Christ, and married to him, are under the Gospel,
and Gospel-day: this truth shines forth clearly, Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4. where
until the woman is married to Christ, she is under her first husband Moses.

11. The one has a rest with God, and beast, and creatures, by Moses; the
other has a rest with God, and Christ, and angels: souls of just men made
perfect on mount Sion. Heb. 12.

Note. Moses and Christ are two, and do not destroy each other; Christ only
perfects Moses: the covenants are two, the Sabbaths two, the states two; one of
the world, the other of the Church; one under the law, the other under the
Gospel: which estates are not to be confounded or made one.

Hence, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in respect of the Sabbath days.

1. Keeping the seventh day Sabbath while unbelievers.

2. Being received by the Church, and now observe the first, and work on the
seventh, whereas before, he wrought on the first, and sanctified the seventh;
justly brings men to be judged and questioned for so doing among men not
knowing the truth, and the will of God therein.

A strange confusion in the world for some time there was, if we may believe
Socrates; who says, the Church of Rome observed only the first day Sabbath,
and all other Churches the seventh. See into what division the loss of truth
had brought the then world into; and ever since, in this darkness arose out of
the bottomless-pit, Rev. 9.3. has the world been shut up.

3. He that is under the law-day Sabbath, is to be punished according to its
law, if he observe it not; and he that is under the Gospel-Sabbath, is to be
proceeded against according to the way of the Gospel, by those several powers
set up of God in them.

Object. God requires but one day of seven; this is two.

Resp. One day is but observed: for those observe the first, are not bound to
observe the seventh; and those bound to observe the seventh, are not bound to
observe the first.

Object. Some would then be buying, selling, merchandising on both days, and
no day observed: which would be very gross confusion.

Resp. This confusion in the Apostles days, if you call it so: and the Apostle
never termed it such at all, but says, Let no man judge you (much more let no
man condemn you) in respect of Sabbath days, Col. 2.

2. By this means the Apostles gathered the Jews and Judaizing Gentiles,
teaching in the Synagogues on the seventh, and after in the Churches on the
first.

3. By this, as the Jews held a preparation to their Sabbath, so now is the
seventh days Sabbath a preparation to the first.

4. There is no sin, where is no law, Moses gave no command to those under the
law, to observe the first day: Christ gave no command to those under grace, to
observe the seventh day Sabbath.

5. Anrichrist could never have made the Church and the world one, but by
destroying those ordinances that separated them; and making them one in
Church-ordinances, it was easy to persuade the world to be one with the
Church, but not the Church with the world.

Quest. is, If the law-estate can be restored and not the seventh days Sabbath.

2. Whether men, until they are Evangelically called thence, are not of and
under that estate, in respect of their visible estate and condition in the
world, Gal. 4.1.

Object. The Apostles gathered many from Paganism, and never were under the
law at all.

Resp. The legal external administration was in a manner abolished.

2. Those were gathered, were under it, spiritually and inwardly, before they
were gathered.

4. If God effectually called them to be under the second, the first was waxen
old to them then only, and not before.

Object. Who shall be Ministers of this administration, seeing Aarons
priesthood dies?

Resp. Aaron was not the Minister of this; this was ministered in the
Synagogues: Aaron ministered in the temple only.

2. The Scribes or Lawyers, which were not Levites or Priests, they read the
law in Synagogues, and are said to sit in Moses (not Aarons) chair, Mat. 23.2,
3.

In the Synagogue it was common to read or teach, Luke 4.16, 17. Acts 13.15.
The ruler of the Synagogue I take to be none else but one designed in especial
to take care of the well-ordering of all things to be done therein.

In the word is no priesthood after this administration, but a scribe, a writer
of the law, that knew how to read it well. Hence the people are called a
Kingdom of Priests, every one being to be a law-priest, for expounding the
judicial law, Exodus 19.6.

Object. What confusion would this bring forth in families!

Resp. Is there more amongst us then was among Jews and Gentiles at the first
erecting of Churches?

2. Did not Christ foretell as much, when he said there should in one house be
three against two, and two against three? Luke 12.52.

3. Does not the Apostle say the servant then to the heathen was the Lords
freeman? 1 Cor. 7. See how God plagued Pharaoh, for keeping his people from
serving him.

Object. Rev. 18.4. God calls his people out of Babel, or Rome, the false
Church only.

Resp. This is the first step from her, to separate the world and Church.

2. We are not to come out of Babels Church-practice only, but her
state-practices also; not in duties of the Gospel only, but the law also. A
people in civil society cannot be without the law; as in the Church-society
they cannot be without the Gospel, and be with and under God therein.

The first-day-Sabbath is of the covenant of grace; the seventh, of works.
Moses is taught the seventh, Christ the first: natural men observe one,
believers the other; yet both sanctified, and Sabbaths, and to be kept holy.

Object. This would be exceeding loss to the Nation.

Resp. Never man did lose by serving God, but gain.

2. The godly man must sell all, If he will be a Christian, and deny himself,
and be dead to all.

Note. The heathens set apart some time to serve their Gods of wood and stone
in, though they had no warrant to do the same: shall not those are the people
of God much more have some day to serve him in? and what day, but that God in
the laws instituted, from which before the Son has made them free, they are
not discharged from what service the law requires, nor what penalty the law
imposes on them for disobedience: apply Mat. 5.19.

Hear what the law says to those under the law, James 2.10. Whosoever keeps
the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Romans 3.19. that
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.
Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law, to do them.

Appl. This seems to me, that men under the law are strictly bound to the
observation of the Seventh-day Sabbath: of which number all unbelievers are,
who are bound to serve God for the creature comforts and mercies, though they
know not Christ, but are in the state of the world.

Appl. The Lords-day-Sabbath is only to be observed in the Church, by men made
free by Christ from the law, curse, and condemnation thereof. Heb. 4.9. There
remains a Sabbatisme to the people of God; called another day, verse. 8. from
the 7. Note verse 5. (...).

This is of great concernment to be inquired into, that whiles we strive to
build up what we should not, we pull down what we ought not. I hope you would
not for a world make a law to make void the law of God.

The Sabbath gave way to circumcision, though it were not of Moses, that is,
Moses law. John 7.22, 23. that the law of Moses concerning circumcision might
not be broken.

It is very remarkable, that in all the conflicts the Scribes and Pharisees had
with Christ about the Sabbath, he never spoke of the abolishing of it, nor
condemned the right observance of it; though the Jews were more often offended at
Christ for this, then any thing; he curing more on that day, then any, because
looked on by the Lord as the work of the day; and they the more troubled at it,
because done thereon, which they judged to be a profanation thereof.

Note. As the law was given by the found of Trumpet, so the congregations of
the Synagogues were to be called by trumpet, and not by bells, Numb. 10.7.
Exodus 19.16. which minded them of giving of the law, and the covenant then made
the believers by rising of the Sun, that is, the time and call of them for
their worship.

Sabbath days journey, some understand one some to be two miles; which was no
less to be observed under the Gospel, then under the Law-day-Sabbath. Joshua
3.4. Acts 1.12.

The Scriptures rightly expounded, will clear this Antichristian darkness. O
take the veil from our eyes and hearts.

Mark. 16.1. The Sabbath being end, (...).

Verse. 2. Early in the morn, (...), and the first of Sabbaths; it being the
first of the Lords-day-Sabbath, or the first of the two Sabbaths; the Lords day
being the first, the seventh day the last of the week, according to the
Scripture, The first shall be last, and last first. And for the ceremonial
Sabbath, they are no more called Sabbaths, but the seventh and first day are
called Sabbaths always in the word.

The Scriptures speaking of the Lords-day-Sabbath, misinterpreted for the first
day of the week, and calls the seventh day a Sabbath also, are these: Mat.
28.1. Mark 16.2. Luke 20.1. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2.

That the Scriptures are misinterpreted when read the first day of the week, is
clear; for when God speaks of the first day of the week, Mark 16.9. he says
(...) in the singular; no (...) in the plural; and thus the Pharisees, Luke
18.12. fasted (...) not (...).

1. After Christ, the Law-day-Sabbath was observed by the Jews, men under the
Law, among whom the Apostles taught, and never in one word reproved them. Acts
18 2. Paul, as his manner was, went into the Synagogue to the Jews, and three
Sabbath days reasoned out of the Scriptures with them. Note, his manner was:
and thus in many other Scriptures.

2. The Lords-day-Sabbath was observed among believers, Act. 20.7. On the
first, or one of the Sabbaths, when the Disciples came together to bread bread
Paul preached to them, etc. and that 1 Cor. 16.2. On every first of Sabbaths (a
command to the Church of Corinth) every one of you lay by him in store as God
has prospered him.

3. Having showed you, that both the first and the seventh day, that under the
covenant of the law, and that under the covenant of grace; Moses Sabbath day,
and Christ's, conjunctly are called Sabbaths, and so of divine authority alike;
only one is a command to men under the law, the other to men under grace: now
I shall show you how they are distinctly called Sabbaths.

Heb. 4.4. He speaks of the seventh days rest.

Verse. 5. In this again of an other rest, which is a days rest, as the
seventh day was, is clear, from verse. 7. and the 8.

Verse 9. This other day is called Sabbatismos, a sabbatisme; which is proper
only to the Church or people of God.

Verse. 10. This Sabbath-rest men must strive to enter into; in the other, all
men are compelled: in this, none but believers in the Kingdom of God enjoy,
into which men are bid to strive to enter.

Object. Here they are said to enter into this sabbatisme, which is proper to
the state of heaven to be entered into.

Resp. Believers in Christ are said to enter into, or be (...), in the law to
Christ; or one in law, (...), to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21.

Object. Mark. 2.28. Luke 6.5. Christ is said to be Lord of the Sabbath: and in
what was he so, but in putting an end to it?

Resp. That Scripture says not so, and is contrary to many express Scriptures,
where Christ says, A tittle of the law shall not perish: and the Scripture is
falsely rendered, the word is; The Lord is Son of man, and of the Sabbath;
because made of woman, and made under the law, Gal. 4.4.

Command the Fifth.
Exodus 20.12. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.


Statute.
LEvit. 19.3. Ye shall fear every man his father and mother.

Verse. 32. Ye shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the
old man.

Mark 7.10. Genesis 22.6. Isaac submits to his father to dye. Luke 2.51. and
thus Jesus Christ: the Rechabites obedience, Jer. 35. and Gods blessing them.

Judgments.
Genesis 9.25, 26. Noah curses Cham with bondage, and blesses Japhet.

Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he sets lightly by his father or mother.

Levit. 20.9. Every one that curses his father or mother, shall surely be put
to death; his blood shall be upon him, Exodus 21.17.

Exodus 21.15. He that smites his father or mother, shall surely be put to
death.

Numb. 12.14. If her father had spit in her face, should she not have been
ashamed seven days? which was a thing of contempt, as in Deuteronomy. 25.9. and it
may be either for disobeying, or contemning of him.

Mark. 7.10. The Gospel confirms it; Who curses father or mother, let him dye
the death.

Prove. 30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 4.9. Forget not the things thine eyes have seen. etc. but teach them thy
sons, and thy sons sons: Verse. 10. Especially the day thou stoodest before the
Lord in Horeb: Verse. 13. and he declared to you his covenant which he commanded
you to perform, even the ten commandments.

Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them diligently thy children, and shall talk of
them when thon sit in thy house, when thou walk by the way, when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up.

Judgment.
Deuteronomy. 21.18. If a man have a stubborn and a rebellious son that will not obey
the voice of his father or his mother, and that when they have chastened him,
he will not hearken unto them; Verse. 19. Then shall his father and mother lay
hold of him, and bring him out to the Elders of his City and the gate of his
place: Verse. 20. They shall say to the Elders of his City, This our son is
stubborn and rebellious, and will not hear our voice: he is a drunkard and a
glutton.

Verse 21. All the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he dye: so
shall thou put away evil from amongst you.

Appl. Why is so much rebellion against parents, is not because the law of God
is silent; this being executed, all England would hear and fear.

2. Is there another way, besides this, to put away evil from among us,
appointed of God? Note, God says, So shall thou put away evil, and no other
way.

3. Or is not the Law of God just, the judgment true and righteous, that it is
not set up amongst us? or will it ever be well with us or ours, until it be set
up?

Statute.
Parents marriage of their children, It was to be confined to such as were in
convenant, Deuteronomy. 7.6.

Exodus 34.16. Thou shall not take of their daughters to thy sons, and their
daughters go a whoring after their Gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after
their Gods.

Deuteronomy. 7.3. Thou shall not make marriages with those nations God will destroy;
thy daughter shall thou not give his son, nor his daughter shall thou take to
thy son. The reason whereof is rendered, verse 4.

Appl. As men under the law were not to match with those nations were not under
the law; so men under grace were not at liberty to match with any but such as
were in Christ, 1 Cor. 7.39.

2. Were we under the law, this would condemn all marriage with idolaters,
more strongly then the work of the law in us has done. Numb. 25.6. 1 Kings
21.25. 1 Kings 11. from 1. to verse 9.

3. See here the authority God has given to men under the law, over their
childrens marriage; they are said to give and take: Esau took a daughter of
Canaan; Jacob obeyed his mother, and married Labans daughter.

Exodus 21.9. If a man betroth his maidservant to his son, he shall deal with
her after the manner of daughters.

Note. Betrothing was the fathers work, in which he gave his daughter, or took
the daughter of some other to his son to wife.

2. The Magistrate or Elders are not to approve of marriage made with any out
of covenant.

It is to be considered, that God (under this word Father) does comprehend the
Magistrate; and obedience and honor hence due to him:

1. Because all authority and rule was first in the father, Genesis 38.24.

2. It came from him to the one Judge Moses.

3. To Judges in every City, who had laws from God to judge the people by: in
which administration only, 1 Samuel 12.12. the Lord God was said to be their
King. And now again, when this law is the rule of judgment to the nation,
then is the Lord Christ said to reign, which shall be a thousand years; God
having committed all judgment and authority to the Son, Mat. 28.18. Rev. 20.6.
and who would not strive to set up Christ's rule?

Note. As Judges were of God before Kings, so if Kings be put down, ye must
return to Judges again; God setting up but these two ways of rule, and God
himself ruling in that of Judges, and therefore best: nor does God rule by
Judges as distinct from Kings, unless they be set up as in the beginning, to
rule by the laws of God.

4. The government came from Judges to Kings; in which the people were said, in
their asking for a King, to have committed great wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 12.17. yea, and God himself said, herein they had rejected him,
and not Samuel, that he should not reign over them. I beseech you, what the
government of Judges by the law God had set up was then to God, and this day is
no less with him, 1 Samuel 8.7.

5. God had foretold of this by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. and the thing occasioned this,
was considerable, 1 Samuel 8.3. which was Samuels age, and his sons perverting
Judgment, and taking bribes, and turning after lucre; yet Samuel, verse. 6. is
displeased at it, when they said, Give us a King; to which God bids Samuel
hearken, and do for them: under whom arose tribute, custom, and imperious
commands, 1 Samuel 8.11. to the end of verse. 18.

6. This rule of Kings, God in the Gospel established by Paul, 13.1. the powers
that be, (even Nero's and his deputies) were said to be ordained of God, in the
Lords setting up of Saul: which fourth Monarchies rule was authoritative,
until the time God had ordained that it should be taken out of the way, for
the wickedness thereof, 2 These. 2.7. and the way how it shall be taken away, is
set down, and by whom, even by the stone cut out of the mountain without
hands: he brake in pieces the iron, brass, clay, silver, and gold, Dan. 2.44,
45. which puts an end to the fourth Monarchy, which shall have its end by Jesus
Christ. So that as the fourth Monarchy (or Roman) put down the law of God,
Christ comes now to put down that in the rule, yea all the rule, authority, and
power thereof, 1 Cor. 15.24.

7. After all this, comes the ancient of days, which is not God, who is not of
time nor days, but he comes by his law, and Judges and judgment, to sit and
judge again; God having foretold he would restore Judges as at the first, Isa.
1.26. to whom government shall be given of God, God having taken it from the
Monarchy, that they may rule again. And now as God is said to give, so shall
it be given by men unto them; in which God is also said to give it, Dan. 2.27.
and that their authority shall not be questioned, as Moses once was, Exodus
2.14. Who made thee a prince and Judge over us? the people making them.

Statute.
Exodus 18.21. Judges are said to be placed over the people, and are called gods.

Exodus 21.6. The master was to bring the servant that would not go out free,
(...) unto the Gods, that is, unto the Judges.

Exodus 22.18. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy
people. Psalm. 82.1. God stands in the congregation of the Gods.

Note. Great is the honor set on Judges, they judging for and under God. I do
not remember that it is said of any Judges but these, nor any other kind of
rulers. Nero was not a God in this sense, though his authority were of God. The
saying of Christ clears this, John 10.34. It is written in your law, I said ye
are Gods, verse. 35. If he called them Gods to whom the word of God came, etc.
so that none are so called, but such to whom the word of God came, that is,
such as by the words of God judged men, as in the place of God, being set up of
God to judge thereby, that judgment may be the Lords.

Heb. 10.28. He that despised Moses law was to dye, Deuteronomy. 17.12. this in the
judgment on Core, Numb. 16.11. they are said to be gathered together against
the Lord, questioning Moses, whom God had set up; and his government, which God
had given as a law to that people. Verse. 13. they say of Moses, he had made,
not God, altogether a prince, and not a Judge over the people, verse. 13. for
which, they and theirs were destroyed, verse. 32.

Statute.
Isa. 38.1. Command thy house (or set it in order) for thou shall dye. Note,
that the law had a rule in it, what men, and how they were to dispose of their
goods and estates in a way of Justice, and not according to their lusts;
according to which rule, they were to divide their estates among them.

1. There was a dowry of virgins, Exodus 22.16. fifty shekels, Deuteronomy. 22.29.

2. The firstborn, Deuteronomy. 21.17. was to have a double portion of all his father
had; and the reason added was not for any ceremonial cause, but that he was the
beginning of his strength.

3. Numb. 36.2. Moses would not make any law in the case of Zelophehad, though
he were as able as any living, but he would inquire of God who should inherit:
and it was resolved, Numb. 27.8. If a man dye and have no son then ye shall
cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughters: if he have no daughter, ye
shall give his inheritance to his brethren: if he have no brethren, ye shall
give it to his fathers brethren: if his father have no brethren, ye shall give
it to his kinsman is next unto him of his family; he shall possess it: and it
shall be to the children of Israel a statute.

Note. How contrary are the practices of this people and nation to Gods law!

Object. In doing thus, we should wrong the dead, and living.

Resp. In doing Gods will, ye can do no wrong.

2. Those that do justice, do not do wrong. But those do thus, do justice: ergo.

3. The dead and living do wrong to themselves and consciences, and others
also, in doing that is forbid by Gods law to be done by them.

4. Many holds and customs necessarily by this law are to be changed.

5. Many other laws do depend on this in civil contracts.

6. How would this quench strife and division among brethren, and prevent the
ruin of many families, and establish love, this being the righteous Judgment
of God!

7. How would this prevent that shame in the nation, where one (the eldest
brother) has all, and is a prince; and the rest all poor, and he only lords
it over all the rest!

Object. These holds are established by law and custom, and may not be changed.

Resp. If a law of man be contrary to the law of God, it is no law, but a
tradition: and men are bound to alter it, when they know Gods mind to be to the
contrary in the case.

2. If a man keeps from him that has right to a possession, his possession, it
is no wrong to take it from him, and give it to whom it justly pertains, but an
act of Justice, Psalm. 24.11. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

Luke 12.13. And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother,
that he divide the inheritance with me.

Verse. 14. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a Judge or a divider over
you? Numb. 34.17.

1. It shows that inheritances were to be divided amongst brethren by the law.

2. It was the work of the Judge to see it done, if complained of. That this
was not at all, or not rightly (that is, justly) done between this man and his
brother.

3. That there was usually to be a divider; they were not to divide it
themselves by the law, that occasions of injustice, and of jealousy, and
discontent, may be removed, and occasion of probate of wills cease; only set a
part for paying the debts, and divide the rest.

4. It was the work of one made a Judge by the people in the way of the law,
and not of others, which had not authority; which authority Christ assumed not,
John 3.17. and 8.15.

Ye children, judge ye if the way of the Lord be not good and sweet, better and
sweeter then your fathers love unto you; and if he cares not more for you,
then they.

Statute. In case some were poor, and had sold their inheritance.
Ruth 4.4. There is none to redeem it besides thee, and I am after thee.

Judgment.
Note. Those had right to redeem, came into it successively and in order, on
the refusal thereof, Jerm. 32.7. (...).

Of servants.
Deuteronomy. 14.12. If thy brother serve thee six years, the seventh he shall go out
free.

Exodus 21.2. If thou buy an Hebrew servaent, six years he shall serve: in the
seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

Note, If a man would buy a servant, he could not buy him for a longer term.

Deuteronomy. 21.5. If the servant will not go forth free, verse. 6. he was to bring
him to the judges; to show, he kept him not by constraint, but free consent.
Note: this liberty servants now have, after seven years, to abide longer if
they please.

Deuteronomy. 15.16, 17. Shows the ground of his stay, that on experience had of the
seven years past service, that it was well with him, he loved him and his
house, he might remain.

Deuteronomy. 15.13. When thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not suffer
him to go away empty, verse. 14. Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy
flock, out of thy flour and wine press, wherewith God has blessed thee.

Verse. 18. It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free,
etc. to which God promised a blessing.

Exodus 21.26, 27. If a man smite out his man or maidservants eye or tooth,
they shall go out free therefore.

Deuteronomy. 23.15. If a servant escape from his master, thou shall not deliver him
unto him: he shall dwell with thee.

To explain this statute, Levit. 25.46. God forbids ruling with rigor, for
which cause the servant ran away, and was not by the Judge to be delivered his
master: which is illustrated, Genesis 16.6, 8. Sarah dealing hardly with Hagar,
she fled from her face: and in One simus.

Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress the hireling of his wages that is poor and
needy, whether of thy brethren or strangers; but shall at his day give him his
wages: nor shall the Sun go down on it: for he is poor, and sets his heart upon
it, Levit. 19.13.

Exodus 21.20. If a man smite his servant with a rod (a thing for correction,
not a sword) and he or she dye under his hand, he shall be surely punished.
Verse. 21. If he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his
money.

Exodus 20. the servant was to rest and sanctify the Sabbath day.

Exodus 21.32. If an Ox gore a manservant or maid, the owner shall pay the
master thirty shekels (and the Ox shall be stoned) which was one pound
seventeen shillings and six pence.

Note. If this were for a law, how good were it for servants, who now are as
slaves for ten years; and at the end, their masters, instead of giving ought,
seek to ruin them? It would be good for masters also; did they obey, God would
bless them.

The manner of the Jews contracts, in the buying and selling of their lands, is
set down, Jer. 32.7, 8, 9, 10.
1. There was a right of redemption in the next of kin, as before.

2. He should, if he could, buy it; if not, he must have the refuse, as
Jeremiah had, though in the prison.

3. Hananeel is necessitated to do it, it seems, by crying, I pray thee buy it:
and indeed, without great necessity, the Jews, for the evil and reproach
thereof, would not do it.

Vid. Genesis 23. Abraham purchasing Mamre.

4. This was only in free purchases.

Verse. 9.1. He bought the field of the owner.

2. He weighed the money; in which was much justice: there was the number,
seventeen shekles; and weight also: and in the contrary, much wrong may be done
in payments, though not used with us.

3. He weighed to him, the man himself, the money.

Verse. 10. Is a repetition of that in the ninth, more fully setting down,

1. That he gave Hananeel an evidence, and subscribed and sealed it, to pay for
the land so much money; to which were witnesses had subscribed their names to
the conditions between them; who also were to see the payment of the moneys:
and this as in the 11. verse was rolled up: none but the buyer, seller, and
witnesses knew.

Verse. 11. Is another evidence, called the evidence of the purchase, which was
given by Hananeel; which was open.

Verse. 12. The evidence of the purchase is not kept by the purchaser, but by
some officer entrusted therewith, for the public, then called Baruch, a
Scribe. Jerem. 36.26.

2. This was done in the sight of him that sold it, Hananeel; which was a
confirmation of the thing to the public officer.

3. To this book of the purchase also there were witnesses had attested their
hands for confirmation, as the former to that writing given Hananeel for
payment of the money.

4. These witnesses subscribed the book of the purchase, before many Jews, in a
judicial way called to fit in the Court of the prison.

5. In the presence of these, it was delivered to Baruch.

6. After the payment of the money that he gave Hananeel, is returned him, and
kept with the other of the purchase, for confirmation of his title: much is the
consideration.

Appl. Parents, see, I pray, what honor God requires of your children to give
you, and to obey you, and to be put to death if they do not obey you. Oh, but
again discharge your duty, as Abraham and Joshua did, and as God commands you
to do, that they may know their duty, and what in the law is commanded them
concerning God and men in general, and you and them in especial, as in
Deuteronom. 4.8, 9, 10. Deuteronom. 11.19. these are the things you are to
teach your children, speaking of them when you are sitting in the house, when
ye walk by the way, when ye lie down and rise up: these ye are to write on the
door-posts of your houses and gates; and not ballads, and songs, and lascivious
pictures, verse. 20. which lead them to disobedience against God.

1. Note. It is said ( Deuteronomy. 21.21.) of the disobedient child, that was a
drunkard and a glutton, he should be stoned to death; and so they should put
away evil from among them.

2. Signifying this, that unless this course were taken with drunken
disobedient children, the evil of drunkenness and disobedience to parents would
not be removed out of the land. And who are there that are accustomed to
drunkenness in the time of their age, that were not accustomed to it in youth?

3. For the neglect of doing justice in this case, see but how these sins, like
a leprosy or spreading evil, have as it were infected the poor and rich, old
and young, in all parts of the Nation; and no other way but this is ever able
to put away the evil thereof from amongst us.

4. You must do so, that is, stone him to death, and not put him to death any
other way; and then all the men, even his own companions, must help stone him
to death, that are of the fame City: which could not but work strangely on them.

1. In Cities is usually most excess and company-keeping.

2. There is most drunkenness, and consequently most disobedience: for drunken
children are disobedient children.

3. Here it should be done, for the greater terror to others.

1. Note, That the Statutes and judgments expressed in the word, are a rule
for every Judge in each City to put in execution.

2. But if cases fall out not clearly expressed or set down, called disficult
cases, Deuteronomy. 17.8.

3. These cases are to be referred to the chief judicatory provided in that
behalf, called the seventy or Synedry. So that here is no straitedness for rule
in the way of God.

4. They are not left to do what they will, for it must be the sentence of the
law, Deuteronomy. 17.11.

5. They are to teach, to show, to tell the sentence, out of, or according to
the law, as appears by comparing Heb. 10.28. with Deuteronomy. 17.12. hence called
Counselors, not Judges.

6. This was to be done by the Judge before whom it was first brought; he was
to seek the resolution thereof at the supreme judicatory or council.

That of Exodus 18.21. rulers of tens to judge, was only proper to that time,
before they came into Canaan; until when, the rule was not settled.

Command the Sixth.
Exodus 20.13. Thou shall not kill.


Statute. Genesis 9.6.
LEvit. 24.17. He that kills a man shall surely be put to death, Numb. 35.16.
If any smite his neighbor with an instrument of iron that he dye, he is a
murderer: he shall surely be put to death.

If he smite him with throwing of a stone, That he dye, he is a murderer.

If he smite him with a hand-weapon of wood, That he dye, he is a murderer.

If he thrust him of hate, That he dye, he is a murderer.

Or hurl at him by lying in wait, That he dye, he is a murderer.

Or in enmity smite him with his hand, That he dye, he is a murderer.

Exodus 21.12. He that smites a man that he dye, etc.

Verse. 14. If any come presumptuously on his neighbor, and stay him with
guile, then thou shall take him from mine altar, etc. 1 Kings 2.5 29, 30.

Verse. 22. If men strive and hurt a woman with child and hurt felloweth (that
is, afterward she loses her life.)

Judgment.
Gal. 5.21. Shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

They shall surely dye, 2 Samuel 1. from verse 6. to the 16.

Exodus 21.14. Take him from the altar and put him to death.

1. Note. The executioner is to be the avenger of bloods; who was to do it when
he met with him, being his near kinsman.

2. The avenger of blood pursued him, and slew him where he met with him. This
would not be so convenient, families being dispersed in another nature among us
then them.

Question is, If any other might be an executioner in this case, and whether
the revenge of blood be to be delayed at all.

3. Numb. 35.24 27. If a man were slain by one not his enemy, nor sought his
hurt, the Congregation were to judge between the slayer and revenger, and
deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger: yet if the slayer come out
of the borders of the City, and the avenger meet with him, and slay him, he
shall not be guilty of blood.

Note. This answered to our Jury; and in no case was the Jury made use of, but
this, as I know of; which was the whole congregation.

1. Here was matter of life and death.

2. The law was diverse in this case, according as it did appear, whether the
murder were wilful or not: they were to judge with the Judge; and the
congregation, not the Judge, deliver him, as in Numb. 25.25.

3. What warrant this is to their proceedings in other cases, I know not, from
the law of God: for the law of God having expressly set down in it the judgment
of God, there needs no Jury, the fact being proved by the witnesses that they
might judge, or else not, Deuteronomy. 25.1, 2.

Statute.
Numb. 35.22, 23. If he thrust suddenly without enmity or east any thing on him
without lying in wait, or with any stone wherewith a man may dye, seeing him
not, and was not his enemy nor sought his harm.

Deuteronomy. 4.24. If he kill his neighbor unawares and hated him not in time past
--

Deuteronomy. 19.5. An instance is set down of a man killed by the head of an Ax
falling ignorantly from the helve.

Judgment.
1. He shall fly to the City of refuge, Joshua 20.4.

2. He shall stay to the death of the High Priest.

3. The Congregation shall judge between the avenger and the slayer, when the
case is not clear whether he slew the man in malice or not.

Deuteronomy. 19.11, 12. If he slew him in malice, he was to be brought from the City
of refuge, and delivered to the Avenger.

2. If he did not, he was to abide in the City.

Exodus 21.13. If a man lie not in wait for his neighbor but God deliver him
into his hand, I will appoint a place where he shall flee.

Question is, whether such Cities, seeing such cases are daily among us, are
not to be set up, to prevent shedding of innocent blood.

2. Whether that Ceremony of staying in the City until the death of the
high priest, do destroy all morality in the rest; or rather, that now Christ is
dead, the congregation having acquitted the man slew his brother unawares, he
should be immediately free, by the blood and death of Christ.

Statute.
Exodus 21.28. If an ox were wont to push in time past, and it has been
testified to his owner in time past, and he has not kept him, but he has
killed man or woman --

Judgment.
1. The Ox shall be stoned.

2. His slesh shall not be eaten.

3. His owner shall be put to death.

4. This sentence by a mulct was only in this case to be taken off from the
man: verse. 30. If there be laid a sum of money on him, then he shall give for
the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid on him.

Note. Here is no benefit of Clergy granted, nor in no case else is there any
like thereunto instituted of God to be used in judgment.

2. The laying on him a sum was Arbitrary.

3. The quantity of money was Arbitrary; he must pay whatever it was, or dye.
Job 2.4. All a man has will he give for his life.

4. What is said of an Ox, may be said and done of like hurtful beasts.

5. Why the Ox is to be killed, I think is, because it is written, He that
sheddeth (as well beast as man) man's blond, his blood shall be shed.

Statute.
Exodus 21.28. If an Ox gore a man or woman that they dye --

Judgment.
1. The Ox shall be surely stoned.

2. His flesh shall not be eaten.

3. The owner shall be quit.

Verse. 31. Whether he has gored son or daughter, according to this judgment
it shall be done unto him.

4. This is the judgment of him who before had not witnessed unto him that it
would push.

Appl. To Judges: Whether ye can dispense with the judgment of God, for the
Ox, in his manner of death or flesh.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 12.8. If thou build a new house, thou shall make battelments on the
roof, that thou bring not blood on thy house.

Judgment.
Quest. 1. Whether the house were to be destroyed. 2. Or a mulct to be laid
thereon for the owner to pay.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor
children for the fathers.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 21.1. If a man be found slain in the land, lying in the field, and not
known who slew him -- verse. 2. The Elders and the Judges shall come forth, and
measure to the Cities that are round about him that is slain: the Elders of
the City that are next to him shall take a red heifer, etc.

1. The ceremony of the heifer then, is the duty of humiliation now.

2. The Case is often, and shows the dwellers between Cities were judged by the
next City Judges, Josh. 18.28.

3. The duty is necessary, that judgment for innocent blood be not brought
upon us.

4. By this means God may be entreated to reveal the murderer, and men show
their innocence and clearness in the thing.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 21.22. If a man has committed sin worthy of death, and he be to be put
to death (which was first done) and thou hang him on a tree:

Verse. 23. His body shall not remain all night on the tree, but thou shall in
any wise bury him that day; for he that is hanged is accursed of God: that thy
land be not defiled.

Quest. 1. Whether men may condemn by the law of God a man to be hanged before
dead.

2. Whether men may let a man hang one the tree all night.

3. Whether a defilement of our land be not now, as well as heretofore the Jews
land thereby; and what ceremony there could be in that.

4. Whether the judgment be Gods a man is judged by, and not the punishment;
we using not Gods, but the Roman punishments.

Note. Gal. 3.13. Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree.

1. First, the sentencing any to death, was not of the ceremonial law, but the
moral or judicial.

2. The curse of the law to those under the law, is as well since Christ as
before.

3. A Nation, as I remember, were never cursed through any ceremonies; they
belonged to the ceremonial law. Now in this, not only Christ's, but all before
and since are under the curse of the law judicial, in which was no ceremonies:
Christ condemned by the law, by false witnesses.

4. The condemnation was death.

5. The curse was, after death to be hanged on a tree. Now shall we put men
under the curse of the law, God has not put under the curse of the law? Is it
not enough that many dye when God says they should not dye, as in case of
theft; but that they should be accursed by the law also, after death?

Statute.
Levit. 24.18. He that kills a beast shall make it good, beast for beast.

Statute.
Exodus 21.18. If men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or
with his fist; and he dye not, but keeps his bed --

Judgment.
Verse. 19. If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he
that smote him be quit.

2. He shall pay for the loss of his time.

3. He shall be thoroughly healed.

Question is, whether a man walking abroad, and after in twelve months and a
day dying, or how long before he be quit, seeing no time is set down.

2. This must be with a stone or fist.

3. This case is in case a man dies not.

4. That he keeps his bed.

5. That he rise again and recover.

Statute.
Exodus 21.22. If men strive, and hurt a woman with child' so that her fruit
depart from her, and yet no mischief follow --

Judgment.
1. He shall be surely punished (or whipped) as the woman's husband will lay on
him.

2. The Judge arbitrarily may lay a pecuniary mulct on him.

3. If mischief follow, life shall be for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
burning for burning, wound for wound, and stripe for stripe.

Statute.
Levit. 24.19. If a man cause a blemish in his neighbor --

Judgment.
As he has done, shall it be done unto him, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
breach for breach, Mat. 5.39, 40. do not destroy this judicial law, the one
being given by Moses for judgment to judge those under the law by in the
world; the other given by Christ to men in the Church to live by, who, verse.
47, are required to do more then others.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 25.11. When men strive together, and the wife of the one draws near to
deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smites him, and puts forth
her hand, and takes him by the secrets --

Judgment.
Thou shall cut off her hand.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 24.16. No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge, for
he takes a man's life to pledge.

Verse. 10. If thou lend, thou shall not go into his house for a pledge; thou
shall stand abroad: and he to whom thou lendest, shall bring it to thee.

If the man be poor, thou shall not sleep with his pledge, but deliver it
again when the Sun sets, that he may sleep in his own raiment.

Verse. 17. Shall not take the widows raiment to pledge.

Statute.
Exodus 22.21. Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: ye shall not
afflict any widow nor fatherless child.

Statute.
Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before
the blind.

Statute.
Levit. 19.17, 18, Thou shall not hate, but rebuke thy neighbor; and not
suffer sin upon him, nor avenge nor bear grudge against him.

Statute.
Numb. 35.31. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is
guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to death.

Of how much evil and blood-guiltiness is this Nation guilty of! verse. 34.
defile not therefore the land by traditions of men. How has this law been made
void in times passed!

Note. If the rule and government of God were restored, many occasions of
murder would be prevented, all encouragements thereunto taken away, and the
fear of God fall on men, to keep them from doing of it; and bloodguiltiness
from the land removed, and the causes of the many plagues of pestilence which
usually came with the deaths of the former princes for defiling of the land
with blood in he time of their rule, with the famines of food, and judgments
of unseasonable weather, and blastings, mildews, etc.

Which the Nation lies dyed with; not only with unrevenged blood for blood,
but with blood of men put to death, which God would not have put to death; as
precious Martyrs, and poor thieves: and many God would have had put to death,
as adulterers, blasphemers, etc. and many God would not have put to death, as
unmarryed men for ravishing maidens; all which that has been committed since
the Nation has had the word of God among them, and especially since Henry the
eighth's days, wherein has been much more free use and abundant knowledge of
it then before, cries to God against us for our blood.

Appl. Here see the necessity of our making a covenant with God, of setting up
his rule and government, if ever we hope to be free from the wrath and
judgment of God in our selves or families.

Our land has been greatly polluted in the way of punishments executed
contrary to Gods laws, by imprisonments, hanging, and other tortures, for law
and judgment, borrowed from the heathens: and here see the irregularity of
man's nature, who rather would be led by the corrupt rule and practice of the
heathens, and their law and judgments, then the pure, just, and unquestionable
way and rule of Gods word.

If by the law there is no use for a Jury, but in that case of trial of
murder, when it was not clear whether it was so or manslaughter; and then not
of any chosen men, but the Congregation were to judge; this would be a great
ease of expense to the Commonweal, if service of Juries were removed.

The Judge, the plaintiff the defendant, and witnesses, being all to sit
publicly in the gate of the City, for all to hear,

1. If the matter were by the witnesses made clear, and the case plainly set
down in the law, the Judgment was to be set forth and shown out of the book of
God to all, and the Judges to judge, Deuteronomy. 25.1.

2. If the witnesses made not the charge clear, then the Judges could not judge
them.

3. If there were but one witness, the Judges could not judge them in any case.

4. If the case were not plainly set down in the law to Judge by, they were not
to judge them, but to transfer it to the supreme Judicatory.

5. In stead of the prisoners putting himself in his trial on God and the
country, every man by covenanting with God, if he transgress, puts himself on
God and Moses.

6. Whereas Juryes are for dispatch of the multiplicity of causes and trials in
the several places of judgment, and joined with the Judges, because of the
long distance of time between Assize and Assize, and then because it is held
but in one place of a shire, whence arises vast charge to the Nation.

1. Judgment being administered daily, without delay.

2. In every corner of the County being to be had, the Judges would not be
straightened in time for hearing of causes, nor would there be any need for any
Juryes to help them.

3. In stead of the country, the man has Moses; in stead of man's law, he has
Gods to put himself on.

But that I am altogether unacquainted with what concern the law or its
proceedings that is among us, I might set more fully the necessity of the
abrogating of the one, and the establishing the other, diversely.

Command the Sixth.
Exodus 20.14. Thou shall not commit adultery.


Statute.
LEvit. 20.10. The man that commits adultery with another man's wife --

Verse. 11. He that commits adultery with his neighbors wife --

Verse. 12. With his fathers wife, or daughter-law --

Judgment.
Shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.

They both shall be put to death; they have defiled themselves with each other.
Numb. 25.1.6. Ezekiel. 16.38.40. Judges 19. and 23. chap. Genesis 34.2, 25, 26, 27.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. If a man be found lying with a woman married to a husband, they
shall both of them dye, Numb. 25.6.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.23. If a damosel, a virgin that is betrothed to an husband, and a
man find her in the City, and lie with her. --

Judgment.
They both shall be stoned at the gate of the City, the damosel, because she
cried not; and the man, because he humbled his neighbors wife.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.25. If a man find a betrothed damosel in the field, and the man
force her and lie with her, he shall dye; but to the damosel ye shall do
nothing: for as when a man rises against his neighbor and slays him, so is
this matter, verse. 27. He found her in the field; she cried, and there was none
to save her.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.28. If a man find a damosel not betrothed, a virgin, and lay hold
on her and lie with her, and they be found --

Judgment.
1. He laid hold on her, and lay with her: he shall give her father fifty
shekels, three pound two shillings and six pence.

2. She shall be his wife; he has humbled her.

3. He shall not put her away all his days.

If any man should have dyed for fornication, this man should; but is not to
dye.

Statute.
Exodus 22.16. If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her --

Judgment.
1. He shall surely indow her to be his wife.

2. Verse. 17. If her father utterly refuse to give her to him to wife (as in
this case he might) he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.

1. Note, Before, a man laid hold on a maid; he here inticeth a maid; and the
maid consenting, the fifty shekels are not paid her father, three pound two
shillings six pence.

2. Here note, all ravishments do not deserve death, as by our law: and though
we say God would not have that severity used under the Gospel as under the law,
we in many cases use more.

Statute.
Levit. 20.14. If a man take a wife and her mother --

Judgment.
He and they shall be burned with fire.

Statute.
Levit. 18.6. to verse. 18. are expressed the prohibited degrees of
consanguinity and affinity; within which men are not to marry.

Chap. 20.21. If a man lie with his uncles or brothers wife, they shall be
childless.

Judgment.
That is, before the time of childbearing, they both should be put to death:
others, only a curse of barrenness, which cannot be.

Statute.
Levit. 20.18. If a man lie with a woman having her sickness, and uncover her
nakedness, etc.

Judgment.
They both shall be cut off from among the people.

Quest. If by death, or as Miriam, shut out without the camp.

It is of great note, that the reason why the widows portion was to be so small
of her husbands estate, was, because her father was to provide for her; or her
husbands brethren, if she had no children; and her children, if she had any.

Statute.
Levit. 20.17. If a man take his sister, his fathers or his mothers daughter,
and see her nakedness, or she see his --

Judgment.
1. It is a wicked thing.

2. They shall be cut off from among the people.

Statute.
Levit. 19.29. Do not prostitute thy daughter to cause her to be a whore.

Statute.
Levit. 18.22. Thou shall not lie with mankind as with womankind.

Levit. 20.13. If a man lie with mankind as with woman --

Judgment.
1. They both have committed abomination.

2. They shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them. This
phrase shows the ground of the Jews cry, His blood be on us and our children,
Mat. 27.25. when Pilate washed his hands as innocent of Christ's death; which
being innocent, he should have justified.

Statute.
Exodus 22.19. Whosoever lies with a beast --

Levit. 18.23. Thou shall not lie with any beast.

Levit. 20.15. If a man lie with a beast --

Judgment.
2. It is a defiling of a man's self.

2. The man shall surely be put to death.

3. The beast shall be slain.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.5. A woman shall not wear that appertains to a man, nor a man that
appertains to a woman's garment.

Statute.
Levit. 18.23. A woman shall not stand before a beast, to lie down thereunto.

Levit. 20.16. If a woman approach to a beast, and lie down thereunto --

Levit. 18.26. Which the stranger was forbid, as well as the home-borne.

Judgment.
1. It is said to be confusion or mixture of contrary natures.

2. The land and people are defiled thereby.

3. Thou shall kill the woman, and the beast; their blood shall be upon them.

4. God cast out and the land vomited out the heathens therefore, Levit. 18.24,
25. and would spew them out also, if they did the like.

Statute.
Levit. 21.7. Thou shall not take a whore to wife.

Deuteronomy. 22.20. If a man take a wife, and she be not a virgin, and he accuse her
to the elders of the City, and her parents cannot show the tokens of her
virginity --

Judgment.
2. They shall bring her out to the door of her fathers house.

2. There the men of her City shall stone her with stones that she dye, because
she wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her fathers house.

3. So (and no otherwise) shall thou put away evil (that is, the Judge) from
among you. Then, by doing this justice on her, which would be a means of
preventing much evil.

1. Note. Elders, not Judges, had the ordinance of marriage referred to them:
which were twelve. Vid. Topsel on Ruth.

2. Adultery before marriage, as well as after, dissolves marriage, and is
punished with death: which would make parents and children more careful of
their childrens conversation and company in youth.

3. A tradition used among us, has made void this law of God; we saying, when
a man married a woman, that he was to take her for better, for worse; so as
that though she were a whore, she was now to be his wife, and no remedy left
him to deliver himself: which gave all manner of liberty and looseness to
maidens before marriage, and occasioned looseness in their conversations
afterward; which is a thing expressly against the law of God.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.13. If a man take a wife, and go in to ber, and hate her, verse. 14.
and give un occasion of speech against her, and bring an evil name upon her,
and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid;
verse. 15. The father and mother of the damosel shall bring forth the tokens of
her virginity to the Elders of the City, in the City, in the gate; verse. 17.
And they shall spread the cloth before the Elders of the City, etc.

Judgment.
1. They shall chastise, that is, whip the man: now in whipping, the man was to
have but forty stripes; nor was he to stand, but lie down.

2. They shall amerce him a hundred shekels of silver, and give them the father
of the damosel; which is six pound five shillings.

3. She shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.

1. A bill of divorce might be given others, but not this.

2. Because that by the report she was defamed, another would not take her.

3. Without this law, he would not keep her a day; he hated her before, but
worse now.

This case is illustrateed in some kind, by Joseph and Mary, Math. 1.18.
1. He espoused Mary.

2. Before they come together, she is found with child.

3. He being a just man, was not willing to make her a public example (that
is, to have her stoned) verse. 19.

4. He was minded to put her away (not to marry her) privately, to leave her
and forsake her.

5. Verse. 20. The Angel said, Fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife. Here by
fear is signified Joseph's fearing to marry her against Gods command, Levit.
21.17. he not knowing that what was conceived in her was of the Holy Spirit,
until revealed to him.

Here it is not amiss to speak of marriage, the means ordained of God to
prevent adultery.
1. This ordinance was not pertaining to the Priests, for it was belonging to
Moses and was before the Priesthood of Aaron; and is lawful among heathens, 1
Cor. 7.10. Heb. 13.4.

2. Nor to the Judges.

3. It belonged to the Elders in the City. Now there were to be Judges and
Elders in the Commonwealth-government: hence matters pertaining to man and wife
are usually referred to the Elders, that concern marriage, Deuteronomy. 25.7, 8, 9,
and 22.15, 17, 18. and not to the Judges.

Ruth 4.2. Boaz took ten men of the Elders of the City, for number.

2. They sat down in the gate of the City, verse. 1. for the place where civil
affairs were discussed of.

3. Verse. 9. He calls Elders and people to witness, he had purchased Ruth to
wife: the dowry of a widow was twenty five, being but half of a maids, which
was fifty shekels.

4. Verse. 11. The people and Elders say, We are witnesses; and bless them both.
Verse. 12. These are not to be Elders of the Church, James 5.14. but of the
Commonweal only.

5. Verse. 13. He took Ruth, and she was his wife; and he went in unto her, and
she conceived and bare a son.

1. Conclusion. If the ordinance belong to Moses, then for any other, under
what pretense soever, to do it, it is high presumption.

2. Those that are married by them, are not joined in the way of the Lord, nor
by that authority God ordained among those that have his law.

3. I say of this, as of acts done by Heathens, without law, that they are a
law to themselves: so are our doings in this matter this day: It were good it
were amended. Never did Priest, Levite, Christ, or Apostle, do it for any; and
then by what authority do the ministry now do it?

Here I desire leave to commend to your consideration that one branch in the
Act made for adultery, May 10. 1650.

If any man shall have the carnal knowledge of the body of any virgin,
unmarryed woman, or widow, every such man and woman convict of such offense,

1. Shall be committed to common goal three months.

2. Shall give security to be of the good bahaviour for one whole year.

Note. 1. If the man be a young man or widdower, then he was to marry the maid,
or unmarryed woman, or widow, by the law of God, and not to be prisoned,
bound, etc.

2. If he be a married man, then the case is adultery, as in the woman's before
that was married to another man; and the judgment death.

3. If you had put them to death by Gods law, ye would not have said it should
be death after such a day; Gods law not taking beginning then, nor
establishment from us; or at least until then, we were not under Gods law, nor
was it declared to the nation in the name of Gods law, but man's, as an Act of
Parliament only.

Statute.
Levit. 19.20. Whoever lies carnally with a woman that is a bondmaid (or
apprentice) betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given
her --

Judgment.
1. She shall be scourged.

2. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free.

This, nor many other cases, are not excepted in the late Act.

Statute.
Levit. 20.11, 12. The man that lies with his fathers wife or daughter-law --

Judgment.
They are to be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

In this law only adulterers dye: the man, because he humbled his neighbors
wife, whether betrothed only or married: the woman, because she broke the
covenant of her God. In which is much justice.

In this law, ravishments of such as are unmarryed, and neither of them
betrothed, are freed from death, either by marriage, or corporal or penal
punishments: which is of exceeding mercy.

Who shall do more in one, or less in the other, and be innocent before God? O
where is law, or justice, or mercy, or righteousness, but in this law of the
Lord! how then shall we yet justify and set up our own, and condemn and
suppress the law of the Lord!

This command is broken by intemperance, or insobriety, in meat, drink, and
apparel; the evil whereof, especially that of drunkenness, abounds in this
Nation, and is very great before the Lord.

Command.
Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him, and
make him drunken, that thou may look on their nakedness, Habac. 2.15, 16.
deprived of his place in Church and world, as a master, an owner, etc.

Esth. 1.8. In Ahasuerus great feast, the drinking was according to the law;
none did compel, for the king had appointed to all the officers of his house,
that they should do according to every man's pleasure. It is emphatical: God
distinguishes his law from the statutes of Kings: (...) and so Ezra 8.36. Yet
this is to be observed, though it serves for a law with us, being sanctified,
and become part of the word of God; in which it excells other kings laws,
though it come short of Gods. By this word, the other commands of the King are
set forth.

Isa. 5.11. Woe to them rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong
drink, that continue until night that wine inflame them; and the harp and pipe,
and viol are in their feasts, etc. Verse. 22. Woe to them are mighty to drink
wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. Isa. 56.12.

Come ye, say they, we will fetch wine, and will fill our selves with strong
drink.

Mat. 24.49. He was the evil servant eat and drank with the drunken.

Judgment.
Quer. Whether the violence of Lebanon, a holy violence, Hab. 2.17. be not of
Habakkuks drunkenness, that his estate be taken from him, and bestowed on those
are to inherit, to preven the evil on his family, the land, and City. Thus in
Abigail, 1 Samuel 2 5.18.19.

Gal. 5. -- Shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 11.21. the
Church-drunkards had the plague among them.

Hos. 4.11. Wine and drunkenness take away the heart, Deuteronomy, 29.19 20.

Isa. 28.3. The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under
foot; have no employment nor honor among men, but be as that vessel in whom is
no delight.

Verse. 4. Their beauty and glory (which consists in riches and greatness) shall
be as a fading flower, and hasty fruit, before summer, Joel 1.5. God would have
one generation tell another, that the plagues of palmer, canker, locust, were
for drunkenness.

Verse. 7. The priest and prophet err through wine and strong drink, they err in
vision; and stumble in judgment, and are out of the way.

Verse. 8. All tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no
place clean. 1 Samuel 25.36.37. Prove. 23.20, 21, 29, 30.

Hab. 2.16. Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy
foreskin be uncovered. The word in the original signifies the taking away of
one out of his place.
The cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned to thee, and shameful spewing
shall be one thy glory. Verse. 17. The violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and
the spoil of heasts which made them afraid, because of men's blood, and for the
violence of the land, and the City, and all that dwell therein, Genesis 9.23.

Jer. 13.13. This drunkenness brought forth, that in which King, Priests,
Prophets, inhabitants, fathers, and sons, became drunk spiritually; and dash
one against another.

Deuteronomy. 21.18. The son on his fathers exhortation would not leave his
drunkenness, was stoned, as in verse. 20. by all the men of his City.

Command the Eighth.
Exodus 20.15. Thou shall not steal.


Statute. Levit. 27.28, 29.
PSalm 76.12. Vow, and pay to the Lord, all ye that are round about him.

Deuteronomy. 12.17. Thou shall not eat thy vows thou vowest to God.

Numb. 30. The case of vows is handled, when lawful, when not, in a man, verse.
2. a maid, verse. 3. and 5. a wife, verse. 6, 7, 8. a widow, verse. 9. to the end.

Judgment.
Jephthah, Judges 11.31, 36, 39.

1. Not to pay, is sacrilege or theft from God.

2. The punishment exemplary in Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5. verse. 1. to the
10.

Appl. To Parliament, people, etc. to remember the vows of God on your souls:
they are not paid; God requires them.

Statute.
Exodus 21.16. He that steals a man, and sells him, or if he be found in his
hand, etc.

Deuteronomy. 24.7. If he be found making merchandise of an Israelite, or stealing of
him, or selling of him --

Judgment.
He shall surely be put to death.

Prove. 28.24.

Statute.
Levit. 19.11. Ye shall not steal nor deal falsely one with another.

Exodus 22.1. If he steal an ox, and kill or sell it,

He shall restore five oxen.

If he steal a sheep, and kill or sell it;

He shall restore four sheep.

Verse. 4. If the thief be found in his hand certainly and alive, whether it be
ox, ass, or sheep --

He shall restore double.

Statute.
Verse. 7. If a man shall deliver money or scuff to keep, and it be stolen out
of the man's house, and the thief be found,

Let him pay double.

Verse. 8. If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be
brought to the Judges, to see whether he have put his hands to his neighbors
goods.

Statute.
Exodus 22.9. For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for
sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing which another challenges
to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the Judges; and whom the
Judges shall coudemne,

He shall pay double to his neighbor.

Statute.
Exodus 22.10. If a man deliver to his neighbor an ass, an ox, or a sheep, or
any beast to keep, and it dye, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it --

Judgment.
Verse. 11. An oath of the Lord shall be between them both, that he has not put
his hand to his neighbors goods.

2. The owner shall accept thereof.

3. He shall not make it good.

Verse. 12. If it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution to the owner
thereof.

Verse. 13 If it be torn in pieces,

1. Let him bring it for witness.

2. He shall not make good what was torn.

Statute.
Exodus 22.2. If a thief be found breaking up, and he be smitten that he dye --

Judgment.
There shall no blood be shed for him (no, not in the member he was wounded)

Statute.
Exodus 22.3. But if the Sun be risen on him --

Judgment.
1. Blood shall be shed for him.

2. He should have made satisfaction.

3. If he have nothing, he shall be sold for his theft.

The Statutes Judicial, as from their Magna Charta, were deduced from the ten
commandments only; to which those of tithes were not referred but depended on
the priesthood of Aaron, and law annexed thereunto.

1. See, here is no hanging, burning, no nor whipping set down by God, nor
Clergy.

2. Gods aim is satisfaction of the loser, and not the loss of the goods of
the honest man, nor life of the thief.

3. The thief, if he have not to pay, his body will yield more to sell beyond
the seas, then his death will do any man good: that yields nothing but trouble
of mind.

4. God would not value any man's life at the rate of any goods; and he is the
Lord thereof, and not man: and how shall we then dare do it?

5. Note, The man that prosecutes, the Jury, the Judge, they have all cause to
call on the Parliament for the setting up of Gods law: for how shall they
answer when God shall Judge?

Object. Men condemned for stealing and released, after come to kill a man: who
is guilty of that blood?

Resp. To take away a man's life for stealing goods, is to be guilty of his
blood, because God, the only Judge, says he shall not dye.

2. When the man slew a man, his blood was on his own head: before he was not,
now he was appointed to dye.

3. As Christ to the man, so may ye say to such, Go thy way, sin no more, lest
a worse thing happen unto thee.

O let us remember we are men, and under a judgment: how shall we do, if God
measure to us as we measure to others? the measure of the man's sin that stole
was not full, until he had killed. Now God says to the man he will destroy.
Fill up the measure of thy sin: and how shall he do it, if we take him away
before? 1 Samuel 2.23.

Statute.
Exodus 22.5. If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall
put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field --

Judgment.
Of the best of his own field, and the best of his own vinyard, shall he make
satisfaction.

Statute.
Exodus 22.6. If fire break forth, and eatch in thorns, that the stacks of
corn or standing corn, or the field be consumed therewith --

Judgment.
He that kindled the fire shall surely make sat is faction:

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 19.11. You shall not steal, nor deal falsty one with another.

Verse. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor, nor rob him.

Verse. 35. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in met-yard, in weight, or measure:
but a just balance, weight, epha, hin, shall ye have.

Deuteronomy. 25.13. Thon shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a
small; nor in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small.

Verse. 15. But a perfect and just measure shall thou have.

Judgment.
1. That thou may live long in the land: God otherwise will cut thee off.

2. Those that do such things, and do unrighteously, are an abomination before
the Lord.

Statute.
Exodus 21.14. If a man borrow ought of his neighbor and it be hurt or dye, and
the owner not with it --

Judgment.
1. He shall surely make it good.

2. But if the owner be present, he shall not make it good.

3. If it be a hired thing, it came for his hire.

Statute.
Exodus 21.33. If a man open a pit, or dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or
an ass fall therein --

Judgment.
1. The owner of the pit shall make it good.

2. He shall give him money for it.

3. He shall have the dead beast.

Statute.
Exodus 21.35. If one man's ox hurt another that he dye --

Judgment.
1. They shall sell the dead ox, and divide the money.

2. They sell the live ox, and divide the money.

Statute.
Exodus 21.36. If it be known the ox has used to push in time past, and the
owner has not kept him in --

Judgment.
1. He shall surely pay ox for ox.

2. The dead one shall be his own.

Note. Though the difference in goodness may be great between them, yet the
penalty justly falls on the master of the killing ox, and the judgment not to
be questioned.

Prove. 22.28. and 23.10.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 19.14. Thou shall not remove thy neighbors landmark, which they of old
time have set in thine inheritance.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 23.24. When thou come into thy neighbors vineyard, thou may eat
grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure: when thou come into the standing corn
of thy neighbors, thou may pluck the ears with thy hand, jus charitatis.

Judgment.
1. Thou shall not put any into thy vessel. This, jus proprietatis.

2. Nor move thy sickle to thy neigbours standing corn.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 22.1. Thou shall not see thy brothers ox or sheep go astray, and hide
thy self from them: thou shall in any case bring them to thy brother.

Verse. 2. If thy brother be not near, and thou know him not, it shall be with
thee until thy brother seek after it; and then thou shall restore it him again.

Verse. 3. In like manner shall thou do with his Ass and Raiment, and all lost
things of thy brothers, that thou have found, Thou may not hide thy self,
Verse. 4.

Exodus 23.4. If thou see thy enemies Ox or Ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again.

Verse. 5. If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden,
and would for bear to help him, thou shall surely help with him.

Note. In the laws of God is not holiness and justice only, but goodness. To
whom will a man obey, if not God? and whose commands will he do, if not his? to
which is promised great reward to those that keep them, Psalm. 19.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend thy brother upon usury of money or victuals,
or any thing is lent on usury.

Verse. 20. Unto a stranger thou may lend on usury.

Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor, by thee,
thou shall not be to them as an usurer, nor shall thou lay on him usury.

Levit. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen into decay with thee,
then thou shall relieve him, though he be a stranger or sojourner with thee.

Verse 36. Take no usury or increase of him. Thou shall not give him thy money
or lend him thy victual for increase.

Note. Deuteronomy. 23.20. and Levit. 25.36. oppose one another seemingly.

1. The stranger in Deuteronomy, is no proselyte, and not added to the Lords
people: God permitted it there, as it were, as Moses for the hardness of heart
gave a bill of divorce.

2. The stranger in Leviticus,

1. He is a brother, being in covenant with God, equally with him in the
judicial, though not in the privileges of the ceremonial law and worship.

2. It is on a special case of mercy; he is fallen into decay, and waxen poor: to
take use of such a one for money or victual, were biting indeed.

3. If usury under the legal covenant were bad, and forbid, it is worse under
grace.

It may be said, The Gospel forbids it not.

Resp. Christ's members need no such prohibition, if they were true members:
they have not so learned Christ, Acts 4.34. Mat. 5.42. Romans 12.20.

4. God under the law in the state of the world, is expressly against usury, and
tolerates it not by his law.

1. Question is, Whether by toleration of usury, we make not that law of God
void by our traditions.

2. Where is no penalty expressed, nor course set down, whether we are not to
leave men to God and his law.

3. If men lend money on usury, and the borrower refuse to pay, and tendering
the principal, especially in the case of a poor man, whether a Judge may force
that man to pay interest: though it is true, by Gods law, a man is to keep his
promise, though he lose thereby, but then it must be in all just things.

4. Whether contracts made to color Usury, are not to be censured as theft,
deceit, cozenage, fraud, by which they go beyond their brethren, and rob them
oppress them, and devour them.

Luke 19,8 (...) I will restore fourfold.

They gave and took suretiship for debts, Prove. 17.18. shows manner, and 20.16.
and cap. 22.26, 27.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 15.2. Every creditor that lends ought to his neighbor, at seven years
shall release it, and not exact it of his neighbor or brother: it is the Lords
release.

Verse. 3. Of a foraigner thou may exact it again; but that which is thine
with thy brother, thy hand shall release.

Except. Save when there shall be no poor amongst you.

Deuteronomy. 15.7. If there be a poor man amongst you, one of thy brethren, thou
shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand against him. Verse. 8. but shall
open it wide, and lend him sufficient for his need.

Verse. 9. Take heed of the wicked thought in thy heart, saying, The seventh
year of release is at hand, and thine eye be evil, and thou gevest thy brother
nothing, and he cry to God against thee, and it be sin unto thee. Verse. 10. For
these things the Lord thy God will bless thee.

Note. The word brother in the law shuts and opens many cases; which was then
applied to men joined in the band of the legal covenant to God and one another,
as in the Gospel it signifies those are united by baptism and faith to Christ
and one another, in fellowship of the Gospel, and house of God.

Now all those that were not under the legal covenant with the Jews, were
called strangers.

1. If men will acknowledge any law, it is Gods, because of his authority and
power of the soul, as well as body.

2. None ever studied the good and profit of a people as God, who is said to
rule over us as a father over his children, and not as a Tyrant over slaves, or
master over servants.

Appl. Hence, O ye princes of the people, for your own consciences, the peoples
good, and Gods glory, and the blessing of the earth, and men in their callings,
set up Gods law, and the nations increase will be great that will follow, if
you will believe and obey: and the good ye shall do in your generation for the
Nation, will be such, as was never done for it by any or all your predecessors;
in which only the people will become a free people, and no other lords besides
God rule over them.

Erasm. Nune adulterium lusus magnatum est, passim saevitur in miseros fures,
cum nec draconis leges, nec Romanae, nec ullae Gentilium simplex furtum
supplicio capitis vindicaverint, sed avaritia nostra facit ut ideo magnum malum
existimemus furtum, quia pecuniam summus boni loco ducimus.

Consider that of Deuteronomy. 23.24. and judge if a neighbor, not with any purpose
to wrong his neighbor, or to make a custom of it, but on some accidental
occasion, go over his neighbors land, whether by the law of God one man in
such a case may arrest, imprison sue at law, or damnifie in any case his
neighbor.

Numb. 5.6, 7. When a man or woman commit sin, and the person be found guilty,
they shall confess their sin they have done: he shall recompense his trespass
with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it
to him against whom they have trespassed.

Verse. 8. But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass to, let the
trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even to the Priest. etc.

The variety of differences of the same measure, viz. the bushel, etc. give
occasion to alter ours into the measure of the Jews Ephah, that the measure may
be one in the whole nation, as theirs was; and so that occasion of buying by
one in one place, and selling by another in another place, may be taken away:
and so for weights and measures.

Object. The Jews had difference among themselves in these things.

Resp. That difference was ceremonial only, as in the shekel of the Sanctuary,
and of the Commonweal: but that cause is now taken away; and was instituted of
God whiles that the temple did remain to continue only, and then to cease
with other ceremonies.

Deuteronomy. 24.19. And in many other places, course was taken that something in the
harvest should be left for the poor in the field, the vineyard, the oliveyard,
for the poor, the stranger, the fatherless, the widow. Exodus

1. Note. Were this rule established among men, the cause of much theft would
be taken away from among men, which men's hard heartedness occasions; and after
with as much severity put them to death oft-times for a small matter, as though
God were not able to restore our loss, or we could not be without it.

2. Many late and unusual offenses as clipping and coining of money and
embasing of it, which is made treason by our law, would not be so rife among
us; the occasion thereof being removed from men in great part.

3. Burning of houses, and such like effects of unnatural envy, would be
removed, when oppression and ignorance of the law of God were removed from the
shoulders of the poor.

4. God would restrain men, as now he does of much evil, to admiration, that
home non sit housini lup us; so then he would do much more: the fear of God,
though his law, and the justice thereof be not so extreme as man's in this case,
yet the after-judgement on the soul, and curse of them and their families,
falls far greater on men then theirs can do.

Command the Ninth.
Exodus 20.16. Thou shall not bear false witness.


THis negative binds in the affirmative, Thou shall bear witness to the truth,
etc.

Statute.
Deuteronomy. 17.6. The Idolater was not to dye at the testimony of one, but of two or
three witnesses.

Deuteronomy. 19.15. One witness shall not rise against a man for any iniquity or sin.

Levit. 19.11. Ye shall not lie one unto another.

Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people,
nor shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor, Ezekiel. 22.9. Prove.
21.18. He that hears, speaks constantly.

Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thy hand with the
wicked, to be an unrighteous witness; as those witnessed against Naboth, 1
Kings.

Verse. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, nor shall thou speak in
a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment.

Verse. 3. Nor shall thou countenance a poor man in his cause.

The witnesses at the time of execution were to stand at the right hand of him
that was condemned, and to lay their hands on his head, and cast the first
stone.

Numb. 35.30. Prove. 24.28.29.

Judgment.
Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly.

Deuteronomy. 19.16. If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against
him, that that is wrong;

Verse. 17. Then both the men between whom the controversy is, shall stand
before the Lord (as a special case referred to the chief Judges) the Priests
and Judges that shall be in those days.

Verse. 18. The Judges shall make diligent inquiry, and behold, if the witness
be a false witness, and has testified falsely against his brother;

Verse. 19. Then shall ye do to him as he had thought to have done unto his
brother: So (and no way else) shall thou put away evil from among you: life for
life, eye, tooth, stripe for stripe, etc.

Note, If Judges and Justices were as (they ought) at all times sitting in all
the chief places of the Nation,

1. Witnesses would not be so chargeable for their journey and attendance to
men as now they are.

2. Men might discharge their consciences, who by the law-covenant were bound
to witness freely one for other, as often as occasion served.

3. Subpaena's were utterly out of use, and the charge thereof taken away from
men.

1. If according to the law of God, that were exactly done on the false
witness, which was intended against the party that was prosecuted, men in the
Nation would hear indeed, and fear to do any such wickedness.

2. If evil be so to be put away, then by not doing so, though to man it seems
to be a matter of never so much severity, the evil there-remaines in the land
still.

1. In what was done or intended to be done by them past.

2. The evil practice thereof will never be done away by any other means from
among us, but by this.

On Deuteronomy. 2.24. The curse denounced against the false, and so the curses added
to the breach of every command, note the difference between Gods law and man's.

1. Man's law only extended to punish sin when proved by witnesses, against a
man; by which men (as in case of adultery) fear to commit it publicly, but
will do it privately; and man he thinks cannot not curse him for it; or if he
do, he cares not.

2. Now God curses such by his law: so that though they may escape the public
punishment, they cannot the secret judgment or curse for it.

3. So that this now will prevail with men, when the other will not: in which
the law of God does far excel the most just and righteous ordinances of man.

4. These curses are added to Gods laws, not men's, for fear before, and a
punishment after his laws are broken, and not men's; so that the hand of God in
the revealing and cutting off, and cursing of evil doers, will appear under his
rule far otherwise then under men's.

5. Effect whereof is excellently set down, Deuteronomy. 29.18. God speaks of one not
regarding the curse, and calls him the root of bitterness that bears gall and
wormwood, who when he hears the words of this curse, he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart
to add drunkenness to thirst, Verse. 20. The Lord will not spare him; the anger
of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against him; and all the curses in
this book shall lie upon him: and the Lord will blot out his name from under
heaven, verse. 21. and the Lord will separate him unto evil out of all the
tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written
in this book of the law.

Command the Tenth.
Exodus 20.17. Thou shall not covet.


1. S Search all the Statute-books of all the Nations in the world, they have
no such law in them; nor take no notice of any such sin, Romans 7.7.

2. Nor have they any punishment for it.

3. Under this law it is condemned as well as any. Hence the Apostle says, The
law is spiritual.

Appl. O ye princes, see here, are not Gods laws more perfect then yours? you
have no such law.

2. Is not your law the work of the law of God in your hearts only? would
there ever have been a law of yours, had not God given a work of his in you?

3. Hence see a necessity of taking his, and leaving yours.

4. Do not say the law is not sufficient to judge by.

1. Were not the Jews as great as we? and they had no other.

2. They fell into as many varieties of evil and sin as any.

Object. If thou say. No, we fall into more;

Resp. The reason of that is, we have not the law of God to prevent it set up
among us, as they had: the law of man can never have that place among a people,
as the law of God has.

3. It is not the least evil against God, to say of the law, It is not
sufficient of it self to judge us by.

1. If the law is not perfect, God would not have said, Add not to, nor
diminish a word from it.

2. This is indeed to despise the law, Heb. 10.28. which was death without
mercy.

3. The law was the moral law, a law for all Nations that would be Gods people,
as well as Jews, to be governed by.

4. David says, Thy law is exceeding broad and large: but thou that know
not the law, and art rude and ignorant of Gods wisdom therein, which is a
great deep, dishonourest God, and say it is only for a foundation of a law,
but it will not serve for a law. At the last day it shall judge thee and all
else, for all their acts, words, and thoughts against God: and yet is it a
narrow law?

5. Say what you can, a Nation, until it has covenanted with God in this law,
they are not the people of God nor is God the God of that nation, more then
other heathens; whatever he may be by faith to them that believe.

6. This would be a means to call in the Jews to acknowledge Christ in the
Gospel with believers, when they see we acknowledge God in the law with them.

Object. These are but few cases in compare of the Statutebook, that is more
full, and large, and plain: this is obscure.

Resp. 1. I have deduced but part of what is in the law, I having not spent a
weeks time in meditation thereon to this end.

2. This has more in one line, then the wit of men laid down for law in an
hundred.

3. That they have more then is in the law of God, must be destroyed, and not
acknowledged law, but traditions only.

4. Much lies hid thereof to us, as yet being not searched out.

5. Judges in special were ordained to judge the difficult causes, and that by
the word also, which appeared not to the common judges to be in the word
clearly.

6. The laws being reduced to the command, we are to judge of cases according
to the nature of the fact, and the command against which the sin is committed.

1. The law is clear plain, and full of light and clearness; and so better
then our corrupted, intricate, unknown law, which the Judges of the land know
not themselves. This needs no counsel.

2. It is brief, and needs not seven years study, to come to be able to speak
law.

3. It is so easy, a man needs no sollicitors: it shows plainly what every man
is to do or suffer.

4. It cannot be corrupted by demurs, nor delayed in proceedings.

5. It is so just, no man shall have wrong that is innocent, nor no man shall
escape that is guilty; Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

6. It is so free, it puts no man to a penny cost.

7. It is so holy, it condems all evil in every man alike.

8. It is so good, that he is accursed that obeys it not, and he is blessed
that observes it.

9. It is free from oppression; it imprisons none.

O ye men and lawyers of the world, bring forth that law that is like this law
of the Lord: as Moses rod eat up the sorcerers: so shall this devour yours.
Your law is as darkness, this as light; it will make it vanish. In a word, all
Rule and Government compared to Gods in the law, for a Nation, is but
bramble-rule, Judge. 9.14. and who would call for that rule?

Conclusion.
PSalm 144.15. Happy is the people whose God is the Lord: that is, that people
only who are in covenant with, and under the government of the Lord and his
law: and thus with Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.5. Behold, I have taught you statutes and
judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me. Verse. 6. Keep therefore and
do them: for this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the
Nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation
is a wise and understanding people. Verse. 7. for what nation is there so great,
that has God so near unto them as the Lord our God is in all things we call
upon him for? Verse. 8. and what nation is there so great, that? has statutes
and judgments so righteous as all this law which I set before you this day?
Who can speak evil of that I have here written, and not speak evil of the law?
who can despise it, and not despise that law shall judge him at the last day?
God judges by it, let therefore the Gods judge by it. In a word, who are they,
if any, that shall condemn me for what I have written? God is he that will
justify me, when he shall arise and plead my cause with them. In a word, if I
have erred, the law erreth not: let me be judged by that; to that I plead, and
make my appeal unto, professing before the most high God, My aim only is Gods
glory, the restoration of Gods rule and government, the peoples freedom and
happiness, Judges freedom of conscience from blood guiltiness, the deliverance
of the Nation from the now wrath of God, the Parliaments eternal honor in
advancing truth and righteousness: with these, and only these desires of soul,
with Esther, though she knew the law of the king, to put to death any shall
come within the inner, who is not called, except such to whom the king holds
out the golden Scepter, that he may live: But I have not been called to come in
unto the king, Esther 4.11. Verse. 16. I will go in unto the king, which is not
according to the law: if I perish, I perish. And as Mordecai, my soul tells me,
If I altogether hold my peace at this time, deliverance shall arise to this
people from another place, and I and my fathers house shall be destroyed. The
fear of God and his law that drove me, and the hope I had in you, as in men
loving God, Justice, Righteousness, and vowing to God and the people the same,
with hands lifted up, to have your and the peoples freedom, being bound up in
one, drew me to this service; in which my hearts desire is to serve you all,
and be

Your affectionately well-wishing servant in the service of the Lord, John
Brain.

The Postscript contains Objections and Resolutions of what is said against the
Rule of the Law.
Quer. Does not the Apostle say, Those without law shall be judged without law?
Romans 2.12. then what need the laws government?

Resp. 1. Some are without the letter and true sense of the law, and the rule
of it; as those heathens, Romans 2.14. Who became a law unto themselves.

2. Others are without the true sense only, and not the letter; as Paul, Romans
7.9.

3. Others without the rule, but not without the letter: and thus we are
without the law this day.

If Paul only without the true inward sense of the law, a Minori ad Maius.
though not without the rule and government out-outwardly, and knowledge of the
law, was yet said to be without law;

How much more may those Nations who have the letter, and yet have not the rule
and government of it, be said to be without law?

O remember, 2 Cor. 6.1. exhorted them not to receive the grace of God in
vain. You have the law in the Bible, which the heathens had not. O receive not
so great a grace in vain, so as not to rule by it: choosing rather to be a law
unto our selves, as those heathens, who had not the knowledge of the law, then
having the knowledge of the law, to have Gods will and law a law unto us.

4. Those without law are said to perish without law: so that it is a sad
estate to be without the law.

5. Though we are without the rule and judgment of the law, we are not without
the knowledge of the law; we are under that; which will necessarly bring Judges
and judged at last to be by God our Judge judged according to that, and our own
law: for our law is no law with God.

Object. This is to make one shoe serve for every foot.

Answ. Is there any shoe will fit our foot as that, nay but that that of Gods
making? will not that of man's be it made as well may be? yea though it had the
same in it as Gods, yet it wanted by far of that Gods, because God made it.

2. Does not that that fits one nation, fit another? are we not all of the same
nature? the unfitness must be either in respect of the law, or our selves.

Note. 1. The unfitness cannot be in the law; it has all fitness of goodness,
righteousness, judges us with perfection; and so none is fit but this.

2. Nor is the unfitness in the people. 1. They are sinful, and need a law. 2.
They are rational to understand the law. 3. They have desires to serve God
according the law. 4. They are liable to punishment, if they obey not; and to
whose more justly then to Gods?

Object. Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the law, but grace.

Resol. 1. Ye (that is, the believers at Rome, gathered out of the state of the
world, into fellowship with Christ in the state of the Gospel, being by Christ
redeemed from under the law) are not under the law.

2. Saying ye are not, the Scriptures imply, all but they in that estate thus
redeemed were under the law, or the work thereof in their hearts: yea and they
also, in the outward man, Romans 3.1.

2. Object. Romans 3.19. What the law speaks, it speaks to those that are under
the law.

Resol. Now if any shall say we are under the law of God,

1. Why do we not rest in the law, without setting up of laws of our own to
judge by? Romans 2.17.

1. What other law, judgment, or punishment ought to be executed, but that,
among those are under the law?

3. We never nationally covenanted with God in it, nor was it ever nationally
acknowledged to be our national rule and government, nor its form set up among
us.

4. If we are under the law, what heathens in the world ever were not?

1. They had law, which were the works of Gods law in their heart, as well as
we.

2. They had this, when they had not the written law by them, as we have.

3. We having the law of God by us, to rule by, judge by, punish by; and yet
ruling, judging and punishing by our own, we are worse then the heathens, and
by our traditions make void the law.

4. The heathens all had rule and government as we have, and laws as we have,
and are yet said to be without law, because they governed not by the law of
God; and so are we at this day.

Again, if any shall say we are not under the law;

1. Question is, Whether of right we ought not to be (or no.)

2. Or whether it be not prejudicious to Gods glory, and to his truth and the
peoples prosperity, that they are not.

If any say of right we ought not to be under the law;

1. As well might that man say, God ought not to rule.

2. People may do well enough without government, against that.

3. And there are no sins, strifes, controversies, contentions among us; and so
we need no justice, judgment, or punishment to be inflicted.

If any say, Of right we ought not to be under the law of God, but out own;

1. By your traditions ye make void the law of God; Gods is the law that has
authority and command only: and indeed, in it yours are but traditions at
best, which like Hagar set themselves up above Sarah.

2. You having Gods law, shall be judged at last by it, and not your
traditions: God will judge by it, and not yours.

3. If our law be not according to Gods, we shall at last be judged for our
judgment.

4. He that will not have Gods law to be his law, shall not have God to be his
God, Exodus 20. before and with the giving of the laws covenant, he in it says
I am the Lord thy God: in the peoples taking of his law, they took him, and he
them: and so he deals with all.

If thou say, Of right we ought not to be under the law, but our traditions;
for we have a long time been under them, and they are the best in the world:

1. The nearer they come to Gods, the better they are.

2. But being not Gods, which only is the Royal law;

1. They are not so good as his, nor to be compared with them.

2. They are not to stand in competition with the Lords: if they do, man
assumes the place of God to himself, and dethrones God: God will rule by none
but his own: shall men again say they will not rule by others but their own?

3. To those that say of this, or that, or any law, that its better then Gods,
tell them it is blasphemy to say so; and that man, as James 4.11. he speaks
evil of the law, and judges the law, If thou judge the law, thou art not a
doer of the law, but a judge. Many such Judges there are, and but few doers.

4. If thou say thy law is not so good as Gods, why do thou not choose the
best?

O but we have been a long time under them.

1. So long thou have been without law.

2. And without God in the way of the law.

3. Ever since, many plagues have been heaped on the Nation, and multitudes of
blessings detained from them.

4. And other lords besides Jehovah have tured over the Nation.

5. The people have been under tyranny and oppression, and many unjust
traditions according to the will of men contrary to the will of God; as in the
Acts repealed, and the mariage-money in Ireland and Scotland paid etc.

O the nation will best bear our own laws.

1. The corrupter a law is, the better natural people can indeed bear it.

2. Every people that will be Gods, must bear his yoke,

3. The people will be bettered by bearing Gods, more then by bearing our own.
Gods law will make an (...) among men.

4. This objection agrees with that of God Ephraim is an heifer unaccustomed to
the yoke; and so would for a while kick against the pricks.

5. That our evil nation will best bear our own laws, ^^^^es not that the laws
therefore are Gods; but against them, that they are therefore evil.

6. We are not to consider what our Nation will bear, but what they should
bear; which is the law and yoke of God, and not men.

Object. Others say. Something may be diminished from the sentence of the Law
but nothing may be added.

Resolv. The one is expressly forbid, as well the other, by the word and Law of
God. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Josua 23.6.

Others will say. This is to be under Moses, not Jesus Christ; and to revive
the Law again.

1. The Law was never destroyed; that is the Judicial and Moral, though the
Ceremonial be: for Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to establish it;
which thou would have destroyed.

2. As in in the time of Moses, there was Moses rule in the Jews Commonweal,
and Aarons in the Temple; and these were distinct: so now.

2. The like form we still retain in our Church and State-government: the
State-government ought to be that of Moses and that because God he gave no
other; and Christ says he destroyed not that: the Church government now is
changed from that of Aarons in Priesthood. Ministry. Administrations, and Rule;
so that now it is Moses and Christ: before, Moses and Aaron ruled.

3. Those under Christ are so far from being without law as that the law is
more excellently opened and taught, in a more spiritual way then Moses taught,
or the people under Moses could bear. This is cleared Mat. 5.27. Ye have heard
it has been said to those of old, (That is those first in Moses time
covenanted with God in the law by Moses) Thou shall not commit Adultery, verse.
28. But I (that is, Christ) say unto you, He that looks on a woman to lust
after her, has committed Adultery with her in his heart.

1. Hence under Christ in the Gospel-estate, God is said to Judge the secrets
of men according to the Gospel Romans 2.16.

2. God by the law under Moses judges the acts of the outward man done in the
flesh against the law, and sets down the judgment and punishment thereof.

3. Heace Paul 1 Timothy 5.27. The sins of some are open beforehand and go before
to Judgment; under Moses: others follow after; under the judgment of Christ.

Question is, Whether law of God be not as absolutely necessary to rule and
govern men in the civil Estate, as in the other of the Ecclesiastic.

2. Whether it be not as unlawful to set up a law contrary to God in the one,
as in the other.

3. Whether it be not the proper authority of God, to give laws to men in the
one, as well as the other.

Moses and the law set men on doing, Christ on doing: and because we cannot do
the law, therefore to believe; assuring us that in that we shall receive the
promise, and be freed from the curse of the law likewise.

1. Note, This Christ manifests, that Judgment of external acts against the
law of Moses, was left to Moses, Luke 12, 13, 14. the man that came to have the
inheritance divided, to Christ, had this answer, Who made me a Judge or a
Divider?

2 In the woman taken in the act of Adultery. Ioh. 8.3, 4, 56. Christ he would
not accuse nor condemn her: for now when Shilo was come, the Scepter was
departed. Again, the woman was dismissed not absolved, because there was no
accnsers.

Object. Some say there is not the like severity used under the Gospel as under
the law in judgment against sin.

Resp. This was the first ground of the Manichean Heresy: for in making
difference between the proceedings of Justice under the Law and the Gospel
against sin, you lay a foundation for the setting forth of two Gods; one
severe, the other merciful.

2. The Gospel does not mitigate, but aggravate sin, and consequently
punishment.

3. Christ did not destroy the law, nor mitigate the punishment to any
unbeliever, of what is set down in the law: nay, if a believer fall into these
sins and he suffer in the body, it is that his soul may be saved in the day of
the Lord. The incestuous person was not put to death the Church having not that
power.

Note, The preventing grace of God keeps the believer from the sin that is unto
death Joh. 15.17.

4. If it be mitigated men should do well to show from the mouth of God in what
it was mitigated to whom, and whether to all or some sin only; and why not
to all, as well as some: and whether it be in the command, or in the statute,
or the punishment, or in all: and how it can be in any one of these, and not in
all and each of them: or how this can be under the Gospel, and not be by
Christ: and how he 1. establishes the law, 2. and does not destroy it in part,
more then many Iota's or tittles, though not in whole.

5. If it be strictly examined, there is more severity then Gods law allows
of in some of our now laws; and in some less: in which both there is injustice
committed, according to the measure we de^^^^ from the law of God, either to
the right hand or to the left.

6. It is to be observed, that the Judges designed to hear difficult causes,
which were not clear to the other Judges, were not to give senteace of their
own; they were to do it according to the sentence of the law. Deuteronomy. 17.11.
which shows clearly this, that where the law is not expressly declared
concerning a case in hand, that it may be is unusal among men, there,

1. That case is to be referred to these Judges.

2. These Judges must judge according to the sentence of the law, though not in
some, yet in facts of the like nature with that.

3. They were to show the sentence out of the law, and to teach it them, if
they understood it not.

4. Then, and not until then, they were to put the sentence in execution.

5. If upon all this, the man should presumptuously refuse to hearken and obey,
and say he was not to do it, the man was to be put to death.

6. This course was not to be taken, but only then and in that case, when it
was not clearly resolved in the word to all.

Applic. Is this; To those which say many cases are not set down in the word,
nor can it be a rule to judge by.

Resp. It is granted: yet is there provision made to remedy that, by the Judges
aforesaid.

Object. How is the law perfect then?

Resp. The Judges shall find the thing sentenced in the law, though not under
that name, in some sin of the same kind, from which they must not decline: the
law, like the Vrim and Thummim, will tell them, and show the judgment to them;
when they have a cause to require thereat.

Object. The Law says, men must not turn from the right hand or left thereof.

Resp. True: Those that know the law in the known causes thereof, are not to
decline from that; nor are the Judges concerning the obscure cases to decline
that sentence of the law that does accord therewith in the book of God, though
it be not particularly set down, and nominally expressed, and added to that
iniquity particular.

Object. David committed Adultery and Murder, and was not slain: which was a
type of more mercy to be ministered under the Gospel then under the Law.

Resp. 1. Some will say. David being King and supreme Magistrate, there was
none under that government then would judge him: but God did judge him in his
house, his wife, his children; as in the Story is set forth abundantly after.

2. And more truly, David's Adultery and Murder was so hid, that there were no
witnesses appeared to accuse him; and though God knew it, few in the world else
did, 2 Samuel 12.12. but these consented thereunto.

3. David married Bathsheba after; which indeed did seem to be according to the
law; but being a Whore, it was not, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10.

4. David was a type of Christ in many things.

5. God might dispense with his law for wonderful sweet ends, and good for us,
though by such ways, as we understand not the justness of them.

1. If men writing the Scriptures had not had our fallings and been subject to
our temptations, we could not have had that comfort now we may have in the
Scriptures.

2. God suffering them to fall, would not with their fall take them away: that
had not been a support, but terror.

3. By this God would show, that though the bodies of those (for such like
sins) suffer, yet they believing and repenting, their souls may be saved in the
day of the Lord. So that the use hereof is good, exceeding good to those that
do suffer.

4. Many of the Saints, as David, are guilty secretly of these fins; and were
it not for David, would have sorrow without hope, as it were.

5. By Nathan God having discovered his sin, and he repenting, God is said to
put away his sin, that he should not dye, 2 Samuel 12.13.

1. Here is the putting away of his sin, which upon repentance many others may
do, and yet not be freed from death.

2. Here expressly is not only one, but the other also by the Prophet from God
revealed, that it should be made good to him.

3. God punished him in his house, his wives, his children, as before.

Object. Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver
from between his feet, etc. so there was a Lawgiver.

Resp. 1. This was spoken before the Law was given, where men made Laws.

2. The word for Lawgiver, signifies a Scribe. If any should give the Law, he
had the Scepter, and not him, between his feet.

3. This he between the Kings Feet, was but an assistant to him, to show him
what the Law was in cases brought before him, out of the Law of God, which was
to be always by the King.

Conclusion.
O that when the Covenant was sent to the Nation, it had been done according to
the mind of God! that is, as Covenants were when nationally by Kings and
People made with God, viz. by taking the law, the Statutes and Judgments of
God, to be our law, and to be ruled and judged by it only; and take God with
the law to be our God, and all other law to be laid aside and known no more of
us: so had we done the work of God, and a heavenly blessing would have followed
it. Since which, the effects of that ignorant blind Covenant have been nothing
but confusion, division, war, and trouble to our selves and others. O ye
Princes and People, though ye are in all these, yet if you will obey and
receive the Lord and his law this day, ye shall be healed of all your confused
distempers, and be saved, 1 King. 8.57. The Lord our God be with us, as he was
with our Fathers; let him not leave us nor forsake us, verse. 58. That he may
incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his
Commandments and his Statutes, and his judgments which he commanded our
Fathers. Deuteronomy. 5.29. That it may be well with us, and our children after us for
ever, Amen.

And ye, O ye Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, a visitation from above is
drawing near, to visit you; and the most just God the visitor, who will judge
you according to the judgment of the great Where. Ye can now no longer delude
nor captivate men with specious pretenses: for God will take you away, and set
up ways of learning of his own.

1. Your rise was from the Pope, even Celestine, the Emperor Theodosious,
twelve Cardinals, and multitudes of Archbishops, Bishops etc. about the year
423.

2. You by being governed and advanced, and educated by his adherents, and set
up to accomplish his ends, came to be the only means to make void the order of
the Church; who first chose her Ministry out of her own societies and members,
but now are taken out of the University, be they what they will, and put on
them whether they will or not; to the utter extirpation of the Churches
privilege: by which encourgement to learning and knowledge in all the
Church Members, was taken away, to encourage such as made a trade of it in the
University, the Church Members resting on their teaching only, and never
respected any power of teaching to be obtained by themselves in the now
Church Way, the Church being robbed of it.

3. You plead for your practice the Scripture, as if it were your pattern. 2
King. 2.3. there were sons of the Prophets at Bethel; and ver. 4. there were
more at Jericho 1 Samuel 19.20. a company of Prophets are standing, and Samuel
standing as appointed over them.

1. These Sons of the Prophets were such as were educated in the writings of
the Prophets, and read them and did more eactly discuss the Mystereis thereof,
then in the Synagogues. Those bred in these, houses were immediately fitted for
the Synagouge-xe hortation and reading.

2. The first of their education was reading, and well understanding of the
word, as writing; and this fitted him as a Scribe.

3. After this, they were taught the sense and meaning of the word, either in
the literal or historical, the prophetical or typical part of it: and then they
came to be disputers of the law, or Pharisees; in which order Paul was.

4. God usually raised up of these (that faithfully gave themselves to the
study of the Law, and taught it) Prophets to foretell things to come; as Elias
and Samuel.

And those other hundred Prophets mentioned 1 Kings 18.13. in which places,
those that were Prophets, for confirmation of their prophesies and call, did
usually teach, as appears: Elias he is sent to Bethel, 2 Kings 2.2. at Bethel
it is without question he taught in that School, and among the rest told the
Children of the Prophets, ver. 3. that the Lord would take him away (being
Elishas Master) from his head that day: and the same being sent to Jericho, in
verse. 4.5. where the Jews received that tradition of his teaching in their
Schools, that Elias shall first come, Matthew. 17.10, 11.

That passage of 1 Samuel 19.20, 24. was an extraordinary case, to preserve
David, in which Saul and his inessengers were changed; as before in Esau, when
he came against Jacob; and that of Saul's meeting the Prophets, 1 Samuel 10.3, 5.
which were given him for signs to confirm him by, in Gods electing of him.

5. These Schools were in all Towns usually, as our Grammar-Schools are, having
only the reading of the Law and the Prophets used among them; who were
according to their several capacities taught and distinguished, as in our
Schools by forms and places, one from the other.

In which, nor Cato, nor Virgil, nor Homer, nor Aristotle, were not usually
read; but the commands of God; by the knowledge whereof God was honored, and
they sanctified.

6. In this study and society, God would manifest himself, when he would not in
the obscene readings of Ovid, and the lying fables of the other Poets.

7. In this teaching men were not devoted hereunto only, but had other
callings to employ themselves in to live by; and were taught also in these
Schools one part of the day: as Paul, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, was
by his profession a Tent-maker.

8. Out of the Word, Astrology and other natural Philosophy, may be deduced
with Tropes, Metaphors, and Figures; Geographie etc. by which men may be better
acquainted with the Word, then now they are. This is the wisdom of a people,
and not the knowledge of the custom of Heathens, which only tends to make men
such, and justifies them.

9. Lawyers hereby may be made, and rightly fitted to judge according to the
Lord.

10. Every man is rightly taught to live in their youth according to Gods law;
as David, Psalm. 11 9.9, and 98, and 99. verses.

11. Now if they offend, they dye more justly, being taught the sense and
sentence of the law.

Appl. Ye Universities, the wrath of God will break out upon you; your days
are numbered, and your time near come, in which you will see that it is not a
reformation will serve your turn, or save you from the decree.

2. Ye princes of the people in Parliament, a people are rude without learning;
O be entreated to convert sufficient maintenance to the maintaining of some
freely to teach in all towns.

1. To teach the Hebrew reading to some.

2. To teach the moral or judicial law to others.

3. The prophets to others, and their meaning.

4. To teach the Greek; and in those schools only read the Histories of Jesus
Christ, written by Matthew, Mark, etc. with the Epistles of the Apostles.

1. As for Latin, and the long time spent in obtaining thereof, the time is
coming that the authors and learning laid up in their writings, will be of
little or no use to the world: God will instruct them with better of his own.
The time is coming, knowledge shall cover the earth, as water the seas: and all
those mighty Libraries be but lost matter.

2. It is as a bage of the Roman conquest, which will cease with that Empire in
a manner amongst us; the laws and true learning being turned into our own
language.

3. By this means, in the meetings on the seventh day sabbath, the gifts and
knowledge of every particular person, either in his exact reading of the law,
or understanding of the mystery or prophecy of the prophets, comes to be made
use of and exercised; they being herein a nation of Priests, and so would beget
much wisdom and emulation for knowledge in every man, and comfort in every man
by seeing and knowing the gifts and profittings of his children in the law, who
would come to be spurs and goads to provoke the elder to a more diligent search
of the law, and knowledge thereof that they may not be under the teaching of
children that they shall speak, and themselves be dumb; they going beyond the
elders in describing the history, and in opening the mysteries of the law and
prophets. In this estate of Moses, or men's being under the law, was no
priesthood at all; yet is he preached every seventh day, Acts 15.21. when and
where the (...) teaching, did what he could to make men from Moses to Jesus
Christ in a right and true way, Act. 21.21. whence, though many are called few
are chosen.

The priesthood in the time of Moses belonged to the temple, and was conferred
on Aaron and his sons, who taught not the law in the Synagogues: those that
taught there, sat in Moses, not Aarons chair, or priestly succession, Moses
being before Aaron, Jer. 7.22, 23.

The which priesthood ceasing, and another, even that of Christ's, being now
instituted of God, and set up in the place thereof in the Church, called from
Moses, consisting of believers; which was given to the Apostles and their true
successors, to administer under the Lord Jesus; which call no man was to take
on him, but according to the Lords institutions; who were to attend on that
place of ministry: whereas Evangelists, pastors, or teachers, as they were
called to minister before the Lord under Jesus Christ, who were not to be
cumbred about any worldly occasions, 2 Timothy 2.4.

Luke 9.33. Let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, one for
Elias.

The tabernacle was the place God first had his worship set up in, under Moses
and Aaron, and here signifies moveableness.

1. The service of God under Moses, and under the law, is meant, under tha^
tabernacle for Moses.

2. The service of God under Christ and grace, is meant by the tabernacle for
thee, or Christ.

3. Which administrations falling, in the hiding of the Church, are again to
be restored in our days by that Elias, in that tabernacle is attributed to him.

How men came from Moses to Christ's administration, is most excellently set
forth, Romans 7.1, 6.

Moses disciples were taught the letter of the ten commands: Christ taught his
disciples the commands, in the spiritual part of it, as Mat. 5. which are
called by Christ my commands; in which his disciples were to walk with God, in
a more holy and more acceptable way: which commands the world could not receive.

In the New Testament, three Scriptures respect Magistrates supreme and
subordinate.

1. The which are kings and their deputies, 1 Timothy 2.2. Romans 13.1. The powers
that be (viz. Nero's and his deputies) are ordained of God. Thus 1 Pet. 2.13.
to kings, as supreme, verse. 14. or to governors, as to them that are sent by
him.

2. God ordained no powers, but Kings and Judges; and the Kings of the Nations,
from whom the Jews took their pattern came to receive a stability in their
place by it, during the time of the fourth, or the Roman Monarchy.

3. When men destroy Monarchy, they must return to Judges again, as at first,
Isa. 1.26. or the power cannot be said, as the heathen power had said of it,
that it was of God; God setting up no other public form of Rule, but that, to
govern a nation by, besides Kings.

Romans 4.4.13. He shows what the rule of Monarchy was, or was to be in their law.

Verse. 3. He shows what the authority was in the rulers execution of their then
law, verse. 2. how the power, during its time of standing; by which authority
and rule were kept alive, and not to be infested until that time, 1 Cor. 15 24.
when all of the then rule, authority, and power, is to be put down, by the
stone cut out of the mount without hands, Deuteronomy. 2.44 45. which is done in part,
and now doing this day.

5. On this only ground, because it was ordained of God, and an ordinance of
God, though they were Gentiles, and without law, only being a law to
themselves, verse. 5. The Apostle shows they should be subject, not only for
wrath, but conscience sake, even to the laws called ordinances of men. 1 Pet.
2.13.

6. To these Kings as to the Kings of Israel, tribute and custom were paid;
which was not under the Judges: which shows it the freest government, and best
for the people: which concerns you to consider, in respect of the trust reposed
in you.

7. The renewing of the kingdom from Judges to kings, is to be done when from
Kings to Judges, 1 Samuel 11.14. and 8.10.

Prove. 21.17. This law owns not suits about hunting, hawking, killing of fowl,
etc. nor allows no such game to trespass other men, and appoints labor rather
to all, and condemns such exercises begets idleness and beggary in a
Commonweal, drunkenness, etc. so that it is as necessary to destroy those
vermin, the hawks and hounds, as heretofore wolves: the one destroyed cattle,
the other men. And in stead of shooting at Pigeons, Oh how good were it the
houses were shot down! Here is no law for Tithes, nor offering, nor for a man's
turning aside occasionally to pass over another man's ground; nor about Wills
and Testaments; nor to satisfy men's revenge, to vex their neighbors with Law:
but, as Prove. 25.8. Go not forth hastily to strive lest thou know not what to
do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame: debate thy
cause with thy neighbor himself, etc. Matthew. 7.12. Do unto all men as you
would men should do unto you; that is the law and the Prophets. So that great
men by Law and Prophets are to do no other to the poor, then they would the
poor should do to them: there must be the same law and liberty to the one, as
to the other, or it is not a Commonweal: one must not keep any thing to
oppress hurt, or hinder another man, much less many men, only to satisfy
their lusts.

As for the State of Venice,

1. As other Gentiles, they are a Law to themselves.

2. Though the people choose their Judges, yet they judging by Laws of their
own, their Government is not of God, nor is it established of Gods, as that of
Kings was among Gentiles.

3. Bland us says, that the liberty of the Venetians to govern by their own
Laws, was granted them by the great and high Bishop of Rome, Charles.

4. That their Government is not of God, appears by their allowance of public
Stews in their Commonweal, worse then which the Heathens have not done; and the
converting of the hire of whores to a public use: a great abomination.

5. Nor are their Judges, as Judges at the first, set up in the gates of every
City: so that that Government, with the rest of the Papal powers, will cease
and fall.

The fall of the Roman Monarchy under the seventh Head, or feet mixed with Iron
and Clay, as it was under Pope and Kings:

1. The first step began in Henry the eighth's destroying the Supremacy of the
Pope, and ruling alone, anno 1531.

2. In the United Estates of Holland, casting down of the Monarchy of the King
of Spain, but ruling by the States General and Provincial, as by Lords and
Commons: which also will be in its time dissolved.

3. In this Nation, this Parliament have deposed King and Lords, the Commons
only having the power of rule in their hands; and so have made a step beyond
them therein.

4. The fourth is, that the Soldier take down the Law, Rule, or Government
that is, and set up God's, by Judges as at first: in which, the grand Mutations
of the worlds affairs come to center, and receive fixedness under God, (the
Kingdom being the Lords) and the earth becomes abundantly blessed, with all
therein, by the same thousand years, when Tyranny springs again; and Time
quickly after has its end.

The main ground and reason why the four Monarchies are set out by Beasts,
arising out of a necessity occasioned by the contentions among men Dau. 7. by
which the world, like another Sea, was filled full of troubles.

1. The Babylonian, set out by the Lion, verse. 4.

2. The Medes and Persian, by the Bear, verse. 5.

3. The Greek, by the Leopard, verse. 6.

4. The Roman is not expressed by its form, but by its nature, to be a Beast
dreadful, terrible, strong, having iron teeth, devouring and breaking in
pieces, and stamping the rest with her feet, and being diverse from all beasts,
lively set out by John, Rev. 13.2. like a leopard in color, having feet like a
bear, the mouth of a lion; and the dragon gave him his power: from whence he
takes the place, power, authority, and name of the dragon.

Note the name of Beast: for Government and Authority is not given them, but
for the kind of Rule and Law that they had among themselves, which was
according to their lusts, and not of God; they making their lusts a law, and so
become a law to themselves, Romans 2.14.

2. Hence the Heathens, without the Law and rule of God, are said not to be a
people. Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 10.19.

3. The Heathen Empires, set out by the Beasts: 1. The Kings were the horns;
the Councels of the kingdoms, the heads; the Laws and Lawyers, the teeth; the
Executioners the feet; the common people, the body, and the Pope riding on them.

4. The best allusion given the four Monarchies, was that of Daniel, which is
likened to a man: when that man that had the vision, and who represented the
golden head, Dan. 4.33. was driven from among men, lost his reason, feeds with
beasts, etc. in which is set forth, what the men were, while without the rule
of God, and what would be the end the Monarchs of the world at last would come
unto: Thus the Psalm, Man that is in honor, and understands not, (that is, how
to rule and govern according to God) is like the beasts that perish.

5. The Jews were therefore called a People, because they had a God, and were
guided by his laws, and sought the good of one another, and not the hurt, as
the aforementioned beasts, who were such as lived by preying one on another:
the worst of all which herein, was the last of the Roman Monarchy; which under
the authority, rule, and power thereof, is still the beast fore-spoken of.

6. The question is, whether a society of men altering that law, and setting up
any other besides that of Gods under God and set up other authority and power
then that of Gods, as set down in the Scripture be not a beast in Gods account
still, though another beast from that which was before. Not that I say there
shall be any; for there are to be but four beasts or Monarchies: the fifth
shall be the dominion of Christ, when the Saints shall rule the world.

Que. If the judicial law be not equally a rule to govern a Commonweal by as
the Gospel is to rule the Church by; on the same grounds and reasons.

Que. If it be not an abomination before God while men have his law to set up
Jus humanum ( if any such things were) in the place of Jus divinum being the
act of Antichrist 2 These. 2. who was without law, setting himself in place of
God, making law of his own.

Que. If there can be any safety to judge by our law seeing God will judge all
men by his own that have his law, as we say we have, Romans 2.12, 13.

As for war, it was

1. Referred to men chosen therefore; and the Judges took no cognizance of it
in judgment.

2. The laws and directions therefore were particular, and distinct from the
judicial law.

3. This war against Antichrist being Gods, as that against Amalek, both having
their time and fullness of sin expired; the rules for the one are rules for the
other in an eminent way: which ought not by the General and the Council of the
Nation for war be passed by, lest it become our sin, and we in the end suffer
for it.

4. Inquire into the reason why the plague is fallen so heavy on the Soldiers
in Ireland, and ye shall find it is of God, for their not fulfilling his
judgment.

This general position is to be concluded on; That whatsoever is not properly
comprehended under one of the ten Commands, belongs not unto the judicial law,
but the ceremonial; as Tithes, etc.

2 That that is referred to any of the commands, must be for judgment and rule.

Quer. If now there be any ground to us, that the sale of lands should be only
for 50 years to the Jubilce; or if that were merely Ceremonial, or in a mixed
law,

1. It did shadow out the restoration of man's fallen estate by Jesus Christ.

2. Christ was to begin his ministry then, under whom was to be a special
freedom of what was under the law or Moses.

The Morality (say some) appears of this, in that,

1. It is under the eighth Command, Thou shaltnot steal.

2. Or under the tenth, Thou shall not covet.

Object. 1. The equity of this cease, in that all had of that land part, but
few have of this.

2. God laid a special claim to that more then any.

Que. If God lays not the same to the lands of others, because judged of God,
forfeited, cast out, etc.

1. Pro. That Law God Judges by, is the fittest law for judgment.

But this is the law God judges by.

Ergo, it is the fittest law for judgment.

2. Where Judgment is not Gods, it is not true.

But where the law is not Gods, the judgment is not his, etc.

Q. If to make laws, when we have the law of God, be not against the law and
God.

1. Against God, taking away his prerogative.

2. Against the law, making that void, having but the name of law.

3. By this means men are in the place of God, and God has no place among us.

Pro. When men judge by the law of God, judgment is Gods, and not else: but in
this Nation men judge not by the law of God.

Pro. As the law and judgment should be Gods, so the authority should be his.

Additional.
Two things I had forgot to clear.

1. Whether the Lawyers, as Zenas, in Titus 3.13. and those others mentioned in
Matthew and Luke, were of divine institution and serve at all to prove the
Lawyers and their now-practice among us.

Resp. 1. Their institution is not in the law, as an officer of the court; but
arose among the rest of corruptions among the Jews.

2. They expounded the law in the Synagogues and not plead it in the gate of
judicature before the Judge.

3. They cleared or interpreted difficulties in the divine law only, and serves
not to prove a practice of men undertaking to plead the laws of nature or of
nations, but shows that their law and pleadings make void Gods and its
dispensation.

4. As for Joseph the counselor, he was a counselor of the Jews republic,
one of their seventy, that counseled by the law of God, and not of men; in a
way for public safety, not private gain.

5. Or it may be he was a counselor to the Roman estate because in favor so
much with Pilate.

Second concerns widows.
Quest. Why in dividing the state, they had so little of what was left by their
deceased husbands.

1. She was to return to her fathers house again, as in Tamar, Genesis 38.10.
Remain a widow at thy fathers house, Levit. 22.13. If the Priests daughter be
a widow, or divorced, etc. and is returned to her fathers house, as in her
youth, she shall eat of her fathers meat. Numb. 30.10. speaks of the widows
vow and if she vowed it in her husbands house or days, as appears in the 11
verse. and he heard it: which shows, after his death she left that was his
house, and went to her fathers; yet her children were not to forsake, but help
her also, of she needed.

2. If her father was living; if dead, she had part if her fathers inheritance,
that that came to her.

3. God made special provision for the desolate or widows by many special laws
Deuteronomy. 16.14. they had part of the harvest, Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20.

4. The widows were provided for out of the store of Gods house, that is, the
tithes, Deuteronomy. 12, 26.13. and 24.19. which was paid once in three years only;
where they came and fetched it; and was a reproachful estate, Isa. 54.4.

1. Quest. If Ministers be not now so to be maintained. Concerning which, I
leave you to a particular Treatise.

2. Quest. If widows and orphans be not that way to be provided for.

Resp. Yea, by bringing in a sufficient portion thereof every three years into
some public place, for relief of the poor widow and orphans, and others, and
some entrusted to deliver it out to them as need requires.

Quest. Is not other ways as good as this?

Resp. No, because this is commanded; which man is not to dispense with.

Quest. If in cases of justice, as an eye for eye tooth for tooth a man may not
take 100 l. satisfaction, and free his adversary.

Resp. 1. The Judge is but an executioner of the wrath.

2. He is bound to do what the law says; that is his rule.

3. He is not to Judgo the law, and its equity or rigor.

4. He is not to decline the will of God, for expedients of men,

5. The law is for terror to others, as well as for doing right to whom wrong
is done at present.

6. Gods justice is to be satisfied on the offender, as well as the damage of
the sufferer satisfied: of which much more may be said; but this I conceive to
be sufficient to prove care herein must be had, that men make not the law of
God void by traditions, or practices in judgment of their own, in which men
actually forsake God, and come to be forsaken of him; to the ruin of the
generations of the world; which they that are wise will fear, and be faithful
to God: which the Lord make the men of this generation to do, and the people
will be free and happy in the governors thereof, yea and in God: to whom be
obedience and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

