CHRIST'S RESULT of his Fathers pleasure. OR HIS ASSENT to his Fathers Sentence.
WHEREIN Is showed, both the Nature and danger of Wisdom and Prudence in
natural men.

By David Bramley, a Preacher of the Gospel.

MAT. 13.11. It is given to you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven,
but to them it is not given.

MAT. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

Printed in the year. 1647.

Courtious Reader,

In the Authors absence, these few ensuing faults passed the Press, which in
reading you are desired to mend with your Pen.

ERRATA:
Page 3. line 34. for for, read from: p. 9. l. 16. for in nature, read
Immature, and l. 17. for in nature, r. mature. p. 14. l. 33. for which is, read
why. line 34. after unlearned, read, is because the learned are but fevv in
comparison of the unlearned. p. 16. l. 17. after conversion, r. then and line
28. for Sinner, read Saint.

FINIS.
CHRIST'S RESULT of his Fathers pleasure.
MAT. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered, and said, I thank the O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.


OUr Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, having upbraided the Cities of Corazin,
Bethzaida, and Capernaum (wherein most of his mighty works were done. Mat,
11.20) for their impenitency, laying before them their misery, in the miserable
condition of Tire and Sidon, (Cities which in all brobability would be and are
damned) and of Sodom (which without all probability was and are damned, 2 Pet.
2, 6. Jude 7.) Mat. 11.21.24. which being good in the sight of God, Christ
(seeking for no other cause of his Fathers actions, then his own good
pleasure, Luke 10.21.) rejoycingly assents unto it, returning him thanks for
it, and for the discovery of himself to babes, thus the Apostles gave thanks
to God, for that he made them through the manifestation of the favor of his
knowledge by them in every place, a sweet favor of Christ unto God, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.

Sect. 1. At that time, namely, when God had used all means of grace to
convert those Cities to himself, and to save them, and when, they had abused
all his means of grace to the subverting themselves to their own condemnation.
Mat. 11.16, 17, 18, 19. etc. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank the
O Father, etc. Whence we may observe.

Doct. 1. That a^ at all times, so especially at that time in which some great
effects of Gods works, or word does appear for good or evil to men, we
should give him thanks. 1 These. 5.18. Rev. 19.1.7.

Sect. 2. Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, whence we may observe.

Doct. That thankfulness to God, is our answer to every effect of his word and
works, it is Gods great end in all that he does. Pro. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself (to wit for the glory of his mercy) yea, even the
wicked for the day of evil, for the glory of his justice. Romans 9.22, 23.

Use. They that murmr against God in any condition, or that curse him, are
called to bless him, and they shall be punished by him; not only for cursing
him, but also for not blessing him; not only for being unthankful, but also
for not being thankful, as it is their dutiful answer to all the doings and
dealings of God, and as not to be thankful is to be unthankful.

Sect. 3. I thank the O Father, as if Christ had said, I rejoice that God is
thus glorified (in his justice and mercy, by the effects of his word and works
in men) for he is my Father. Whence we may observe,

Doct. That a man to be thankful to God first must know him to be his Father.
and that for a double Reason,

Reas. First, Because until I more or less know God to be my Father, he is in
my understanding to me an angry and an avenging Judge, and a consuming fire.
Heb. 12.29. in which consideration of God, I can not unfainedly thank him for
any thing.

Reas. Secondly, Because God is thanked but when he is thanked unfainedly; but
when I more or less know God to be my Father, then I can see his love to me in
all things, drawing me from a principle of unfeigned love, to be thankful to
aim in, and for all things.

Sect. 4 Lord of heaven and earth. Observe hence,

Doct. That a child of God wheresoever he is, though it be upon the highest
mountain in the world yet he cannot see above him beside him, nor beneath him,
beyond his Fathers Lordship. Psalm. 50.10.11.12. Every beast of the Forest is
mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills, J know all the fowls of the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine, the world is mine and
the fulness there^^.

Use. Thou then that see thy self to be a child of God, and see thy Fathers
Lordship to be more, and above, and beyond all that thou can see any way
before thee, or behind thee, beside thee, above thee, or beneath thee, why
should thou fear any want, or distrust thy Fathers providence for thee?
Learn of rich men's children, who whilst they are under age, have no power over
their Fathers estate, and yet from what estate they see of their Fathers in his
own hands and in the hands of tenants and servants, they gather assurance of
maintenance from their Father by that estate, as if it were all in their own
hands: So thou that art a child of God, whose land and riches is all the world,
and the fulness thereof, and thou have nothing in thine own hands as yet, but
all is in the hands of thy Father, and in the hands of his tenants and
servants. And now from all this estate of thy Fathers, can thou gather less
than assurance of thy relief and maintenance, and if thou do question this,
thou do as much question whether God is thy Father or no, or else whether he
be Lord of all things or no.

Sect. 4. Lord of heaven and earth, Observe again.

Doct. That all the Lords in the world and the possessers thereof, are but
tenants, Stewards, and servants to this great Landlord called the Lord, who is
therefore, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. 1 Timothy 6.15. Use. Therefore ^e
not men boast themselves of their riches nor ingrosse the Lords inheritance to
themselves, as if there were no Lord above them, but let them own and
acknowledge their high Lord in all that they possess, and honor him with all
their substance, Pro. 3 9 Send him his high rents, by his servants the poor,
least ye forfeit all to him, and he call you to a strict account and turn you
out of your Stewardship, see that as good Stewards of God you give his family a
portion in due season, and remember that you receive freely to give freely; be
good in your place lest you come to disgrace, be liberal, lest you come to
misery all, make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations; he that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much; if therefore ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true
riches? and if you have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own? Luke 16.9, 10, 11, 12. Let this be the
rich man's Motto, and mind, ever in his mind, That while he is rich he may not
be poor, and that when he is poor he may be rich.

Sect. 5. Because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent.

Object. How is God here said to hide the things of himself and his Christ
from men?

Answ. Not by darkening of them, but by not enlightening of them; not by taking
away their sight, but by not giving them sight; by denying them the eye salve,
Rev. 3.18. without which none can see spiritually spiritual things. Whence
observe,

Doct. That God blinds and hardens wicked men, not by changing them from better
to worse, but only, by not changing them from worse to better. He does not
harden them by infusing or inferring any wicked quality into them, which before
was not in them; but by not infusing nor infering better qualities into them,
than by nature they have in them; thus men are said to blind one another. 1 Samuel 20.2. Behold, my Father will do nothing, either great or small, but that
he will show it me, and why should my Father hide this thing from me. Where he
shows that his Fathers hideing that thing from him (if he did it) would be by
not showing it unto him, and not by blinding of him, or by infusing of any
darkness into him, or by taking any light or understanding from him; even so
God hides things from men, 2 King. 4.27. The Lord has hid it from me, and has
not told me. Where it is clear, that the Lord hid that thing from him by not
telling it unto him, and not by blinding of him more than he was before; not by
taking any knowledge from him, that he had, but by not giving more knowledge to
him than he had. And Genesis 18.17. And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham
that thing which I do. Which is as much as to say, shall I not reveal to
Abraham that thing which I do, or I will reveal to Abraham that thing which I
do.

Reas. First, It must needs be so, because blindness or ignorance of Christ,
and hardness of heart against him, is evil and sin; Now God has no evil,
nor can be the author of evil, and therefore he cannot hide any good from men
by insusing any evil into them.

Reas. Secondly, Because (as he cannot be the Author of any evil, because it
is evil, so) he cannot be an infuser of evil into one that is either good or
evil already, because that is evil also; Wherefore as ignorance of Christ,
and hardnsse of heart against Christ are evil, and as God has no evil nor
cannot be the Author nor Actor of evil; it must needs be, that his hiding of
Christ and the things of him from men, is not by taking any light or sight from
them: but only by his not communicating his light to them; thus only God
hides the things of Christ from the wise and prudent.

Use. This therefore (according to what I conceive) shows clearly, that no
natural man has free will or power in himself to believe in Christ to
salvation and glory. Ier. 10.23. and 13.23.

Obj. And whereas it is objected against this, thus, Adam, and all his
posterity in his loins had free will to good, before he lost it by sin in
his fall: but Christ the second Adam came to (and did) restore to the first
Adam, and to all his posterity all that they have lost. Romans 5.14. -- 19.
Therefore all Adams posterity, which are all men, have free will to good and to
believe to salvation and glory.

Answ. First, I deny that Adam, or his posterity in him had ever free will to
believe to salvation and glory.

First, Because as Adam and his posterity in him, in their innocence before
their fall had no need of a Savior, or of faith to believe in one to
salvation, so neither had they free will so to believe; for as they had by
nature so much as they needed, so they had no more then they needed.

Secondly, Because Adam in innocence was but a mere natural man, whose
holiness was but a natural holiness, consisting only of an innocence of all
evil, whereas faith in Christ is a grace of the holy Spirit of God; Gal 5.22.
and the Divine nature of God. 2 Pet. 1.4. Therefore Acam in his innocence had
not Faith, nor power to believe as aforesaid; Wherefore though Christ restores
again all that Adam lost, yet he restores not to him nor to his; a power to
believe in Christ to salvation by nature; because by nature they never had it,
nor lost it.

Thirdly, Because if Adam, and his posterity in him, in their innocence had
this power and grace of Faith, then could not Adam and his posterity have fell
from God as they did; as no man now that has received that grace, or any grace
in truth can fall totally and finally from God; this shall suffice for the
first answer to the question.

Answ. Secondly, suppose that it were granted that Adam in his innocence had
free will to believe as aforesaid and that he lost it in his fall, and that
Christ came to restore it to him again, and that Christ has done what he came
to do; yet he has no more restored this free will, or power of believing to
Adam and his posterity as yet, then he has destroyed death, and all the
occasions thereof; to wit, imperfection of body, weakness, sickness,
excessive cold, and heat, and all other evils that are incident to the nature
and condition of man in this world, which Adam with the ^osse of free will as
aforesaid (which I deny that ever he had it by nature to loose) procured by his
fall.

Now I grant that whatsoever Adam lost, or procured by his fall, Christ the
second Adam by his death will restore, and all things else to their first and
best condition; in which sense the first Adam is called the figure of him that
was to come, to wit, Christ. Rom 5.14. But I affirm that this restoration in
respect of us is not yet, but as the harvest is potentially in the seed: Genesis
1.11, 12. So this general restoration is potentially in the death and
resurrection of Christ, or in the redemption by Christ, according to Heb. 2.8,
9. thou have put all things in subjection under his feat; For in that he put
all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him: but now
we see not yet all things put under him; but we see Jesus, who was made a
little lower then the Angels, for, or by the suffering of death, crowned with
glory and honor, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man;
Where the Apostle shows, that in regard of us men, and of time, this
redemption or restoration by Christ is not, but in regard of the work it self
(which appears in Christ's victory over his and our enemies, and his exaltation
into glory) this general redemption and restoration is already, though we see
not yet all things put under him, yet we see Jesus by the suffering of death
crowned with glory and honor, we see that he has overcome, and has obtained
the honorable garland, and glorious crown of victory over al his and our
enemies, so as they can never prevail nor persist long against us; the time
will come when all their power will be over, and all things restored again
according to the worth and dignity of the death of Christ, the time thereof is
at hand, but it is not yet; and therefore it is said to be expected or waited
for by the Saints themselves. Romans 8.23. We our selves greane within our selves
waiting for the adoption to wit, the redemption of our body. Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve
not the holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption.
So that though redemption is already in regard of God and the work it self,
yet, it is not yet in regard of men, and of time; but it is to come, and will
be to come until Christ our reedemer come again; Therefore he says, ( Luke
21.27.28.) after he had declared to his people the signs of his second coming,
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a Cloud with Power and great
glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads, for the redemption draws nigh, and hence it is said, Act. 3.20,
21. And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you, whom
the heaven must receive, until the times of restoration of all things. So
that the work of redemption though it be completed in regard of it self, yet
in regard of time it is not, neither is the restoration or restitution of all
things, or of any thing until the second coming of Christ from heaven;
Wherefore if it were granted that Adam by his fall lost free will to believe in
Christ to salvation and glory, (which I deny) and Christ by his death has
restored it to Adam and his posterity again; yet it would be but potentially
as the harvest is in the seed. Genesis 1.11, 12.

Sect. 6. I thank thee, because thou have hid these things. whence Observe,

Doct. That thanks ought to be given to God for any work or effect of his
works or word good or evil in men. 2 Gor. 2.14, 15. Leive. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.

Use. I thank God for making me or any man an instrument of his glory in any
kind, either of his mercy, or of his justice; I do not thank God for the
hardening and ruining of any man or woman, but for the manifestation and
glorification of his justice; Neither do I thank God for glorifying of his
justice, in the hardening and destroying of any enemy of his: but I thank him
for the glorifying of his justice, though in the hardening and destruction of
any enemy of his; For Gods will is that we should labor to bring our will to
all his will, or wills, and so far as we come short of this, we are weak and
imperfect in grace; For when we are just men made perfect, we shall with joy
thank God as well for the glory of his justice though it be in the damnation of
our parents, or children, etc. as for the glory of his mercy in the salvation
of our Parents or children, or of our selves. etc.

Sect. 7. Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, that is, both
from the wisdom and prudence of this world, 1 Cor. 1.21. In the wisdom of God,
the world by wisdom knew not God. Matt. 16.16, 17. flesh and blood has not
revealed is unto the, and for the most part of the wise and prudent of the
world: Ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh
-- are called, some of them are called, but yet they are but few to them of
that sort that are not called; from hence we may observe this truth,

Doct. That all worldly wisdom and prudence, is so far from attaining the
knowledge of Christ, that in anaturall man (above all things) it obscures and
hides Christ from him, and hinders him from Christ, its the greatest impediment
in a natural man in his way to the knowledge of Christ.

And for the better clearing of this point, I will show what humain wisdom is,
and what humain prudence is, and in what sense they are distinct, and to be
known one from the other. Human wisdom is natural knowledge, and human
prudence is knowledge of nature; Wisdom is a seed of Prudence in nature, and
prudence is the knowledge of nature as the fruit and effect of wisdom: so that
prudence is something acquired by the natural seed of wisdom in the use of
means, and so prudence here is nothingelse but their science or knowledge of the
humane arts attained by study, and practice in the improvement of the seed
natural wisdom. Wisdom is in nature prudence, and prudence is in nature
wisdom: insomuch as wisdom is perfectly in prudence and prudence is potentially
in wisdom, as the harvest is in the seed, as heathen teachers and writers (the
greatest naturallists and seacrhers into nature) have observed, Plato
affirms, that there is set in the soul of man coming into the world, certain
species, or as it were seed of things, and rules of Arts or sciences; Wherefore
Socrates (in the books of science) resembles himself to a Midwise, his words
are these, In teaching young men, I did put into them no science, but rather
brought forth that which already was in them: like as the Midwise brought not
in the child, but being conceived did help to bring it forth. Thus having
showed you the nature of imman wisdom and Prudence, and how they differ, I will
now show you the danger of them in a natural man, as being the greatest
obstacle in the way to the divine knowledge of Christ, Isa. 47.10. The wisdom
and thy knowledge has perverted the. Hebr. has caused the to turn away. I^^le
ver. 10. What they know naturally as brute beasts in those things they corrupt
themselves.

King James (a profound Scholar) did experimentally see, and say, that the
deep Theoremes or knowledge of Philosophy makes one learned, but seldom
better, and oftentimes worse, mere Athists, wise men after the flesh are too
wise to go to Heaven, and the Reasons of this Truth are,

Reas. First, Because humane wisdom and prudence are in, and of nature, now all
the nature of man is corrupted, and at enmity against God, Nay the carnal
mind is enmity it self against God, (insomuch as) it is (not only) not
subject to the Law of God, (but also it) neither indeed can be. Romans 8.7. The
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
Romans 8.8. Therefore all natural wisdom, and prudence in natural things in a
natural man, are so far from attaining the knowledge of Christ, that it hides
Christ from him, and hinders him from Christ.

Reas. Secondly, Because fleshly, wisdom and prudence, makes men arrogant and
proud, and lifts them up above, and against the cross of Christ, the humility
and poverty etc, of Christ; knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. 1 Timothy 3.6. But
he that will come to Christ must deny himself, and take up his cross, and
follow him. Matt. 16.24. Ergo. etc.

Reas. Thirdly, Humane wisdom and prudence in a natural man obscures, and
hinders him of the knowledge of Christ, because it cannot acquire, not in the
least measure be a mears to him to procure it in the least measure, it hinders
because it conduces nothing unto this supernatural knowledge; He that is not
with me is against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatereth abroad,
says Christ Mat. 12.30.

Reas. 4. Because only by Faith men are able to apprehend and understand
Christ, Heb. 11.6. Now fleshly wisdom, and humane prudence in a natural man,
hinders him from Faith, for humane wisdom, and prudence will believe no more in
Religion, then is plain and demonstrative by reason, (and although it may be
said, there is nothing true in Religion, or Divinity, that is either false in
reason, or contrary to reason; yet, I say, there are many things in Religion,
and Divinity, that are above reasons reach, and that are to be believed by
Faith, because they cannot be apprehended, or comprehended, much less
demonstrated by reason) now the natural wise man will believe no more then he
can take up by natural reason, although it be taught and confirmed by the word
of God, as every ages experience from the beginning to this day have declared;
therefore fleshly wisdom, and humane prudence in a natural man, hides Christ
from him, and hinders him from Christ.

Reas. 5. Because fleshly wisdom, and humane Learning makes men undocible of
spiritual things; those who are great Scholars in humane Learning, are ashamed
to be taught Divine Lessons. They judge it to be as great disgrace to them, as
a boy that is well learned would be ashamed to be put back by his master to
learn his A B C again. Mt. Bolton who was a man of very pregnant wit, and a
great Scholar, and a Bachelor of Divinity, acknowledged (as we may read in the
relation of his life and death) that before his conversion, he accounted all
Divinity, but foolery (which he repented of, after his conversion,
acknowledging all wisdom and learning to be but foolery; but the wisdom and
learning of Divinity) wherefore all natural, and Scholasticall wisdom in a
natural man hides Christ from him, and hinders him from Christ.

Reas. 6. Because in Scholars that are natural, there is a certain curiosity of
disputing, and propounding doubts and Questions; now though this may be commend
able in humane Learning, yet it is condemnable in Divine: For it is written, I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent; Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is
the Disputer of this world? has not God made soolish the wisdom of this world?
for after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God: It
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor.
1.19, 20.21. And I, brethren, when I came, to you, I came not with excellency
of speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto you the wisdom of God; for I determined
not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified; and my
speech, and my preaching was not with entising words of man^ wisdom, but in
demonstration of the Spiris, and of power; howbeit, we spoke wisdom among them,
that are perfect yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this
world that came to naught, etc. 1 Cor. 2.1.2, 4, 6, 7, 8. So that it is clear,
that humane learning, quaint, and elegant words of man's wisdom, are so far from
being commended, that it is condemned in Divinity, and there is great reason
rendered for it, 1 Cor. 2.5. That your Faith should not stand in the Wisdam of
men, but in the power of God; and another main reason to the same effect, we
find in the 1. Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom
of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect.

Now this is a great impediment in the way to Christ, obscuring Christ from the
wise and prudent of the world, and hinders them mightily and mainly from
embracing Christ, for wise men after the flesh despise the simplicity of the
Gospel of Christ; Aristotle, that great learned Philosopher, rejected the
Pontateuch, or five Books of Moses, because he did only positively lay down
things, and not demonstrate them from the principles of Philosophy, which is a
main cause, why most men do refuse to hear and receive the truth to this day.

Some will not hear learned men, because they preach not learnedly, in quaint,
and elegant words of man's wisdom; others will not hear unlearned men, because
they are not learned, and so their humane-Wisdom, and prudence prevents their
whole man's eternal happiness, and procures their everlasting misery.

Use 1. Showing, that humane-Learning without Divine Religion is dangerous to
the soul, and mightily indangers the soul; the stronger a man is, in his limbs,
the abler he is to oppose, and prevent his Antagonist, so the greater the
humble parts of an natural man are, the abler he is to oppose Christ, and to
withstand him in his word, and in the motions of his spirit; his fleshly
wisdom, and humane learning is his power and policy against Christ, which he
will improve to the uttermost against the truth and himself, as we see by sad
experience, for how fearfully, and divilishly do such unlearned learned men,
wrest, wrinch, and pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction, as saint
Peter says in his second Epistle chap. 3. ver. 16. which unlearned, and
ignorant men have not skill to do, and therefore Paul does most earnestly
exhort Timothy to avoid such humane skill in Divine things, 1 Timothy 6.20, 21. O
Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding prophaine and
vain bablings, and oppofitions of science, falsely so called, which some
professing, have erred concerning the faith, now science, is as much as to say
knowledge, and signifies knowledge of and in the human learned Arts, and so
science is nothing else but humane learning; and whereas the Apostle says,
opposition of science, falsely so called, he denies it not to be science or
knowledge in it self, but only as it is abused to the opposing of the truth,
and as men corruptly make use of it in opposition to the spiritual knowledge
of Christ, and to their own erring concerning the faith, in which sense only a
natural man can and will use it, or rather abuse it, and in which sense it is
so far from being knowledge or light; that it is ignorance and darkness, and
thus science is falsely so called, which our Savior confirms, Mat. 6.23. If
the light that is in thee be darkness, to show that the natural and humane
light of knowledge or science in a man, if it be unsanctified, it is but the
darkness of ignorance, and is falsely called science, or light, which some
professing have erred concerning the says, now an error you know is a taking
up of something more or less for truth that is not truth, and so as science,
knowledge, or light in a man unsanctified, is but ignorance or darknsse, so it
makes him to refuse the light of truth for the darkness of error, and to
rective the darkness of error for the light of truth, hence the Prophet says
of those that are in a woeful or natural condition, that they say conceining
evil, it is good, and concerning good, it is evil (as the Hebrew renders it)
that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for
sweet, and (...) for bitter, Esa. 5.20. all which shows the danger of humane
learning, wisdom, and prudence in natural men to be very great and hurtful,
hiding Christ from them, and hindering them from going to Christ; wherefore
now, thou that art a Father of Children, that are naturally unconverted, and
thou bring them up Scollers, thou know not what wrong thou do them, for
thou do as much as in thee lies, send them headlong to hell, for as they are
by nature enemies to Christ, so thou put a weapon into their hands to
oppose Christ by, or at least whereby they will oppose him the more, and
whereby they will be all most as able as they are willing to do it, and so thou
put thy Children into a more dangerous condition, than ever nature it self
put them into, for while thy Children are weak in fleshly wisdom and
prudence, or humane learning, they are of the number of those of whom there are
many to be saved, but when they are endowed with much fleshly wisdom and
prudence; or humane learning, then they are of the number of those of whom but
a few are to be saved, for you see your calling, Brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh -- are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. now praesuppose there were
2 parties of men, and each of them just to in number, and all of each of them
justly adjudged to dye, and of one of those pirties, 4. were to be saved, and
the other six to be put to death, and of the other party only, one was to be
saved, and the other 9. to be put to death, now if thou were one of that party,
of which 4. are to be saved, and the other 6. to be put to death, would thou
not count it great wrong done to thee to be exchanged for one, or to be made
one of the other party of which but one only is to be saved, and all the other
9. to be put to death, even so, and much more does a Father wrong his Child,
when while he is natural and uncenverted, he makes him a great Scoler in the
humane learned Arts, or sciences, for a man's child is a child of wrath by
nature, and justly adjudged to dye, and whilst he is unlearned, he is of the
sort of people whereof God calls many, but when he is made wise in the said
Arts, he is so wise and willing to deceive himself, that he is of that sort of
people whereof God calls but few to the knowledge of himself, for God hides
the things of eternal life and Salvation, (to wit, Christ, and his things)
from the wise and prudent, and reveals them unto Babes, and Christ prays it
may be so for ever, as being the will of his Father, even so Father, for so it
seems good in thy sight, verse 26.

Object. But here some may object and say, all the reason which is but a few of
wise and prudent, or learned men are saved, in comparison of the weak
unlearned?

Answ. That this is not the meaning of our Savior, in my Text, nor of the
Apostle in the 1 Cor. 1.16. is most clear, for he does not thank his Father
for hiding these things from the wise and prudent, because they are few, but
because they are wise and prudent, as knowing it would not so much redowne to
his glory to reveal them to such, as it would to reveal them unto babes, to
wit, the ignorant and illiterate, for he said to Paul, my strength is made
perfect in weakness 2 Cor. 12.9. all which is more, yea, most manifest in the
1 Cor. chapt. 1. verse 19. to the end of the Chapter, to which end pray read
it.

Object. 2. God has decreed who shall be saved and glorified among men, and
this foundation of God standethsure, having the Seal, the Lord knows who are
his, 2 Timothy 2.14. Wherefore it is not all that we can do ither by giving to,
or by taking from our children any thing that can either save them if they are
not appointed thereunto bp God, or hinder their salvation if they are appointed
thereunto by God; Therefore though humane learning, to wit, fleshly wisdom and
prudence in an unregenerate man is a hinderance of his conversion to God; yet
it is no cause why we should hinder our children of that learning or prudence,
nor why we should spare to gain it for them.

Answ. To breed thy child a Scholar as aforesaid, upon this ground, is all one
as if thou should not give thy child food because his days are determined,
and the number of his months' are with the Lord who has appointed his bounds
that he cannot pass: Job. 14.5. So that we cannot by all that we can do draw
out life one minute longer, nor end it one moment sooner then God has
appointed it. Now what father is so unreasonable to deny his child food upon
this ground, and starvd his child; yet so, and worse do those that bring up
their children in the Scholasticall knowledge of the learned arts before their
conversion to God.

Object. God has commanded men to live as long as they can, but God has
ordained men to live by food; Therefore God commands men as long as they live
to feed as nature shall repuire.

Answ. God has also commanded men to believe: 1 John 3.23. But fleshly wisdom
and prudence, or humane learning is a maine and ordinary hinderance, and a
mighty enemy in a natural man to faith or believing; Matt. 11.25, 26. 1 Cor.
1.26. therefore God has commanded us not to breed our unregenerate children,
or any others in that estate Scholars as aforesaid (as when he commands us to
honor our parents, Exodus 20.12. therein he commands us not to dishonor them)
thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind, Lev. 1914.

Object. 3.1 Cor. 14.14. there says Paul, I thank God I speak with tongues
more then you all* and verse, 5. I would that you all speak with tongues, and
verse 39. forbid not to speak with tongues.

Answ. Paul does not say I thank God for my knowledge of the learned arts, nor
does he say, I would ye all had the knowledge of the learned arts, neither does
he say, forbid not the knowledge of the learned arts; Much learning doubtless
he had in a very great measure, and was not unthankful to God for it, and much
learning he loved to see and commended in all Saints, as knowing by experience
that, as what any man has in him before his conversion he will use and improve
against his conversion, and against Christ, so he will use and improve it after
his conversion, for his conversion, and for Christ; and therefore this does not
at all warrant men in their breeding their Children, or others unregenerate,
Scholars in the learned Arts, which are the substance, matter, and marrow of
humane learning, in so much as ye speaking with tongues is nothing to them, and
is distinct from them, for it is no more humane learning for an Englishman to
speak the tongues of Hebrew, Greek, etc. then it is for a Greek or a Hebrew to
speak English, French, Irish, etc. a natural man may speak with tongues, and
yet not be of that sort of people, to wit, wise men after the flesh of whom
many are not called, and the prudent from whom God hides himself more
ordinarily then from the ignorant; and therefore my Doctrine is not against
natural men's learning the tongues, but against their learning the
scholasticall Arts, which in a natural man darkness, and disables him to do
good, and inlightens and inables him to evil, as I have fully proved.

Use 2. Is it so that natural wisdom and humane prudence in a natural man,
is so far from attaining the knowledge of Christ, that it hides Christ from
him, and hinders him from Christ, then it informs us, that you that are as yet
a mere natural or carnal man, and art unlearned and weak in understanding,
that there is more possibility and probability of thy conversion, and glorious
Salvation; then there is of a natural carnal man that is endowed with much
humane learning, and have abundance of wisdom after the flesh, as for example,
suppose there were of learned wise men after the flesh, and of unlearned men,
weak in understanding, so many for so many, and all unconverted to Christ, as
thus, grant that of each sort of these there were an hundred, and of those that
are wise or learned men after the flesh, there were but one only to be saved,
and that one as yet unknown to any, or to himself, and of the other sort, to
wit, the unlearned and ignorant ten to be saved, and they also unknown as
before, now he that is one of the last and ignorantest company, is not there
more possibility and probability, and hope of his conversion, of any one of the
other company of learned wise ones after the flesh, yea there is ten to one
more hopes of him then of any one of the other, for among an equal number of
each sort, many are called to Christ from among the ignorant or weak sort of
sinners, and but a few from the more wise and learned sort of sinners, says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. for you know your calling Brethren, how that not many
wise men after the flesh -- are called; wherefore where there are together a
learned wise man after the flesh, and an unlearned man, or one weak in
understanding (I say not void of understanding) and both unconverted, the
weaker or ignoranter sinner is more like to be a sinner then the other, and I
my self being converted to Christ, seeing such a couple of unconverted sinners
together, and I might and must choose to be in the case of one of them, I
profess before God, that I would choose rather to be the ignorant or unlearned
sinner, then to be the wise or learned one; wherefore let ignorant and
unlearned sinners, learn both from Scripture and reason not to grudge at the
fleshly wisdom and learning of others, nor despair for their own weakness,
and illiteratenesse, and let not the learned, wise, unconverted men after the
flesh, disdain, nor contemn the illiterate ignorant ones, as apprehending
themselves to be in a better, or so good and hopeful a condition as they are
in.

Use. 3. Seeing that natural wisdom and humane prudence or learning in a
natural man, is so far from attaining the knowledge and divine learning of
Christ, that it hides Christ from him, and hinders him from Christ, then art
thou a learned or wise man after the flesh, as Paul was, and has Christ
revealed himself to thee, and converted thee to himself as he did Paul, then
behold in this similitude Gods mercy to thy soul more then to other converts
that are ignorant and illiterate in comparison of thee, suppose there were 10.
Traitors, and thy self one of them justly condemned to dye, and of these 10.
the Kings pleasure is to save 3. and of which 3. thou art one, yet unknown to
thee, or any one of the 10. which are the 3. to be saved; now this is great
mercy of the King to the whole 10. and so to thee as much as to any other of
them, and so it will be apprehended by all, and each of them; but when thou
come to know that thou art one of the 3, to be saved, then thou will see
greater mercy to thee, but if the King will save but 2. of these 10. condemned
Traitors, and thou art one of these 2. then the Kings mercy is greater to thee,
then if he had saved 3. and thee one of them, but if of these 10. the King will
save but one, and thou art this one, then it would be greater mercy to thee
then if thou had been one of 2. or of 3. out of 10. to be saved, or thus, if
there were 10. Traitors condemned to dye, and thou one of them, and the King
will save 8. or 9. of them; now neither of these 8. or 9. could apprehend so
much mercy of the King in his pardon, as he could if he were the one, or one of
2. of 10. Traitors condemned to dye; whereof there is but one, or two to be
saved by the Kings mercy, and the other 8. or 9. to be put to death by the
Kings justice, even so there are 2. sorts of lost people, and of each sort God
will save some, now of those 2. sorts of people, one of them consists of
unlearned ignorant men, women, etc. the other sort consists of learned wise men
after the flesh, and these sorts being divided into 2. equal parts for number,
of the weaker sort God will save many, and of the wiser sort he will save but a
few in comparison of the other; now when God converts one of the wiser and
learned, does he not show more mercy to him that he converts and calls out
of the wiser sort of whom he will save but a few, then he does show to him whom
he saves out of the ignorantest and weakest sort of whom he saves many, it
being many to one that he is saved, and comparatively; but a few to one that
the other is saved; wherefore as thou do exceed other Converts in Gods
mercy showed in thy conversion, and in the parts above other converts, so it
is the duty to exceed other converts in the love and obedience to God, as Saint
Paul did who as he was a great Scolar, and a wise man after the flesh and so of
their rank of whom but a few are to be saved, so after his conversion as Gods
mercy was showed to him in his conversion more then to other ordinary
converts, and as he exceeded them in human parts and learning, so he did exceed
them in the love and service of God, we finding none like him in resolution and
labor for God. 1 Cor. 15.10. wherefore thou that art a convert of his sort,
know that thou may be equal in thy love and obedience to God with converts
of the other sort in their love and obedience to God, yet if thou do not
exceed them in it, thou art as short of them in the duty to God as thou do
exceed them in natural, and humane parts, learning, and mercy from God.

Use. 4. Showing the folly and blindness of the world in their making fleshly
wisdom and humane learning in a man though he be natural and altogether
carnal as all sufficient to enable him for the work of the preaching of the
Gospel, whereas the wiser any man is without Christ, the weaker he is for any
work of Christ, and the clearer he is in any science or knowledge humane
without Christ, the darker he is in the knowledge of Christ, the more a man
knows without him the more he is ignorant of him, Man. 6.22, 23. the light of
the Body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be
full of light, but if their eye be evil thy whole body shall be full of
darkness, if therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness.

The Postscript.
I Know that this truth premised, or before specified, will be foolishness to
fools, that is to say, unregenerate men, and especially to those of them that
are mighty in fleshly wisdom, and in the learned Arts and sciences, and
therein is the Scripture fulfilled; the preaching whereof, in reference to
such, is called the foolishness of preaching, and the foolishness of God,
etc. 1 Cor. 1.18. to the 29. but yet verse 24. to the truly wise and learned,
to wit, to them that are called both Jews and Greeks, it is Christ the power
of God, and the wisdom of God to them to whom it comes the power of God, it is
the wisdom of God, Jews or Greeks, bond or free, learned or unlearned, 1
Cor. 2. we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the Princes of this world, that came to naught, verse 6.

FINIS.

