God save the King, And Prosper Him and His PARLIAMENT: OR, A justification by
the Word of God, of the Kings gracious proffer for LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, Made
to His Parliament and Subjects, before he came into ENGLAND, In Matters
disputable.

By THEOPHILUS BRABOVRN.

Him that is weak in the Faith, receive unto you; but not put away from you,

Romans 14.1. One believes that he may eat of all things: another which is
weak, eats herbs

Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: and let not him which
eats not, condemn him that eats,

Romans 14.2, 3. For we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,

Rom 14.10. And every one of us shall give an account of himself unto God. Let
us not therefore judge or condemn one another any more,

Romans 14.10, 12, 13. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord Christ come,

1 Cor. 4.5. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Booksellers
in London, and by William Nowell, Bookseller in Norwich, 1660.

A JUSTIFICATION BY THE Word of God, of the KINGS gracious proffer for Liberty
of Conscience, made to the Parliament and his Subjects before he came into
ENGLAND.
THAT Christians should be all of one heart, and of one mind, in all points of
Religion, is a thing highly to be desired by every good man, but not to be
expected in this life by the wisest of men.

Are not the Scriptures dark, and hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. in many
disputable points among us, so as every man cannot light upon the Truth? Are
all Ministers and others of one stature in knowledge? Have not one man five
talents, another four, and another four? How is it possible then, that every
one of these should be of one opinion in all things? Can he that has but one
or two talents understand as much as he that has five? Or is any one perfect
in knowledge? There are and ever were strong Christians, and weak: wherefore
the strong must bear with the weak, not persecute the weak, Romans 15.1.

In those purest Churches in the Apostles days, they were not all of one heart
and mind: for some believers stood up for days and meats, others were of a
contrary mind, Romans 14. Some hold it lawful to eat-meats sacrificed to Idols,
but others hold it unlawful, 1 Cor. 10.25, 28. Now if those purest Churches
had such differences in opinion, who can think our Churches should be free?
What marvail is it that we have Episcoparians, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, and other differences in opinions? It will never be otherwise
until we get into heaven, where we shall be perfect in Knowledge: in the mean
time, we must exercise patience one toward another, the strong must bear with
the weak.

These things premised, I come to the point in question; which is Liberty of
Conscience: Touching which, know all men, that I defend not a loose and wicked
liberty, for any man to speak or practice contrary to a light in Scripture
clearly revealed: I pefend only a liberty in disputable points, such as both
parties do alleadg Scripture one against another, or either of them for
himself: or when one alleges a Scripture, the sense whereof is dark and
doubtful to the other.

Before I prove my question, give me leave to show the original rise, and
evil fruits of the Magistrates punishing the people for disputable points in
Religion: The Pope began it; for he and his Clergy never left till they had
moved Parliaments to enact cruel Laws against Protestants, to burn them to
ashes, that so his Catholic Church might be all of one heart and mind: Now
the Sacraments of the Altar, or Christ's corporal presence was in those days a
disputable point, both sides alleging Scripture: and see the evil fruits of
this persecution? The Magistrate made himself guilty of shedding the innocent
blood of multitudes of godly Martyrs.

And since the Pope, our Bishops abusing the Kings authority, have imprisoned
some, and vexed, sued and molested others in their Courts, for things then
disputable, as for opening their Shops, or working on Popish Holy Days, for
refusing the Cross in Baptism, for Surplice, Hood, and Tipet, with other popish
trinkets: now see one of the evil fruits hereof to the King; he lost the hearts
of many of his Subjects so much, for arming his Bishops with his authority, as
when the King and Parliament made War, thousands of his Subjects fell from him
in his greatest need of them, and joined with the Parliament. Those that love
the King, should not exasperate him, but persuade him for his own safety, to
bear as much as possible may be with those who make conscience in matters
disputable: But those who persuade him otherwise, are none of the Kings best
friends. For a King who is over all, must so order his government, as he may
have the hearts of all: but not for a disputable point in Religion, to loose
the hearts of many. Men will do much for their civil rights, but much more for
their Consciences; yet I justify not Rebellion upon any account.

1. Argument.
The Magistrate has not received any Authority from God to compel, or
constrain by greater or lesser punishments, the consciences of men in matters
disputable: and therefore he may maintain Liberty of Conscience in such things:
search the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, and you shall find no such
authority committed to the Magistrate.

As for the Old Testament, I confess there the Magistrate had authority to
punish with death the Murderer, the Adulterer, and the Idolater, that
worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars: but these were no disputable points, but
errors clearly revealed in Scripture: but you shall no where find the
Magistrate empowered from God, to punish any for matters disputable and
doubtful.

As for the New Testament, neither Christ nor his Apostles left any order for
the Magistrate to punish any for the liberty of his Conscience in things
doubtful and disputable. Excommunication was for incest, 1 Cor. 5.1. etc.
which is a scandalous sin, and clearly condemned in Scripture, but not for
points doubtful and disputable: I may therefore conclude, that God has not
given the Magistrate any authority in the Old or New Testament to punish any
for liberty of his Conscience in things disputable: wherefore the Magistrate
may maintain liberty of Conscience in such things.

2. Argument.
It is against the common light of Reason in all men, to punish any for a fault
which is disputable and doubtful: so you have the judgment of all men against
this.

Furthermore, in a disputable point, St. Paul reckons him that holds the truth
to be a strong brother, and him that is in the error a weak brother, Romans 14.
Now is it not contrary to reason, that a Magistrate should by punishment
constrain a weak man to do more than he can do? or carry a burden above his
strength?

But Papists who maintain Free Will, and persecution for Conscience Sake will
say, as some Protestants do among us, these men can alter their minds if they
will, but they are obstinate Heretics, or Schismatics, after a sufficient
conviction.

I reply. 1. Does perseverance in an opinion signify obstinacy? Why then all
that persevere in the truth are obstinate persons, and such were our Martyrs:
it signifies self-perswasion, but not obstinacy: and may not a multitude be
obstinate as well as a few?

2. St. Paul knew as well as we or Papists, what belongs to disputable points,
yet he made no such objections against an erring person: he calls him a
brother, and a weak brother, not an obstinate person, or an obstinate Heretic:
he would not have a weak brother burnt or excommunicated, but borne withal,
Romans 15.1. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak.

3. You talk of sufficient conviction, but where is it? neither at Rome, nor in
England: has any man the spirit of infallibility to determine of all the
controversal opinions in Religion? or of all all doubtful and disputable
points? But suppose some man had; as if any had, St. Paul had it: yet is not
this excellent means often obstructed among us, and made invalid? partly for
weakness of understanding and judgment in the party to be instructed, and
partly through the flesh and corruption of nature in all men more or less?
Gal. 5.17. Romans 7.18, 19. Mat. 26.41. Now both these render a man a weak
brother: and if he be weak, then is he to be born with, not persecuted, Romans
15.1.

Yet further, Is there not more reason that one Christian brother should bear
the infirmities and weakness in Conscience of another, then to excite or desire
the Magistrate to punish him for it? The Scriptures do often excite us to
patience, and Ministers in Pulpit do the same, and every man has it in his
tongue, saying, we must be patient: but where is the man that will practice it?
God calls us to patience in these things, but we refuse to use it. Do not the
most say, Oh! he is one of dangerous opinions, it is pity he lives? Oh that the
Parliament would enact some severe Law to punish him? Where Is thy patience
then, whilst thou desire revenge? Is there not more reason that the
Magistrate should excite such impatient spirits to exercise their patience,
then for them to excite the Magistrate by his Law to punish and revnge?

3. Argument.
It is against that golden Rule of our Savior, for the Magistrate to punish,
or for the people to desire him to punish any for his Conscience in matters
disputable: For Christ said, Whatsoever ye would that men should do you, even
so do you to them, Mat. 7.12.

Now our whole Kingdom are a multitude of none but Sectaries in disputable
points: though they be unanimous and orthodox in the clear Fundamentals, yet
are they divided into dark Disputables: For the Episcoparian is a Sect divided
from all others, so is the Presbyterian, so is the Independent, and so is the
Anabapist, etc. And if the Parliament should own none but Presbyterians, yet
these are but Sectaries, because divided from all others; and the greatest sort
they may be, and yet but a Sect. Now the Episcoparian would have liberty for
themselves to read the Common Prayer, but would not that any of the other sorts
should enjoy the liberty of their Consciences: It may be the like is true of
those other sorts of Presbyters, Independents, and Anabaptists: But why should
Christians be so selfish and partial? is not one man's Conscience as tender to
him, as another man's is to him? Where is the practice of our Saviors rule? to
do that for another man, which we would he should do for us. The Magistrate
therefore being of one Sect or other, must be as willing to give liberty to
others, as to take it for himself.

4. Argument.
It is against Christian charity to the souls of the people, for a Magistrate
by punishment, to constrain them to sin against their own souls unto perdition.

For if the people for fear of punishment shall do any thing against their
Consciences, they sin against conscience, Romans 14.14, 23. And the Magistrate by
his constraint of them does what in him is to destroy them eternally, Rom
14.15. and to drive them to everlasting perdition of soul and body, 1 Cor. 8
11, 12.

Now God forbid, that any Christian Magistrate should be so severe, as by his
hard Laws, to force any man to destroy himself eternally: and not only so,
but also to make himself guilty of his peoples destruction: Is it not better
for him to grant liberty of conscience?

5. Argument.
It is against Justice for a Magistrate to punish any man for a disputable
opinion.

In matters of Justice, God forbad the Magistrates to admit of one single
witness, as being not clear enough, and therefore for more certainty there
must be two or three witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.15. and see Deuteronomy. 17.4, 5. our
Magistrates will not punish any man, unless the Fact be clearly against the
Law, probabilities are nothing: how then can the Magistrate do injustice to
punish for a disputable opinion, which is doubtful?

Yet further, If the Magistrate condemns for a disputable opinion, out of doubt
sometime he shall condemn unjustly, and always be in danger so to do, for want
of the judgment of certainty: wherefore in these disputable points the
Magistrate should do well to forbear his judgment until Christ the Judge come:
when we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one of
us give an account of himself to God, Romans 14.10, 12. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more, Romans 14.13. Judge nothing before the time, until
the Lord come, etc. 1 Cor. 4.5.

But it will be said, may not the Magistrate call into his help ten or twenty
learned and godly Ministers, and then judge of the opinion? May not many
Ministers judge of the opinion of two or three private persons?

I answer. 1. There are no learned and godly Ministers who have the spirit of
certainty and infallibility, in a doubtful or disputable opinion. 2. The
Ministers called into the help of the Magistrate, are ever of a contrary
opinion to his who is accused: and therefore they are incompetent judges: May
the Plaintiff judge the Defendant? or the Presbyterian the Independent? then
may we know the Verdict before the Jury be impanelled: These things considered,
oh! that since God has left many things in Scripture disputable, out
Parliaments and Magistrates would leave them so too.

6. Argument.
It will be a great folly in the Magistrate to attempt by his authority, to do
that which is impossible to be done: Will a wise man attempt to empty the water
in the Sea, or to wash a Blackamoor white? Such is his attempt, that thinks by
lawful means to bring all men to be of one mind and opinion in things
doubtful and disputable: the Magistrate may as well cure one sick of an Ague
or Fever by his Sword, as by it to to inform and reform a doubtful and weak
Conscience; this is the Ministers office, not the Magistrates.

In the Apostles days, when the Church was most pure, there was great
differences in opinions, and high contests among Christians about days and
meats, Romans 14.2.5, 3.10. Now if all men were not of one opinion in those
purest Churches, what hope has the Magistrate to avoid all differences in
opinion in our Church?

2. Consider the obscurity of Scripture in disputable points. St. Peter says
of St. Paul's Epistles, some things are hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16.
And herewithall consider also, that the wisest men know but in part in this
life, and the holiest men are sanctified but in part, so as too often their
judgment is blinded by unmortified passions and affections: Now how is it
possible that the Magistrate should rectify all these by his sword? the which
unless he could rectify, it is altogether in vain for him, to attempt to bring
all men to be of one mind and opinion.

7. Argument.
In the Church of God, in the Jewish Nation, many people were suffered to live
under the authority of Moses and the Magistrates, who were of different
opinions from the most of the people.

For they had strangers among them, who were no Proselytes, or of the Jewish
Religion, and yet they were not constrained by the Magistrate to become
Proselytes: For the Text says, If a stranger will, etc. let him, etc. Exodus
12.48. It was left to his choice and will: no punishment was appointed to
compel them: none though he neglected their Sacraments of Circumcision and the
Passover: none, though he did eat meats which the Jews abhorred to eat,
Deuteronomy. 14.21. Moses and the Magistrates, with Aaron the high Priest, did all
allow of this liberty: and why then may not the King and Magistrates, with all
the Clergy, allow of liberty of Conscience in our days, in matters disputable
among Christians?

8. Argument.
If the King and Magistrates under him will govern by St. Paul's Discipline,
then they must govern by the discipline of liberty of Conscience: the which I
thus prove.

St. Paul said, we which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves, Romans 15.1. and see Gal. 6.1, 2. And he rebuked
the believing Romans, for that the strong despised the weak, and the weak
judged and condemned the strong, Rom 14.3, 10.13. Now what other thing is this
toleration of St. Paul, and bearing with the weak in matters of conscience, but
liberty of Conscience? and no other thing is signified by this, that he would
not have believers to despise one another, or to judge and condemn one another
for conscience sake, and differences in judgments.

The differences in those days were about the Ceremonies of meats, and
drinks, and Holidays, Romans 14. Now we have too many Ministers of impatient
spirits, who cannot endure St. Paul's liberty of Conscience, and to use patience
in bearing with the weakness of others; but like better of uncharitable
persecution; these have learned an evil art of aggravation, by consequences to
wyre-draw, and draw blood from the opinion contrary to themselves, and have
drawn the people to hate and despise the persons of that opinion: such
Ministers if they had lived in those days, could with the high Priest have
made Christ guilty of blasphemy, Mat. 26.65. and St. Paul and Heretic, Acts
24.14. and these weak christian Romans obstinate heretics: For by their use of
meats and days after Christ was come, they signified that Christ was not come,
but expected to come, as the heretical Jews do at this day: Meats and Days
were types and shadows of Christ to come, Colos. 2.16, 17. Now no doubt St.
Paul had as sufficiently instructed and convicted these believing Romans of
their error, as any Minister in these our days can any man in his error; yet
St. Paul did not count them obstinate heretics, nor by aggravations and
consequences draw them to be guilty of heresy.

But it may be said to me, of these different opinions among us, which party is
the weaker, and which the stronger?

I answer, To determine infallibly I cannot; I must leave it for Christ to do
it at his coming, 1 Cor. 4.4, 5. I shall only answer by the opinion of our
times: The multitude and greatest number countenanced by the King, will think
themselves the strong. If so, then say I, those strong ones must bear with
those that are weak, and differ in opinion from them, Romans 15.1. If the
Presbyterian think himself the strong, he must bear with the weak Independent:
Or if the Independent think himself the strong, he must bear with the weak
Presbyterian: and so of other opinionists, we must all bear one with another,
Gal. 6.2. and so by a mutual toleration, we shall live in love like
Christians. So far of my 8. Arguments

Thus I have made it appear, that the King and Parliament may maintain Liberty
of Conscience, and ought so to do by the Word of God. And now I come to answer
sundry objections raised against this truth.

Object. 1. If the Magistrate tolerate liberty of Conscience, thereby he shall
justify, embolden, and harden some in their errors.

Answ. 1. St. Paul tolerated liberty of Conscience, and yet it will not follow
that he did thereby justify, embolden, and harden the weak believers in their
errors. 2. The Magistrate has no authority from God to punish any for a
disputable error, as has been proved, and therefore no blame is in him: he
cannot reform that which is not in his power to reform. 3. He has no
infallible guide; to know which side is in the error, how then can he punish
any? 4. If any harden their heart in error because it is tolerated, themselves
shall answer to God for it, at the appearing of Christ the Judge of quick and
dead, Romans 14.10, 12.

Object 2. Yea, but if the Magistrate tolerate errors, he tolerates sins: many
say, to tolerate error, is to tolerate sin.

Answ. 1. Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3 4. Now in disputable
points, no opinionist desires liberty to break Gods Law, as to commit
idolatry, to profane the Sabbath, to commit adultery, to steal, or deal
fraudulently, or to do any thing contrary to a light clearly revealed: now in a
disputable point, no man can say for certain which is the sin and which not:
But suppose some man could say for certain, his is the sin, yet St. Paul did
tolerate the sin of ignorance, t Romans 14. in weak Christians. 2. Toleration is
voluntary or necessary: now the Magistrates toleration is necessary, because
God has not given them authority (as has been proved) to punish disputable
sins.

Object. 3. Some say, there can be but one truth, and one true Religion: Now to
maintain sundry and many opinions, is to maintain sundry and many religions.

Answ. The question is not about maintaining of sundry opinions which are
disputable, but about toleration and bearing with them, so as they may be free
of punishment: The Magistrate maintains the Doctrine of the ten Commandments,
the Articles of Faith, with faith and repentance, and any thing clearly
revealed in Scripture: all these may be reckoned for one truth and one
Religion, because we all agree herein as one: but as for disputable points not
clearly revealed, the Magistrate may tolerate them, and not maintain or
countenance them: and yet he shall not be said to maintain two or many
Religions or Truths: St. Paul did tolerate the weak Christians, who were of
different opinions from the strong, and yet he did not maintain them, but
dispute against them: nor did he maintain sundry Truths, and many Religions.
All things clearly revealed, make up but one Religion, and this we maintain:
and yet may tolerate many disputable opinions not clearly revealed.

Object. 4. Papists may say, if you tolerate liberty of Conscience in
disputable points, then we Papists must have a toleration.

Answ. There is more then Religion, and matter of Conscience in this matter:
there is matter of State and safety of Commonwealth in it, which admits not of
a toleration, unless Papists could give us security for our lives,

For Papists are professed enemies to Protestants, and to their lives, so as we
cannot live in safety by them: for to further their Catholic cause, they hold
it their duty to blow up with powder an whole Parliament at once, and to cut
the throats of an whole Kingdom of Protestants, as in Ireland of late years,
and the like, of the Popish massacre of many thousands of Protestants at Paris
in France: No Heretics are so bloody minded as Papists, nor so dangerous to be
tolerated as they be: No Heretic seeks the life of his neighbor, and ruin of
the Nation wherein he lives, but a Papist: If therefore it were safe to
tolerate their Religion, is it safe to tolerate such murderers, who wait daily
for a time to cut all our throats.

Object. 5. Christ rebuked the Angel of the Church at Thyatira, for suffering
Jezebel to teach and deceive his people, Rev. 2.18.20. And St. Paul says of
deceiveable teachers, their mouths must be stopped, Tit. 1.11. Now this is
contrary to toleration.

Answ. 1. These Texts concern not the office of the Magistrate, but of the
Minister, as of the Angel of the Church, Rev. 2.18. He ought to rebuke them
sharply, Tit. 1.13. Now it is not meet that the Minister should suffer known
errors to be in his Church, but that he should stop them, by convincing them
by the Scriptures: but I like not of some Ministers, who in stead of
convincing, fall a railing at the persons, crying out against them, oh! these
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. are dangerous persons, etc. I
like well to hear these opinions soberly confuted, but not reviled. 2 These
Texts speak not against disputable points, but against Idolatry, Rev. 2.20. and
lying, Tit. 1.12. which are sins clearly revealed in Scripture.

Obj. 6. If a kingdom be divided against it self, it cannot stand, Mark 3.24.

Answ. This parable is true of a Kingdom: for if the Subjects take up Arms one
against another, that Kingdom will come to ruin: but the case is not alike in
a Church, where all agree in all things clearly revealed, but differ in some
disputable points darkly revealed. For 1. In Holland there are many of
differing opinions, and yet that Nation stands and flourishes, and so does
that Church of Presbyterians. 2. In the Commonwealth of the Jews, there were
many strangers tolerated, who were no Proselytes of the Jewish Religion: for
they were not circumcised, neither did they eat the Passover, Exodus 12.43,
45.48. and see Deuteronomy. 14.21. And yet that Commonwealth stood, and so did that
Church.

Obj 7. Then the Master said unto the servant, Go forth into the high ways,
etc. and compel them to come in to my Supper, etc. Luke 14.23. Hereby we see,
that compulsion may be made in matters of Religion.

Answ. By the Servant here, is not meant the Magistrate, of whom our question
is: for in these days they had no christian Magistrate that would compel any
to be Religious: but we must understand, the Minister, whose office is to
invite and call in, yea, to compel the guests to come to Christ his feast: now
there is a compulsion and constraint by the forcible exhortations and
persuasions of the strong arguments of the Minister, Luke 24.29. Acts 16 15. So
notwithstanding this Text, the Magistrate may maintain Liberty of Conscience.

FINIS

