BRAVE NEWS Of the taking of the City of Chitchester by the Parliaments Force,
UNDER The Command of Sir William Waller, Upon Wednesday last, at 5. of the
Clock, half an hour before it began to Rain;

WHEREIN The Bishop, some Lords, and about fourscore Commanders are taken
Prisoners.

And OF THE MAINTAINING OF Bradford in Yorkshire by 40. Musketeers, against
1300. Cavaliers;

With the manner of the Fight, and how our men were Victors, To the praise of
God.

London Printed for T. Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreete, December. 30. 1642.

Bradford, December. 21. 1642.
YOur solicitousnesse for my welfare made me impatient till I had informed you
of it: our safety is included in this towns prosperity, and this town
prospers wonderfully; our distractions were marvelously quashed, Delinquents
apprehended, and town with parish united, in a resolution to stand upon our
guard, and the Lord has prospered us: The last Lords day 13. Colors came
against us, under the command of Col: Goring, Col: Evers a Papist, Sir William
Savill, Sir Marmad: Langdale, and Sir John Gothricke, a Papist, etc. They
appeared in Barker End about 9. a clock, when we had not in town above 40.
Musketeers; planted their Ordnance in William Cooks Barn, marched down the
Causey with their foot, whilst their horse coasted about the town to hinder
aid from coming in, possessed themselves of those houses under the Church, and
from thence played hotly upon our Musketeers in the Church till 11. a clock,
about which time Hallifax men, and other neigh bours came in to our help; the
Fight before hot, was then hotter: our men impatient to be coopt up in the
Church, rusht out, forced a passage into the foresaid houses, and there our
Club-man did good execution upon them: thereabouts the Fight continued till it
was dark: many of theirs was slain, their best Canoneer, 6. Commanders, they
acknowledge 4. one of them (whose body we have) is discovered to be the
Commander of the foot, and Artilery in this expedition, by a commission found
in his pocket, many taken, a commander, for whom they sent their Trumpeter
yesternight; they writ him a captain, he says he is a Sergeant Major; Ralph
Atkison took him, got from him, 2. pieces, a Ring, and might have had more if
he would: besides taken 24. common soldiers, about 10. horses, much powder,
many muskets, some got 2. some 3. few that ventured came empty; wounded there
are more amongst them, Sir Jo: Gothricke, as their Trumpeter confesses, and
some say Capt. nevill: nor can I hear that above 2. of our men perished by the
enemy in the Fight; their Canons, One Captain Bins is dead since upon his
wounds received at Bradford.
one of which shoots a 9. pound ball, played all that time upon the town, but
hurt no man, praised be God, who has delivered those that were ordained to
death, etc.

The last News from Chitchester, Brought by a special Messenger, concerning
the taking of it, the 29. of December. 1642.
THat after Sir William Waller with his men had besieged the City of
Chitchester seven days and nights, and had given sever all assaults upon it,
to the the loss of about twenty men of both sides; it was surrendered on
Wednesday last, being the last Fast day (as a fruit of the prayers of Gods
people) at 5. of the clock in the afternoon upon composition, viz. 1. That
the Town should let the Parliaments forces in. 2. That they should pay unto
the Parliaments forces a months pay before hand. 3. That all the Commanders in
the town, and chief Cavaliers should be seized upon, and to be at the
disposal of the Parliament. 4. That the Town should not be plundered, whereupon
the gates were opened, our men entered, and shut them again; which done, they
first released the honest men which were committed to prison, who they employed
in places of trust; and after that, seized upon the Brshop, those Lords, and
other Commanders that are there, to the number of about 80. It is conceived
they have found great store of money and plate, but how much, and how they
served the common soldiers, together with other particulars not here
mentioned, we may shortly expect to hear.

One or two chief passages of providence I cannot omit. 1. That this victory
was upon the Fast day, even before many Congregations had ended prayer, a good
answer of our prayers, and so a good encouragement for us still to seek Gods
face and favor in behalf of this distressed Land. 2. Consider the great
goodness of God to our soldiers; there fell not a drop of rain a that place
all the while they were in siege about that Town, and that they took it but
half an hour before this last great rain began: Oh the goodness of God!
What hard service would it have been for our men to have lain out night and day
in the wet. For all these great meries, the Lord of Hosts be Praised, Amen.

The Readers are desired by T. Underhill, Stationer, that if they meet with
any ting in Print, either fained, or scurrilous, with his name at them (as such
things have been done with his name at them, to his great wrong not to believe
that they are Printed or published by him, or by his means, but by ungodly
fellows, who usurp his name, to credit their lies.


