A NEW And clear Discovery, OF THE TRVE, AND PROPER, NATURAL CAUSE, OF THE
EBBING AND FLOWING OF THE MAIN SEA.

Convincingly held forth, both from Scripture and Reason: So as any Rational
man, may easily apprehend, the proper Cause of its fluent motion: And that it
is not the Moon, as some have imagined, and gone about to prove.

Written by ELLIS BRADSHAWE of the Parish of Boulton in the County of
Lancaster, Husbandman.

PSALM. 97.4, 5. His Lightnings lightened the world; the earth saw it and
trembled.

The hills melted like wax, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the
Lord of the whole earth.

All thy works praise thee, oh Lord, Therefore even (I) also will magnify thy
Name, for it is holy.

Yea, let the heavens and the earth praise him: the seas, and every thing that
moves therein.

Psalm. ^9.34. LONDON, Printed by G^rtrude Dawson for Thomas Brewster, at the
Sign of the three Bibles under Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1649.

THE Authors Apology, in Respect he is but an Husbandman, and unlearned in
the Tongues, to excuse himself of Presumption herein to the Christian Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER, If when thou have read these few lines, thou can say, as
it is prophesied, Isa. 52.15. That that which has not been told thee thou do
hereby see; and that which thou had not heard, thou do now consider. Let it
stop thy mouth from speaking evil of the unworthy Instrument, and thy heart
from thinking him too presumpteous, for appearing in Print, and undertaking the
discovery of such truths, as neither thou, nor others, that are now living on
the face of the earth, for ought thou know, have discovered before,

Refuse not knowledge because tendered unto thee by so unworthy an Instrument;
they are too squemish, that refuse good meat, because presented in an earthen
vessel, 2 Cor, 4.7. for ought thou know (it may be done of purpose) that
the excellency of power, may be of God and not of man.

And they that are taught in the word, should rather communicate unto him that
teaches them in all good things, then despise and reproach him; returning
evil for good, hatred for love; this is bad requital, but not a little common
now adays: But however thou judge, or requitest the Instrument, yet give God
the glory of what thou learnest; else thou also despisest, even the fountain of
knowledge, who is justly worthy of praise, and honor; yea, and will have the
glory; as so the Instrument desires, that both wholly and freely it might be
ascribed, for ever, Amen.

But it may be objected, that this is not the first, of my appearing in Print;
but that I have also presumed to write a Book, called, An Husbandmans Harrow to
pull down the Ridges of the Presbyteriall Government, and to smooth a little
the Independent, etc. And therefore an Apology to excuse my presumption, might
have been therein also held forth to the Reader, as well as now, considering,
that in the Title thereof, I conclude so presumptuously, as to call my
arguments contained therein, both new, and unanswerable to that purpose, and
such as I have also proved to be like teeth of steel, that will pull down the
Ridges, before they break or bend.

I answer, that I intended that very Title, to serve to excuse me instead of
any further Apology. For thus I thought that any rational man might easily
gather, to wit,

That if in my apprehension, I had any arguments to so good a purpose, as the
reconciling of such hot disputes, and that betwixt Brethren: That might truly
and properly be called new, having never yet been proposed by others, on either
party, I thought it might well excuse me; For who is it, but he will be content
to hear, yea, and enquire of any man, be he learned, or unlearned, that can
tell him (News) and especially good (News) and such as may be useful both to
himself, and others, yea, such as may possibly guide him into the right way,
when he is at a stand, and knows not which way to ^urne in the dark night, but
may possibly be endangered to fall into some pit.

And if there be not such Arguments contained in that Book, when any man
shows me that they are old, and needles, having bin formerly proposd by such,
or such, on either party; then I shall confess that I presumed too far: Or
when any man has answ^red them from Scripture grounds, I shall also confess
that I presumed too far, in calling them una^swerable: But they are not yet
answered, nor proved to be old, nor useless, and unprofitable; and therefore
I, as yet, think not any worse of them* then is expressed in the Title: But it is
my desire; that such who think me p^esumptuous, would but suspend their
censure, till they be answered by way of contradiction, from Scripture grounds,
and then let them censure as they find cause. But they might do well in the
mean time, to take the Apostles advice, and judge nothing before the time: F^r
if I therein erred, my error as yet, remains with me, Job 19.4. And if they
know wherein, they might do well to let me k^ow mine error, as Job 6.24. Yea,
let them teach me, I shall hold my tongue, and cause me to underst^nd wherein I
have erred; Yea, I shall also thank them for their just rebuke, I shall love
them better, then if they hold their peace, and smother my faults, which they
plainly see; And however they deem, yet this is the truth; that if I had not
thought those Scripturall Arguments, both new, and unanswerable, I had not
presumed to appear in Print: Neither do I purpose, through the grace of God,
to presume to appear any further in Print, concerning any subject, but wherein
I am confident that I hold forth something of special use to such a purpose,
that no man else has published in print, or held forth before, nor it may be
considered, or thought so far in that respect, but that all that read it, may
in something or other, be instructed thereby, if they will consider as they
ought to do, without prejudicate conceits.

And yet I purpose, (God willing) to appear in Pri^t, concerning diverse
subjects, the Lord assisting me, as I hope he will.

And therefore, do but give the glory to the God of Truth, of every truth thou
learnest, though it be by never so weak an instrument, as so thou ought to
do. And let me bear the shame, of what I write presumptuously, and without a
cause, and ground from Scripture, as so I justly deserve. And in the mean time,
accept me, as thy loving friend, and brother in the Lord,

Ellis Bradshaw.

A new and clear discovery of the true, and proper, and natural cause of the
ebbing and flowing of the maine Sea.
THE great Lord of Heaven and Earth, that has made all things for his own
sake, requires praise, and will have glory from all his works, Psalm. 148. Yea
all his works [do] praise him, as Psalm. 1* 5.10. And his Saints bless him yea,
they shall speak of the glory of his Kingdom, and talk of his power, to make
known to the sons of men, his mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty of his
kingdom, verse. 11, 12. For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and
his greatness is unsearchable verse 3. One generation should praise his works
to another, and declare his mighty acts, 4. verse. 5, 6, 7. Yea they shall speak
of the might of his terrible acts, and I (also) will declare his greatness,
verse 5. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the formament shows his
handy work, and that day by day, from the first creation, as Psalm. 19.

Yea the invisible things of God, are clearly seen, being considered in his
works; and understood by the things that are made; even his eternal power and
Godhead; so that all nations are without excuse, as Romans 1* 20. And woe unto
us, if we despise his name, and do not reverence, and fear that great and
fearful name, even the Lord our God.

But mark: The invisible things of God, are clearly understood by the things
that are made, if considered, Isa. 44.19, 20. Ezekiel. 18.14. and 28. Mat. 5.3.
Isa. 3.1.
etc. But without consideration how little understanding, or knowledge of God,
and of his power, and greatness, can we attain unto? Give me leave therefore,
in the words, and name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to invite him that reads,
that he would consider: yea, thou whomsoever that read, consider; for if
thou look at things without consideration, thou may easily conceive, that the
Sun, or Moon, are no broader, nor bigger, then thou can make a Cheese; if
thou do not consider, or that thou have not knowledge of their distance from
the earth; But do judge by sense, and without rational consideration, like a
rational creature?

And so in like manner if thou judge by sense, and have not travaild, thou
may possibly think, unless thou beleevest others, that the earth is little
broader, then thou can see about thee, on every side; or thou may think as
many that are dull and ignorant; that it is not round, like the compass of a
ball, but broad, and thin, and narrow likewise. And if thou do not consider,
thou will hardly believe, no though it be told thee, That God has stretched
out the North over the empty place, Jeb 26.7.
and hanged the Earth upon nothing. Thou will hardly believe; If thou do not
consider, that the Heavens are still in constant motion, about the earth, and
that it is loose on every side, and at the ends likewise, like a great Ball in
the midst of the Heavens. Nor that the Earth and Waters make but one Ball, the
liquid water tending as directly to the center of the earth, as does any part
of the Earth it self.

Let me therefore entreat thee, to consider seriously of these great things:
though thou never formerly, have thought thus far. And thou may yet be
capable of greater things, which thou have never heard, nor seen before; and
may therein discover the infinite greatness and power of God, and so be
brought to fear him: And the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom:
And so thou may be wise; yea, and wise for thy self; yea, wise and happy unto
all eternity. If thou will not [be] and [demean] thy self, like one of those
fools, that do hate knowledge, as Prove. 1.7. and that will not choose the fear
of the Lord.

For thou can not see him by going forward, backward, on the right hand, left
hand, where he does works; unless thou consider who it is that works, and
that it is no other but his invisible hand that works all, things according
to the counsel of his own will. But when Job considered, he was troubled at
his presence, yea, when he considered, he was afraid of him, Job 23 3, 8, 9,
13, 14, 15.

Consider therefore, with awful respects to the great Lord, both of Heaven and
Earth; and thou shall understand;

That the Earth and Waters, the Sea and dry Land, are still alike, in equal,
constant, and continual motion, from the very beginning till this present day:
yea, since he gathered the waters into one place, and let the dry land appear;
the saw still kept, an equal, constant, and continual motion; save only that
time whilst Noah's Flood was upon the earth.

But it will be demanded, what I mean by this, that they have kept motion.

I answer briefly; That as the Sea rises and accordingly flows, ascending
higher from the center of the earth; and that at every short, where it is not
straightened, as so it does twice in 24. hours, and that in all places
throughout the world, as the Seamen know.

Even so accordingly, and at the same time, does the Earth descend, and as it
were close it self, or sink downwards, so much nearer to the middle, or center
of the Earth, as the Sea arises, or ascends from it, directly upwards on
every side. So that as the Sea ebbs, the Earth ascends, and as the Earth
descends the Sea flows, or rises higher, and that at every shore.

For as the Earth closes all the parts of it toward the center, it presses
forth the liquid waters from the Bowels of the Earth; and as the Earth rises,
or ascends again, it opens place, in the Bowels of the Earth, for
descension of the Sea, that it may fall, or ebb, or descend lower at every
shore, as we may daily see that it constantly does in all the world, where the
main Sea comes, and as the Mariners know.

Quest. But it will be demanded how it can be known, that it does thus move,
and that it is not a fiction, or device of man's brain, but a real truth,
clearly demonstrated from Scripture and Reason.

Answ. I answer briefly; That I only learned, and understood this secret,
through consideration of certain places, and testimonies of sacred Sciptures,
which in my apprehension are clear grounds, being compared together, to assure
the truth of this great secret, which has long been hid from the wise and
learned. Which sacred testimonies are briefly these. It is written Psalm. 104.
speaking of God, who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters. That he
laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be removed for ever. And
that he covered it with the deep, as with a garment, the waters (says he)
stood above the mountains, to wit, in the beginning, as Genesis 1.9. and at Noah's
flood, as Genesis 7.20. Psalm. 104.6. and Job 38.8.10, 11.

And again, At thy rebuke they fled, (meaning the waters) at the voice of thy
thunder they hasted away: They go up by the Mountains, they go down by the
Valleys, to the place which thou have founded for them: Thou have set a bound
which they shall not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth,
as verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. Which words of Scripture in the old translation are
something different, but far more plain to my apprehension, and more suitable to
the Scriptures, to which they relate; for they are after this manner; to wit,
beginning at verse. 6. says he, Thou coucredst it with the deep as with a
garment; the water, would stand above the Mountains: But at thy rebuke they
fly, at the voice of thy thunder they haste away: And the Mountains ascend, and
the Valleys descend to the place which thou have appointed for them. From which
it plainly appears in my apprehension; and hence I first concluded.

That the waters naturally, as at the first Creation, Genesis 1.2.9. would stand
above the mountains, as they did also, at Noah's Flood; for they being lighter,
and more soft and liquid, than the massy earth, cannot tend so strongly, nor
press so heavily toward the Center, or middle of the earth, as the earth it
self, toward which Center, all heavy substances below the Moon, do naturally
tend, by the ordinance of God, whose essential word directs all things to
their proper places, according to his will, which caused their subsistence:
For, else with God, there is no way upward, nor any way downward, any more than
other, but only in regard of their proper tendency, at his appointment; for
all the Planets, are as solid materials, as either the earth, or waters, and
yet are moved about in a circular motion, yet coming no nearer to the Center
of the Earth at the last, then at first,

So that the Earth naturally, being of an heavier nature, than the liquid Sea,
does tend more strongly to the Center thereof, and would press forth all the
liquid waters, from the womb, or bowels, or center thereof, which is the proper
place broken up for it, as these Scriptures show, and will make to appear, Job
38.10.8. and Psalm. 24.1, 2. For who (says the Lord) has shut up the Sea with
doors? when it brake forth as if it had issued out of the womb, as (it did at
Noah's Flood) And (says he) when I brake up for it my decreed place, and set
bars and doors, and said, hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here
shall thy proud waves be staid, as verse 10, 11. and Chap. 26.10. So also Prove.
8.28, 29.

From whence it appears, that the womb of the earth, is the decreed place,
broken up for it at the first Creation, when God said, Let the waters under the
Heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear; and
it was so, Genesis 1.9. And when all the Fountains of the great deep were broken
up, to wit, at Noah's Flood, and that the Sea brake forth, as if it had issued
out of the womb, as Job 38.8. Genesis 7.11.

For when the waters abated from off the Earth, it is said, That the Fountains
of the great deep, were stopped; and, that the waters returned from off the
earth continually, as Genesis 8.2, 3. They returned to the place, yea, even the
decreed place, which the Lord in the beginning had appontied for them, as Psalm.
104.8.

Cons. Therefore it follows, that the womb of the earth, being the decreed
place, broken up for it, out of which it issued, when it overflowed, and into
which it returned, when it ebbed, or abated.

That it does so now, even in like manner, so far forth as it ebs and flows,
I say, it issues forth from the womb of the earth, when it flows, or rises
at every shore; And it returns again into the womb of the earth, when it
abateth, or ebs, or falls again at every shore; For he has founded the
earth upon the waters, see Psalm, 24.1, 2. And for clearer satisfaction, that
this is so, consider this text, Psalm. 104.8. where the Psalmist speaks in the
present tense, saying, And the mountains ascend, and the valleys descend, to
the place which thou have appointed for them.

Which to my apprehension, is as much fully, as if he should have said;

The Earth rises, and the Sea falls, or goes down by the valleys, to the
place which he has appointed for them; yea, they do thus continually, for so
it is spoken in the present tense: And that though they thus do, he has set
them a bound, which they shall not pass, For they shall not return to cover
the earth; verse. 9. For though by their own nature, they would flow, and
ascend, till they covered the tops of the highest mountanes, as verse. 6. and
Genesis 1.2 9. yet when they come to the height which God has appointed, the
Earth rises, and ascends upward, every part of it, from the Center thereof,
or from the womb thereof, and so enlarges again the womb of the Earth, and the
valleys, or channels of the main Ocean, for receiving of the waters till they
be abated, and fallen so far as they use to ebb, as God has appointed: And
then the earth falling, or sinking downwards, does again streighten the womb
of the Earth, and the valleys also, and channels of the Sea, pressing forth the
waters to their height again, from the springs, or fountains of the great
deep, to every side, or shore, as Job 38.16. and Gen 7.11. by an equal motion
of the earth, and waters, as has been said before; for being pressed forth by
the weight of the Earth, when it quietly descends, the water springs forth in
some places, as the Mariners know, that the Sea boyleth up like a hill of
water, falling down from it like a running Tide; and that every way from such
springing place, that they can scarce sail directly over it, till they come to
the midst of such spring, or fountain, though they have a strong, and a direct
wind; But when they come to the middle, then they can sail so much the more
swifdy, as both with wind, and tide, whiles the Sea is flowing, till it ebb
again. And thus it is found in the very middle of the main Sea, in many
places; and these are called in Scripture Language, the Springs of the Sea, as
Job 38.16. And it is therefore said of God, that by his wisdom, the depths
are broken up, Prove. 3.20. And he is also said to have strengthened the
Fountains of the deep, Prove. 8.28.

And again, Psalm. 24.1, 2. it is clearly asserted, That the Earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, the World, and them that dwell, therein; and
the reason is rendered to prove it so, for (says he) He has founded it upon
the Seas, and establisted it upon the Floods.

From whence it plainly appears, that the Earth is situate, founded, and
established, even upon the Seas, and upon the Floods, as if all the parts or
pieces of the earth, did but naturally swim, or float on the waters, like so
many ships, founded, or situate, or lying thereupon.

For it is without all controversy, that the earth never closes, or so far
streightneth the womb, or bowels, or clefts thereof, as to press forth all
those liquid waters of the main Ocean, for then, as has been said, The waters
would stand above the mountains, as Psali 104.6. as they did at first, till
their decreed place was broken up for them, as Genesis 1.2.9.

But when the parts of the earth are so far descended, as to press down the
waters, to the bounds decreed, which they must not pass, nor return again to
cover the earth.

Then, as has bin said, by the power of God, the parts of the earth do again
ascend, and so the Sea is withdrawn, and falls downwards, returning again to
its decreed place, in a constant, equal, continued motion, from the very
beginning; as no man (I hope) that once apprehends these considerations, but
will confess, that it is most likely to be ordered, and moved after this
manner, and no ways else, especially considering these Scripture grounds.

And thus much briefly for Scripture grounds, which are fully satisfactory to
any rational man, that this is the manner, and way, and motion, both of the
Earth, and Sea, equally moving by the power of God, by the word of his power,
to wit, his essential word. as Heb. 1.3.

But for fuller satisfaction, consider also these reasons following, to prove
that it must needs be thus, and cannot possibly be otherwise, unless God
should exercise his miraculous, and creating power from the very beginning,
which that he does not, as Genesis 2 2. For he rested the seventh day.

1 Reason. For whither else can so mighty a bulk, or measure of water, as does
increase or raise the whole Sea to such a height of plumb directly upwards, as
6 or 7 yards, and that at every main shore, at the same time, and that also so
vast a breadth, as all the Sea is, round about the Earth, so largely
circumventing it, as is well known, if it should not thus do.

Reas. For if the Earth should not rise directly upwards* by the force and
virtue of his essential word, that upholdeth all things.

Q. Where could the Sea find place of subsistence for so much of it, as must
necessarily subsist in one place or other, else it could not slow so soon
after to such height again, without a new cretion of more waters so to fill it
with.

Assum. But God does not create, and dissolve again, the waters of the Sea
from the first beginning, twice every day, as it ebs and flows, as Genesis 2.2.3.

Conseq. Therefore it follows, that the earth rises directly upwards when the
Sea ebs, as has been said.

2. Reason, And again, seeing it is manifest as has been proved, that the womb
of the earth, is that decreed place, broken up for it to descend into, when it
first was gathered into one place, to let the dry land appear; and not by
dissolving, or drying up, or consumption of the water, as Genesis 2.2, 3.

It is most likely that the same way is held on still; for the ordinary ebbing,
and withdrawing of the Sea; as has been said before.

3. And if it should not be so, that the Earth ascends, to enlarge both the
womb, and the channels of the Sea, to let it in; and also closes again, to
press it forth.

Then it would necessarily follow, that when the Sea flows it should leave the
womb of the earth empty, either of air, or water; which cannot be, for no
place can be empried, of any ^ind of substance, but it is presertly filled with
air again: But if, it should be filled either with air, or fire; it would
keep out the liquid water, for descending any more. And there would always be
contention betwixt the air and water, so that it could not ascend, nor descend
neither, so quietly as it does.

Object. If it be objected that there may be a vent-hole, on some side the
earth, for the air to pass in and out through it.

Answ. I answer, That there is no such place that was ever found: and it must
needs be a large one, if there should be any such; that must let in and out,
twice over in 24. hours, so much measure of air, as to ebb and flow the main
Sea, 6, or 7. yards of direct plumb over all the Sea.

Therefore these conceits would prove ridiculous, and they are altogether
without ground, or reason, from any Scripture testimony.

But it will be objected, That Aristotle and others were of opinion, that the
Moon was (...) cause of its ebbing and flowing; who darting her beams into the
Sea, caused it to swell; and when the Moon was absent, and under the Earth, it
abated again.

To which I answer, That the Moon has no beams of any such heat, as to swell
the Sea: neither is the Sea hotter, or coulder, for the absence, or presence of
the Moon over it. And besides, it is manifest, that it both ebbs and flows,
whilst the Moon is above the earth; which shows plainly, that though the Moon
be appointed for certain seasons, and be set for signs and for seasons, of
such things, it increasing and waning, as the Sea does; and is very needful to
be observed in many things which God has appointed it, to direct us in; both
for knowing the time of the ebbing and flowing of the main Sea; and for the
felling of timber; and many such things, of which it is a sign; yet for all
that, it were rediculous to affirm, or account it, (any cause at all) either of
the Sea its ebbing, or its flowing again; or of any such things; of which it
may be observed as signs thereof: Neither was it appointed as any cause at all.

For God said. Let there be lights in the firmament of the Heaven, to divide
the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for
days, and years; and let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven,
to give light upon the earth; and it was so, Genesis 1.1^, 15.

But he never set them, for causes of its ebbing, or flowing either.

Neither is there any cause, that is able to do it, but the essent^^ll word, of
the power of God, by which it was created, and by which it is upheld, as it is
said of him, Hebr. 1.2, 3 That he by whom also God made the worlds; who is the
brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person; upholding all
things by the word of his power, as Hebr. 1. throughout.

For only he who is Omnipotent, yea whose pure essence, is both in, and
through, and in every part, both of the earth and waters; is able to uphold,
and to keep in motion, in so constant a manner, from the first creation, both
the earth and Sea; as he does also all the 7. Planets, and the starry
Firmament, with such unspeakable swiftness, as we daily see; and as I purpose
(God willing) to make appear when time shall serve, to as many as please to
read, and consider what I purpose to write to all rational creatures that
would know his power, as I purpose in the next.

But how easy it is, for the great Lord, both of heaven and earth, who is an
infinite Spirit, filling both all place, and every substance; from the top, or
height, of the highest heavens, to the very bowels, or center of the earth:
yea, and infinitely beyond these, circumventing heavens on every side; and who
carries about, both the Starry Firmament, and all the Planets, in such a
steadfast, constant, unwearied manner, such a vaste and incredible
circumference, in so short a time, as the Mathematics know, and that from the
first Creation, yea, causing the morning to know his place. It may easily be
believed, that he can easily cause the constant motion, both of the earth and
waters, as has been said, being in, and through them, yea, in every dust of
the earth, and every drop of water, as we must needs acknowledge, if we believe
the Scriptures, Psalm. 139. and 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Job 26.5, 6.

Whither shall I go, says David, from thy spirit, or whither shall I fly from
thy presence, etc. Implying, that there is no place, nor any substance, in
which he is not present by his All-seeing Spirit: And as the Motion of the
Heavens, and of all the Planets do manifestly show, that he is in, and
through, and in every part of [them.] Even so the Motion of the Sea, and of the
massy Earth, as has been said, do as manifestly declare, that his All-seeing
Spirit, is also in, and through, and in every part, both of the earth and
waters, as I could, largely show. But such as believe the Scriptures, will not
deny it to be true; though I much doubt, that for want of consideration, it is
not settled in their hearts, as it ought to be.

To make them reverence, and fear that great and fearful Name, even the Lord
our God, as they ought to do; the Lord our God being a consuming fire, being
able in a moment even to consume all things, that he has created, as he
threatened to consume the Israelites, (as in a moment.) And would have done it,
had not Moses stood in the breach.

But I must not enlarge my self any further in this particular, but to two
Printed sheets; therefore I only say to such who know these things, and that
confidently bleeve them; settle these things in your hearts, and your hearts
shall be settled against Atheism; for you shall thereby be convinced, not only
that there is a God, but that his eternal power and Godhead, is in, and
through, and in every part, not only of the Earth and Sea, but of all his
works, that the Lord God has created and made; I mean, he is in them, in
respect of his Essence, which is unlimitable; Though in respect of the
operation or manifestation of himself; It is truly said of some men, that they
are (even) sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19.

FINIS.
October. 19. 1649.
Imprimatur,

JOHN DOWNHAM.


