THE MARKS OF THE Apocalyptical Beast, PLAINLY DECYPHERED; AND The Danger of
having COMMUNION with him clearly Discovered. The Testimony of a Reverend and
Learned Divine concerning the following Treatise.

As to the Treatise, Mr. -- and I have perused it carefully; and not to speak
to please, but as the thing is, it is very clear, strong, and useful, and very
fit to open the Eyes of those Papists whom God has a favor to: I wish the
Nation enjoyed it, being it is so solid, short, and fitted for good.



Printed in the Year, 1667.

The Marks of the Apocaliptical Beast Decyphered and the danger of having
Communion with him Discovered.
IN the Thirteenth chapter of Revelation, we read of a strange Beast, with
seven Heads and ten Horns, rising up out of the Sea; Verse. 1. Verse. 2. Verse. 5,
6. Verse. 7.
Monstrous in shape, Blasphemous in language, and impiously Cruel in practice;
for he wars with the Saints, and overcomes them; who, by his Tone and Fraud,
had gotten so large a Dominion and Empire, over the Souls, as well as Bodies,
Verse. 3.
of deluded men, that the whole Earth, is said to wonder after the Beast; that
is, to follow, or, as it is expressed more fully, to Worship him; Verse. 4, 8.
nor without much inward Amazement at his bewitching Figure (as being in part
like to a Panther, Verse. 2.
which of all other creatures has a most alluring shape) and seemingly
invincible puissance; for, who, say they, is like to the Beast, who is able to
war with him? But all this time they were ignorant; that, while they worshipped
the Beast, Verse. 4. Rev. 12.9. Rev. 13.2, 4.
they only worshipped the Dragon (or the Devil) from whom that Beast, which
they so stupidly admired and doted upon, did immediately derive all his Power
and great Authority. And therefore all those deceived and mistaken Worshippers,
how numerous soever, or what pretenses soever they had to gild and color their
Irreligious and Blind Devotion with; yet they are declared by the Spirit of
God, to be in a sad and deplorable condition, Verse. 8. Rev. 20.15
in that their Names are not written in the Book of Life, whose final Doom is,
to be cast into the Lake of Fire.

Lest this Punishment should be passed slightly over, as if it either were
easy to be born, or that at last there were hopes of its ending, there is an
Angel sent on purpose to proclaim it in a most particular and dreadful manner,
Rev. 14.9, 10, 11
If any does worship the Beast and his Image, and receives his Mark upon his
forehead, or upon his head (i.e. who either openly professes his obedience to
the Beast, in receiving that visible Mark, or Name, or Character, by which his
followers are signalized and distinguished from all others: or, whoever
avoiding the Name, in a more concealed and politic way, does secretly join his
endeavors with those who seek to uphold the Beast in his Throne) even he shall
drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, See of this Phrase, Ps. 75.8. Isa.
51.22. Jer. 25.15.
which is without mixture, mingled in the cup of his Anger; and he shall be
tormented in the sight of the Holy Angels, and in the sight of the Lamb: And
the smoke of their torment goes up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
day or night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and if any does receive the
Mark of his Name.

There is not, that I know of, in the whole Book of God, any Curse set out in
more express and affrighting language; but, because we are all naturally apt to
put far from us the evil day, Amos 6.3 Eccl. 8.11
and to think that a sentence deferred (till after the Resurrection) will never
be executed; therefore in the Fifteenth chapter of Revelation, we have an
account of seven Viols, Verse. 7. (...).
or, goblets of Gold, all filled (up to the brim) with the wrath of God (which
oftentimes in Scripture is compared to Wine, and, because of the effects of it,
is called the wine of Trembling, Psalm. 60.3 and Isa. 51.21, 22 Rev. 15.1 (...).
See Lam. 4.11. Eze. 5.13. Psa. 78.38 and 50 Deuteronomy. 32.23 Luke 16.23, 24 Rev.
16.10, 11 2 Pet. 2.3
or Astonishment) whence they are called the seven last Plagues, or, Strokes,
because in them the wrath of God is finished (i.e. is fully and perfectly
accomplished, without any farther Reserve or Delay of Vengeance, as this Phrase
in other places signifies.) God then, in the words of the Psalmist, says, Not
turning away his anger, but stirring up all his wrath, and weighing out a Path
for his Fury, he heaps mischiefs, and spends his Arrows upon a rebellious and
sinful world, with such an overflowing deluge of intolerable calamities, that
the sufferers of them, like men already damned, do gnaw their Tongues for pain,
and Blaspheme the God of Heaven; whereby, in stead of getting ease, they only
ripen and fit themselves for their Appointed, and then approaching, Ruin. All
which miseries, little differing from the torments of Hell but only in
continuance, remain to be felt in this life, and that only by such, Rev. 16.2
as have the Mark of the Beast, and who worship his Image; So that if either
fear of future and endless, or sense of imminent and unavoidable misery (which
then is most likely to seize upon us, See 1 The. 5.1, 2, 3 Rev. 16.15 Luke
21.34 35
when we think our selves most secure) can prevail with us to mind our safety,
we are bound, with all imaginable diligence and speed, to enquire who this
Beast is, what is his Name, his Mark, his Number; least, either by our wilful
or unwary worshipping of him, we become guilty of a Sin unpardonably heinous,
and which God has so expressly threatened that he will most severely and
everlastingly punish.

To direct us in this search, Rev. 13.18 1 Samuel 21.8 See 2 The. 2.7. Rev. 17.5
See Rev. 13.18. and 17 9
although the spirit of God has left some things (and particularly the Number
of the Beasts Name) still veiled, and (like Goliahs Sword behind the Ephod)
wrapped them up in a Mystery; and that on purpose to incite our study, and to
quicken us the more vigourously to look after wisdom; yet so much is plainly
discovered to us, that unless we resolve to be ignorant, and, as the Jews did
at the shining of the glory of Christ, wilfully shut our eyes, we cannot but be
led unto a plain and manifest discovery of this his disguised, but most
dangerous and Implacable Adversary: For this end, the Seventeenth chapter of
Revelation was purposely writ, which is to be looked upon, as the Key unto all
the foregoing Vision; Verse. 3. Verse. 8.
but more particularly to that in the 13. chapter, with which the 17. perfectly
agrees, in the description of the Beast, in the Number and final estate of his
Worshippers; unto which there are added some other things by way of
Explication. As

First, Verse. 3, 4
Upon the Beast there is discovered to sit an Imperious and Whorish Woman,
attired in a very sumptuous and pompous manner, bedecked with Gold, and
precious Stones, and Pearls, Compare Hos. 2.13 Jer. 4.30 See also Prove. 7 10,
16, 17 2 These. 2.3, 4 1 Timothy 4.1 2 Cor. 11.2, 3 Cant. 8.6 Isa. 47.5 Rev. 18.7
Nah. 3.4 with Rev. 14.8. and 18.23
just as the Church of Israel is described by the Prophets, when she was fallen
from the Service of God, unto the worship of Idols; in resemblance of whom,
this Woman may well be called, The Church Apostatical, as having now arrived
unto the height of Apostasy, which before was prophesied of. For, as the true
Church, the Virgin Spouse of Christ, is said to lean upon her Beloved, having
dependence upon, and taking complacency in him alone; so this False and
Adulterous Church, sits upon the Beast, by whom she is supported and upheld, in
whom she glories as her Head, and by whose means she extends her sovereignty
so far, that, like Babylon of old, she sits as Queen; and with Niniveth, that
once Imperial City, she intoxicates the Nations, and bewitcheth them unto a
Communion with her, in her Abominable and Idolatrous Practices. Whence it
appears, that whatever she may vaunt her self to be, as the Mother Church, the
Mistress of Faith, and the like; yet when the Mystery of her Iniquity comes to
be revealed, and the Curtain drawn, she must then be called, Rev. 17.5
as the Spirit of God does call her, in her true style, The Mother of Harlots
(i. e. of all false and Adulterous Churches) and of the Adominations of the
earth, (i. e. of all Impious and Idolatrous Practices.) And that we might not
wonder who this Woman should be, as men ignorant or surprised are wont to do
(for even the holy Evangelist, Revel. 17 6.
who saw her but in a vision could not but greatly wonder at her) the Angel
plainly tells us that this woman was nothing else but the City placed upon
seven Hills, verse 9. verse 10, 11, etc. see Tacitus p. 1, 2. Verse 18.
which had already passed thorough five several forms of Governments; being
then under the sixth, viz. that of Heathen Emperors, and (to leave no scruple
or doubt remaining) which, at that time, when he saw this Vision, and wrote
this Prophecy, had the supreme Dominion over the Kings of the Earth: Which
City, if any one can be so far mistaken, as to deny to be Rome, he must find
out some other City, unto whom those Properties will more exactly agree, which
is altogether impossible.

Secondly, Seeds Romana.
Though by this discovery of the Whore, we might satisfactorily enough be led
unto a knowledge of the Beast, upon whom she fits: yet that we might be more
certainly and infallibly guided, Rev. 17.3. Mark 1.
the Spirit of God is pleased to lay down some clearer Marks to make him
evident and notorious to us.

First, The Beast, is said to be of a skarlet-colour, and full of the Names of
Blasphemy, Of his Blasphemy see Isa. 14.13, 14. Dan. 3.15. and 4.30. Of his
Blasphemy see Dan. 8. 9-12. and 11.36, 37 He was called Do minus Deusque
noster. Martial. Verse 6. Job. 22. 25-17. with 21.14, 15. Exodus 5.2. 2 Kings 19
10, 16.
not being it seems contented with one Name, as Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus
Epiphanes, Domitian, and other Tyrants and Oppressors, his Predecessors were;
but this Beast, as he succeeded into their room, so he was to inherit their
Nature, and to outdo them in the worst of their Actions; loading himself with
many sacrilegious Names of Blasphemy, that so he might the more easily be
discovered. What these Names are, is not particularly expressed, but they may
easily be guessed at, by the character which is given of him in the 13th.
Chapter: That he opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven. The several parts of
which description deserve to be particularly insisted on.

1. To utter Blasphemy against God; or, to Blaspheme the Name of God, may be
done two ways: Either,

1. In direct and open denying the very Being of God, as the men before the
Flood, Pharaoh and Senacherib did; Saying, Who is the Lord, that we should obey
his voice? Or,

2. When frail men, by reason of some outward success given them, do intrude
themselves into the Place and Authority of God, by assuming some of his Divine
and Incommunicable Attributes: Thus the Prince of Tire Blasphemed God, when he
said: I am a God, I sit in the seat of God; Ezekiel. 28.2, 3, 4.6.
of whom likewise it is spoken in a way of sacred Irony: Behold thou art wiser
than Daniel, ( i. e. than any of the Prophets, or divinely inspired men) there
is no secret they can hide from thee: This arrogant Prince it seems not only
challenging the Power of God unto himself, but likewise his Wisdom too, even
pretending to a kind of Omniscience, and Infallibility, for he adds, with thy
Wisdom, and with thy understanding thou have gotten thee Riches: In conformity
to which Description, the Apostle Paul gives us this full and perfect
Definition of Antichrist, or, of the Beast we are enquiring after; He is one
who opposes ( viz. 2 These. 2.4. Psalm. 82.
Christ and his Saints) and far exalts himself above all that is called God,
or Worshipped (whereby is meant, not only above Magistrates, who are called
Gods, but likewise above every thing else, which is thought by men to be most
capable of Divine Honor ( so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God ( i.
e. in the Church, which was of old truly so, and still pretends to be so)
declaring himself that he is God: Declaring, that is, Demonstrating and
manifesting this, Mark 2.7.
by his pretending to a Godlike Power; as to be able to pardon sins, which none
can do but God alone, To absolve from Laws, To Dispense with Oaths, To be
Infallible, and the like, which Titles and Power whoever dares assume to
himself; He is The Antichrist, a Blasphemer, and consequently, that Beast
whose Marks we are seeking for, of which the first is, that he was to be full
of such Names of Blasphemy.

2. The Tabernacle of God, which this Beast is said to Blaspheme may either
signify the Church of God, Ephesians. 2.22 1 Timothy 3.5, 15.
(which oftentimes is called the House of God) over which the Beast does
sinfully assume a power; or, which I rather take to be the meaning, The humane
Nature of Christ, for thus the divine Writer to the Hebrews, does elegantly
call it, because it was the true Tabernacle, Heb. 8.2. and 9.11.
which God pitched and not man: Which Tabernacle is Blasphemed, when the Merit
of those Sufferings, which God himself underwent in the Humane Nature, is
lessened, and the blood of Christ not accounted sufficient to cleanse from sin,
without something added by men to eek out its value; For since our Savior
expressly affirms, that he gave his flesh, Joh. 6.51
( i. e. his humane Nature) for the life of the World; and nothing can be more
undeniable than that excellent Argument of a Divine Writer; Heb. 9.13, 14.
If the blood of Bulls and of Goats does sanctify to the purifying of the
Flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who by the Eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot unto God, purify our Conscience from dead works.
The shedding of that blood (which was the price paid for the satisfaction of
sin) being abundantly sufficient to merit forgiveness, for millions of worlds,
because the Mortal Nature which suffered, by its Union with the Divine, was of
Infinite and Incomparable Value; If then the Beast shall dare to extenuate and
lessen it, by pretending that some part of the Ransom is yet unpaid, and that
he has power by his Indulgences to add something to it, this must needs be a
Blasphemy of the highest kind, because it is in effect to say, that the Son of
God did not finish the work, for the full performing of which, Heb. 10.5, 10, 14
a Body was prepared him.

3. Those that dwell in Heaven, are the Angels and the departed Saints; who are
then Blasphemed, when any thing is ascribed or done to them, which, were they
now on Earth, they would not dare to own; Thus when the men of Lystra, who had
the excuse of an amazing Miracle to justify them, did prepare to offer
Sacrifice unto Paul and Barnabas; we read that those blessed Apostles did rent
their clothes, Act. 14.14 2 Kings 18 37. Mat. 26.65
which was usual in the cases of Blasphemy, and shows what Opinion they
conceived of that Action. So when our Evangelist, perhaps only in a pious
gratitude for such great discoveries, would have fallen down at the Angels feet
to Worship him; The Angel, in a kind of sacred horror, forbad him, Revel.
19.10.
saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants, Worship God: And a
greater than he, even the Son of God himself, yet appearing in the form of an
Angel, would not have Sacrifice offered to him, Jud. 13.16
but says he to Manoah; If thou will offer a Burnt-Offering, thou must offer
it to the Lord: If therefore Sacrifice and Adoration was not at all pleasing to
those blessed Spirits upon Earth, 1 Pet. 2.5 Heb. 13.15
we cannot think but Prayer and Praise (which are a Christians Sacrifice) and
other acts of Divine Worship, must needs be accounted by them as Blasphemous
now they are in Heaven. For they have not altered their minds, nor are they now
less zealous of Gods Honor, than when they did on Earth express their utmost
abhorrence of whatever did but seem to entrench upon it. So that to sum up
all the parts of this first Mark together, for a sinful man, to assume the
prerogative and incommunicable properties of God, to lessen the Invaluable
Merits, and Satisfaction of our Lord Christ, and to enjoin undue honor unto
Saints and Angels, such as were they now on earth, they would detest, these all
are Blasphemies of the grossest nature, which who-ever belcheth forth, he is
the Beast we are commanded to beware of.

Secondly, Another Mark, and that no little one, Mark. 2
by which the Beast may be known, is the numberless number of his followers;
even the whole Earth, says the Text, Rev. 13.3 with 17.8
or All that dwell upon the Earth: whereby is not meant every individual person
throughout the world, but as is afterward explained, Every Tribe, and Tongue,
and Nation: That is, All the Professors of Christianity throughout the world,
except the Elect, Mat. 24.24 Rev. 17.8 Rev. 13.7 Rev. 12.17
or They whose Names are written in the Book of Life: These are called the
Saints, or the seed of the Woman, ( i. e. the Sons and Daughters of the true
Church) Whom the Dragon persecuted: Who keep (not the Traditions of men, but)
the Commandments of God, and (in direct opposition to the Usurpations of
Antichrist) do hold the Testimony of Jesus: Who, in comparison of that vast
Rout, or rather Heard, which Worship the Beast, are styled a little Flock,
left, as it were, Luke 12.32.
to humane view altogether Naked and Defenseless, in the midst of many fierce
and ravening Wolves, Rev. 11.7
by whom they are no sooner discovered, but they are hunted, taken, and slain:
Which General delusion and raging madness of the Bestal crew, together with the
distressed condition of the Lambs company, must needs, even in the eye of
common Reason, make those swelling Titles of Universality, Visibility, Pomp,
and Extent of dominion, very unsafe and most unfit to plead as signs of the
true Church, since during the whole time of the Beasts Reign, they are
applicable only unto his Followers.

If any ask how it was possible, for the world, professing themselves (as they
did) to be Christians, to become so stupid, Rev. 5.6
and senseless, as, instead of the Lamb Christ Jesus, to show a Tyrannical and
outrageous Beast, his greatest Enemy; in answer to this, we must consider, that
from the first moment, wherein the Beast was invested in his Sovereignty, there
was universally conceived a slavish dread of his Power; which made the overawed
and captivated world to cry out who is like unto the Beast? Rev. 13.4
who is able to war with him, For if those of Samaria were exceedingly afraid
of Jehu, 2 Kings 10.4.
and thought they reasoned well when they said, Behold two Kings stood not
before him, how then shall we stand? How much less able then were any to
resist the Beasts encroachments, who had ten Horns, i. e. Ten Kings his
Vassals, Revel. 17.12, 13.
that owned him for their Head, and tamely gave up their Authority to be
disposed of, and ordered by him? But besides this Argument from Force and Fear,
which alone had been sufficient to enslave the world, there were two other
causes, which did concur to make the spiritual Thraldom plausible and
universally taking.

1. There was a willingness in the world to be deceived; as the Israelites,
being many years accustomed to the taste of Mannah (though it was bread of
Heaven, Ps. 105 40 Psa. 78.24 25
and food for Angels) began to loath it: so did the World grow weary of the
plainness of Truth, which made God in his just judgment, give them up to be
acted by a Spirit of Error, 2 These. 2.10, 12 Joh. 7.18 1 Cor. 13.6 So (...)
Psalm. 52.3
because they loved not the Truth, says the Apostle, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, or, in falsehood; as the word (...) often signifies. Men
having then their Ears open to receive, and their minds ready to believe a
Lie; and offering themselves as a willing Prey, to every one that would but
take pains to cozen them.

2. To this propensity and readiness, which was in the world, for the embracing
of any kind of Error, there was not wanting the Vigilance and care of a
False-Prophet to promote and preach it. Rev. 16.13
Who being twin with the Ten-horned Beast, rising out of the Earth at the same
time, Rev. 13.12
and ever present with him, used all his craft and industry to enlarge the
Beasts Kingdom, as being himself a sharer both in the Profit and Power of it.
And therefore by his false Doctrine, which he had power to confirm by Miracles,
Verse 13,14
he easily persuaded the credulous world to enslave themselves unto the Beast,
and willingly to receive his Mark; and if any refused it, Verse. 16,17
he caused them to be killed; Preaching no doubt, as his predecessors did
before him, concerning the Apostles, Joh, 16.2
That, who so killed them did God good service: Which False-Prophet (in the
usual Scripture Dialect (where the frog, the Locust, Exodus 8.9 (...) Exo. 10.12
(...) a Pet. 2. 1 John c.2. and c. 4 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
and the like in the singular Number, does comprehend the whole Species)
signifies all those False-Teachers, which were to arise in the Church, whose
Doctrine, and Manners, almost all the Apostles do fully declare. It is no
wonder then, if such vast Multitudes, for so many ages, ran blindly into
pernicious and destructive Errors, who, being first disposed by themselves
unto the love of false-hood, were afterward forsaken by God, and had besides
many fly and cunning Impostours, to lead them farther astray: Their Eyes it
seems being so dazzled with the false Fire, Rev. 13.13
which by Miracles came down from Heaven, that men were content to forget their
way thither, and willing to be led to Hell in company. But had the world been
then awakened, as now, through the goodness of God, some part of it is, they
would have known that true Doctrine did always precede and give a luster and
credit to Miracles; for without their aid, Truth alone can maintain its
Authority, as it did in John Baptists time: Joh. 10.41, 42
But Miracles without true Doctrine (of which the Word of God must be the
Touchstone) are sometimes suffered by God to try the grounded sincerity of our
Obedience: See Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2 Mat. 24.24 25. 2 These. 2.9 Rev. 13 13, 14. and
16.13, 14. and 19, 20
And therefore we are strictly cautioned, that we be not deceived by them: So
that whenever Miracles are urged in defense of False or Questionable Doctrines,
they only serve as Evidences to show that the False-Prophet is at work, and the
way, for setting up the Kingdom of the Beast, or, the Throne of Antichrist,
is secretly prepraring.

Thirdly, Another Mark, Mark 3.
and equal in Evidence to any of the former, is the time wherein the Beast
began (not to Be, but) to Reign: Of this, is to be understood that Aenigmatical
speech of the Angel, The Beast, which is not, although he is. Rev. 17.8
Which Phrase, as containing some singular sense, is repeated twice in one
Verse; and this seems to be the meaning of it, that although the Beast, as to
some of his parts, was then actually in Being, and some foundations were
already laid for his future greatness (as likewise is elsewhere witnessed) yet
he had not hitherto arrived to his full growth; or as the Apostle Paul's Phrase
is. See 2 These. 2.6, 7 1 John 2.18 and 4.3.
He was not revealed as yet; which word revealed, when it is applied to the Man
of Sin, I take to signify the setting up of his Kingdom, and actual exercise
of his Sovereignty, or, the visible displaying of his Power: For thus the
revealing of Christ, is used for his Reigning, and that by the Apostle Paul, in
the same Epistle, 1 Pet. 1.7, 13. and 4.13 2 These. 1.5, 7
where he treats of Antichrist: what therefore the Apostle John speaks
concerning the Beast, that, He is not, although he is; amounts to this, That,
though he was in some degree already, even at that time (as a Poisonous Plant,
may be said to be, as soon as it is sown, and has taken root in the Earth) yet
he was not come then unto his absolute Dominion, which, says he afterward, you
must then look for, when ten Kings, Rev 17. 12, 13 (...). 2 These. 2.6, 7,8
who are to be his Horns, do arise, with whom, at the very same instant of
time, the Beast shall begin his Reign. This, though somewhat more darkly, was
intimated by the Apostle Paul, when he says, The Mystery of Iniquity does
already work, only that which hinders (shall hinder) until he be taken out of
the way, (...).
and then that lawless one shall be revealed. Which words, the Primitive
Christians did generally understand to signify the Roman Empire, Tertul.
Apolog. c. 32
as Tertullian witnesses in the name of them all; and this made them in all
their meetings, to pray for the continuance of that Empire, that thereby the
coming of Antichrist, and the Desolation to be wrought by him, might be
prevented. For while the Empire of Rome was undivided, and in its height of
Sovereignty, the Beast, whose seat was in the City, had neither pretense of
Plea, nor force of Power, sufficient to make himself acknowledged as Sovereign
there; but when that Empire was broken, and several Kingdoms did arise out of
the Ruins of it (all which, for the better establishment of themselves, did
agree to submit unto the Bishop of Rome, and to own him as their Head) then
there was nothing left powerful enough to hinder the Beasts Usurpation: The
time therefore, when these Monarchies or Principalities arose, must be
carefully enquired after, because from thence we must date the beginning of the
Beasts reign and Independent Supremacy; which was to last from that period of
Time, even until the coming of Christ, See of this 2 These. 2.8 Dan. 7.21, 22.
Rev. 16 13-16. and 19.19, 20, 21 See Dan. 7 etc. 8.20 Dan. 7.25 and 12.7 Rev.
12.14 Rev. 11.2, 3 and 12.6. and 13.5
who by the brightness of his personal appearance, will finally destroy the
Beast, and fully plead the cause of his persecuted and cruelly slaughtered
Servants against him. From what has been said, three things do evidently
follow.

1. That the Beast is not one Man, as some do vainly imagine, but a Series or
Race of Men succeeding one another in the same Bestial and Blasphemous
Government and Titles,

2. That the Time, Times, and half a Time, the 42. Months, The three years and
an half, or, which is all one account, The 1260. Years, so often mentioned in
Daniel, and the Revelation, as the precise time limited by God for the duration
of the Beasts Dominion, must necessarily be understood of Prophetical days,
that is, taking a Day for a Year; as it is in that famous instance of Daniels
weeks, Dan. 9 Numb. 14.34 Ezekiel. 44, 5, 6
and more than once elsewhere in Scripture before; and this Interpretation as
it is usual, so it is most agreeable to the design of the Spirit of God, who
speaks of the Beast, as of one that was to reign a long time, and comparatively
much longer than either the Christian, Rev. 17.10 11
or the Heathen Emperors before him, in whose place the Beast was to succeed,
as the eighth in Number, but indeed the seventh Head, and was thence forward to
continue, until the Lord Christ himself came to take away his Authority from
him.

3. That since the breaking of the Roman Empire, and the Rise of several
Kingdoms or Principalities out of it (which by all writers is placed between
the fourth and the fifth Century, though many differ concerning the particular
Time of each) there have already lapsed above 1200. years; all which time we
must, in conformity to this Scripture, be forced to acknowledge, that the
Beast, who was to begin his Reign with those ten Kings, has been visibly and
powerfully reigning; and to speak more plainly, this the Spirit of God has
affirmed he was to do, and therefore has done, in Rome it self, and thither
we are directed by the Angle to seek him, that we may know who it is, whose
Communion we are with so much care commanded to avoid.

From what has been said it is very evident, nor indeed can any thing possibly
be more clear to all unprejudiced men, that as Rome was that City which was
represented under the form of a Whorish Woman; so the Pope, or, Bishop of Rome,
is the Beast who bears her; It is he, who for many hundred of years, has fixed
his Seat, and his Supremacy there; It is he, who challenges Authority over
all Kings and Earthly Magistrates (the greatest of whom have been forced to
wait as Lackeyes to make up his Train) It is He, who has all these Names of
Blasphemy (of being Head of the Church, Infallible, Pardoning Sin, Dan. 7.25
and the like) which the Spirit of God had before prophesied of, and witnesses
against: It is He, who has attempted to change Times, and daily does change
Laws, dispensing for his own gain with whatever is Sacred and Holy: It is He,
who Blasphemes those that dwell in Heaven, Canonizing whom he pleases for
Saints, and then commanding them to be worshipped as Gods; showing himself
hereby, not only to be a God, Apolog.
but (as Tertullians expression is) Deus Deificus, A God that can make Gods. So
much is he advanced above the condition of a Mortal Man. And lastly, It is He,
who has the False-Prophet to Act and Preach for him, even an infinite number
of Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and the like False-Teachers, who, being his sworn
Subjects, by their Lies and Lying Wonders, do all strive to bring the World
into the same Vassallage; not much caring what becomes of other Points; so that
Men will but be Ignorant enough, and quietly hold the Fundamental Article of
their Creed, that, the Pope is Head of the Church; but if any, suspecting him
to be the Beast they are bid to beware of, (...)Mic 3.5
do once boggle at this, then these False-prophets, prepare, or, as the Hebrew
word signifies, Hallow War against them, i.e, Wage an Holy War, the meaning of
which Phrase, our Protestant Churches in France, Savoy, Germany, and other
places, are too sensibly acquainted with, to need an explication.

If this be so, for the proof of which, I have not followed any pre-conceived
Notions of mine own, but the unerring guidance of Scripture Light, then it does
necessarily follow, that in the Church of Rome (I mean for those who knowingly
live and dye in Communion with Her, acknowledging the Pope for their Head)
there is not any possibility of Salvation; and to affirm there is, is boldly to
contradict the express denuntiation of the Spirit of God, and therein to be
mercilesly Cruel unto the Souls of those deluded men, under pretense of being
Charitable. 2 Th. 2.10 See 2 Cor. 2.15. and 4.3 Acts 2.47 1 Cor. 1.18 Jude. v. 4
The Apostle Paul says, that the Deceivableness of Unrighteousness works,
(...), in them that perish, or, in the lost, who being always opposed to the
(...), or, the saved, it abundantly shows that all who continue their adherence
unto the damnable Errors of that Church and Head, are wholly forsaken by God,
and designed to Destruction. What may be said concerning former Times, when
the Truth was not so clear, nor the Apostasy in all its parts so visible, I
will not determine; It is possible, Acts 17.30 31
that, as heretofore, so then, God might wink at those times of Ignorance; but
I am sure, he now calls upon all to repent, or else we must expect to perish
in our Obstinacy. It is therefore very observable, Verse. 7 See Psalm. 96.5. and
115.4, etc. Isa. 41. 1 These. 1.9
that in the 14th. of Revelation, first there comes an Angel to Preach the
Everlasting Gospel; the sum of which is no other, than what the Prophets and
Apostles did Preach of Old, That men should turn from Idols, to serve the
living and true God; and worship him who made Heaven and Earth and the
fountains of Waters: Upon the preaching of which Gospel, immediately there
follows another Angel proclaiming that dreadful Judgment before mentioned,
against such as worship the Beast, and receive his Mark or his Image. From
whence I gather, that whatever may be the dealings of God toward those in
Spain and Italy, or other places, where the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel
is utterly suppressed, and those poor souls, who possibly may long for light, are
forcibly detained in darkness; yet in such places, where the Truths of God are
taught, and freedom given unto all that will come and hear them, there to
continue in that sin of Popery, which God has already declared he will not
pardon, must needs be utterly inconsistent with any hopes of Happiness.

Although I need not say any more for the proof of this, than what has already
been spoken, concerning the Judgment threatened against all such as obey that
Man of sin, and Child of Perdition, the Pope, or the Beast, against whom the
Lord has an irreconcilable controversy, yet in compassion to the souls of
those miserably deceived Papists, amongst us, I shall add these few things,
farther. That

1. If all, who either add to, or take away from, Rev. 22.18 19.
the words of Scripture, are to expect all the Plagues threatened, and to be
excluded from the happiness promised in it.

2. If they, who Worship God after the Doctrines and Commandments of men, do
only Worship him in vain; Mat. 15.9 13, 14.
and instead of gaining a reward for their Service, are to be plucked up, as
Plants, not of the Fathers planting.

3. If they, who blindly, and with an implicit Faith, do follow after blind
Guides, will certainly at last fall with them into the ditch, even the
bottomless-Pit of destruction.

4. Rev. 21.8. Psalm. 97.7.
If Idolaters are to have their portion in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone; and all such are to be confounded; i. e. To perish for ever, who
serve Graven Images, and boast themselves of Idols.

5. If they who believe a lie, 2 These. 2.9-12.
(as that a piece of Bread is turned into the very Body and Blood of the Son of
God) and have pleasure in such unrighteousness, are all to be damned.

6. If they who Worship Angels, hold not the Head, Christ; and therefore cannot
look for any life from him.

Lastly, If they who, in a proud conceit of their own Righteousness, either
prefer it to, or else mingle it with the Righteousness of Christ for
Justification, do commit the very sin of the Reprobate Jews, See Romans 9 30-32.
and 10.3. Gal. 2.21. and 5.4.
making the death of Christ in vain, and consequently have no Interest in the
Redemption purchased by it: If I say these things are of that heinous nature,
as who ever is guilty of any one of them, is by the Word of God pronounced
Worthy of death; then the Papists, who (besides their bearing the Name of that
accursed Beast, 2 Pet. 2.1
the Pope) do hold all these, and many more such destructive Heresies are
certainly in a state desperately and deplorably dangerous, and for any to teach
otherwise, it is to speak peace, and Pity where the mouth of the Lord has not
spoken it.

For us therefore, who, through the infinite goodness of God, have escaped the
snare, to have any Church Fellowship, or to seek Reconciliation with them, it
is not only ingratefully to slight the Mercy of our deliverance, but
foolishly, if not impiously, to sell the Truth, or rather to betray it, into
the hands of its most prejudiced, hardened, and implacable enemies: Let them
therefore, in the Words of God by the Prophet to back-slidden Israel, Jer. 15.19
Return to us, by renouncing their Blasphemies, forsaking their Idolatries, and
withdrawing their Obedience from that Beast they serve; but let not us return
to them, by parting with one Iota of Scripture-Truths, Rev. 18.4 Deuteronomy. 7.25,
26. and 13 18, 19. Levit. 14.44. Rev. 18.23, 24.
least by partaking in their sins, we become likewise sharers in their Plagues;
and by touching the accursed thing, do make our selves a Curse; and incur that
guilt, which still cleaves, like an incurable Leprosy, unto that Idolatrous
and bloody City of Rome: Against which City God has formerly sent the Goths
and Vandals, and other Executioners of his Vengeance, to scrape and to pare,
and to cleanse her filth out of her; but she is now returned to her Trade
again, still Worshipping Devils and Idols; Rev 9.20, 21.
and not repenting of her Fornications, Witch-crafts and Murders; It remains
therefore, Heb. 6.8
that like the Barren Earth, which having often been Rained upon, brings forth
only Briars and Thorns, she is nigh to a curse, and her end is to be burnt
with fire: This glorious spectacle, Rev. 18 ib. v. 20 Rev. 6.10, 11 Rev. 11.17
18 2 Timothy 2.10, 11 Rev. 20.4, 6 Rev. 22 20 Cant. 8.14
though worldly-spirited men will lament and tremble at the sight of; yet the
Heavens, and the blessed Inhabitants of them, are commanded to rejoice at: For
which, the Souls of the Martyred Saints, that are already under the Altar; and
all their Brethren, who are yet witnessing in the Wilderness do earnestly pray,
as being then to receive a full Reward for their labors, and to Reign with
Christ, for whom they suffered.

Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

POSTSCRIPT.
THough a Doctrine, which is built upon and confirmed by the Scriptures, the
word of God, needs not any Testimony from Man for its farther establishment;
yet because this Truth comes forth at this time without a Name, and some of the
Protestant-Readers may possibly suspect it to be New, and not agreeable unto
the Judgment of our Reformed Churches; the Author therefore of the foregoing
Treatise has thought fit to add, that he has delivered nothing for
substance, but what is exactly consonant, not only unto the Scripture, but unto
that Interpretation of it, which the most Learned and Judicious of our
Protestant Writers have already given: And this was thought so clear a Truth in
former times, that this Article, The Pope is Antichrist, has been put into
most of the Public Confessions of Faith of the several Churches: And in our
own Church, he thinks it still is, but he is assured it was, till of very late
years, the Judgment of almost all that were of any Reputation, either for
Religion or Learning. It were easy to exscribe their Words and Arguments, but
I shall content my self with the Testimony of One, whose imcomparable Learning
and Piety, together with the eminent Place and Authority he enjoyed, may serve
either to make his words to be received, or at least mine not over forwardly
condemned. It is the Reverend Dr. Usher Archbishop of Armagh, Page 438.
who in his Catechism writes thus,

As Christ is the Head of the Church, which is his Body; so Antichrist is the
Head of the Romish Church, which is his Body.

Quest. Who is that Antichrist?

Answ. He is one, who under color of being for Christ, and under Title of his
Vicegerent, exalts himself above and against Christ opposing himself against
all his Offices and Ordinances both in Church and Commonwealth; bearing
Authority in the Church of God, ruling over that City with seven Hills, which
did bear Rule over the Nations, and put our Lord to death; A man of Sin, a
Child of Perdition, a Destroyer, establishing himself by lying Mircacles and
false Wonders: All which MARKS together, do agree with none, but the POPE of
ROME. Page 439.


Quest. What is the use of all his Doctrine?

Answ. That whosoever are partakers of the Sins of Rome, are also under the
same curse -- etc.

Quest. What farther?

Answ. That there can be no sound Agreement betwixt Popery, and the profession
of the Gospel, no more than betwixt Light and Darkness, Falsehood and Truth,
God and Belial, and therefore no RECONCILIATION can be devised betwixt them.
For if the members of Antichrist shall be destroyed, we cannot in any sort
communicate with them in their Errors, unless we will bear them company in
their destruction also.

The Author has no more to add, but to beg of God, that he will own this Work
by giving a Blessing to it, in this Dark and Cloudy day.

FINIS.

