FIFTEEN LOYAL QUERIES FOR THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY, AND THE THREE
KNGDOMS. With a LASH for the Quondam Jugler of State, W. L. Sp. MR. R. Sec. And
the rest of the Grand and notorious Traitors who thirsted after the Blood of
his Sacred Majesty KING CHARLES. By J. BRAMSTONE Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, living near the three Crowns in Barbican, 1660.

A LASH for the Quondam Jugler, of State W. L. Sp.
1. Quere.

WHether if those Traitors Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Prideaux, or any of that
cursed crew late dead, were now living or wicked Lambert, or any of those
notorious Regicides now surviving all things seriously weighed in the balance
of true judgment, deserve more severe punishment in reward of their matchless
rebellions, then the prime and most exalted head of that prodigious Monster
Hydra that underminer and subverter of our Laws and Liberties, that Quondam
Jugler W. L.

2. Quere. Whether be, being the principal Agent and contriver of those so
detestable and damnable plots and conspiracies should not in honor to Gods
Law, and Justice to the Nation, be the first man that should be made exemplary?

3. Quere. Whether his crimes being so Captital as rendering him in the sight of
all honest men the chief of these Traitors, not only exceeding those with whom
he conspired as being Principal, but superlatively transcending those of the
Gunpowder Treason: if he should by running away escape the hand of Justice, it
would not highly displease God, and much disatisfie the Kingdoms.

4. Quere. If he should thus work his freedom we might not believe that the
hand of God would meet with him, as it did with Sir Thomas Martin of
Cambridgeshire who wished he might wash his hands in the Kings blood, as this
Traitor did in the blood of his Father.

5. Quere. Whether it were not fit that he should be presently secured thereby
to prevent Gods wrath, and the Nations calamity, and to have indictments
against him speedily preferred for his perjuries at several times, as also to
have several actions brought against him of the case of Trover, and the like
for his falsely imprisoning, opposing, defrauding the meaner sort of people,
that by means of the Legal proceeding by indictments he may loose his ears
which has been forfeited many and being used upon those actions may be forced
Legally to render some satisfaction to the Common people whom he has abused:
before these treasons and Capital crimes be laid to his charge whereby he will
assuredly loose his head.

6. Quere. Whether it were fit upon his first surprisal to have his effiges
exactly cut out; which after his execution should be hanged up at the Rolls
gate in Chaucery Lane, for a perpetual monument with an Exit Hypocrita and a
Dae vobis over his head who in his life time forgot that of Optatus Super
Imperatorem non est nisi qui fecit Imperatorem hanc ab causam not to be judged
condemned and executed by Traitors of which W. L. was chief.

7. Quere. Whether it were fit in charity to his sinful soul that he were put
in mind of his wretched Hypocrisy in having many times honest godly Devines
preach before him at the Roll, especially at those times when he was about the
greatest treasons, thus acting not only against the good Law of the Land but
also Diametrically against the Law and Gospel of God and Christ which say,
Touch not mine Anointed, and fear God and honor the King (not murder the
King).

8. Quere.

Whether those Divines ought not to endeavor to make him sensible of that
terrible guilt which lies upon him, seeing that many times Consuetudo peccandi
tollet sensum peccati, and to manifest to him his Judas like condition, and
freely to declare unto him, how much his sin looks in all appearance like to
the sin against the Holy Ghost, unpardonable unless he can wash away those
black and bloody spots, with cordial repenting tears, and that subito.

9. Quere. Whether they were not best particularly to mind him of his own
perjuries, and breach of Oaths and Covenants. First of his Oath of Allegiance
to the King, his Crown and Dignity in the University. Secondly, in the Ins of
Court, Thirdly, when he was chosen a Member of the long Parliament, and exalted
to be Speaker. Fourthly, the solemn Oath and Covenant made generally in
Parliament, and particularly by him, to preserve the Kings Royal Person, his
Crown and Dignity, Posterity, the Kingdoms and the Parliament with its Members;
besides other Oaths of Supremacy, fealty, Allegiance, Protestations, with
manifold Declarations, Remonstrances and other sac ed and Civil Obligations to
his sacred Majesty. All which he has violated b sitting, and still being the
principal Actor in all the Treasons, of expelling the honest Members,
murdering the King, the Nobles and others, and acting many years together most
treacherously, perfideously, athiestically, in subverting and destroying the
Laws of the Nations, the Privileges of Parliament, and the Libertys of the
Subject.

10. Quere. Whether the precious blood of the King, and of every innocent man
that has suffered by the late seditions Army, or High Court of Justice since
the expulsion of the Noble members are not to be laid to his CHARGE: though he
Scylla like, after he had contrived the Murders and given command he appears
not in the croude of the Murderers, but endeavored to obscure himself under
an nihil dicit in publico. He being nevertheless, that Hydrocephatos that
swelled with Pride and Ambition, the Primate dictator, yea Principal of those
accursed conspirators in all their Treasons.

11. Quere. Whether some men ignorant in State affairs, yet honest men that
seem to plead for him, and say that since he was none of the high Court of
Justice he may be excused; be a sufficient cause to move true English spirits
to alter their resolutions, and not to Petition for Justice against him, he
being the man without whom those Traitors could not they durst not act their
accursed Rebellious: For no man can be so ignorant, as not to know that what
the most illegal high Court of Justice did, was by the pretended Authority of
Parliament, of which Traiterous and hydeous monster was not he ( W. L. S. P. as
before said) the head.

12. Quere. Whether because some of his favorers say, that had he forsaken the
Chair, another would presently having no posseson thereof, can any way expiate
those murders, and perjures which he has committed, or make him appear any
way the less guilty in the eye of the Law, or of any truly conscientious man,
for may a man commit murder in the highest degree and other enormities, and
conclude it is no sin either against God or man, because he conceives that had
he not done the same another would have done it.

13. Whether they do not manifest their partiality and in discretion, or at
least their neglect of Gods holy Precepts, who utter a Syllable in his behalf,
who indeed has been the contriver of all our miseries and calamities, who sat
continually at the stern to direct those vile Pirates in all their Traytorous
designs, who delighted more in his imagined honor, then in honoring either
God or the King: who to enrich himself spared no man's life, no not the life of
a King, nor the happiness of three Kingdoms! Oh call to your thoughts how much
the Lord hates Covenant breakers! oh remember how poor Israel suffered in the
time of David for their breach of Covenant though with the Gibeonites and
Heathenish people: what is it then for a Subject to break Covenant with his
lawful King, with the great Council of the Nation, and afterward to murder
him and some of the Parliament whom he had sworn to preserve. Oh remember blood
requires blood; the very Gibeonits disdained David's money in satisfaction! Let
them that are in authority remember this, it was the seven sons of Saul whose
blood must make an expiation.

14. Quere. Whether if he had been Hono pietatis (as he would be reputed) or so
honest as he was politic, ambitious and covetous, as on the very day of the
expulsion of the Secluded Members to have endeavored their readmission, and
when he found that he could not prevail, he knowing the desperate design they
were about, had be then like a noble brave spirited Senator declared to the
Rump his sense and interpretation of their rebellious actings and resolutions,
and then to have left the Chair, and consequently to have protested to the
Nations against the treasonable and illegal proceedings of those wicked
Members; might not in all probability with Gods mercy, have intercepted the
abominable Acts of murdering the King and others by striking terror to the
hearts of those impudent Conspirators; it be evident in all Histories both
Divine and Moral, both ancient and modern, how wicked Armies, though Potent,
have been put to flight, and the most insolent Traitors examinated by weak
means.

15. Quere. Whether the sin of this wrecth does not exceed the sin of the
Jews, for though they poor creatures murdered their King, yet they knew him
not to be their King, their Messiah, neither had Pontius Pilate or any of the
Jews swore to preserve him, nor did the unhappy Jews commit that murder,
intending thereby to enrich themselves, or to get four hundred thousand pounds
as this wicked man has done, as plainly appears in the Register, besides six
and twenty thousand pound a year Revenue; All which duly considered, he is a
most inhumane creature addicted wholly to his own lust. Wherefore dear
Countrymen, let us humbly and speedily present our Petitions to the Parliament
for Justice against him, lest our neglects provoke the Lord, who is a just
Judge, and will require due satisfaction for innocent blood.

The EPILOGUE. For the Bloody TRAITOR, W. L. Sp.
THou bloody man, had thou remembered to make use of that saying, though
from the mouth of a Heathen, which will rise up against thee at the latter day,
to thy confusion if thou repentest not, Non solum nobis, nati sumus partem
Patria, thou would not have occasioned so much of thy own Countrey-mens
blood blood to be spilt, to satisfy thy insatiate desire, enriching thy self,
and glorying in thy Countries ruin. Or had thou made use of that of holy
Gregory, Homo ad contemplandum creatorem suam creatus est, You could not
possibly then have beat your mind so to commit sacrilege, blasphemy and
murder; or that of Zanchius, No^ ^ndi creati sumus ad neminem sad^^d^^. Oh
thou, thou would never have employed thy hands to do any mischief, much less
to bathe thy treacherous hands in thy Kings and fellow Subjects blood; For
which destruction attends thy Body and Soul eternally, without thou heartily
repent.

FINIS.

