TO HIS MAJESTY UPON HIS HAPPY ARRIVAL In our late discomposed ALBION.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

Sidon. Vidi quod speravi, vidisse tamen dolui, peraegre spectando quod petii.
By R. BRATHWAIT Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivie-lane. 1660.

To HIS MAJESTY, UPON HIS HAPPY ARRIVAL In our late discomposed ALBION.
Blessed be that all-ey'd-Lord, who gave us eyes
To see the Period of our Miseries.
Now be our longing hopes safe brought a Shore,
Our State secured, what can we wish for more?
Secured! not so as we were used of late
When our Security was through a Grate.
But that Storm's past, we from those Shackles free,
Our glorious State rid of that Anarchie
Or Syracusan thraldom, which no age
E're paralleled with more tyrannick rage.
Was ever any such distraction known,
As no man might impropriate his own?
All out of joint; no sympathizing sense
Applide a Cure to wounded Innocence.
No Crime like Loyalty: He that would clime
Must suit himself to the Habit of the time.
None to the Throne of Justice durst arise
Unless He were of the Protectorian Size.
That gave him footing, and dimension too,
Acting what his Rebellion willed him do.
Were these pure Lesbian (...) where moral Law
Derived her Spirit from u^urpers aw?
Were these Cloanthes Tables holden meet
For minced Justice to erect a Seat?
And with an oily tongue delude the ear,
Like Fauns o're-ballanced with gain or fear?
What rare Sysambres have we had, whose Sin
Deserved well the forfeit of a Skin
For their Skrude Judicature: -- now struck dumb
Me thinks they tremble at Your coming home,
Fearing their sad Account; but if they grieve
For what they have done, Your mercy can forgive,
Such is Your Princely Candor: holding fit
Where Justice dooms, Mercy should sweeten it.
Which seems presented in that prudent sort
As the Lions Cave becomes Astraea's Court.
Yet an Indulgence, to egregious Crimes
Would not sort well with temper of these times.
Such State-pretenders should Your Censure feel,
Who under Color of a Commonweal,
Reared of their own foundation, have expressed
Their Sole Concern to be self-interest;
And to promote it as their supreme good,
Imbrude their lawless hands in loyall-blood.
For their destruct on, order, quality,
To name them all would swell an Elegy
To a vast Iliad. -- There Is no public place
Wherein the tincture of a Jewish ^ace
Brands them not Conscious: should I write in Steel,
Those rubric Characters no age can heal
Nor Annal parallel; it might appear
A Subject fitting to extract a tear
From the Perusers eye, but wanting Strength
To Analize those tragic acts at length;
Which our Anarchiall Stage so late presented
In lines of blood, and tyranny indented.
Sometimes I made my walk in Rufus Hall,
Where I might see a Scarlet-arras'd wall
Deep-dyed in Crimson gore; this reft me Sense
To find a Shambles on a Royal Bench,
Asking what that ascendent chair might be?
Seat of High Justice, it was answered me.
Inquiring further of him what it meant?
Here, he replied, sits the Lord President
Th Protectors Favorite, Commissioner Lisle,
To try the Delinquents of our Purple Isle.
Rough Rhadamant, said I, blancht be his fame
To derogate from such a loyal Name
As Colchester perpetuates, where his prize
Fames him his Princes LOYAL SACRIFICE;
Whose innocent blood in Annals shall be found,
Recording how no As it has been observed and constantly reported for a truth.
grass grows on that ground.
But in the revolution of that State
Both Names and Natures were degenerate;
For as the First did his blood for's Sovereign shed,
In Subjects blood the Later surfeted.
But let us divert our Current; Jubilees
Reserve no Ear for such sad Histories.
When th Sabine State appeared without dispute
Subjects to none, but Masters absolute;
They Would wear no Black, nor taste an herb was sour
Upon the Choice of a new Governor.
It skills not much for Habits, but I Am sure
Your wished arrival has applide a Cure
To worse distempers then this age brought forth,
By the Conduct of that happy Star of the North.
But for as much as Humane Blessings give
Their just proportion when Comparative
To our preceding sufferings: let each part
Communicate a portion to the heart;
And with an active vivid accent cry,
Blessed be the approach of lineall Sov'raignty
Clothed with a native Splendour! every way
With Pouls and Bushes keep their Holy Day.
Our Checker'd-curled Groves prepare their Bowrs
Artfully wreathed with shady Sycomours
For their choice aerie quires; whose cheerful song
Tyres not their Spirits though the day be long:
Virgins their untoucht Loyalty display,
Paving with fragrant flowrs his Highness way.
Zeal makes all Tasks delightful: but no tune
In this our prelude to a cheerful June.
(Though Ut Carolus rediit Terris Astraea refulsit; Nunrius ut Floris Maius,
honoris erit.
May were th'month that brought our May Game in,
Without which sight our hopes had blasted bin)
Me thinks I hear of joy this Signal token
Breathed forth, A three-fold-cord is hardly broken
Computed and Completed in that Trine
Of You, and Your two Brothers; from which line
Spring our aspiring hopes, that Your blessed Reign
Shall parallel the same of Charlemaine;
And in Your Brothers princely virtues live
To give Your Comforts a prerogative.
This cheers mine aged hopes as much as any,
And makes me sprightly, though my years be many:
So as some think both by my face and gate
That I had eaten Aesons herb of late.
But those sweet prosperous gales which waf't you hither
Gave me that Color which can hardly wither;
That was the Herb of Grace, or if you please
A Chaplet interwoven with Hearts Ease.
I court not the rising Sun, to cause his rays
To dart their Splendour on my rural lays:
Zeal makes my Muse enthusiastic; which
Though it pretend not to a Bard that is rich,
For these late times did publicly proclaim
None should be rich that owned their Sovereign,
My ruined fortunes I shall nere bemone
Though I have felt as much as any one
Of the Delinquents whip: I Am still the man
I was, before these Civil wars began;
Those Capital Grand-Bugbears had no power
TO affright Your Servant, though they might devour
That small remainder which He then possessed;
Wherein they grew half-Sharers at the least:
Amidst those dusky Clouds which adverse Fate
Had thrown on mine anatomized State,
The morning Sun shone cheerfully on me
Because a subject sworn to loyalty.
The infringment of which Oath has brought some wits
In these distracted times to Bedlamites.
We shall not need their features to display,
Some have we caught, and others run away
In a disguised habit; who like Apes
Aray'd in garish-counterfeated Shapes
With royalized Ribbands, in them writ
VIVE LE ROY, an Impreze most unfit
For such perfidious Rooks, who boldly made
VENDE LE ROY their universal trade;
Have taken their flight -- and that they might appear
In this their fev'rish passage to be clear
From Cordial Rebeliion, upsefreze
They drunk their Sov'raigns Health upon their knees.
Brave Presidents of Justice! did Your House
Teach Your imbrodered Honors to carouse?
In blood it did; witness so many lives:
They needs must run apace whom the Devil drives.
Far be these Scorpions from my Sovereigns head,
Who eat Your Subjects as their daily bread.
May You make Your distinction still 'twixt those
Who be Your real Friends and bosom foes.
May You confer Your honors on such men
Whose loyal Service has deserved them.
Your Royal Grandsire num^rously inthrall'd,
No other then a Craft, a Kingship called;
And sure, me thinks, that Simele may fit,
For we shall find rare workmanship in it.
Kings are like Hammers, and their Subjects like
To Bells, which sound just as their Hammers strike.
But if the Clock fall to a tunelesse Strain;
Art more then Force must bring't to Frame again.
Titus that princely Darling of Mankind, Procop.

As in his life related we do find,
Would not bestow his Style on any man
Unless his Actions with Vespacian
Had merited that Title, which was done
In honor to a Father by his Son.
Gifts when they are rarely given oblige the most,
And by the Givers hand, then by their Cost
More highly valued: Your Experience
Knows the gradations of Munificence;
How You the Fabric of Your State should make,
What Princes are to give, and Subjects take.
Many rough Tempests has my Liege sustained,
And by those Sufferings infinitely gained
In Your Observance; You have found how Kings
Are oft-times mutable as other things
In their affections: when successful gales
Breath with a prosperous convoy on our Sails,
Each coast smiles on us: whereas adverse winds
Make Seas not only brackish, but men's minds.
What a rich Lecture is it to read man!
Wherein you were improved before you came,
And can instruct your Courtiers in that feat
Which in my judgment makes them most complete.
For what is it to know the use of Plants,
Those various tempers of the Elements,
The deep discovery of each Mineral,
Nay, the notion of all things since Adams fall,
If our eyes in man's knowledge should grow dim
Who does contain a Little world in Him?
To make the work exact, Augustus form
Might with his Principles a Court adorn:
His Course was this: That Courtier He approved
Who his improvement seriously loved.
Tasks he enjoined: Each' plide his Exercise
In Music, Posy, Gymnick Masteries.
Sloth was exiled the Court: though Stages were
Enriched with State and Action; they were rare.
Artfull Dramaticks in high-buskind lines
Addressed their Sceans for These Theatrall times;
And with such ample pensions gratified,
Archtas sat close by Augustus side;
Learned Mecoenas die not then refuse
To become Patron to a Laureat Muse.
Those Halcyon days crowned Poets! as for those
Who could Encomiums write on Casars foes
As well as on his Friends, they were discarded,
And with Contempt deservingly rewarded.
I shall not need to give a further touch,
Your piercing Judgment can discover such,
Holding them worthless in a Princes eye;
A Parasite dishonours Poetry;
Much more Seditious Pens who would advance
A State usurped, and Styl't Inheritance;
This our Diurnals, Almanacks could do,
Which prudent eyes, no doubt, will look into.
Lillies should fancy Candor, and retain
Their Native Hue, and not be died in grain,
As that Star-starer in his Rubric writ;
Sure he was signed with Aries penned it:
But let not his Predictions now deceive him,
Neither his Book, nor Sweden Chain will save him,
Unless your pious heart indulgence give,
And grant him life that merits not to live.
As for Diurnals, we shall never read them,
The Game is up, and therefore little Need'am:
The Evening crowns the Day; these Calmer times
All Stormings chase and Sallies from our lines:
But if Corranto's must be sent abroad,
As Countries have been burd'ned with their load,
I hope we shall receive them stored more
With Honest Novells then we had before.
But let us gather yet one Select-flower
From the royal Seed-plot of that Emperor,
And though long distanc'd by the course of time,
May give a light to present Discipline,
But specially in order to the Court;
Where many beg who have small reason for it,
Yet often prevail by means of such an one
Whom many craving eyes are fixed upon.
But should Great Gifts bestowed be on those
Who in these Civil Wars became our Foes;
Or should our Honors here be set at price,
And in our Court made private Marchandice,
So prudent is our Prince, so firmly just,
No Mushrom Spirit shall have them, so we trust.
May those who such Hydroptick thoughts have nursed
With Grandeur of their burden swell, and burst.
The best receipt prescribed by Physician
Is Surfeting of Honor, to Ambition.
That Prince withal a Catalogue did keep
Which he perused before he fell asleep, He goes on with the discovery of
Augustus curiall care or Court discipline.

Of his days-promises: and 'twas his Task
To serve those first, who were the slow'st to ask.
A Serious care he took what Courtiers were
Worth the attention of a Princes ear:
Some culled He, and indeard, because He found
Their apprehensions quick, their Judgments sound;
But of this Number scarce one chus'd of twenty,
So as the City filled, the Court grew empty.
Augustus well observing this decrease,
No wonder, said He, if there were in Greece
But found seven Sages, when in this wise age
The Court of Rome affords so little Sage.
But he supplied that want with such a Call,
His Court appeared Academicall,
Stored with best wits the Latian could afford;
Complete in all both for the Gown and sword.
Which Court-directions though they Ethnic be,
They suit well with a Christian liverie.
Political, and Civil too they are
And may conduce much to a Princes care
In rallying his affairs, which thoroughly wrought
He acts not what he might, but what he ought.
Level be his dimensions, and so right
As they draw by the Curtain of the night
Lest it obscure their Splendour: such are you,
To limne you fully in your Peoples view,
A Model so transparent, as it gives
By its Example, form to others lives.
Such rare Idaea's Princes be, when worth
Contests with Birth to set their goodness forth.
Let Him my Liege, a modest boldness take
Who has exposed his fortunes for Your sake:
And late engaged both life and liberty
In his defense of Legal Sov'raignty;
Sweep off those Gnats, and Cobwebs which resort
To beg without deserving in your Court.
He merits ill the Title of a Knight,
That has more heart to vapor then to fight.
My gracious Liege, make Sponges of all such
As soak your Land by draining it too much.
Such numbers crowded at your Gate last day,
Your ancient Servants could not find a way
For their Addresses: let those Fauns decline,
They Are held the Chattering Swallows of our time
That flicker over Success, but hide their head,
When those they hugged before, shall stand in need.
He breaths not upon Earth can be pursude
By a worse Fury then Ingratitude.
Even-ballanc't Justice may she steer your State;
Urim and Thummin over the Clergies gate.
The only way to make Presbytery
Run Diapasan with Epispacy,
Is to acquaint one the other with their grieves,
And stich up their Divisions in Laun sleeves.
This may procure Church-union speedily,
And make our Organs whistle cheerfully:
Which presupposed, no Charity can want
'Twixt moderate Presbyter and Protestant.
Now that your vine her branches may display,
'Twere fit luxurious Sprigs were lopt away;
They cumber but the Land, and by their force,
Should they grow great, your vine would prosper worse.
But those Expressions from your royal pen
Against vicious, profane and debauched men
Confirm your Native Goodness, and ronut
The knowledge of our Happiness in you.
This in your near accession to your Crown Alluding to his approaching
Coronation.

Must needs redound much to your high renown.
Peace, precious plenty, high-priz'd Liberty,
Late Strangers to us, usher Majesty.
These cheerful accents breathed from loyal hearts
Methinks I hear resounding in all Parts.
Our Seas grown calm; our Air refined, and clear,
With joyful News re-ecchoing every where,
Our CHARLES safe returned, by whose direction
Were steered, and need not OLIVERS Protection.
Our Score's discharged; our Liberty re-gain'd,
And Nol who long Triennium mensium, perennium dementium incendium. Innocentium
suspendium. Rhem. Miles.
triennially reigned,
Called to account: Mab and her Court broke up,
And all his Sweets drenched in a wormwood Cup.
His Rich Relations stripped: He to be tried
At the Bar of Justice for a Regicide:
Where if that wild usurping Beast get free,
We Will Annals write in praise of Tyranny.
A new Call of sad Justices had we, A Glancing at those Mechanich Justices, who
were created Commissioners in our late Anarchiall Government.

Which, I confess, did much dis-relish me.
Green-Lapwing-Novices of sense bereft,
Who scarcely knew the right hand from the left:
Holding the Acts of Justice to be Dreams,
As if they cared not what their Office means.
Such should be put Apprentices to Sense
Before they were admitted to the Bench.
Let ancient Justices mount to their place,
Such will support the State, secure your Grace.
These, these be they who can deliver sense,
And make their Sessions seats of Conscience.
Let honest Jenkins flowrish in your Isle,
And pass a Sentence on perfidious Lisle.
Let only such ascend unto that Throne
Who scorn rewards and slight an awful frown.
Those were the Lures our Ayri's did pursue,
While State and Treason held their Interview.
But the Tide is turned; Themis now smiles on Thames,
And crowns our Consuls with religious Names.
BY HIM, WHO EVER HELD HIS INTIMACY OF LOYALTY A SUFFICIENT REWARD FOR ALL HIS
SUFFERINGS: AND HIS HOUSE MOST HAPPY IN THE HOSPITALITY OF YOUR SERVANTS.

To the Crowd of Supplicants at White Hall.
HOw is it Friends, that you do thus resort,
Crowd, and disturb the Quiet of the Count?
Is this the Loyalty you have professed
To give no time unto your King to rest?
Be these your set employments thus to stand
At the Presence door to kiss his Highness hand,
Or beg an Office? How do you contrive
The way to get where there is none to give?
Honors He freely can confer, but those
Will not discharge the Mercer for his clothes.
Be civil SIRS; He bears a royal heart,
And will bestow on every one a part,
When He is settled; mean time it is well known
Where naught remains, the King must loss his own.
Should all the Rebels Lands to the Checker fall;
Their values would not satisfy us all.
Our Sufferings be so numerous, as alas
We Are like Bare-bones, who in the Last Synod was.
Let it content us, that the State's our Debtor,
And if unpaid, our own will thrive the better.
Who serves his Sovereign for mere hope of gain,
May have an Hector's heart, but's mind a Swain.
FINIS.

