COMFORT FROM THE CRADLE, AS WELL AS FROM THE CROSS of CHRIST. Being
Meditations upon Isaiah 9.6.

The substance whereof was delivered in TWO SERMONS. Preached at WINCHESTER upon
the Feast of the NATIVITIE last past.

By THO. BRADLEY Dr in Divinity, lately one of His Majesty's Chaplains, and
Rector of Castleford and Ackworth near Pontefract in Yorke-shire.

(...).

OXFORD, Printed by H.H. An. Dom. 1650.

To the Honorable, The Lady FRANCES Daughter to the Right Honorable JOHN LORD
SAVILE Baron of PONTEFRACT, etc. his Dear Wife, The Preacher wishes a portion
in all the Grace, and comfort in the ensuing Discourse discovered.
DEAR LADY,
IT is not my business in this Dedication, either to excuse my ambition in
looking so high, or to justify your discretion in stooping so low, till two
such unequals met together in a Conjugall relation, there was a time when such
a meeting needed no apology, when it was no wonder for our Tribe to match into
Noble samilies nor disparagement for Noble Families to match into our Tribe,
among all the Tribes of the children of Israel, none but that (the Tribe of
Levy) was allowed to match into the royal Tribe of Judah, by which previledge
Iehoiada the Priest had to wife 2 Chr. 22.11
Iehoshabeah daughter to Iehoram, and sister to Ahaziah Kings of Judah, The
very Isaiah the son of Amoz, brother to Amaziah King of Judah.
Prophet and Penman of my text (if the Jewish records deceive us not) was of
the blood Royal, and the greatest Presbyter John.
Prince this day in the world, counts it his highest honor (and it is the
first in the Catalogue of all his high titles) to be styled (...). Prae^stants
Anrtestes Sacerdos. Atiqua nomina summum huic officio tribuunt honore^
Priest. True it is we are fallen into other times, which 1 King. 13.33, 34.
by making the lowest of the people Priests, have made the Priests the lowest
of the People: but you know whose sin that was, charged and recharged so home
upon him, Jeroboam.
as the very cause of his ruin, and remains in the story of his life, as a
blot in his Arms, and a stain to his honor to this very day. I confess
(notwithstanding) it had been honor enough for me to have been your
Chaplain. The nobleness of your birth, with other perfections suitable might
well have commended you to any, my Lords your Father or Brothers Peers in this
Kingdom, but seeing providence had otherwise determined, as the As God decreed
so we agreed.
Posie of your wedding Ring, of your own choice (if at least it be not She
suffered deeply in both, but both never troubled me till I lost my Library (of
choice books, and of good value, by the treachery of a pretended friend, but a
close hypocrite and notorious temporizer, one Lake of Castleford aforesaid, who
upon highest engagements undertook to preserve them for me, but upon the
turning of the times, and the taking of Pontefract Castle, betrayed his trust,
and kept them from me, and that not for the use of the public but for his
own, after he had concealed them for mine, above two years and had them in
his hands so concealed, when my other goods were sequestered, and he a prizer of
them.
sequestered nor plundered among the rest) will daily put you in mind. I am glad
to see you do so contentedly sit down with your lot, and bear with patience
the cross that is laid upon you, while I (as duty binds me) and as in good
reason I ought) help to bear one end of it with you. And now, Lady, since by
this means I have undone you (and the times will needs have it so) I know no
way better how to make you amends, then by becoming an instrument to help
forward your faith, a means to further you in the way of life. And if in the
loss of all our earthly comforts and contentments, we can compass those that
are heavenly, if in the want of all the joys of this world, and the seeming
happiness in the things here below, we can make it an occasion to seek the
more earnestly after heavenly happiness, and the joys which are from above,
we shall be still happy in our sufferings, and gainers by being Periissem nisi
periissem. Themist. Athen.
loosers. It was your own expression, and I must not forget it; that the hope
which you did conceive of advantaging your self in your souls health, and of
being furthered in the way to heaven, was the maine inducement which prevailed
with you, to look upon a man of my profession, in that way that you did. And
it is (therefore) my duty, and I must not neglect it, carefully to endeavor so
to satisfy that your expectation, as that you may not be altogether
disappointed of that hope, in performance of which duty, and part of payment of
which debt, I send you here these two mites, not doubting your acceptance, both
for his sake from whom they come, but especially for the Image sake, and
superscription which they bear, and that is not of Caesar, but a greater then
Caesar, of A Child on the one side, and A Son on the other, the maine subject
of the ensuing text, and discourse upon it. A visit to your two sons at
Winchester gave the occasion of coining them, The eldest borne at Castleford on
Christmas day 1632.
one of which was borne on that very day, set apart by the Church for
celebrating the memorial of the birth of this child, and if it were not
reproveable in Herod to celebrate his birthday (as the Evangelists silence in
that particular, recording the story of it) seems to me to conclude) and if
the marvailous works of the Lord be such, Psalm.
that they ought to be had in remembrance, and to be kept in remembrance, and
to be delivered over from Generation to Generation to be preserved in
remembrance, and the way which the wisdom of God himself has appointed as
most fit to do this by, bath ever been by anniversary Commemorations yearly
feasts, holy meetings, Est^r 9.27.
Exodus 12.
and Convocations for that purpose. I hope it will neither be charged upon the
Church as a crime that it has appointed such a day for the celebrating of the
memorial of the birth of this child in my text, nor in me, that I did my part
then in speaking, or now in writing in the honor of his Natitivity such a
subject I confess might well become a better pen, and such it has, and such
many, but amongst many, and many better, there is still matter enough for more,
and room enough for mine, which is so much the bolder, because it writes (if
not only to you, yet principally) to you Dear Lady, some slips, and failings
doubtless may be found in it, in which notwithstanding, I desire heartily to
be interpreted, it may be there will be found some thing among hand, which may
make amends for it, some thing which you do not read every day, some thing
which it is very necessary for your Sex to know (especially in the second
Sermon) something which (I doubt not) will afford you much comfort, and good
satisfaction, and that in some necessary but clouded truths, such as it is what
ever it be, yours it is most peculiarly, and to your hand and view I present
it. Read it over Dear Lady, and in it my love to your Soul, my due respects
to you, my tender care of you, and all that may speak me most faithfully,
really, and affectionately yours, desiring of Almighty God, that you may
receive as much comfort, satisfaction, and assurance, out of it as he that
penned it has grounded on it, and daily receives from it, who is and ever will
be

Yours in all things according to the Covenant which once I made you THOMAS
BRADLEY.
From OXFORD Jan. the first 1650.
COMFORT FROM THE CRADLE, AS WELL AS from the Cross of CHRIST: Being
MEDITATIONS upon
ESAIAH 9.6. For unto us a Child is borne,
Unto us a Son is given.

AMong all the Prophets that arose in the Church from Moses to Malachie, there
was none that had more clear visions of the Messiah than this the Penman of
our Text, the Prophet Isayah, who spoke and writ of him more like an Evangelist
than a Prophet, as if he were to deliver (not a Prophecy of things to come,
but rather Is borne, is given, says this Text, whereas he was not actually
borne till 700 years after.
a hystory of things already done, and long since accomplished: hence it is
that he is usually called The Evangelicall Prophet. And it is no idle
conjecture, that in reference to this he had his name, (not by chance) but by
special providence assigned him, Isayah, which (if you will read in the
Original is (...) Jeschaiah, and imports as much as salus Domini, The
salvation of the Lord, or as some read (...) Jeschaiahu, Conservet Dominus, or,
det Dominus salutem, Let the Lord save, les the Lord give salvation; namely,
according to his good word unto this Prophet, according to the manifold visions
concerning the Messiah revealed unto him, and the clear prophesies of him
contained in this book. It is observable, that out of this Prophet there are
no less then Musculus in Isayam.
sixty testimonies alleged by our Lord and his Apostles in the New Testament,
which is more then they have done out of any other of the Prophets besides (one
only excepted) namely the Prophet David, out of whose book of Psalms, there
are alleged sixty four, and out of both so frequently for the same reason,
because they writ more clearly, more fully, more distinctly, of the Messiah,
then any of the rest of their brethren the Prophets had done. Amongst them all,
there is not found a more famous prophecy concerning him then this we have
under hand, in the words which I have read unto you, where you have him
presented to you in the very cradle. For Unto us a Child is borne,
Unto us a Son is given.


For the better understanding of these words you must consider well the
occasion of them, and to what purpose the Prophet brings them in at this time,
and that was to comfort the King in a case of distress, as you may gather out
of The history there refers to the prophecy here.
2 Chronicles. 28. and this was the case: Ahaz King of Judah was at this time
brought very low, being sore oppressed by the Kings of Israel and Syria, with one
of which he had lately fought a great battle, wherein he had the worse of
it, so far the worse that he lost 120000 men upon the place, 2 Chronicles: 28:
besides 200000 more of all sorts taken prisoners, and carried away captives,
so great a blow as that he was afraid it might not only weaken his Kingdom in
his hands, but even shake the foundation of the Monarchy for ever. In this
case he comes to the Prophet for council and for comfort, and the Prophet
gives him both, and the grounds of both he fetches from the child in my text:
he bids the King be of good comfort, and that the loss of that day should not
so much trouble him, nor the fear of the ill consequence which he did
misdoubt might fall thereupon, in as much as there was a child borne in whom he
should be relieved in all this; A mighty Prince that should do valiently, that
should raise amongst them a greater and more glorious Kingdom then that was
when it was at the highest, that should fight against the enemies of it a more
terrible battle then that which he had fought, and win upon them a more
glorious victory then he had lost: (though not with sword and spear, Isay 1.25.
but with sword and fire, with a two-edged sword, proceeding out of his mouth,
Isay 4.4.
and with the spirit of burning, the spirit of grace and power conquering by
the Gospel: all this in the fifth verse, Every battle of the warrior is with
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, but this shall be with burning,
and fuel of fire: And then in the sixth verse he tells you who it is that
shall execute all this, and that is the Child in the Text, whom he describes by
nine glorious attributes in all and every of them making him out a mighty
Prince indeed. The government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall
be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government, and peace there shall be no
end, He shall sit upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it,
and to establish it with judgment and justice from henceforth even for ever.
The Prophet under the type of Hezekiah preaches to the King the Messiah.
The Prophet all this while, and in all this (under the type of Hezekiah, the
son of Ahaz, a hopeful Prince, and as yet but a child) with singular art
preaching Christ unto him, and prophesying of the glory and greatness of his
Kingdom, (the spiritual Kingdom of the Church) for the protection and
preservation of which he should do wonderfully. To him the Prophet leads the
King now in the day of his distress, as to a ground and pillar of hope, and
comforts him in the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, even against
the loss of his own. Be of good cheer. For unto us a Child is borne, unto us
a Son is given. This was the method and the means by which the Prophets
before the coming of Christ were wont to comfort the people of God in the time
of their trouble, by leading them unto Christ, by pointing them to the Messiah,
in whom was laid up all their hope and comfort, this was a standing comfort in
the Church which never failed them, a reserve of hope, unto which in the time
of their most grievous troubles they had recourse and found relief: And hence
it is observed, that the clearest visions of the Messiah have ever been made
out to the people of God in the darkest times: Jacob in Egypt, Genesis 49.10.
Number. 23. Dan. 9.24.
Moses in the wilderness, Daniel in the captivity, saw more, and more clearly
of the Messiah, then they did at any other time besides: The Lord in his mercy
having appointed him as a ground of their hope and comfort against evil times:
in the remembrance of whom they might stay themselves until his coming: And
such a time was it with Ahaz now; and therefore such a method and means does
the Prophet use to comfort him: Be of good cheer, for unto us a child is
borne, unto us a son is given.

And (beloved) let us learn from this method of the Prophet how to comfort our
selves and others in the like cases, even by embracing this child in the arms
of our faith, by flying unto Christ with the wings of our hope, and by having
recourse to the Fundamental mercies are sure mercies.
sure mercies of the Covenant purchased by his blood in it is laid up all our
hope and happiness, that's our reserve and sure refuge unto which we must trust
in an evil day, and well may, for it will not fail us. If such a day come
(and such days will come) remember the Prophets council, turn thee to
Christ, and turn to the covenant of grace, of which he is the mediator, and
consider the precious and glorious things therein sealed up and made sure to
thee, read there thine eternal election to grace and glory firmer then the
mouniaines, The Covinan^ of grace the charter of the Church. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet.
1.18. Tit. 3.7. Gal. 4.5. Psalm. 32.1. Luke 10.10. Col. 1.12.
thy redemption by the blood of Jesus Christ, thy free justification by faith,
thy reconciliation and peace made with God, thy adoption to the honor to
become the son of God, the remission of thy sins, thy name written in
heaven, and thy infallible title to an inheritance in glory, all made over to
thee, and all made sure to thee in the Covenant of grace: all (...) (as the
Greek proverb has it) without the reach and danger of the dart, unshaken
grounds of hope and joy in the midst of all the troubles, losses, and crosses
which in this mortal life you are subject unto, think upon these and be
comforted, when all is lost, something yet there is left in these, which we
cannot lose, when the world has done its worst, something yet it has left us,
which it could neither give, nor take away, enough (in the Prophets judgment
here) to comfort a King, even in the loss of a Kingdom, and in all that
comfort have we all a share as well as he, For Unto us this Child is borne,
Unto us this Son is given.


In which words here are three things which clearly to the eye, and at first
view offer themselves to our examination, take them in so many words.

1 Quis Who? 2 Quid What? and 3 Quibus To whom.
1 In the first of these we are to enquire who it is of whom the Prophet
speaks this? and that the Text gives you in in two words, A Child, A Son.

2 In the second we are to consider what it is that he speaks of him, and
that he gives us in in two words more, is borne, is given, The Child is borne,
but the Son is given.

3 In the third we are to examine to whom he is so borne, and for whom he is
given? and that we have in a double expression too, Nobis, to us; and again,
for failing, Nobis, to us; For unto us a Child is borne, unto us a Son is
given.

Of these in order, and first of the first, Quis who? As sometimes that noble
Eunuch asked the question, Act. 8.34. I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet
this? of himself or of some other? such is the question here offered in the
Text, of whom does the Prophet prophecy this? of the Messiah, or of some other?

Surely of some other says the Jew, which (because he will by no means hear
of Christ yet come in the flesh, and because the Prophet speaks in the praeter
tense, is borne, is given) tells us, we must needs understand this of some child
that was now actually borne and visible in the world, and in that inquiry they
pitch upon Hezekiah the son of Ahaz, a child now of about As by computation
of time may be gathered out of 2 King. 18. compared with 2 Chronicles. 28.
13 years of age; as if the Prophet (like some flattering Court-Chaplaine, to
please the King) did in these words but sooth and smooth him up, by telling him
what a glorious Prince his son Hezekiah should prove, and what a mighty and
lasting Monarchy he should raise, and be established in.

In answer to this cavil, we do not deny but that the Prophet did all along in
this prophecy allude to Hezekiah (a hopeful Prince) as to the type of another
Prince far more glorious, herein (with singular art) gaining the Kings ear,
the more readily to entertain the doctrine of the Messiah, The Prophets
singular art to gain the Kings ear while he preaches Christ unto him.
when he preaches him to him under so lovely and lively a type as his own
son, whereby he did not only honor the Prince in making him the type of
Christ, but leading the King on with delight in hearing such glorious
achievements personated in his son, he prevailed with him the more readily
to receive him that was personated by him, and while he opens his affections to
the taking in of the one, he takes the advantage of it to convey in with him
the other also, the type with the Antitype both together: wherein he acted the
part of a wise charmer. Fishers of men should be cunning, and have baits of all
sorts to catch souls withal; and (reserving still the innocence of the dove)
need had they be wise as serpents, which have serpents to deal withal, which
will stop their ears to the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely.

But that it could not be Hezekiah which was here principally intended, the
sequel of this verse makes it clear, where the wonderful things spoken of
this child, and the magnificent titles attributed to him in the description of
him, are too high and glorious to be ascribed to Hezekiah, or to any mortal
man else.

If I were to preach in a Synagogue of Jews, me thinks I should need no more
but four other prophesies (to this in the Text) to convince them, and to
demonstrate the Child in my Text to be the Messiah that was to come and none
other, that child which above 3000 years before, the Lord promised to Adam to
comfort him after his fall, Genesis 3.15. That child which to the Patriarchs and
Fathers of former generations was preached and pointed at, in types and figures,
promises and prophesies, sacraments and sacrifices under the law. That child
whose day Abraham saw a far off (but dimly) as it were, through a perspective
glass, and at a distance: that child which was the joy of the world, the
expectation of the nations, the hope of all the ends of the earth; that is the
child which here the Prophet speaks off, and in the Text presents to us as
visibly as if (with old Symion) he had him in his arms, Unto us A Child is
borne. And to this give all the Prophets witness. Micah foretold long before,
the place where he should be borne, at The very name of it did prophecy, and
promise some singular good to us out of it, (...) signifies the home of bread,
and out of it did he come that was the bread of life.
Bethlem, Micah 5.2. little Bethlem in this Honorable above all the Cities of
all the other tribes, Act. 10.34.
yea above Jerusalem it self, in that it was the birthplace of our blessed
Lord: which therefore St Ambrose often calls Christi villula, Christ's little
village: Old Jacob 1000 years before that foretold the time when he should be
borne, Genesis 49.10. when the Scepter was departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver
from between his feet, not before. This our Prophet 19. Generations before he
was borne, foretells us out of what stock, tribe, and family he should come.
Isay 11.1. That he should be a branch springing out of the root of Jesse, of
the Tribe of Judah, of the stock and lineage of David: And in the 7th of this
Prophecy, and 14th verse, he comes nearer yet, and describes the very woman
of whom he should be borne, tells us, what manner of woman she should be, and
what manner of child he should be that was to be borne of her: that his mother
should be a Maid, Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son; and the
child should be a twin, and yet but one neither, but that one consisting of two
natures united together in one person, and these natures as different one from
the other, as heaven is distant from earth, and therefore had he a name
assigned him from heaven suitable to them both, and comprehending both of them
in the signification of it. His name shall be called (...). Immanu-el.

So then you have the time when, the place where, the tribe and family out of
which this child should be borne, you have him described by two distinguishing
properties besides, the one in the mother that should bear him, the other in
the child that should be borne, by which he may be known from all other
children in the world. Then we need go no further in this inquiry, lay all
these together and compare them with what you read in the first chapter of the
Gospel by St Matthew, Mat. 1.
and the second by St Luke, and you have found the child that we look for,
Luke 2.
what here you have in the prophecy, there you have in the history. This day
are all these Scriptures fulfilled in your ears. There is no stronger prop to
our faith to confirm us in the truth of those things which we believe, then
when we see that those things which are come to pass were so long before
foretold that they should so come to pass, and among all the great things
which time has brought forth since the creation of the world, there is nothing
wherein this has been so punctually made good, as in the things concerning
this child, of whom there is scarce any passage in his conception, birth,
baptism, life, death, burial, resurrection or ascension so small, but we can
show it you, either in promise, or prophecy, or type, or figure, or sacrament,
or sacrifice, long before, many of them some thousands of years before foretold
and foreshewed; whence it is that you read so often in the Gospells such
expressions as these, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the mouth
of such a Prophet, Matthew: 1.22.
and that it might be fulfilled which was written by such a Prophet: Matthew:
2.15.
That you may see how in all things concerning the Messiah the Prophecy and
the history agree and answer each other (as in a glass) face to face: Nor to
be trembled at, then the impudence of the Athist that dare call them into
question.
In so much as there is nothing more to be wondered at, or indeed to be
lamented, then the judicial blindness of the Jews, which to this day do not
see these things, nor acknowledge the Messiah come in the flesh, but do with
great earnestness still look for him out at the window, when he is long since
come in at the door: The Lord open their eyes that they may see him, and that
they may look upon him whom they have pierced, Zach. 11.9.
and and mourn for him abundantly, even as a mother mourns for her son,
and as one that is in bitterness for her first borne.

And that they may do so, here it is necessary that we remove the scruple in
the Text (which they stumble at) arising from the time wherein the Prophet
gives you in his birth, which here he expresses in the praeter tense as a
thing done already, is borne, is given: whereas they say even the child that
we speak of was not borne till about 700 years after this prophecy uttered:
And it is true that they say, for if we search the Chronologies of time, and
the Genealogies of this Child, Mat. 1.
we shall find there were 19 generations between this of Ahaz, in which the
prophet prophesied this, and that of Mary, wherein and of whom this child was
borne, which took up much about this time that they speak of. But it is an
usual thing with the penmen of the Holy Ghost especially writing the
historical and prophetical parts of Scripture thus to express themselves,
and to speak of things to come as if present, or past already by a figure
usually found in Scriptures, called Anticipatio: Anticipatio.
But there is more in this expression here in this place then a bare figure,
the prophet has a further meaning in it, and would thereby teach us, and point
out unto us these three things.

1. First the certainty of fulfilling the promise of his coming, that it was
as sure as if they had had him then amongst them: what you have in hope
grounded upon a promise from the all-sufficient God, is as sure as if you had
it in hand, in whom all the promises are yea and Amen. If the Lord has said it
shall be done, write it done already, it is as sure as if it were done, Hab.
2.3.
though the vision tarry, wait, for in the end it will surely come, it will not
tarry. If the Lord has said, he shall be borne, the Prophet dares boldly
write him borne already, unto us A Child is borne.

2 Secondly, to note the eternal efficacy of his birth, life, death, and
passion, with all the other parts of his obedience, in respect of which he was
not only A Child borne, but A lamb slain from the beginning of the world.
Mich. 5.2.
And (as the prophet Micah tells us) his goings forth were from the beginning and
from everlasting, one would think that in this verse the prophet did speak
contradictions. In the beginning of it, he tells us he shall come, Out of thee
shall he come that shall be captain of my people, and in the latter end of it
he tells us he is come already, come long ago, his goings out have been from
the beginning, and from everlasting, this clear distinction reconciles the
matter. There is a twofold coming of the Messiah an Actual coming, and A
Vertuall coming. Actually he shall come. Vertually, he is come already; His
goings out have been from the beginning, and from everlasting, the virtue and
efficacy of his redemption reaching as well to the first man that was created
in the world as to the last that shall stand upon the earth at the last day,
even Adam the (...) was saved by his death: for of the salvation even of him
(notwithstanding his grievous sin and fall) we nothing doubt, yea Origin
has recorded it, that (when he had finished his days on earth, and returned
to the dust from whence he was taken, he was buried in mount Calvery in the
very place where (about 4000 years afterward) the Cross of Christ was set
whereon he was crucified. A wonderful providence (if true) Ut primus virtute^
sanguinis Christi sentiret qui primus peccati author fuerit, That he might
first feel the efficacy of Christ's blood which was the first cause of
shedding it. He did not then That is, vertually, and efficaciously according
to the distinction foregoing.
first open the Kingdom of heaven to all believers when he had overcome the
sharpness of death, but when (by covenant made with his father, and concluded
upon for the reconciling of the world) He took upon him to deliver man. And
had it not been so, the patriarchs and fathers of former generations before his
coming in the flesh had been very unhappy (with all their faith and hope,
piety and patience, holiness and obedience (in which they were exemplary) to
be thrust into Limbus, there to be imprisoned for so many hundreds of years
(as by the doctrine of the Church of Rome they must) until Christ came thither
with his Cross to break open the prison doors, and to set them free. They
were in Christ before us, they saw his day and rejoiced, and not only Isay in
his time, but the Fathers of the first ages of the world (long before him)
embraced this child in the arms of their faith and hope, and acknowledged, (as
in the Text) Unto us this Child is born.

3 Thirdly, by this expression does the Prophet preach to us, and declare the
omniscience, and eternity of the Lord God, with whom there is no distinction of
time, nor any part of it past, or to come, but to whom all time is present,
with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years but as one
day, which sees all things past and to come uno intuita at one view present
before him; which calls things that are not as if they were, which says unto
Cyrus, thou art my Shepherd, I have known thee and called thee by name: an
hundred years before Cyrus was borne: neither is it in the power of any power
under or in heaven so to speak, but only of him who writes himself (...), I AM
the A Alpha, and the O Omega, the beginning and the end, Exodus 3.14.
the first and the last; which lifts up his hand to heaven and says, Revel:
1.
I live for ever. And therefore upon this trial the Lord challenges all the
heathen gods, pretenders to deity, Isay 41.21. Produce your cause, says the
Lord, show your strong reasons (says the King of Jacob) let them bring them
forth, and show us what shall happen, Isay 41.
let them show the former things what they be, that we may consider them, and
know the latter end of them: or (...) them declare the things for to come, show
the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods. A
more convincing argument of the deity then that of miracles, in them there may
be juggling, and Jannes and Jambres in many strange things may go as far as
Moses: but to foresee things to come at such a distance, at which it is
impossible to see them in their causes, any farther then as it is the will and
council of him that has ordained them, to bring them to pass according to
his own purpose, is the act and work only of a deity. When therefore you
read in these words what the Prophet speaks, do but remember withal from whom
he speaks, and you will be satisfied.

Add hereunto that the Prophet (though speaking hereof the Messiah yet)
alludes to Hezekiah the young Prince and lively type of him, in whom he is said
to be actually borne, as in his type and representitive.

In all which respects the expression of the Prophet here is not only
defensible, but divine, and high, full of grace and truth, and preaches to the
world Christ incarnate with power. The Angel seconds him Luke 2.11. Unto you
is borne this day in the City of David, A Savior, even Christ the Lord. And
see, with what joy does he deliver the news of it? and how beautfull are his
feet upon the mountains, bringing the glad tidings of it? the whole universe
seems to be sensible of it, men and Angels rejoice at it, and heaven and earth
join together to celebrate his Nativitie: the star appears, the Angels
sing, the heralds poast, the shepherds run, the Kings come in to bring their
presents, and to tender their homage to him in his very cradle. And shall it be
reproveable in us this day to join with them in contributing our halleluiahs of
joy and praise for our share in this holy birth? or in the Church that it has
appointed a set and solemn day for that purpose, because For there are that
undertake to give us in more then that, the very minute in which he first
opened the matrix, as Cardanus a famous Astronomour, who gives it in at 15.
minutes after 10. at night, Virgo being then ascendant in prima domo, in his
Commentary on Ptolomies Quadri. partite.
perhaps we cannot give you in precisely (at this distance of time) the very
day, or hour of the day wherein he was borne into the world? why it is not our
purpose to calculate his nativitie, that we should be so precise in this
matter, But to the honor of God, and for our own comfort to preserve and
perpetuate the memory of so great a mercy, to renew our thankfulness for the
unspeakeable good purchased unto the world by it, to meditate upon the benefit
of his conception, and incarnation, and to rejoice before the Lord, and in the
Lord, for the favor and good will which thereby he has showed to the sons
of men, duties which (though on no day unseasonable, yet then surely most
suitable, when (a day being set apart for those duties) we set our selves apart
for that day, and suspending our thoughts from all worldly cares, and taking
our selves off from all other distractions, we bend our minds (with most
serious devotion, and intended affections, to the performance of the duty of
the day, in the day of the duty. And this is the day that calls for that duty
at our hands, Come let us rejoice and be glad in it; hark how the Angels sing
their Gloria in excelsis; Mary exults in her Magnificat, and why should not we
(amongst them) bear a part in this heavenly Choyre for our part in this holy
birth? Let us also with joy and praise sing Glory to God on high, for his Peace
(sent) on earth below, and for his good will showed to the sons of men, let
our souls magnify the Lord, and our spirits rejoice in God our Savior for
(...) Lanu, Lanu, unto us, even unto us This Child is borne.

SO then you see by the help of the Star we have found the child we spoke
off: The second branch of the first general part. The Son.
But what say you to the Son? whether is it the same with the Child here in
the Text, or some other? and if the same, why does the Prophet so suddenly vary
in his expression? but even now a Child, and presently in the next word a
Son, surely there is something in it, what may be the meaning of it? Nothing
at all (says the Rabbi) but only this, in the first word, Rabbi Kimhi.
he told you there was a Child borne, and in the next he tells you what manner
of child it was, it was a man-child, a son and not a daughter.

1 But by the Rabbis leave there is more in it then so. If indeed the former
word (...) jelad, here rendered a Child, were of the Common-gender, as in our
English it is, and did signify a woman-child as well as a man-child
indifferently, then there were some ground for this conjecture, but if you
examine the original text you will find it otherwise, you will find that the
word (...) jelad is of the masculine gender and can signify no other but a
man-child. And so, for the Prophet to bring us news that a man-child was
borne, and presently tell us it was a son, were an unnecessary tautologie,
therefore there is more in it then so.

2 There are which tell us, that by these masculine expressions of a Manchild,
A Son is intimated to us the honor and prerogative that the man has above
the woman in this business, and the interest he has in Christ before her, in
that he was borne a man-child, not a woman-child, a Son and not a daughter.

But to this we answer, if this circumstance may be a ground of an argument,
whereby to prove the privilege of either sex, and whether of them be nearer a
kinnne to Christ, certainly it will conclude for the woman rather then for the
man, for although our Lord took upon him the nature of a man in that sex, yet
he took that nature of a woman, not of a man, yea without the help of man, and
so he has united that sex unto himself in a kind of consanguinity, which
the man cannot chillenge. But Saint Ambrose has reconciled this difference, by
dividing Christ equally between them thus. Virum assumendo, and de foemina
nascendo, utrumque sexum honoravit Christus: Our Lord Christ by taking upon him
the nature of man, and yet taking that nature of a woman, has hereby equally
honored both sexes, and showed that they have both an equal interest in him,
in Jesus Christ in this respect, there is neither male nor female.

3 But yet we have not sounded the bottom of this mystery, there is more in
it yet then all this, let it be well looked into, and it will be found, that in
these two words is contained and taught the greatest mystery that is in all the
Christian Religion, and that is the two really distinguished natures united in
the one and undivided person of our Mediator, the humanity and the Divinity of
the Son of God. Unto us A Child is borne, there is his humanity: and, Unto us
A Son is given, there is his Divinity. As he was a child, so he was the son
of Mary; as a son, so he was, (by eternal generation) the natural Son of
God: as a child, so he had a Mother, but was without a Father; as a son, so
he had a Father, but was without a Mother: Heb.
and so was the true Antitype of him (in whom he was long before typified)
Melchizedek, without father, without mother, without generation: in respect of
his humanity without a father, in respect of his Divinity without a mother, and
therefore his generation who shall declare? Isay.
No wonder if a few words after my text the Prophet tells us his name shall be
called Wonderful.

And (as here in my text,) so all along throughout the whole course of his
life, fom his birth to his baptism, from his baptism to his death and passion
you shall observe how this child, and this son; the Divinity, and the
Humanity of Christ, (like Hypocrates his twins,) go hand in hand together.

His birth was mean, his parents poor, there was no room for them in the
Inn, they are feign to take up a stable for their quarter; they find more
kindness among the beasts, then among them that owed them, there is he borne,
Luke 2.7.

Behold the Child.

But do you not see at the same time a strange and new created star appear
in heaven waiting upon his birth, and the place where the child lay? and do
you not hear the Angels singing, Luke 2.
Gloria in excelsis, in honor of his Nativitie?

Behold the Son.

Luke 2.
As his birth was mean, so his accommodations are meaner, being borne he has
not a place where to lay his head. This shall be a sign unto you (says the
Angel) you shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger.

Behold a Child.

But do you not see at the same time, Kings by inspiration come from the East
to do him homage, do you not read how they brought their presents to him,
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh; Gold representing the Kingly office,
Francumcense the Priestly, and Myrrh the Prophetical office which he was
borne to, The Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts. Ps. 45.
and which he was to bear and exercise in the Church.

Behold A Son.

When he was to be baptized he submits himself unto an ordinance, and to
receive it at the hands of a man infinitely meaner then himself, one that
profeseth he was not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoe, yet without
disputing he goes into the water, Matthew. 3.
and is baptized of him.

Behold A Child.

But look up and you shall see the heavens opened unto him, and the Spirit of
God in the likeness of a dove descending upon him, and you shall hear a voice
from heaven giving testimony of him, (...), This is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased.

Behold A Son.

When his parents (as the manner was) went up to Jerusalem to the feast of the
Passover, they took him along with them, he was numbered among other children,
and as an ordinary child he went in the multitude with the rest, when his
parents missing him rebuked him for it, he submitted to their reprehension,
and (as the text tells us, Luke 2.
) He came down and was obedient to them.

Behold A Child.

But do you not read, how at the same time being but twelve years old, he went
into the Temple, presented himself among the Doctors, disputed with them, both
hearing them and posing them, asking them questions, resolving their doubts,
and that with such gravity, such satisfactory resolution, as raised
astonishment and admiration in all that heard him?

Behold A Son.

Lastly, to conclude this paralele, at the time of his passion you see him
under the hands, and power of his enemies, scourged, crowned, crucified,
hanging on the Cross, bowing down his head sorrowing, complaining, weeping,
bleeding, dying.

Behold the Child.

But do you not see at the same time, the heavens grow black, and darkened
above, and the earth trembling beneath him: do you not see the graves open, the
rocks cleave in sunder, the veil of the Temple rent, and the whole universe
seem to be troubled at the sadness of the spectacle?

Behold the Son.

And thus you see (not only in my text, but all along, the history of the
Gospel, and throughout the whole course of our blessed Redeemers life) the
glory of the Lord appearing in the cloud, the divinity of the Son of God
breaking out through the cloud and veyle of his flesh, and both of them clearly
manifesting themselves in the person of our Mediator. And therefore (as the
Father has observed) when you see him crying in the cradle, Ambrose.
or crucified on the cross, when you see him hungry and thirsty, weary,
weeping, sorrowing, grieving, bleeding, and dying, Ecc^ homo, Behold A man: But
when you see him casting out Devils, raising the dead, feeding of thousands
with a few loaves, and fewer fishes miraculously multiplied: when you see him,
reading the riddles of men's inmost thoughts, forgiving sins, commanding not
only winds and seas, but unclean spirits and devils unto obedience, then
Ecce Deus, Behold A God: Behold them both in my text in this child, and in this
son, Infans vagiens in cunabulo, filius tonans in Coelo, Ambrose.
A child crying in the Cradle, and he at the same time A son thundering in
heaven: an Infant thrust out of doors to take up his harbor in a stable, and
he at the same time A Son disposing of Paradise, and of the glorious mansions
in heaven, at the right hand of his Father.

And there was a reason for all this, Reasons of this marvelous union of two
natures in the one undivided person of our Mediator.
yea there was a necessity of it on our parts; or else he could never have
reconciled us to God the Father, nor have become for us a fit and perfect
Mediator. Neither the child without the son, nor the son without the
child, could have done it, he must be both, A Child, and A Son too, both God
and man that was to reconcile God and man, heaven and earth together. Had he
been only man, he could never have laid down a price which might have been
of sufficient value to ransom the sins of the whole world, and had he been
only God, he had not had what to lay down to ransom them withal, not a body
to offer up in sacrifice for us, nor blood to shed, without which there is no
redemption, (for the God head is impatible.) Had he been only man, he could
never have gone through the great work of our redemption, he could never have
stood under the great weight of his Fathers wrath, and the burden of the sins
of the whole world, which were to be laid upon him. And had he been only God,
he could not have satisfied the justice of God for the sin of man, which
required that satisfaction should be made in that nature that had offended: and
what satisfaction had it been for God to satisfy himself upon himself, for
the sin and offense that was committed against him by another? There was a
necessity (therefore) that he should be both, that the Child and the Son
together; the Humanity, and the Divinity united in one might make up the person
of a fit Mediator.

1 There was a necessity that he should be man that so he might punctually
satisfy the justice of God for the sin of man, answering for sin in that
nature that had committed it. Therefore A Child.

And there was a necessity he should be God too, that by the dignity of his
person he might add value to his sufferings and obedience, to make them
meritorious and of a sufficient price to ransom the sin of thousands
Therefore A Son.

2 It was necessary he should be man, that so he might have what to offer up
to God in sacrifice for us, even a body capable of death, and blood to be shed
for remission of sin for the taking off of the sentence of death that was
gone out against us:

Therefore A Child.

And it was necessary he should be God too, that so by the power of his deity
he might support his humanity in that great conflict, and under that great
burden of his Fathers wrath, and the sin of the whole world that lay upon
him, and that in the end he might be able to rescue himself out of the hands
and power of hell, death, and the grave; and by his own power to raise up his
body from death to life; and openly to triumph over it. Therefore A Son.
Therefore both, that he might be a fit Mediator between both, neither as
God, so tendering the honor of the Deity offended, as to forget the misery of
the poor lost sons of Adam: Nor yet as man, so compassionating the misery of
the lost sons of Adam, as to neglect the honor of the Deity offended, but as
one that was partaker of both, dear to both, and both to him, he might lay an
indifferent hand upon both, and so become between both, an aequall,
indifferent, and impartial Mediator.

And here (beloved) you have the revelation of that great mystery, the mystery
of godliness, the mystery of which Saint Paul writes to Tymothy, 1 Timothy: 3.16.
(...), without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: and what is that?
2 Cor. 5.19.
God manifested in the flesh: Joh. 1.4.
God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. 2 Cor. 5. The Word made
flesh, Joh. 1. A mystery indeed, which the Angels themselves desire to look
into, 1 Pet. 1.12. (...) (says the Original) to pry into, to the very
bottom, implying, that the farther they pry into it, the farther they may, and
the more still they discover of the mystery, affording matter of admiration,
even to those Angelical spirits: And although we are not able to look so
far into this great mystery as those Angelical spirits are, nor to discover
so much of it as they do, yet let it be seriously looked into, and the
discerning spirit will easily perceive how in this high mystery all the most
glorious Attributes of Almighty God do meet together, and work together, and
in most eminent manner display themselves, how his wisdom, his power, his
justice, and his grace are all set aworke in this great design, and the result
of them all is, just the burden of the Angels song, Glory to God on high,
peace on earth beneath, Luke 2.14.
and toward men good will.

1 First his wisdom in laying the plot, in contriving the way how mankind
lost should be restored and saved, and yet he not suffer in the honor of his
truth and justice which had past against them the sentence of death, In quo die
commederis morte morieris: Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest, thou shall die the death.

2 Secondly, his power in bringing this about, being contrived, (against so
great oppositions, so many difficulties standing in the way) and effecting it
with such happy success as he has done, though it cost him dear.

3 Thirdly, his justice in punishing sin so severely, and that in his own
Son, being but an undertaker for it, and that merely out of his love and
compassion to poor souls lost and undone, that they might not perish.

4 Fourthly, his grace in being at such cost to save and to restore sinful men
his enemies, that had so highly offended him, and undone themselves. All these
may he that runs read in this mystery. There s in the 85. Psalm, and 10.
verse, a sweet passage of the Prophet David, Mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other: Behold in this mystery they
are met together, and in this glorious design they kiss each other. His mercy
such, that rather then mankind shall perish, his own and only son shall
become a Child, take their nature upon him, and in that nature suffer all, that
mankind should have suffered, and do all that he should have done, that so
all this being imputed unto him, he might have the benefit of it, that he might
be excused from suffering, and accepted in the sight of God as holy, as
innocent, and as just, as if he had never offended. And yet his justice such,
that rather then sin shall go unpunished, he would punish it in his own
son, yea and that with great severity too, he would not spare him, although
in the extremity of the conflict he begged of him that he would, he desired
that that cup might pass from him, Matthew. 26.39.
yet he would not hear him, nor excuse him, but laid on load of wrath and
justice upon him, gave him up to the bitterness of death, and locked him up in
the prison of the grave, till he had paid the uttermost farthing of our debt.

See here how in this mystery mercy and truth are met together, righteousness
and peace (in this Child and in this Son) kiss each other. Behold how the
wisdom and the power, the justice and the grace of Almighty God all work
together, and proclaim with loud voice, Glory to God on high. And these make
up the first part of the Angels song.

The second part of their song proclaims good will unto men, and declares the
unspeakable good which by this mystery they receive, and there are five great
blessings and benefits which they receive by it.

1 First, the ennobling of their natures: what an honor is this to our flesh
to be taken into union with the divine nature in the person of the Son of
God? What an exaltation is this of our nature, that the Prince of Glory should
vouchsafe to cloth him self with it, and in it to appear and converse among
the sons of men? but how much more that in it he has victoriously triumphed
over sin, death, hell, and the grave, that in it he is ascended into heaven,
and there sits on the right hand of the Father, and in that part of our
flesh which he took has taken possession of heaven for us, and (in our
names) of the heavenly mansions which he has purchased and provided for us?
Quid est homo? Lord what is man that thou should thus consider him, Psalm. 8
4.
or the son of man that thou should thus regard him? thou have made him
little lower then the Angels. Nay in this respect higher then the Angels, for
he took not upon him the nature of Angels, Heb^
but he took upon him the nature of Adam, the seed of Abraham: hence arises a
nearer affinity (consanguinity rather) between Christ and us, then is between
Christ and the Angels, he becoming flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, by
this are we made sons of God, brethren of Christ, and coheirs with him of an
Inheritance in glory. Genesis 2 23. Ephesians. 5.30
This is an high privilege, and a great benefit which we receive by this
mystery. The enobling of our natures. And

2 The second is like unto this: The enabling of our natures to gracious and
spiritual performances of holy and heavenly duties; for by virtue of this
union of our natures with his, and his with ours, th^re flows from him into us
an influence of grace, by which he (through his spirit) lives in us, and works
in us, by which he informs, actuates, and animates us, as the soul does the
body, of which it is the form; hence follows the enabling of our natures to
holy and spiritual performances; by virtue of this influence of grace, and of
Christ by his spirit living in us, and working in us, we are enabled to live
that life which is according to godliness, to mortify our corruptions, to
deny our selves with all our corrupt lusts and passions, to crucify the flesh,
to despise the world with all the corruptions that are in it through lust, to
do and to suffer for his name, above the power of nature by a higher power and
principle of grace received from above. This is a second benefit derived unto
us from this mystery.

3. The third is an interest in the Lord Jesus, and with him in all that is
his, in all his righteousness, merits, holiness, obedience, in all that he
has done and suffered for us, it is all ours, we have a right in it, for from
this union of our natures, there follows a Communion, and a common interest
between us, of all that we have or are (which is communicable) by virtue of
this union our sins are laid upon him, and he has satisfied for them, and
(on the other side) his righteousness is imputed unto us, and we are
justified by it. The Lord Jesus by infusing his spirit into us makes us 2 Pet.
1.4. Joh. 5.
partakers of the divine nature: The admirable manner by ashich the unio^
between Christ and his Church is wrought.
and again, himself taking our flesh upon him becomes partaker of our nature,
and so there grows a near union between us, he is ours, and we are his, he
in us, and we in him; as the vine with the branches, the husband with the
wife, the body with the members are one, so Christ and those that are of Christ
are one, Eph^s. 5.30.
nay (with holy reverence be it spoken) we are himself, the expression is
high, but it is his own, at least breathed from his own spirit, 1 Corin.
12.12. As the body is one, 1 Cor. 12.12.
and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are
one body, even so is CHRIST: mark this Scripture well, it contains in it a
truth more precious then the gold of Ophir: the union (should I say) nay more,
the Identity of Christ with his Church, they make but one body: For the word
Christ here in the text (as is clear by the context) does not represent unto us
Christ as a person, but is nomen collectivum, a collective name, comprehending
in it, The Identitie of Christ with the Church.
together with himself his whole Church, with every child and member of the
same, all making up but one body, even so is Christ, where (as if they were
himself) and he not himself without them, see how he vouchsafes them his
own name, Even so is Christ: so he calls them, and so he counts them Oh the
happiness and security of the poor Saints in this respect, they are rich
enough, happy enough, when he is theirs who is the fountain of all happiness,
In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom, and godliness, and from
whose fullness, as at the wellhead, they all receive grace for grace.

4 The fourth benefit derived unto us out of this mystery, is in the sympathy
that hence arises between Christ and those that belong unto him, for from
this union and mystical marriage of our natures together, there follows a
sympathy between him and us, whereby that which is done to the one, is done to
the other also, whether it be good or evil, he that receives you receives
me, Matthew. 10.40.
and he that dispiseth you despises me, says the Lord to, and of, the least
of those little ones which belong to him, Luke 10. You cannot give a cup of
cold water to a Disciple, under the name of a Disciple, but Chist thanks you
for it, as if you had given it unto him. For in as much as you did it to the
least of these little ones, you did it unto me, Matthew. 25 40.
Matthew. 25. Again, you cannot offer the least wrong or injury to any of them,
but he will tax you for it, as if you had offered it to him too. If Saul be
traveling to Damascus with commission to persecute the members, the head
looks down from heaven and complains (...) Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? Act. 9. not mine, but me, because me in mine, thou woundest me through
their sides. Oh that this sympathy were reciprocal in us too, that the same
mind were in us toward Christ Jesus, which is in him toward us, that we could
be sensible of the wrong, and dishonor that is done unto him daily, as if it
were done immediately unto our selves, so it was with the holy Prophet. The
rebukes of them that fell upon thee fell upon me And, Psalm. 69 9.
do not I hate them that hate thee? even as if they were mine enemies? Yes,
Psalm. 139.21.
I bear him witness he did, and for those that loved and feared the Lord,
he loved them as well, and that eonomine, and qua tales, for that very cause,
and in that respect, because they did love, Psalm 16.3.
and fear the Lord. Oh that we had that witness within our selve that we did
regard the cause of God, and the honor of God as this Prophet did, and that
we did show our love to God, by taking to heart the wrongs and dishonours that
are daily done unto him (in his Church, his Children, his Cause, his
Ordinances, his Names, his Sabbaths, in all thar is dear unto him) as if it
were done unto our selves, the Lord would surely take it very well at our
hands, and reward that pious affection sevenfold into our bosoms.

5 Lastly, here is a ground of reverent boldness, and child-like confidence in
our approaches to the throne of Grace, we can not draw near to God, nor look
upon him in his Majesty, but we shall be oppressed by his glory (No man can
see me and live) but to God incarnate, Exodus 33 20.
to God manifested in the flesh, we may, and live: we cannot look upon the
body of the Sun in his brightness, but it will hurt our eyes to behold it,
but we may look upon it in the water without danger: behold Christ in the
flesh is the Charactet of the Glory of the Father, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his person: through him we may behold him, through
him we have access unto him; and if we dare not be too bold with the Son,
yet let us look upon the Child, inviting us to the throne of grace, to partake
of the plenty of his Fathers Court.

Behold what a treasury of Grace and Glory is here contained in this mystery,
what precious privileges we receive by it! what wonderful fruits, and effects
are brought forth by this wonderful design, all suitable to the greatness of
the means, by which they were wrought, and the high honor and dignity of the
persons which acted in it: no less then the wisdom of the whole Trinity, was
set aworke in laying the plot, and contriving this great business, no worse
then the Son of God himself in his own person, employed in the executing of
it, and where there was such a Council Table to deliberate and to resolve, and
such a person to execute, needs must the effects of both be high and glorious,
suitable to the honor, greatness, wisdom, and power of the high persons
exercised in the producing of them, and so (you see) they are.

LLet no man then for ever hereafter reproach the Christian religion, with the
meannesse, Conclusio.
or despicablenesse of him that was the founder of it. Let no man object unto
us the humanity, nor the humility of our Mediator, when we see for what
glorious purposes he was content to stoop so low, and what precious grace he
has obtained and purchased unto his Church in so doing.

Let not the Jewe stumble at the Cross of Christ, by telling us that we
believe in a crucified God: nor let the Atheist stumble at the Cradle of Christ
by telling us we embrace a Child for our God. Nestorius his Blasphemy.
Nor let Nestorius reproach us with our bimestris aut trimestris Deus, a God of
two or three months old, as he blaspemously calls him. If the Child seem
little in your eyes behold the Son, if the Cradle offend you, behold the
Star, if the Cross offend you, behold the Heavens without a Sun, and the
Stars withold their shining at the spectacle. And be not faithless but
believe, and you shall see greater things then these. You shall see this Son
of man coming in the clouds, Matthew 25.
with power and great glory. Now you see him in the Cradle, then you shall see
him in a fiery Chariot, riding upon the wings of the wind: now he came in
Virgin, then he shall come in Libra, with a balance in one hand to weigh the
actions of the sons of men, and a two edged sword in the other, to cut them
off, and to be avenged on his enemies, now he came attended with a few
fishermen, and others of the meaner sort that followed him: but then he shall
come attended with thousands and thousands of thousands of Angels, and
Archangels: now he came in humility, then he shall come in glory; now he came
to be judged, but then he shall come to judge both quick and dead, yea to judge
even them that judged him: and the soldiers shall look upon him whom they
have pierced; Zach: 11.
and the Jew shall look upon him whom they have rejected, and the Arrians,
Eunomians, Ebionites, Corinthians, Photinians, Socinians, and Mohomitans, shall
look upon him whom they have denied, and despised, and shall be confounded,
when they shall see him now armed with power and authority, to be avenged on
them for their contempts, and injuries done to him and his for his sake: And
those that have confessed him, shall say unto them, by way of reproach and
insultation, Behold ye despisers and wonder, and perish. Act. 13.41. Luk:
19.27.
And the King shall say unto them, as sometimes to those Rebels in the Gospel,
Those that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before my face.

Psalm. 2.12.
Oh then kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so ye perish, embrace the Child
in the arms of your faith, and best affections, Ambrose.
that so hereafter he may embrace you in the arms of his mercy, Infans est,
noli timere; filius, noli spernere: Behold he is a Child, that you should not
be afraid to draw near unto him; and a Son, that you may not despise him.
Let the meditation of the former raise in you hope and confidence, and of the
latter beget in you fear and reverence, and both together that saving comfort,
sound joy, and settled peace, that flows from your reconciliation with God,
and your adoption to the honor to become the Sons of God, brethren to this
Child, and coheires with this Son, of an inheritance in glory, the very end
of this his Childhood, and of this his Sonship; the very end why he was borne
to us, and given for us. Lord let him have his end in us, that we may have our
fruit in him, even the end of our hopes; the salvation of our souls in bliss,
and glory that never shall have end. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
COMFORT FROM THE CRADLE AS WELL AS from the Cross of CHRIST. The second
SERMON.
ESAIAH 9.6. Unto us a Child is borne,
Unto us a Son is given.

I Have given you an account of the first general part of the Text inquiring
of the person, who and what he is of whom the Prophet speaks this as he is
here represented to us under the names and notions of A Child, A Son,
Transitio.
and there in I have discovered unto you the stupendous mystery which lies
coucht under these two words, and is clearly made out from them, and that is
t^^ ^w^ really distinguished natures, united in the on^ individed person of our
Mediator, the Deity and the Humanity of the Son of God, both made good not
only out of the text, but all along throughout the whole course of his life,
from his birth to his baptism, from his baptism to his death as in the
several passages of them all I have observed: In his birth, you had A Cradle
for the Child, and a Star for the Son: In his Baptism, water for the
Child, and a voice from Heaven for the Son, In his passion A Cross, and A
Crown of thorns, nails, and a spear, scourgings, and whippings, and stripes
for the Child: and thundrings and darkness, and an earthquake, and rocks
cleaving in sunder, and graves opening, and the veyle of the Temple rent for
the Son, and generally throughout the whole course of his life in the
several eminent passages of it you saw the glory of the Lord appearing in the
cloud, infallible evidences of the Deity, breaking out through the cloud and
veil of his flesh. I showed you the reasons of all these wonders, they were
wonderful things that he was to do, and therefore not to be transacted but by
wonderful means, and by a wonderful person, even by him whose name is called
VVonderfull: And I showed you the friuts issuing out of them all. Glory to God
on high, peace on earth below, and toward men good will. I am now to examine
the second general proposed, Luke 2.
wherein we are to consider, what it is which is here affirmed of this Child,
and of this Son, and that is laid down in two words more Is borne, Is given.
The Child is borne, but the Son is given.

First, The Child is borne.

That is was necessary that our Mediator should be made man it is confessed, and
we have showed the reasons of it: but why A Child? why borne of a woman? why to
be conceived in the womb? this is much more, and surely there is more of the
mystery in it, which yet we have not discovered when the first Adam was created
he was made A man, not A child; created, not begotten; A man in full strength
and perfection of life, and so was excused all the impotencies and
imperfections of Childhood and infancy. And when the second Adam came to
repair, and to restore what he had lost, was it not reasonable, and agreeable
to his type that he should be made a man too in perfect state, stature, and
perfection of life as the first was, and so have been abated all those parts
of his sufferings, and degrees of his humiliation, which in the womb, and from
the womb in his childhood and infancy he past through, must he needs become A
Child, be conceived in the womb, and borne? what was the reason of this?

Yes surely there was reason for it, Reasons why it was necessary Christ should
not only be made man but borne a Child.
nay there was a necessity of it, it must needs be so, and I will give you in
three Reason for it.

1 The first concerns the posterity of Adam in general.

2 The second concerns the daughters of Eve more specially.

3 And the the third concerns the infants that are borne of them, and issue
from them both.

1 First in respect of the posterity of Adam in general, it was necessary that
our Mediator should become a Child, be conceived in the womb, and borne.
Psalm. 51.
That he might begin the cure of our disease where our disease it self begins,
and that is in the very womb. Behold (says the Prophet David,) I was
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51. Our blessed Lord becoming
our Mediator, and undertaking to satisfy the justice of God for this sin,
and to cure us of so grievous a disease that lays hold on us in the very womb
is feign to descend into the womb of a daughter of Eve, there to take our
nature upon him and there to be conceived though without sin, and of her to
be borne, but without iniquity, a pure birth that so by the purity of his
humane nature imputed unto us the impurity of ours may be cured and cleansed,
and that by his Original righteousness, our original sin may be done away.
There is beloved if you mark it, A method observed by the second Adam in
curing the evils we receive from the first.
and I pray do, for it is well worth your marking, and much comfort shall you
reap by it when you apprehend it aright) There is I say A method observed by
the second Adam in curing the evils which we have received from the first, it
is a methodicall cure, wherein the second Adam has trac't the first step, by
step, and where ever he saw that he had wounded us, he provided to heal us,
and prepared for us a remedy proportionable to our malady a salve suitable to
the sore and proper for the cure of it. To show you this a little more plainly.

There are three things wherein the first Adam has deadly and desperately
wounded his posterity.



fac hoc and vives, do this and thou shall live, and so breaking the
Commandment in the mandatory part of it, be forfeited to himself and his, all
that life, and happiness which upon the condition of obedience was made over
to him and them.

minatory part of it, which said, In quo die comederis morte morieris, in the
day that thou eatest thou shall die the death and so made us liable to all the
miseries of this life, and of that which is to come. By his privative
disobedience breaking the holy Commandment, in the mandatory part of it he
forfeited to himself and us the inheritance of Paradise, our right and title
to the Kingdom of Heaven, but by his positive disobedience, transgressing the
holy Law and Commandment in the minatory part of it, he has plunged us all
into the lowest hell. Now for the relieving of us in all these desperate evils,
was our Lord feign to provide for us suitable remedies, and to apply each of
them to that malady for the cure whereof, it was most proper, and so he did,
though they cost him dear. For,

1 First for the cure of our Original sin he applies his Original
righteousness, that he may punctually satisfy the justice of God for the
depravation of our natures, the sin wherein we are conceived and borne,
himself is conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary, that he
may begin the cure of our disease, where our disease begins, in the very womb,
even thither is he content to descend, and there to take our nature upon him,
that in his person our natures might be sanctified, and our birth-sinne cured
and done away.

2 Secondly, for relieving of us in the second of these evils, our failing in
performance of the condition of the Covenant of works he applies unto us his
active obedience, by which he fulfilled the Law for us in every part and
particle of it in the days of his flesh, that so by this his obedience imputed
unto us he might punctually satisfy the Justice of God for all our failings,
and sins of omission, and so restore us again to our right and title to the
Kingdom of heaven our forfeited inheritance.

3 And for the relieving of us in the third, the transgression of the Law and
holy Commandment in the minatory part, by actual sins and positive
disobedience he applies unto us his passive obedience, himself bearing our
sins in his body upon the tree, and by his death taking off from us that
sentence of death that was gone out against us: By this his passive obedience
he has satisfied the law in the minatory part of it, and by his active in the
mandatory. by his passive obedience he has satisfied the justice of God for
all our sins of Commission, and by his active for all our failings and our sins
of omission, by his passive obedience he has freed us A poena sensus, from the
punishment of pain, and by his active A poena damni, from the punishment of
loss, by his passive obedience he has rescued us out of the jaws of hell,
and by his active he has opened unto us the gate of heaven, his passive
obedience was satisfactory, and his active meritorious: And thus by these three
parts of his obedience, the obedience of his birth, the obedience of his life,
and the obedience of his death, by the obedience of his birth in his
incarnation, of his life in his holy conversation, and of his death in his
passion, he has fulfilled for us all righteousness, he is become unto us A
perfect Saviomr, and has wrought out for us plentiful redemption. Had the
son of God come down from Heaven to earth, and here been made man for us,
and taken our nature upon him in a body created, as Adams was, and in that body
lived amongst us as long as he did, and during all that time by his most holy
conversation (perfectly fulfilled the Law for us, and performed the condition
of the Covenant of works in our behalf, yet he had not wrought out for us
plentiful redemption, he had by this his active obedience, only fulfilled the
Law in the mandatory part of it, and so satisfied the justice of God for our
sins of omission, but still he had left us open to the justice and wrath of
God for our sins of Commission, and for our transgressions of the law in the
minatory part of it, and so left us to the curse of it, even death and
damnation. Had he not only so fulfilled the law for us by his active
obedience in the days of his life, but in the end thereof laid down his life
for us, and shed his blood for the ransom of our souls, yet he had not
wrought out for us plentiful redemption, he had indeed by this his passive
obedience satisfied the justice of God for all our sins of commission too,
and by fulfilling the Law in the minatory part of it, cleared us of all our
transgressions committed against it, but still he had left us indebted unto
God, and in danger of his wrath and justice for the sin of our nature, our
radical pravitie, and original corruption in which we are conceived and
borne, but that he might clear us of this sin also and so become unto us a
perfect Savior and work out for us Plentiful redemption, it was necessary
that he should be incarnate that in the very womb he should take our nature
upon him, and be borne of a woman, without sin, that so by the purity of his
humane nature imputed unto us, the impurity of ours might be cured, and that in
his person, our natures might be sanctified in the womb, and from the womb.

And so by grace derived from these three parts in the obedience of the second
Adam we are perfectly cured of all the evil we received from the first, by
the merit of his incarnation in his holy birth by his active obedience in his
holy life, and of his passive obedience in his bitter death and passion he
has, fulfilled for us all righteousness, he is become unto us a perfect
Savior, and has wrought out for us plentiful redemption. And this was the
first reason why it was necessary that our Mediator should not only be made
man, but borne a child.

The second reason of this part and passage in the obedience of our Mediator,
and of this so low degree of his humiliation, respects the Woman, more
especially even Eve with all her daughters, for their sakes more peculiarly,
and unto them, and of them was he borne, that by his birth he might repair
them in a loss, and recover them out of a danger into which beyond and above
the man they had cast themselves by being first in the transgression.

If you heedfully observe the story of the fall compared with other Scriptures
commenting upon it, you will find it to be so: Genesis 3.
if you read but the process made against her, and the doom pronounced upon
her at the day of her trial, you will find a heavier charge against her, and
a greater burden laid upon her, then upon Adam was laid: but waving that, the
Scripture upon which this reason is grounded is that famous place of St Paul to
Timothy, 1. Tim. 2.16. verse. 1.2.16.
Yet nevertheless through childbearing she shall be savd if they continue in
Faith and Charity with holiness and sobroetie, which because it is a very
intricate Scripture one of those which are hard to be understood, and so
generally mistaken by most men, so few have attained to the true meaning of it,
I will take some pains to examine it, and to find; it out both for my own and
others satisfaction which that I may do, I must entreat you to look back with
me to 2. or 3. verses going before, there you shall find the Apostle had laid
2 heavy yokes upon her, Silence and Subjection, V. 11. And that you may know
what silence he means, in the next verse he interprets himself and tells you
he means silence as it is put in opposition to teaching, or public preaching.
I permit not a woman to teach (though I see not but by the grounds upon which
most men take upon them to teach now adays she has as good a license to teach
as any of them all, and that is (merely the inward calling) or at least a
conceit of it, but St Paul that had reason to know their gifts of ability
well enough, and their desire to exercise them in the Church yet directly
silences them as to this intent, she that preached such false doctrine to her
husband as whereby she had undone us all, he thinks it fit she should be
silence't from ever preaching more. I permit not a woman to teach, but let her
be silent. 2ly Subjection I permit not the woman to usurp authority over the
man, in the same verse, if she do it is usurpation, she has no right so to
do. Therefore let her be silent, and let her be subject, v. 11.12. But verse
14. the Apostle shows the reason why the Lord laid this heavy burden upon her,
and that was the deepnesse of her guilt in the matter of the first and great
transgression. For Adam was not in the transgression, but Eve being deceived
was in the transgression, that is comparatively nothing so deeply as she was,
he was in it but as accessory she was the principal, for first she seduced
him and so became an Agent for Satan to prevail with her husband to do that
which himself was confident he could never have persuaded him too. 2ly, She
was first in the transgression. A grievous aggravation, if rightly considered,
for the meaning of it is she was first in the transgressio^, not only because
she first gave her consent to Satan tempting her, nor because she tempted her
husband to do the like, who of himself had no such thoughts nor desires that
we read of till she suggested them, but she was first in the transgression,
because she did first actually eat of the forbidden fruit without the consent
of her hurband, or knowledge either, for sure enough the iubtle Serpent watched
the advantage of such an opportunity to attempt her in the absence of her
husband whom he might well imagine would have prevented her transgression and
given her better counsel, and what a grievous error was this in her to
adventure upon such a fact of so infinite consequence as this was upon which
depended the everlasting weal or woe of her self and all her posterity after
her; without the knowledge or consent of her husband, who might have given her
better counsel, and whose advise in all reason she should have desired, but
she staid not for that she hearkened to the Serpent promising high things unto
her to ensue upon her eating and she believed him, and so without ever
acquainting him with it, she eat of it, she was first in the transgression,
this as it was the aggravation of her sin so it might be some extenuation to
Adams sin, who did therein but second what she had done before, for by her
eating, the Covenant was broken, the law transgressed, and though Adam had not
eaten at all yet she had done enough to undo us all at least her self and all
her daughters which were involved in the transgression with her and with whom
they all stood and fell;

Upon these aggravations the Lord does not only lay upon her these burdens
before mentioned, but the Apostle in this Text which I have under hand
intimates a greater danger, which she had cast her self into then all they
amount unto, even into danher of perishing everlastingly, Eve by her
transgresson cast all her daughters into far greater danger then Adam did his
Sons.
what else means this adversative here in the Text nevertheless.
Nevertheless (through childbearing she shall be saved. It shows plainly that
if God had not found out a remedy for her, if God of his goodness had not
provided a means whereby she might be relieved in this dangerous case she
could not have been saved.

Hence has arisen the question whether Eve were saved or no, and from that
another touching the state of all her sex for her sake, the opening of this
Text shall clear them both.

That both Adam and Eve our first parents were saved, we nothing doubt, yea
Origin and ^^^iphanius have recorded it that after Adam had finished his days
on earth, and was returned to his dust from whence he was taken, he was buried
in mount Calvary in the very place whereabout 4000 years after the Cross was
set on which Christ the second Adam was crucified. A wonderful providence (if
true) Vt primus virtutem sanguinis Christi sentiret, Origin.
qui primus peccati author fuerit, that he might first taste the power and
virtue of Christ's blood which was first cause of shedding it and what fitter
objects for the Lord Jesus on which to show his power to save, Epiphan.
then those very persons on whom Satan had used all his skill, and power to
destroy. But the question is not so much whether they were saved, as how, and
this not so much of the Man as of the Woman for the reasons before mentioned.
And the Apostle tells you in this Text, how, he says it shall be by
Childbearing. Yet nevertheless by or through Childbearing she shall be saved.

But what childbearing he here means is still the Quaere,

The most Authors that I have consulted in this matter (and I have consulted
not a few) concieve it to be understood of these two things.

1 Of the sore pain and travail which women endure in chid-bearing, which
being laid upon them as a punishment for this their transgression by enduring
it with patience in the acknowledgment of their offense that brought it upon
them they make some amends for that which they had done amiss, and
satisfaction for their transgression, so Cornelius a Lapide and those of his
strain.

2ly, Others extend it not only to bearing of children, but especially to
breeding up of Children in the fear of God, and nurture of the Lord, because
in the next words it is said ( if they continue in faith and love with holiness,
and sobriety, which they understand as required of the Children which they
bear bred up in these gracious ways by their care, and so by this means they
shall be saved; So Danaeus and others both equally mistaken, neither in the one
nor in the other have they hit the Apostles meaning, 1. Tim. 16. interpreted
and cleared.
examine it a little and you shall see whether they have or no.

For if the extraordinary pains which women endure be a kind of amends, and
satisfaction for their extraordinary transgression, then what do we by this
doctrine but establish a Purgatory, and set out a way of satisfying for sin and
meriting life and salvation by doing and suffering? Moreover, if child bearing
in this sense be the sovereign remedy of recovering that sex out of the
danger they have brought upon themselves by that great transgression and the
means whereby they shall be saved, what shall become of the barren womb that
bears not, or of maidens that know not man? Surely upon this account the case
of Harlots, and Strumpets were better then theirs; but to find out the
Apostles meaning, here we must find out another childbearing, such as all the
daughters of Eve have a share in, such as in which the barren as well as the
bearing womb, the maiden that never knew man as well as the married wife has
an equal interest.

This place therefore may be best expounded by another place of the same
Apostles. Gal. 3:16.
Gal. 3. Where the Apostle discoursing of the promise of God to Abraham. Genesis
22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, excellently
observes: This is not spoken to his seeds as of many, but as of one unto thy
seed which is Christ: By the like analogy, as Paul here interprets Moses, so
will I interpret Paul, he says not in this place the woman shall be saved by
bearing of Children as speaking of many, but (...): through her childbirth, or
childbearing as meaning one, which one is Christ the very Child in my Text,
the Child Jesus.

But if this be so why was not the mentioning of the Child enough, by the Child
she shall be saved, It is usual with the Hebrews to put the abstract for the
concrete, Childbearing for the Child-borne, or the child which she should bear
what need any mention of the bearing of it by Childbearing? she shall be
saved?

Yes there is something in that too, there is an emphasis in that, even by the
bearing of the Child does the woman gain not only honor and reputatation
above the man, but reparation in her loss and comfort after her fall suitable
to the danger she had fallen into* by this her Childbirth she receives more
grace from him, and has a nearer relation to him and interest in the Savior
of the world then the man has, and this the Scripture takes special notice
of, and often mentions for her consolation. Genesis 3.15. Semen mulieris, the seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head, not so of the man, he did not so
much as share with her in this honor. Gal. 4.4. In the fullness of time God
sent his Son made of a woman, not of a man, the first woman was made of a
man, now by a contrary way of generation, this man, this blessed Child in whom
all the nations of the earth are blessed, was made of a woman, even of one of
the daughters of Eve, the Virgin Mary: so that as in the first Eve conceiving
sin all the whole sex and race of her daughters miscarried, so in the second
Eve (as I may say) conceiving in her womb, and bearing in her body the Savior
of the world, sA the first Eve conceiving sin brought forth death, So the
second Eve conceiving the Savior brought forth life.
they are all repar'd, and restored again. As she (by being first in the
transgression, cast all her daughters into a more desperate condition then Adam
did his sons, so God found out a more sovereign remedy for her by which she
receives more grace from Christ, and challenges a nearer relation to and
interest in the Savior of the world then he can claim: from her substance,
did he take that flesh which he offered up in sacrifice to God for us, from
her body did he take that blood which he shed for the redemption of the world,
he could truly call a woman his mother, but no man living his Father, as Adam
once said to Eve, Thou art flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone, so could the
second Eve, in whom all the daughters of the first are repaired and restored,
say to to the Savior of the world, Thou art flesh of my flesh, and bone of my
bone, unto all the which relations the man is a stranger, and shares not with
her in the honor of them.

See how the goodness of God for the comfort of that sex against this their
grievous fall has provided a remedy suitable to their malady, a measure of
consolation answerable to their dejection, a ground of hope agreeable to their
fears and doubts, a reparation proportionable to their loss, if they were
first in the transgression, they are likewise first in being isntrumental in
the means of our salvation if they were deepest in the guilt of the
prevarication they were fairest for the means of their reparation. Through
Childbearing she shall be saved.

For this cause was this child the seed the woman. Genesis 3.15. Made of a Woman,
Gai. 4, 4. Borne of a Woman, Math. 1. and that sex may say after a more
peculiar manner then the man may, Unto us, yea of us, and for us, this Child is
borne.

That other condition which follows in this Text, If they continue in faith,
and love with holiness, and sobriety, is not to be referred to the children
that are to be borne of the Woman, but to the woman her self, upon whom these
duties are especially charged as cautions or preservatives to keep her from
ever falling into the like sin again, as you shall hear anon: but that they
are not to be understood here as charged upon her children is clear by this,
that they are charged as conditions upon which she is to be saved, now if to
this intent the conditions here mentioned be charged upon the^ then by this
doctrine may Parents be saved by the holiness and righteousness of their
children which is clean contrary to the exact justice of God revealed in
Scripture which says iustus sua fide vivet, the just shall live by his own
faith.

Besides we have known many gracious women which have done their best in this
way to bring up their children in faith, and love, in holiness and sobriety,
which yet have not proved such, and contrariwise we could instance in some
carnal, lewd, and ungodly women, whose children have proved gracious
continuing in faith with love, etc. And yet neither has the graciousnesse of
these profited, nor the gracelesnesse of the other prejudic't to the saving or
not saving of their mothers that bare them, therefore this charge in this place
referres not to the children that are borne but to the woman that bears them.

All the difficulty will be how we shall reconcile this seeming incongruity
between the 2 pronouns she and they, she shall be saved if they continue,
how can these two in grammatical construction be referred to the same as
understood of the same person or persons?

For satisfying of this doubt consider these three things.

1 First diverse Greek copies have it in the singular number, so Musculas, and
so Theophilact reads it so Danaeus, and others, si permanserit, if she
continue, not they, and if that reading be current there is no farther question
at all in the matter.

2 But be it so, that the latter Pronoune and Verb be of the plural number,
it is usual with the Hebrews to join singulars and pluralls together, (...).
Dii creavit in which is the mystery of the Trinity.
in the two very first words of the holy Bible, you have such an expression.

3 But that which is satisfactory beyond exception is this that the first
pronoune she, though it be of the singular number, yet is of plural
signification, nomen multitudinis, a name of multitude, such as Turba ruunt,
collectivum a collective pronounce, comprehending in it not only Eve, but all
woman kind, all her whole sex and race descended from her, and so is
aequivalent and of as large extent as they in the next word, she, that is Eve
with all her daughters, all her sex, all the whole race of womankind descended
from her shall be saved, If they continue in the faith and love, with holiness
and sobriety. And that this charge concerns the woman more peculiarly it
further appears by the suitablenes of it to the sin by which she had
transgrest, the four duties here enjoined being directly opposite to the four
sins by which in her first and great transgression she had offended, her
first sin was unbelief, God had said in the day that she did eat of that
fruit, she should dye, the Devil told her she should not dye at all, and she
believes him rather then God, she was an unbelieving soul, therefore the first
duty charged upon her is Faith, if they continue in faith, the 2d fin was in
violating the law of love which she owed both to God and to her husband, she
slighted them both and adhered to the Serpent as her better friend, and
therefore the next duty charged upon her is Love, if she continue in love. Her
third sin was against the rules of holiness, she defiled her self by
touching and tasting that which being forbidden her, was to her polluted, and
so by her grievous sin drew not only upon her self, but upon all hers,
corruption of nature, which like the leprosy of Gehazi, cleaves to them and
their posterity for ever: and therefore the third duty enjoynd and charged upon
her is holiness. Lastly her fourth sin was intemperance, in that all the
variety of the fruits in the Paradise of God which he had so graciously and
bountifully allowd her, not only for necessity but for delight too, yet would
not serve her turn, but whereas there were but two trees reserved) her
luxurious appetite must needs glut it self with them too, and therefore the
fourth duty charged upon her is temperance or sobriety if they continue in
faith and love with holiness and sobrietee, by all which duties directly
opposite to the sins whereby she had transgrest, the Apostle does not only put
them in mind of those sins, that in remembrance of them they may be humbled
and cautioned against the like sins hereafter: but also admonishes them by
the studious and careful practice of the contrary duties to make amends for
their former folly, and to take a holy revenge of themselves for their past
error whereby they had so grievously offended.

And this is the second reason enforcing the necessity of the childbirth in
my Text in reference to the woman and all women kind, I have been something
large in opening this Scripture upon which this reason is grounded in regard of
the difficulty of it, and for justifying this interpretation and clearing it of
those obje and ions which might seem to question it, wherein I hope I have
given you some reasonable satisfaction.

3. The third reason for which it was necessary this child should be borne
respects infants, and children more peculiarly: for infants sakes did he become
an infant, for childrens sakes was he content become a child; that by his
birth he might merit for them their New Birth, he was borne, that they might
be borne again. That from his very conception, and incarnation they might draw
virtue, and derive grace to their spiritual regeneration, and in his person
their natures might be sanctified in the very womb: That in him the Lord might
become not only the God of believers, but of their seed also, that the promise
made to the^, and to their children by this means might be made good, and they
made capable of receiving it, though as yet they knew him not, nor their right
hand from their left. And this part of his humiliation (as for this end it was
most necessary, so) for our comfort it was not obscurely foreshewed and preached
to the world by the Prophets of old. In the 49. of Genesis, and the 10. verse,
we have a famous and ancient prophecy to this purpose. The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet till Shiloh come. It
is clear by all the circumstances in the Text, and by the fulfilling of the
prophecy since (which is the best interpretation of it) that by this Shiloh is
meant none other but the Messiah. Jesus Christ the Savior of the world, but
why Shiloh, rather then the Messiah, Emanuel, or any other of his names by
which he is in scripture made known unto us, why does the Patriarch prophecy
of him under so strange a name? surely there is a mystery in it, and if you
consult the Hebrew it will give you some light to the finding of it out. This
word (...) with very little alteration either in sense or sound refers to a
word, (...) Shiliah.
which in the original signifies that part in a childbearing woman which is
called secundina, the Afterbirth, that filme which contains the Child in the
womde after it is conceived, and wherein it is nourished by the navell until
it be ripened for the birth, so that in this expression there is a double
figure; first by a Metonimy, naming the vessel containing for that which is
contained in it, by Shiloh here is signified a man child (...) a son and then
by a synecdoche using a word more general for that which is more particular
and eminent in that kind, by this child is meant none other but the holy
Child Jesus, the Christ, the Messiah that was to come in whom this prophecy
was evidently fulfilled. This is that then which in this prophecy is so
remarkable, and speaks home to out purpose, That this holy Prophet, and
Patriarch prophesiing of this great Prince the Messiah and preaching to the
world the Savior thereof, he does not show you Christ upon the Cross
suffering for our sins, nor Christ in the pulpit preaching to the world the
doctrine of salvation; nor Christ working miracles, going about and doing good,
though all these were necessary parts of his, obedience and performances of the
office of his Mediatorship respectively, but he prophesies of Christ in
Shiloh, he points at Christ in Shiloh, he sends you to Christ in Shiloh to
Christ in the womb, to Christ in his incarnation, to Christ in his conception,
that you may know that you derive grace and virtue, not only from Christ
crucified, but from Christ borne and incarnate, not onley from his death, but
from his birth too, not only from his blood which he shed for you, but even
from the holy seed of which his body was formed for you not only from the
Cross of Christ, but even from his cradle too, not only from his passion and
crucifixion, but from his conception, and incarnation. Hence you shall observe
that the holy penmen of our blessed Lords life and death, are as careful and
punctual in giving you an account of his conception, and incarnation, as of
his death and passion, consult but the beginning of St Mathews Gospel for the
one, and of St Lukes for the other, and you shall find it to be so. And the
Apostolical Creed teaches you and tells you, that it is not sufficient that
you know and believe that he was crucified for you under Pontius Pilate, but
also that he was conceived for you by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary. That the Infants even as yet unborne may have cause to praise him who out
of a tender regard to them was content to take their nature and infirmities
upon him in the womb, that he might cure them: What once the Lord by way of
reproach objected against his unthankful people. Ezekiel. 16. that may he by way
of magnifying his compassion toward these little ones most suitably apply to
them word for word, ver. 3. Thy Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an
Hittite.

Verse. 4. And in thy nativitie when thou wast borne, thy navill was not cut,
thou wast not washed with water to soften thee, thou wast not salted with salt,
nor swadled with clothes.

5 None eye pitied thee to do any of these unto thee for to have compassion
upon thee, but thou wast cast out in the open field to the contempt of thy
person in the day that thou wast borne.

6 And when I passed by thee I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, And I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood I said thou shall live.

8 Now when I passed by thee, I had compassion on thee I spread my skirt over
thee, and covered thy nakedness.

9 I washed thee with water, yea I washed away thy blood frous thee, I
anointed thee with oil, and I clothed thee, etc.

This was their case, and this was their cure, and such was his love to them
and his compassion on them, that to the end he might effect it, he is content
not only to be made man but to become a child too for their sakes. And this is
the third Reason why. Unto us, and unto them this Child is borne.

The Uses.
ANd now whar use shall we make of this Meditation, surely very great, It is of
great use in the Church of God, well-nigh all the errors that men have run
into concerning Infants have proceeded from the ignorance of this Gospel
truth, namely of the grace and virtue which we derive and receive from this
part in the obedience of Christ, and degree of his humiliation, his conception,
and incarnation.

1 First therefore it is of use for satisfaction of doubtful minds in that
Quaere which these times have made more questionable then ever (as indeed they
have done all the other ordinances in the Church of Christ) concerning the
lawfulnes of the baptizing of Infants? Who will doubt it when he is
sufficiently informed what grace and virtue they receive from the incarnation,
The ground of baptizing Infants.
and birth of the holy Child Jesus? And that the very end why he became a
Child and was conceived in the womb, was to merit it for them? Are they capable
of corruption conveyed unto them from the first Adam, in their very conception,
before they have done good or evil, and are they not capable of the grace
merited for them and derived unto them from the second until they come to be
of 14. or 15. years of age? or if they be why should we deny unto them the
seal of that covenant the grace whereof we do not deny them? Nay upon this
ground I dare affirm that if it were possible, it were lawful to baptize a
child in the very womb.

Secondly, the knowledge of this truth is of use for confutation of the
uncharitable doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning infants dying without
baptism, The state of children dying without baptism.
which cruelly condemns all such (though not to the lowest hell) yet to a
place belonging to it which they call Limbus infantum, the Limbus of Infants, a
hard sentence, some of the Fathers likewise of better repute in the Church,
have puzzeld themselves and been mistaken in this point, some of them
condemning infants thus dying ad poenam damni, though excusing them from Poena
sensus, that is, depriving them of the happiness and joys of heaven, though
not condemning them to the pains of Hell St Augustine lays upon them poenam
mitissimam, some most gentle punishment, but what that is dares not determine,
Prudentius goes a middle way between both, the happiness of heaven he will
not allow them, nor dares he condemn them to the pains of hell, but has
found out for them a third place between both these, and that is the new
heaven, and the new earth which shall be created when these shall be dissolved,
thus have they wandered in their own fancies, and framd to themselves diverse
conceits in their own imaginations concerning these little ones, but all
without a guide, and without a ground, and all this because all this while they
saw not this little one herein my Text, or at least considered not the maine
reason why he became such a one, nor the virtue and the grace which these
little ones they speak of derive from him, and in particular from this degree
of his humiliation, his conception, and incarnation, as the cure of their
original sin and sanctification of their natures, their regeneration and new
birth, all which (had means and opportunity for it been afforded) should and
ought in the laver of regeneration to have been sealed up unto them, in the
want of which and not the contempt of it, let us know for our comfort that the
grace of Almighty God is not so tied to his outward ordinance, as that he may
not and often does save without it, and may when he please dispense with the
absence or omission of it, though we may not, Baptismus signum est non causa
salutis
Contempsisse nefas, sed caruisse minus.


Baptism is the sign, but not the cause of salvation, it is the contempt, not
the want of it that is so dangerous.

Thirdly, it is of use for consolation to tenderhearted parents mourning over
their children either stilborne, Of Children still borne.
or called out of the world before they were washed in the Laver of
regeneration: Let them not give them for lost, nor mourn for them as men
without hope when they see the grace derived from the incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ takes hold of them in the very womb, and reaches to their very
conception.

5. Lastly, it is of use for reprehension of the ignorance and
uncharitableness of some men and women in the base opinion they have
entertained of abortive births, esteeming no more nor better of the^ then of so
much earth diggd out of the ground, yea of so much carrion and therefore have
denied them Christian burial, or any other ordinary respect, Of abortive
births.
which if not in Christianity, yet at least in Humanity were due to the
children of Adam. Let such know that even those abortives if they were once
formed and quickened in the womb, and had that soul infused into them, whereby
they were distinguished from vegetatives and sensitives, they were capable of
that grace which in his conception this child in my Text has merited for them.
It is worth our observation to consider in what terms the Covenant runs. I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed: not of thy offspring, nor of thy
posterity, nor of thy children, but of thy Seed, intimating that even in the
womb as soon as they have a being, while they are but yet as seed the Lord
takes them into Covenant with him and ownes them for his own.

These are the benefits which we reap by the birth of this blessed Child, these
the fruits and advantages accrewing to the Church by this part of his
obedience, this degree of his humiliation, his incarnation. And it shall be our
wisdom to learn, and much for our comfort, distinctly to know Christ borne,
Christ crucified, Christ dead, Christ raised, Christ ascended, Christ
glorified, Christ in all the parts of his obedience, and degrees of his
humiliation, and exaltation, and to discern what particular grace, and comfort
each part and degree in it does peculiarly afford, and to apply it to that part
of our disease and spiritual defect in our souls for the cure whereof it is
most proper. As there is no wou^d given unto us by the disobedience of the
first Adam, but there is found in the obedience of the second a cure proper for
it, this when you are able to discover and sutably to apply then have you
learned Christ crucified indeed, when you can see in his original
righteousness, the cure of your original sin, in his active obedience, your
fulfilling of the law in the precept or mandatory part of it, in his passive
obedience your satisfaction of the law in the curse or minatory part of it,
when you can see in his apprehension your dismission, in his condemnation, your
absolution, in his stripes, your healing, in his death, your life in his
resurrection and ascension, your glorification, all these are impli'd in the
parallel between the two Adams, Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, when you
are able to compare these two together, and to suit the parallel in all the
parts of it, As and so, the^ have you learned Christ crucified aright, It is
something to know Christ crucified in gross, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, this is something it gives the Fisith of adherence, but
when you are able to know this more distinctly; to take his obedience, his
merits, his righteousness into parts, to discover what grace, what comfort,
each part does peculiarly afford, and then suitably to apply it to that part of
your spiritual disease for the cure whereof it is intended; the^ does the
soul take in full satisfaction, then is it confirmed with strong cosolation.

We read in the 4. Chap. of the 2. of Kings, how Elesha going to raise the
Shunamits child from death to life, he went up the bed where the child lay, 2.
Kings 4.
and he stretched himself upon the child, and laid his face to the child's
face, his eyes to the child's eyes, his hands to the child's hands, and applied
himself unto it part by part, and so the flesh of the child grew warm, and he
neesed 7 times and revived, so we if we can apply our selves to this child in
my text part by part by a particular and distinct knowledge and application of
his righteousness, merits, and obedience to our souls, not the child, but we
which are dead in sins and trespasses by virtue and grace derived from him
shall revive and live.

And this is the peculiar grace which we receive from this part of his
obedience, his incarnation even the sanctification of our natures in and from
the womb and the healing of them of that deadly disease which we bring into
the world with us our original sin. And now when you understand this aright,
when you consider what inestimable grace we derive from this degree of our
Lords humiliation when you understand what infinite benefits he has purchased
unto his Church by this part of his obedience; you will the less wonder at the
wonder. The wonder indeed of wonders, THE INCARNATION OF THE LORD OF GLORY, God
manifested in the flesh.] That he which was in the form of God, and thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, yet should thus annihilate himself, as to
make himself of no reputation for our sakes, and stoop so low to do us good?
that he whom the heaven of heavens is not able to contain should be content to
be imprisoned in the narrow circle and darksome cell of a Virgins womb? that
he which was the Prince of heaven sitting in state and Majesty at the right
hand of his father, should as an Infant suck the breasts of his Mother, that he
should strip himself of his Robes of glory, to be wrapped in swaddling clothes,
and come down from thundering in Heaven to cry in a Cradle? No marvel then if
among all the passages of his humiliation the Church celebrate this as a wonder
of wonders well worthy a room in her despised Liturgy, When thou tookest upon
thee to deliver man thou did not abhor the Virgins Womb.

And so we leave the Child borne in the arms of his Mother, Transitio.
while in the next place we consider a while the gift of the Father.

Unto us a Son is given.

The words at the first sound of them speak a great mercy from God, The second
branch of the second general.
and bespeake a proportionable measure of thankfulness from man in return of
it, with what earnest suits have holy men and women importuned the Lord, that
he would be pleased to give them a son? With what joy and thankfulness have
they received him, when he was given? Abraham, Sarah, Hannah the Shunamite to
both these bear witness upon record, why behold of this mercy are we all
partakers in a more eminent manner then all or any of them were, For,

Unto us a Son is given.

There are two things which do wonderfully magnify the grace and bounty of
Almighty God in this mavelous gift bestowed upon the sons of men.

1. The greatness of it, It is a Son. 2. The Freeness of it, It is a gift.
1. The greatness of it. Of all the good and perfect gifts that have been
from above, or that ever came down from the Father of Lights, there was never
any like this the gift of the son of that Father, what could the Lord have
parted with, or given unto us that was more dear unto him, then his own son
out of his own bosom? it was more then if he had Given us the heathen for our
inheritance, or the uttermost arts of the earth for our possession, we read of
our Savior, that When he ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4.
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, but how great a gift was
that wherein he was given, which gave those gifts? in whom all those gifts are
included, from whom they are all derived. in him are hidden all the treasures
of wisdom and godliness, and out of his fullness we all receave grace for
grace: Colos. 2. Joh. 1.
when God gave unto us his Son, with him he gave us all his righteousness
merits, and obedience, with all the benefits by them purchased unto the Church,
in him he gave us redemption of our souls and bodies, justification,
sanctification, reconciliation, to God, remission of sins, and life
everlasting, For of him and from him and by him are they all to him be the
glory of all for ever and ever.

2. The second thing in this gift which magnifies the bounty of our heavenly
father is the Freeness of it, it is a gift, donum gratuitum, a Free gift.
Nothing did the Lord see in us which might promerit it, nothing could he expect
from us in compensatio^ of it, it proceeded merely from a principle within
himself, pure love, mere mercy, free grace, that he bestowed upon us this free
gift. He sent redempteon to his people, In the fullness of time God sent his
Son, Psalm, Gal. 4.4.
we could not fetch him who should ascend up to heaven to fetch him thence? We
did not so much as desire him to come, we were not so sensible of our own
misery as to look after him, we did not know that we stood in any need of him,
but the Lord did, and therefore out of his mere compassion he Sent him, out of
his mere bounty he gave Him, The Son was given.

Now out of these two, the greatness of this gift and the freeness of it we
will infallibly conclude these two things.

1. First, That the Lord loves the sons of men, what greater evidence could
be given of it then this that he has given his own son to be borne for them,
and to dye for them? When Abraham did but offer to offer up his son in
sacrifice to God, God bid him hold his hand, go no farther, the very offer of
it was evidence enough of unfeined love to him that commanded it, Now (says
the Lord) I know that thou love me. Genesis 25.

If that were evidence clear enough of man's love to God how much stronger must
it needs be of Gods far greater love to man that did not only offer to offer
up his son, but offered him up indeed a sacrifice for their ransom? No
marvayle if St John reporting this set it forth with a note of admiration. Joh.
13.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son to the end
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have life everlasting.
Those four circumstances in that Text, tantus, tantillos, t^les, and tanti.
That such a high Majesty as the Lord is, should so value such worms as we
are, as to give for us such a price as he did, to redeem us out of misery and
thraldom by the death of his own son, do raise this his love to such a
height as is beyond the comprehension of men or Angels. As therefore the Jews
seeing Christ weeping over Lazarus his grave, Joh. 11.
took notice of it as a special evidence of this love that he bare him, and
whispered one to another (as in that Text) See how he loved him. So when you
see the Lord parting with his own son out of his own bosom, and freely
giving him up to us to be borne and to dye for us, say as these Jews, and upon
as infallible grounds and evidence, See how he loved us. And when you see the
son taking leave of his father, laying by all his robes of dignity and glory,
which he did enjoy at the right hand of his father to come down to the earth
to be borne for us, and to dye for us, to take our nature upon him, and in that
nature to do and to suffer such grievous things as he did and suffered. When
you see him reviled, buffeted, spit upon, scourged, crowned, crucified, when
you see him upon the Cross, weeping, bleeding, dying for you, say as those
Jews did upon a less occasion, 2. Sam. 1.
See how he loved us, surely his love to us was wonderful, passing the love of
women.

2. Secondly, hence I conclude, that henceforth the Lord will deny us nothing
that is good for us, what will the Lord deny us that has not denied us his
son to dye for us, he that spared not his son, but gave him up for us all,
how shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. The argument
concludes strongly a majori, from the greater to the less: when Acsah the
daughter of Caleb, made suit to her father for a well of water, Josh. 15
thus she accoasts him, Thou have given me a South country, give me also a
well of water, she was confident that he that had given her the greater would
not deny her this small re-request, and she was not deceaved in it for the Text
tells us he granted her request with advantage, He gave her the upper springs
and the nether springs, so we may upon the same ground, persuade our selves of
our heavenly father, he has given us the greater, he will not surely deny us
the lesser mercies, he has given us Fields and Vineyards, he will not deny us
a well of water, but will give us the upper Springs and the nether Springs,
he will not deny us supply in our wants, comfort in our afflictions,
protection in dangers, deliverance out of troubles, the nether Springs, nor
will he deny us his spirit, his grace, remission of our sins, life
everlasting, and an inheritance in glory, the upper Springs. Oh the happiness
of the Saints and people of God in this his favor, he has nothing too dear
for them, thinks nothing too good for them, with what boldness and confidence
may they at all times draw near the Throne of grace in assurance that they
shall find help in times of need?

And so I have done with the gift too, the gift of the son, The child was
borne the son was given.

BUt there is no gift, The third general part.
nor giver but there is a receiver, in this there are many, we must not
overlook them, it is very fit we should reflect our eyes a little upon them
too, to let them know their engagement by so great a gift that so thanks may
be given by many for the gift bestowed upon many.

And this pronoune tells us who they are to whom he was given, Nohis To us and
twice for failing, Nobis, To us. Because indeed he is given to us in a twofold
respect.

1 First Nobis, To us exclusive exclusively. 2 Secondly, Nobis To us inclusive
inclusively. Nobis To us exclusive excluding some. And Nobis To us inclusive
including others.
Excluding first himself, for he was not borne for himself, nor did he live
to himself, nor dye for himself, but Nobis to Us, and Nobis for Us, for us
men and for our salvation it was that he came down from heaven, as the Nicaene
Creed in our Church Liturgy, puts us in mind. He needed not have done nor
suffered any of these things for himself, nor did he thereby merit for
himself, nor could there any addition be made to that glory and happiness
which from all eternity he did enjoy at the right hand of his father, unless
it were this, to see us happy with him, which before were miserable: that he
might do so he is content to become miserable that we might be happy,
exinanire se, to emply himself (says one Text annihilare to annihilate (says
another) to emply himself that he might fill us to make nothing of himself
that he might make something of us, which were worse then nothing, to become
poor that we might be made rich, naked, that we might be clothed,
harbourlesse, that we might have mansions in heaven a prisoner, that we might
be set free: and at these great disadvantages to exchange conditions with us
that we might be happy, and therefore truly Nobis to us was he given, and
Nobis exclusive, exclusively to us, not for himself.

2. Secondly, Nobis to us exclusively, in respect of the Angels, Heb.
For he took not upon him the nature of Angels. And therefore when an Angel
preaches this doctrine, Luke 2.11. he preaches it not in the first person,
Nobis to us, but in the second person, Luke 2.11.
Vobus to you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior which is Christ
the Lord. He was not given for the Angels. whether it were because their sin
was of a more higher nature, then the sin of Adam was, or whether it came
within the compass of the sin agt the holy Ghost, or whether it was because
they sinned with an higher hand against God, or that they sinned against
greater light, and against greater grace, and greater strength to subsist then
Adam had, or whether it were because their sin was more voluntary in that they
sinned without a tempter we dispute not. This we have reason even with
admiration and astonishment, to take notice of his singular philanthropie, the
freenes and the greatness of his grace showed to the lost sons of Adam, in
that when he saw them and the Apostate Angels both equally lost and undone, and
lying in a forlorn estate, and condition under his wrath and judgment of
eternal death, he was pleased (passing by the Angels and leaving them fast
bound in chains of darkness reserved to the judgment of the great day) to
cast upon the sons of Adam a pitiful and a gracious eye, Judae.
and to find out a means to recover and to restore them again by this his
son. Say no more, What is man that thou art thus mindful of him, or the son
of man that thou thus visitest him. Psalm. 8.
Thou have made him lower then the Angels, for in this respect the Lord has
made him higher then the Angels. For he took not upon him the nature of Angels,
but he took upon him the seed of Abraham. And therefore secondly is he said to
be given Nobis to us, To us exclusively, excluding the Angels fallen, which
stood in as great need of his redemption as man did.

Nobis to us inclusive, including all those that receive benefit by Christ, and
so this Nobis to us, may be understood first Personally of Isay, and all such
faithful servants of Gods as Isay was. Nationallly To us, that is to us Jews
the seed of Abraham the people of the Covenant, to whom belong the promises,
and in particular this of the Messiah descending of us. Universally to us, that
is to all nations of the world, parum est, says the Lord Isa. 49.6. It is a
light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth. So
that the Jew cannot say to the Gentile he was given for us, and not for you,
nor the Gentile to the Jew, he was given for us and not for you, nor the Greek
to the Barbarian he was given for us and not for you, nor the Barbarian to the
Greek he was given to us and not to you. Nor these that were under the Law to
those that were before the Law he was given to us and not to you, nor these
that live under the Gospel to those that lived under the Law he is given to
us and not to you, for he is given to them all, to the Gentile as well as to
the Jew, the Greek as well as to the Barbarian, to those that were under the
Law, as well as to those that are under the Gospel, to those that were before,
both as well as to either of them both, and therefore let all these take comfort
in him, let them all challenge their interest in him, and every of them with
hope and confidence say, as in the Text, Unto us this son is given.

I am not willing here (though it falls just in my way) to engage in that great
question which has so much troubled the world touching the Latitude and extent
of this gift we are speaking of, to whom, or to how many it may appertain or
was intended, I know there are errors on both hands while some extend it not
only to all the sons of Adam, Origin. etc. I had once a dispute with a
Knight in Lincoln shiere, one S. W. Hickman, a zealous Origenist in this point.
but even to the Devils too and apostate Angels, unto all which they say he
was given, and by whom in the end they shall all be restored and saved. Others
on the other hand limit it to a certain definite number of men, fore thought
on long before the world was for that purpose, and then by an unchangeable,
immovable and irresistible decree set forth and designd to salvation by Jesus
Christ in time to be given to them and they to him by the father, and this
number so inconsiderable in comparison of the rest that perish, that by their
computation, and account scarsly the ten thousandth man of the sons of Adam
shall be saved. But who are we that we should thus limit the holy one of
Israel, and why should our eye be evil if his be good. Indeed this doctrine if
true to those few they speak of (how few so ever they be) must needs be
precious, it magnifies beyond measure, the riches of that gra^e to them wards
which has made such a difference where it found none, it binds them for ever
to love much to whom so much is given and forgiven, but what a sad yea what a
desperate condition does it cast the whole world of the rest of the sons of
Adam into? Nay what an imputation does it lay upon the Lord God in the highest
of his attributes, the attribute of his grace and goodness unto his creature,
as if he did make the world well nigh for no other intent, but that thereby he
might have an occasion to win honor unto himself in one of his attributes,
the attribute of his justice in destroying it. Revel.
A space that no man can measure for multitudes, that no man can number. I am
easily persuaded to believe that the Lord by Jesus Christ has opened a greater
and a wider door into the kingdom of heaven then these men are persuaded of:
and that it does neither stand with the nature of his grace and goodness, and
love to his creature nor with the honor of Christ his Mediatorship, nor suit
with the price of that blood that was paid for our ransom, nor with the glory
of the prophesies of old or the promises since of the abundance of grace, and
glory of Christ's kingdom, nor the latitude of the covenant made unto the
Church, that the remnant of Adams sons that return should be so small or the
berries upon the Olive tree so few and so thin as some imagine.

But to hold our selves close to the word in this matter as it is fit we should.
Understand here Nobis, To us, in that sense in which our Lord himself
understands it, speaking of this very gift, Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten son to the end that whosoever believed in him
should not perish, but have life everlasting. Nobis to us, in that sense in
which S. Paul understands it. Romans 5.10. As by the offense of one, judgment
came upon all men to condemnation, so by the righteousness. of one, the free
gift came upon all men to justification of life. Nobis to us, in that sense in
which the same Apostle understands it, 1. Tim. 2.4. when he says, God would
have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. And verse. 7.
of the same Chapter, which gave himself a ransom for all, For sinners. 1.
Tim. 1.15. for the ungodly. Romans 5.6. For his enemies, verse. 10. For them that
deny him: 2. Pet. 2.1. Even for them that are damned, in the same Text the
latter end of the verse. Let no man here charge me with Arminianisme in that I
preach up grace so high, or if he do, I pass not much, as long as by his own
confession it is grace that I preach, let me preach it as high as I can, I shall
therein be found more faithful to my Master then they that extenuate,
conceal, suppress, or monopolize it. Upon these testimonies of holy writ, I
am persuaded to believe that there is no son of Adam that ever was or shall be
borne in the world, but the second Adam when he took his nature upon him did
something for him, so much at least as has freed him of the guilt of the sin
of the first Adam imputed to him, and has put him upon a new score and a new
account with the Lord God, and made over salvation to him upon a new covenant
purchased by his blood made upon better terms, conditions, and promises then
the old was, and that he shall never perish everlastingly unless he forfeit
his salvation a second time.

All the question is, de modo applicandi, about the manner how Christ and the
grace by him comes to be applied to the^ seeing there are so many nations that
never heard so much as of his name, or know what the Gospel means, of which
I shall by Gods help shortly give you an account, and I hope some reasonable
satisfaction, in a Treatise which I have now under my hand upon the parallel
between the two Adams compared in the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans; In the mean time rest upon this, with God all things are possible. And
(as in the case of infants) so of these, where their ignorance is invincible,
and the means whereby that should be cured, to them impossible to be
attained, although they cannot apply themselves unto Christ, the Lord of his
abundant grace and goodness can apply Christ unto them? Who is found of them
that sought him not, and seeks out them that asked not after him.

Who is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe. Although it is
certain they are in no wise capable of that special salvation peculiar to
beleivers, yet I trust it is no heresy, neither against grace, nor charity to
hope that (walking up with all their might to that light which they have) by
the mercy of God, and the merits of the Mediator, they may be found capable of
some degree of salvation, and of an estate (at least) above that of perdition
in the lake of everlasting burnings.

3. Consider thirdly, that at the last and great day of account, though all the
world shall be judged at one bar, yet they shall not all be juded by one Law
but the mere Gentile by the Law of nature, the mere Jew by the Law of Moses,
and the Christian by the Gospel, the Law of grace, and according to their
conformity to these three Laws shall they receive their doom, their Euge or
their Apage, Romans 2.12. But to leave them to stand or fall to their own master:
give me leave to turn my self to you (Bell) and to speak something to you by
way of application, and so I will conclude this point: And I have three things
to say to you concerning this matter.

1. The first is to put you in mind of your great happiness, and privilege
that you have above these poor people we speak of in this particular,
inasmuch as the Lord has dealt more liberally with you then with them he has
done, that which concerning them is but a question, is to you out of question,
to you is this salvation sent, which to them is denied, to you this son is
given, to you is he come to you, he offers himself in his Gospel, in his
Ordinances, how happy are you if you can see your happiness to whom such
means of happiness are afforded, what a price have you in your hands, to get
knowledge, life, and salvation, what fair opportunity to build up your selves
in grace here, and to lay for your selves a foundation of glory hereafter,
blessed are your eyes that see the things that you see and your ears that
hear the things that you hear, which Kings and Prophets have desired to see
and hear and have not, and which to the greatest part of the world besides
has been denied?

But how miserable are you, if in the midst of all these means you should
miscarry, if such a light being come into the world you should love darkness
rather then light, if having such a price put into your hands to get knowledge,
grace, and glory, you like fools should have no heart? will he charge you
another day as being in the number of those that wilfully forsake their own
mercy that refuse and despise great salvation, and thrust from them the
kingdom of heaven, he would have gathered you but you would not be gathered,
he would have healed you, but you would not be healed.

2. Wherefore the next duty charged upon you is this: if the Lord has so
freely given you his son then is it your duty with all joy and thankfulness to
receive him, it is not the sending of his son that will make you happy, nor the
giving, but the receiving of this gift that will enrich you, receive him
therefore by your ready and cheerful entertainment of the Gospel in which
he offers himself unto you, receive him into your hearts by Faith, into your
houses by Charity, into your affections by Joy and Praise and into your
practice too, by imitation, though he be given to us of the Father, yet he is
never actually ours till he be thus ours, by a partciular reception and
application of him to our selves and our own souls, It Is not the Universal
Nobis that makes him ours, that speaks him at too great a distance, nor the
National Nobis that gives us an interest in him, that's yet too general, it is
the Personal nobis that brings him home to us, and gives us assurance, nay nor
that neither until we come yet nearer home by changing the number, the plural
into the singular, when instead of Nobis natus, and Nobis datus, we can with
old Simeon take up this child and hug him in our arms by a more special
application and say mihi natus and mihi datus, unto me this child is borne,
and unto me this Son is given.

3. The third duty charged upon us in consideration of this gift shall conclude
this discourse. And that follows ex congruo by way of congruity. It is
thankfulness. It is very fit that thanks should be given by many, for the
gift bestowed upon many. Hitherto we have been of the taking hand, all has
been, to us, to us the child, and to us the Son, to us the birth, and to us
the gift all has been to us, but what? will there be nothing looked for from
us think you for all this good communicated to us, No return to be made upon
the receipt of so great a gift? Nothing to the Father that gave him, Nothing to
the Son that was given, Nothing to the child that was born for us, and to us?
Yes surely, something to them all.

1. First, thanks to the Father that gave the Son, We thank thee O Father Lord
of Heaven and Earth, that thou were pleased to spare and part with thine own
Son out of thine own bosom for our sakes, that by his merit and mediation (of
sons of wrath) we might be made sons of grace, sons of adoption, and coheyers
with this thy son of an inheritance in glory. Now thanks be to God for this
unspeakable gift.

2. Secondly, thanks to the Son that was willing to be given, and content to
submit to such hard conditions to rescue us out of that miserable thraldom
into which we had cast our selves, and under which without him helps, and
hopeless we had lain for ever.

3. And thirdly, thanks to the child for his love showed to the Children of
men, in that for their sakes he was content to become a child, to be conceived
in the womb, borne of a woman, and in his person to bear all the infirmities
of infancy and childhood, that so he might merit for them the sanctification of
their natures, and by the holiness of his, imputed to them purify theirs and
cure them of their Original sin even in the womb.

But what? Nothing but thanks for all this? Yes something more, though it be
not much that we can do in compensation of so great love and kindness, nor
much that we can give by way of return, yet let us give what we can, let us
do what we can. Let us give up our selves, souls and bodies a living
sacrifice unto him, which gave up his to be a dying sacrifice for us. Let us
love the Child, reverence the Son, honor the Father, ever more admiring and
adoring, the Philanthropie of the child, the humility of the Son, the
wisdom, power, grace, justice, truth, and mercy of the Father, all set aworke
in this great design undertaken merely for the good of mankind, for us men
and for our salvation, For unto us the Child was borne, And unto us the Son
was given, and therefore from us, and from all the hoasts of Heaven, from men
and from Angels, let there be ascribed unto them all (as is most due) All
glory, honor, power, praise, might, Majesty, thanksgiving, obedience, and
dominion with Halleluiah For evermore Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

