DEATH DISARMED: THE GRAVE BVRIED: OR, The Christians future Triumph through
CHRIST over DEATH, and the GRAVE.

Delivered in a SERMON at the Interrment of Mr. HENRY ENGLISH; at SALERST in
the County of SUSSEX. December. 10. MDCXLIX.

By JOHN BRADSHAVV Mr. of Arts, Preacher of ETCHINGHAM.

(...). Isidor. Pelusiot. Lib. 3. Epistol. 311. The sleep of good men, of which
number he was one, is the period of their evil things, and the beginning of
their good things. LONDON, Printed by Richard Constable, for Henry Shepherd,
and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible on Tower Hill. 1650.

TO THE Worshipful Mr. Henry English Esquire. and his virtuous Consort Mrs. Lucy
English, only Daughter of Sr. Edward Carr of Sleford in Lincolnshire, Knight
and Baronet, deceased; increase of all true Grace, fruition of all true
Comforts, possessed hereafter of eternal Glory.
I Have often seen it (honored Friends) in some ill made Sun-dials, where the
Gnomon has sloopt below the Elevation, that they have gone too fast in the
morning, and as much too slow in the afternoon: which as it may fitly be
applied to some, that being too quick, and ripe witted in their younger time,
prove often less eminent in their elder: So also to the favor and freindship
of this world, which in the first setting out, a carceribus, is very quick and
fleet (primus impetus major quam virorum) but in the progress, rather than
hasty, ad metam, is sluggish and dull enough. No one thing so soon runs it
self out of breath, as that does. The solid cause whereof, I take to be this,
because it is not solid: and this again, because too many enter such relation,
for their own private ends; the virtue it self not being their end, but their
own self ends all their virtue; which when they cannot effect, they cease to
affect; Like Trumpeters that fill their circumflect Instruments with their
breath, that they may fill by a like circumflect reciprocation their ear with
the sound. But as for you (worthy friends) your (...) need. But then as it is
with wine and all such liquors, they are best kept when they are kept close and
covered, so it is with deeds of Charity, which must needs prove flat and dead,
when by our selves vent is given to them, or they uncovered.

No more at present, but let it be your endeavor to follow him as he followed
GOD: And the Lord grant to you all your Fathers Blessings, and add thereto.
The cordial prayer of

Your servant, for JESUS sake, I. B.
May 21. 1650.
The Epistle to the READER.
CHristian Reader, I could well have liked it that this Sermon might have been
buried with the Gentleman, upon occasion of whose Interrment it was delivered,
and not received a Resuscitation from the Press. And to say truth, the best
Sepulture of a Sermon is the in Hearers memory and affections, and the best
Resurrection of it in his practice and conversation. I know very well, that
many things of this nature in all places both more copious for matter, more
elaborate for composure, more elegant for style, more apposite for the end, and
more acceptabte for the Author have like Jonah his Gourd sprung up one day and
withered the next, the more is the pity. But thus it is, that often times great
and stately Vessels lie moored up in a by Channel, when smaller Barks are
rigged out for the main Ocean.

For my part, I look not on this or any thing of mine as a Benjamin, so dearly
beloved as not to suffer it to go out from under my wing. I have heard some men
complain who have been Merchant-venturers of their Works into the public
view, that they never suffered from any so much as from their own Acquaintance,
and especially those of their own Function.

English Merchants they say suffer most by English Pirates in English Bottoms.
It is part of the vanity of the Worlds amity and man's familiarity with man, to
suffer more by these that know him, than these that know him not, and by a
kind of enterfeiring to be galled by what is nearest. But my Charity together
with the inoffensiveness of the Sermon, prompt me with hopes of better measure.

But if it shall fall out otherwise, let such consider, First, that We all know
but in part, and prophecy but in part. Perfection is not expected till
expectation be perfected. Here is no summity in this middle part of the
Universe. I cannot boast of much Silver and Gold laid upon the Foundation, and
yet I hope I have not against the Gospel Law erected a Cottage upon the Lords
Common, or thatched hay and stubble upon the Fabric. Well, the fire must try
every man's Work, and the last Judgment will be a day of impartial Judgment.

2. I could wish that all such critical persons who have no other way to shore
up their own Repute than by the Hypotenusa of another man's declination, (who
would make the World believe they can mend all things they tax, because they
can tax all things they see) would honor the Church with something of their
own that may be every way impregnable, and beyond Hercules, not so much as
vulnerable in the heel.

3. The desires of some of the Friends of the deceased have moved me to this
last office, my readiness to which or any other innocent service I publish to
the World whilst I publish this Sermon.

4. There might happily be some my Hearers then, who imagining that the party
spoken of went not so far as they desired in Religion, might therefore deem I
went too far in his Commendation. If any such were, let them consider:

1. That much larger Testimonials than this have been given by other Divines of
unquestionable modesty and ineegrity to their Friends, who have not been in all
respects so eminent for piety and morality as he was.

2. All that was spoken of the dead, so as applied to him, may he comprised in
a very few lines. Occasion indeed being taken from some things appearing in
him, to recommend the things at large from themselves; particularly a wise and
regulated temper in Religion.

3. I may with modesty avouch it, that the Apology made at the beginning, was
with that sobriety, grounded especially upon the equity of propounding a
fathers example to his children, that if any thought the encomiastical part too
large, either it was because they considered not what way apologized, or are so
inexorable as no Addresses to them can lightly qualify them.

4. Nothing was asserted concerning his present condition in statu separato, as
in heaven, but only by way of hope and charity. It is not for a mortal Worm
(as I am) to search the Book of Life, which is claspt up from us till the last
day.

5. Nothing was spoken of his condition past in this World, but what was well
grounded. The moral part whereof, viz. what concerned his temperancy,
peaceableness, fair dealing, knowledge, humility, being taken upon the
testimony of many, but one especially who was not likely to give an impartial
Character of Mr. English. And as for his way of Religion, mine own experience
of him, and converse with him at several times gave me evidence what it was,
and an encouragement to recommend it to his children, friends, and all others.

6. What I have spoken of him, as for the Matter, it is true; so for the
Expression, it is not Hyberbolicall. As I dare not call Evil, Good; and Good,
Evil; put Darkness for Light, or Light for Darkness; or put Bitter for
Sweet, or Sweet for Bitter. Isa. 5.20. So neither dare I with some falsifying
Limners set out a Complexion with Colors beyond the life. I had rather men
should say the Picture is like him, than that it is fairer.

7. I hope that adulation will rather by rational men be expected from
Time-servers, then him who from his first entrance into his Ministry, to his
cost, has chosen still rather to swim against the streams of Sin and Error,
in what channel soever, yea running contrary ways. That man should be but
Penny-wise, and Pound-foolish for the world; that should be careful to
pleasure three or four persons, and careless to displease the whole world,
when he sees the world bent to displease GOD.

8. It would be considered also, that to hunch at this Testimony given, is to
make the world believe that the deceased was one that lay under some blemish;
which what it should be, I cannot tell; I know no man that can accuse him.

9. Some prejudice also must needs accrue to those that the deceased has left
behind him, who especially manage his Affairs, as if they would be ready to
approve, or reward any Impartiality, which is far from them.

10. For their sakes that thought too much said (if any) I have not only made
the good Name of this Gentleman more public, but more durable; and have also
added somewhat more, which was not known to me till afterward.

Let the Reader understand, that if any few there were who took any pet, the
occasion seems to have been one short passage in the latter end, about
Knowledge which puffes up. And more I might have said, but less could not say,
to see how by such practices (as were there, and then but gently taught) the
Church of God is infected, His Word mis-interpreted, His Ordinances profaned,
His Ministers neglected, and His Name polluted. And above all others I may well
be pardoned, for so little spoken; when as not only I have deeply sufferd a^
^^verall times, and in several places within these twe^^^ years from those
people; but a Expertus ea quale sit hominum genus. Ego vero tam barbaram
atrocitatem hactenus in nullo videram. Cum ego humaniter pro linguae meae more
eum compellarem, nunquam aliter dignatus est mecu^ loqui, quam si cum cane sibi
negotium fuisset. Calvinus Fa^ello Epistol. Edit. Genev. 1617.
principal man amongst them, about fifteen years since, has in a printed
Book, must unworthily trampled upon the ashes of my dear Father Mr. William
Bradshaw above 30 years since deceased, whose Works are still useful, and
whose name is still precious to the Church of God. It is pity that a man that
styles himself the Pastor of a Church, should be so ill employed as to weave
the Spiders-webs of weak inferences, broken consequences, slender arguments,
thereby to catch some fly to throw into the sweet Ointment of his good Name;
who when living in the defense of the Ministry of the Church of England by dint
of Argument, would not have turned his back to any one. But this has been the
lot of many of Gods servants to be cowardly smitten by their fellow servants,
when they are down; Sickness giving them the foil, Death the fall, and
Corruption holding them down for a season: But I hope the time is not long
before he, and all the Members of CHRIST shall get up again; and through
CHRIST shall conquer that which has conquered them, which is Death. The ground
of which hopes is set foth in this ensuing Sermon. Thou have it as near as I
could as it was delivered. The addition made is very little. Some eyes look
for Marginals, for whose sake J have added a few. I meddle not with
State-Affaires, but yet deal with matters of Life and Death, or rather upon
Life and Death, as my subject matter.

I know not into whose hands these published Lines may come: But whosoever thou
art, I entreat thee to look on me as one that earnestly desires the growth of
Christianity, the spreading of the Gospel, the exaltation of Truth, the honor
of the Church, the settlement of soun^ ^^ligion, and the concord of all good
Christians: In short, that these two things may be as it were the two Gospel
Tables, the saving Knowledge of CHRIST Crucified, and next to that the practice
of firm, faithful, fervent Charity one toward another; according to which
two maine Pillars of Christianity, I have long since chosen this for my Gnome,
by which I desire to be known, Christus and Charitas.

Thine in both, I. B.

DEATH DISARMED; the GRAVE BURIED. OR, The Christians future Triumph through
CHRIST over DEATH and the GRAVE.
1 COR. 5.55. O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?
Eccl. 3.18. (...). Graec. adug.
THere is to every thing a Season, and a Time to every purpose under the Heaven;
a time to be Borne, and a time to Dye; a time to Plant, and a time to pluck up
that which is planted; a time to Kill, and a time to Heal; a time to Break
down, and a time to Build up; a time to Weep, and a time to Laugh; a time to
Mourn, and a time to Dance. When the Wiseman therefore says there is a time
for every purpose, his meaning is, there is a time for contrary Actions, for
contrary Passions, for contrary Conditions.

1. For contrary Conditions; to go out of the World, is contrary to our Birth
and coming into the World; the one is our Genesis and the other is our Exodus;
there is a time for both these,

2. For contrary Actions; Planting and plucking up, building and breaking
down, killing and healing, renting and sowing, speaking and silence.

3. For contrary Passions; so weeping, and laughing, mourning and dancing,
loving and hating. Whether things be positively contrary, as planting and
plucking up, or (...). etc. Aristot. Metaph. lib. 4. De natura privationis et
contrariorum, et quomodo contraria sunt privationes contrariorum consule,
Julium Scaligerum Exercit.
privatively, as Silence and Speech: God has dealt out seasons for all these
opposits; the world being made up of Chequer work, consisting either of the
white of position, or the black of privation, either consisting of the lucid
part of bearing and planting, and healing, and gathering and getting; or the
dark part of dying, of killing, of pulling down, of plucking up, of loosing,
of War. The Earth which is the pavement of the world, is inlayd with this
Mosaic work of several colors. But then Solomon teaches us another lesson;
that these as they have their time in general, so they have their season in
special; as they are conjoined in one common time, so they are disjoined in a
peculiar season; all under one roof of a general allowance, but parted into
several rooms and partitions of a special appropriation, Planeta est stella
peculiari motu infra octavam sphaeram per signiferum vagans.
moving like (b) Planets in one common motion of all the Orbs, and yet having
peculiar motions of their own. From both which conclusions of Solomon's, we may
derive a third, that the season of one condition, action, or passion, is not
the season of the opposite; the day of the one, is not the day of the other; at
least the moment of one, not the moment of the other.

Apes peragunt opus suum non statis diebus, sed quoties cali commoditas
invitat: ita suo quaeque tempore capienda est occasio, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 6.10.
And therefore it may seem strange that I should join both together; that as
the Israelites did unseasonably to Mourn upon a Festival, as it is Nehem.
8.10. so we should sing a Triumph, and handle a Text of Triumph upon a day of
Mourning.

But much shall not need to be spoken of the fitness of this Text. It pleads
sufficiently for it self. It is sure, it is a Text sounding out the Triumph of
the Righteous man over Death and over the Grave; and it is as true, it is a day
of Mourning, and (considering the loss we have of the deceased) deserves to be
a day of mourning: we do not triumphum canere, or agere, either Triumph, or
sing a Triumph, but only discourse of, or concerning that triumphant Victory
every righteous man that dies in Christ shall shortly have over Death, and over
the Grave. Yet if we did so, if we should flourish our Ensign, and hang out
our Streamers, and make it a kind of Iubile, considering it is Death and the
Grave we insult over, now when Death and the Grave seem to bid battle to us,
surely it is very opportune. So that that though the sense of Deaths prevalency
over the Righteous, may teach us mourning; yet Faith shows the future
prevalency of the Righteous over the Grave; and that teaches us to be
comfortable; and though Nature may, and does require a Tribute and Custom of
Tears, Cur dolemus quenquam mortuum? An ad hoc nati sumus ut maneamus aeterni?
Abraham, Moses, Isaias, Petrus, Johannes, Paulus electionis vas, et super omnia
filius Dei moritur, et nos indignamur aliquem exire de corpore? -- Lugeatur
mortuus, sed ille quem gehenna suscipit, quem tartarus devorat, in cujus panam
ignis aeternus aestuat. Nos quorum exitum angelorum turba comitatur, quibus
obviam Christus occurrit, gravemur magis si diutius in tabernaculo isto mortis
habitaemus. S. Hieronymus ad Paulum, etc.
Grace will not let the Spiritual eye shed one tear, but lifts it up to a
comfortable expectation of a future Conquest.

But let me first untie a knot which may hinder our smoother passage. This Text
is cited out of Hos. 13.14. The Hebrew is (...). Rendered thus in our English
Translation, O Death, I will be thy plague; O Grave I will be thy destruction.
But who knows not this sounds more like to the Septuagint (...); O Death,
where is thy Cause? O Grave (or Hell) where is thy Sting? I list not at present
to raise a Controversy betwixt the Septuagint Translation, and the Hebrew
Vowels, with their first founders: However I do not find that the Apostle
does punctually follow the Greek: For first he makes a manifest Metathesis; for
the 70 set together (...) and (...) and (...). Besides they write (...), and
the Apostle (...). Not to stand to show, that (...) are like in sense, as well
as in sound: That the Metathesis makes no material change: That Ehi the Hebrew
word is either a Verb, or an Adverb, and signifies either ero or ubi. Nor yet
to trouble you by showing how the other Hebrew words by other interlineary
appurtenances, might be made to speak otherwise then you find them in your
Bibles; for the Hebrew Vowels beneath the letters are like the Keys to the
Organs, which open and stop the sound of the Pipes above at pleasure. I say,
not to trouble you with these speculations, this you may conlude, that either
the Apostles manner of Citation makes it the Authentic Translation of the
place, or else, at least, the undoubted Interpretation; for I cannot think
that here he only alludes, and no more.

I might from the Coherence observe to you, that our future Victory over Death,
and the Grant was formerly prophesied of. That this Prophecy is to be found in
the Prophecy of the Old Testament before Christ's coming. That this and all
other Prophesies of the like kind shall in their time be fulfilled. That the
special time for the impletion of this which is written shall be at the
Resurrection of the just. But I rather desire to handle the Text entirely by it
self.

The Words afford these Parts, 1. The Enemy, Death or the Grave. 2. The Weapon
of this Enemy, a Sting. 3. The whilom prevalency of this Enemy, it had the
Victory for a time. 4. The Conquest of this victorious and all vanquishing
Enemy; Where is thy Sting? Where is thy Victory? 5. The Joy and Triumph in this
Victory, the (...) of gladness; O Death, where is thy Sting? etc. The Enemy is
powerful and prevalent, and that is Death; the Weapon is dangerous and mortal,
that is a Sting; the Victory is general and universal, Death has passed over
all men. Qui per Osee quondam tibi rigidus minabatur, ero mors tua o mors, ero
morsus tuus inserne, illius morte tu mortua es, illius morte nos vivimus:
devorasti et devorata es, dumque assumpti c^rporis Christi sollicitaris
illecebra, et avidis faucibus praedam putas, interiora tua adjuncto dente
confossa sunt. Gratias tibi Christ salvator, tua agimus creatura, quod tam
potentem adversarium nostrum dum occideres, occidisti. Hier. in epitaphio
Nepot. ad H^lidor.
The vanquishment of this Enemy, and the regaining of the Victory shall be
certain and joyful; this joy shall be triumphant and permanent. For then shall
be brought to pass that saying that is written by the infallible spirit of
Prophecy, written for our everlasting comfort, Death is swallowed up in
Victory, O Death, where, etc. That Death is an Enemy. Here is a Triumph, and
that is still over an Enemy. And we may say of it as David said of his Enemy,
Psalm. 143.3. The Enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to
the ground, he has made me dwell in darkness. Vbi sunt quos ambiebat civium
potentatus? Vbi insuperabiles imperatores? ubi qui conventus disponebant, et
festa? ubi equorum splend^di invectores? ubi exercituum duces? ubi Satrapae
tyrannici? Nunc omnia pulvis, nunc omnia favilla. August.
It persecutes the soul till it drives it out of the body, it smites the life
down to the ground and lays our honor in the dust, it makes us dwell in
darkness, for what is darker than the Grave? Death and the Grave are the
Enemies we shall have dominion over. I put both together, as being both our
Vanquishers now, and shall be both vanquished by us hereafter. Here is all the
difference, Death fits us for the Grave, the Grave receives us after Death,
Death divides the Soul from the Body, the Grave divides the body from the sight
and company of the living. Death is the Cause of Corruption, the Grave is the
place of Corruption. Death is the Privation in the man dying, and the Grave is
an accident in the earth receiving.

a But the main difference is, Necesse est vel mergi cadaver in mari, vel obrui
terra, vel in ae^e putre^cere, vel consumi vel devorari a seris, vel aliquid
simile. Quod spectat ad mersionem, antea dixit mare; quod ad sepulchrum nunc
dicit infernus: mors complectitur reliqua omnia. Thomas Brightmanus in locum.
that the extent of Death seems larger than the extent of the grave, for though
Death seases upon all that the Grave seases upon, yet the Grave does not sease
upon all that that Death seases on; for a man may die and not find a Grave,
the fire may consume him, the birds, beasts, or fishes may devour him, the
water may enwrap him; but then if you will use a Trope, even these may be
called Graves, and then the extent will be the same, and so we may well take
it, when our Savior has so used it, Porio per eos qui in monumentis sunt,
intelliguntur omnes mortui: ab his enim qui sunt in monumentis et naturaliter
sepulti, etiam eos significavit qui non sunt naturaliter sepulti. Iansen.
Comment. in Concord. Evang. cap. 36.
John 5.28. All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice. What? shall not
those that are folded up so many folds of generation and corruption, in the
bowels of Creatures, shall not they that Rev. 20.13. And the Sea gave up the
dead which were in it. Convenienter hoc loco quidam mare pro isto seculo
positum accipiunt, says Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 15. But the literal
sense seems more genuine. Tenendus tamen videtur prop^ius sensus de mortuis in
mari. Pareus in loc.
lie in the bottom of the Sea also hear his voice? Yes; therefore this shows
that all Receptacles of dead bodies, yea though they be living bodies, may be
called Graves. Death is an Enemy to our dwellings and habitations. Many times
the good housekeeper drops down first, and then the house drops down not long
after, as if the dweller were the soul of the house: but if this were all, it
were no great matter. 2. It is an Enemy to friendship and acquaintance amongst
men. This is as Alexanders sword, has cut many a Gordian knot of friendship,
that no contingencies, no bickerings could dissolve, such as the sharp teeth of
bitter words could never pull open, such as the smoother fingers of close
flattery could never unloose. A man can be a friend but usque ad aras, and no
farther. It is an Adage, Ama tanquam osuru, oderis tanquam amaturus. So love as
if you should shortly hate, so hate as if you should shortly love. But be it
love or hatred, it cannot last long. It was Aristotle's gnome, (...), A little
strangeness destroys much friendship. What greater silence or retiredness than
the Grave? If strangeness will break friendship, Who is so strange as he that
is in the Grave, who knows no body, and whom no body knows? Septuagint. much
differently, (...), etc. accordingly the old Latin, erubescant impij, et
deducantur in infernum: muta flant labia dolosa. Iun. et T^emell. Ex^indantur
in sepulchrum. Moller. id est, morte coerceatur ipsorum petulantia, ne amplius
nocere possint. Silere dicuntur, quae ita auseruntur, ut amplius non appareant,
ut cum leges dicuntur silere inter arma. Et Plinius silentia lunae nominat
illud temporis spatium, quo luna conjuncta soli non aspi^itur.
Psalm. 31.17. Let them be silent in the Grave. An Enemy to all natural
Relations; this Enemy But if the Husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of
the Husband. Romans 7.2. Cum enim nuptiae sint bona mortalium, ut ait Augustinus
lib. de nuptijs et concupiscentia, non se extendit obligatio nuptiarum post
vitam mortalem. Et propter hoc in resurrectione quando erit vita immortalis,
neque nubent, neque nubentur, ut dicitur Math. 22. Aquin. in dictum locum.
dissolves the firm bond of Marriage. It snatches the Wife from the Husband,
the Husband from the Wife. Their tenure is but for term of life, till death
them depart. It is an Enemy to all other Relations, it bereaves the Father of
the Son, the Son of the Father, the Daughter of the Mother, the Mother of the
Daughter. It is an Enemy to Brotherhood, and produces that sad Complaint Alas
my Brother It may well be our Subscription, your loving Father, your dutiful
son, your loving Brother till Death, but longer it cannot be.

To our increase; for it lays aside our trading, our purchasing, our letting,
our setting, our husbandry, we sow no more, being to be the seed our selves,
and to be cast into the earth. It cuts off the coveting part of our Age. It
makes a fool of the Miser. Primo stultus est, quia sapiens sibi videtur vir
dives. -- Secundo quia ea custodit quae custodita perduntur, perdita vero
custodiuntur. -- Tertio, quia eam domum et mansionem, in qua in perpetuum debet
permanere sibi non curat -- quarto, quiaquae somniat vera existmat. Stella in
Luc. 12. ubi plura pulchre.
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken, etc. To all earthly hopes. It
nips them in the bud, and strangles them in the birth. It spoils one man's
preferment, another man's Quid enim seculi potest esse diuturnum, cum ipsa
diuturna non sint secula? Ambr. in Lucae quart. cap.
enjoyment. One man hopes to be a Judge; death will not let him. Another hopes
to be a great Commander; Death will not suffer him. A third hopes after tedious
journies, and long absence, to see his own home, to visit his Family, and Death
prevents him arresting him by the way, and claps him into Prison. We must cease
to hope, when we cease to be. Our dance is turned into mourning, Lam. 5.15.
Septuagint. (...).
To our joy and mirth. When we are merry amongst our Friends, sporting or
feasting, oftentimes in comes news that such a dear Brother, such a near
Friend, such a courteous neighbor is deceased, and this damps all our jollity,
and often turns our dancing into mourning, our laughter into weeping, our
feasting into fasting, our pastimes into pensiveness. Mors est recessus animae
a corpore Aristot. Mors hominis non est nisi separalio animae a corpore, hac
enim anima a corpore separata totum compositum moritur: quia de^init esse
compositum; caro moritur, quia privatur forma quae essentialiter est vita --
Vnde impossible est animam esse et non vivere, sicut impossible est animam
esse, et non esse animam. Gabr. di. 21. q. unica, etc. (...), etc. Isid. Pelus.
lib. 3. epist. 248.
To our very subsistence, it divides matter and form, it separates soul and
body. An Enemy to Gods Workmanship in the World; a tearing, a devouring Enemy.
So that the dying man may well say to Death seasing on him, as Ahab to the
Prophet, Have thou found me, O mine Enemy?

Object. But many men find it to be a Friend. 1. The extremely miserable man,
who had rather Nature should die in him, than Misery should live in him. Job
3.20, 21, 22. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to
the bitter in soul? wh ch long for Death, but it comes not, and dig for it
more than for hid Treasure, which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they
can find the Grave. So also, The Septuag. much otherwise, (...).
Job 7.15, 16: So that my soul chooses strangling and death rather than my
life. I loath it, I would not live always, for my days are vanity. Yea Solomon
says, The day of our death is better than the day of our birth, Eccles. 7.1.
2. It may seem a friend to a true godly man, because at once it seems to do
many good offices for him, and to set him free from many encumbrances; being as
welcome to him that he may begin his felicity, as to the other, that he may end
his misery. It is the bridge by which he Finis malorum, janua ad vitam, et c.
Cyprian. Mors piorum mors non est sed vita, miseria hominis moritur non homo.
passes into a better life, it sets him free from mortality, it enters him into
a state of immortality. It puts an end to his labors, it is the beginning of
his reward. It is the end of his tears, it is the beginning of his joy. It is
the Jail-delivery of his soul, the enlargement of his better part.

Resol. To the first Branch. Either the miserable man is in the way of
righteousness or unrighteousness, a child of light, or a child of wrath, an
heir of everlasting promises, or an object of everlasting anger, a vessel of
honor, or a vessel of dishonor. If the latter, so Death is an Enemy, as it
puts an end to his finite miseries to begin his infinite, it exempts him from
temporal wrath to immerse him into eternal wrath, and this is not the part of a
friend, but an Enemy.

If the former, we must distinguish; there is a natural enmity and an
accidental enmity. Naturally Death destroys even a righteous man, it at least
keeps the body in Prison. The fruit and wages of sin cannot absolutely,
naturally, and per se, be a Friend, but an Enemy: if by this a godly man be
dispossessed of his Troubles, yet is he not possessed of his joys. The excutioner
of a Martyr sends him out of this world, yet is not said to send a Martyr to
heaven. It is his work, and so the work of Death to destroy; it is the work of
God to save and glorify. Mors quando a te (muliere scilicet) provisa est tunc
lamentandi materia fuit: nunc vero facta est virtutis occasio; quia tunc ad
paenam peccati data est, nunc permissa est resuscitantis ad gloriam: tunc
tartarus invenit hominem, nunc amittit. Chrysolog. Sermon. 63. Discamus recte
judicare de divina providentia -- non ipsa mala facit, sed quae fiunt a malis
been administrat. Paraeus in Genesis 45.8.
If therefore it be a Friend to any man it is per accidens, per se it is an
Enemy to every man, at least to the life and being of man. To that of Eccles.
7.1. Solomon speaks only of the present vanity of the World, In vita nostra
copia tribulationis inopia consolationis. August.
that a man meets with so much evil, and so much vain good in the World, that
it is better for a man not to be born. Chap. 4.2, 3. explaines it.

The full Answer therefore is this b look upon the vanity, Mors transit est de
laborem ad refrigerium, de expectatione ad praemiuus, de agone ad brabium, de
fide ad notitiam, de peregrinatione ad patriam, de mundo ad patrem Bernard.
misery, and iniquity in the World, so Death is a Friend, at least to a good
man. But consider life is sweet, and every thing desirous to preserve it self,
so it is an Enemy; in the former sense a Friend by chance; in the latter an
Enemy absolutely. Look upon the Troubles incident to the flesh, the frailties,
our wearisomnesse, and pains, and griefs, and maladies, so it is a Friend, as
being ex duobus malis minus, of two evils the least: but as it keeps down the
body, and tyrannizes over the same till the Resurrection, so it is an Enemy, in
the former regard it is a Friend for a need, in the latter regaed it is an
Enemy for a long continuance.

Use 1. Stand then upon your Vt dum semper ignoratur, semper proxima esse
credatur; et tanto quisque in operatione sit ferventior quanto est de vocatione
incertior. Greg. Moral.
Watch against Death as against an Enemy. You know not at what time, or how
soon it may come; you know not in what place, or how near it may be; you know
not whether it will meet you at home in your house, or abroad in the field,
whether it will come in the day or in the night, whether it will take you
sleeping or waking. You know not whether it will come in the second Watch or in
the third Watch. It becomes you to be watchful, least you prove your selves to
be wastfull of your own souls. So look for it as to expect it every day. Die
daily in expectation, that you may die any day in fit preparation.

2. Stand upon your Guard. Be sure you have your Armor of Proof on, your
spiritual Armor.

Object. But to what purpose is that? I shall be conquered, let me do my best.
Was ever man able to grapple with Death, and so to overcome? Does it not
always get the Victory where ever it comes? Is it not called Aequa leg^
Necessitas sortitur insignes et imos. Hor.
Necessitas? So Job 18.14. According to the Seventy, (...)
Let necessity lay hold on him. We read it, The King of terrors. Sol a
insuperabile fatum, etc. Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 15.
Can any one man overcome that which overcomes all men?

Resol. It is true, there is no man is or can be death-proof by any Armor of
proof; the thickest Walls it can pierce, it can scale the highest Walls, it can
cut through the strongest Coat of Mail. But yet as it was said of Vtque
animadvertit undique se strictis pugionibus peti, toga caput obvolvit: simul
sinistra manu sinum ad ima crura deduxit, quo honestius caderet, etiam
inseriore corporis part velata Sueton.
Julius Caesar, when he saw there was no remedy but die he must, the
Assassinatours pressing so hard upon him, and adding so many wounds to him, He
covered his head with his Gown, and with his left hand drew down the fold of
his Garment over his legs, that he might fall modestly, Covering his lower
parts that the nakedness of life might not be seen, and covering his face that
the Deformities of Death might not be looked on. So if thou can not avoid the
mortal wound of Death, yet laboul in another sense honest cadere. Die with a
good Name, and a good Report, and a good Conscience.

2. This preparation will serve for an after Victory; for as Christ led
Captivity captive, and triumphed over Death, which had before triumphed over
him; so shall we, if we die in Christ, and live to Christ. We must be content
to lose the Victory that we may gain it, and give ground at first that we may
gain ground at last of this our Enemy. And mark what pieces of Armor are
necessary against Satan or the World, the same are necessary against Death. Yet
when we have done all we can, We are but poor Soldiers, it is our Cheiftaine
that gets the Victory for us. The Weapon of this Enemy wherewith he does all
the mischief, that is a sting; that Death carries a sting with it. A sting is
first telum natural, Nature gives stings to those Creatures that have stings,
it is not any artificial Weapon, as the Sword or Bow. 2. Poenale, it puts the
Creature that is stung (be it Man or Beast) to a great deal of smart and pain
for the time, it is very a terrifying pain. 3. Lethale, some especially are so
poysonsom, viz. of Adders and Vipers, and other Serpents, that they corrupt and
inflame the blood, and poison the body, and in short time bring Death. This
sting the Apostle says is sin, verse. 56. For as the Scorpion by the sting
transfuses a deadly poison into those upon whom it fastens, so Aculeum enim
mortis esse peccatum, utque multo gravius malum ipsa morte utpote in quo suas
illa vires habeat omnes jam manifestum est.
Death kills by sin. Were it not for sin, Death would be weaponless, and
stingless, a toothless thing. Or rather it would not be at all. For it is Sin
only stings men to death.
It would be to us but as it is to herbs and plants which die in the Winter,
but live again in the Summer. So it would be but as a benumming for a short
time; whereas sin by which Death stings leaves such a poison in the nature of
man, that he shall never recover himself by any natural power, as the herb or
flower, but only by the mighty power of God in Jesus Christ.

Therefore we can never be sufficiently thankful to him disarm Death for us,
and draw out the sting. And who is it that can disarm such an universal Enemy,
but he that has the universal Militia of all the World? the Lord of hosts is
his Name; But of this more anon in the fourth part.

If Death carry a sting with it, and that sting be sin, as Aquinas well notes)
Sciendum est autem quod strimulus mortis potest dici vel stimulans ad mortem,
vel quo utitur seu quem facit mors. Sed literalis sensus est stimulus mortis,
i. e. stimulans ad mortem, quia qomo per peccatum est impu^sus et dejectus ad
mortem. Aquin. in 1 Cor. 15.
if sin sting men to Death, How can we sufficiently wonder at the
fool-hardiness of mortal men, who make nothing of it to dally and play with
sin, as if it were some toothless, harmless thing, as if it were some harmless
play-fellow. To see people play with Dogs or Birds, to see them stroke them,
and take them in their arms, is not strange, but to see people play with Snakes
and Adders, with Scorpions and Cockatrices, is a most strange sight: and what
do men do otherwise in dallying with sin? The Serpent in the Garden left a
sting in Adams disobedience. Adam could not be content with the fruit of
Paradise, and so was stung to Death by his disobedience. As the Israelites
could not be content with Numb. 21.6. These serpents fiery teeth being the just
punishment of their fiery tongues. Or the serpents tongue, which is his sting,
being the just punishment of their tongues become stings.
Manna, and so God sent amongst them fiery Serpents which stung them to death,
that they who murmured at mercies might now have something to murmur for.

The greatest of boasters is vanquished by one of the least of creatures.
Orion boasted that the earth could not produce any such Monster which he would
not undertake to encounter and kill, and yet this man was after killed by a
Scorpion. Thus the proud sinner that dares Heaven and Earth, Angels and Men,
nay God himself, and all, is killed with the sting of one sin. It That was
applied to him to wound, which is ordinarily used for healing.
was a strange death that Marcus Arethusius the Martyr was put to by Julian the
Apostate, which was to be anointed all over with honey, and so to be stung to
death with Waspes and Bees. But this is the death of every sinner he annoints
himself with the sweetness and pleasure of sin, and so is stung to death for
his labor. You that are yet in your sins, that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity and sin as it were with carr-ropes, will no warning serve you? Has not
sin been represented to you in the Book of God, and by the Ministers of God,
and through the judgments of God as the most infectious, poyson-some,
dangerous, mortal thing that can be imagined? Has it not been laid open to you
the very Monster of Nature, the shame of the Creature, the Sicut putredo aufert
pomo decorem, colorem, odorem et saporem: sic peccatum aufert animae decorem
vitae, odorem fama, valorem gratiae, saporem gloriae. Bonavent.
spot of the soul, the darkness of the mind, the obliquity of that which was
straight, the infection of that which was sound, the weakness of that which was
strong, and the death of that which was living? Has it not been displayed as a
sore, a wound, a stench, and now as a sting! and will you still venture upon it,
nay follow after it, delight in it, nay yet defend and patronize it? What then
shall we say to draw off your hearts? Expressions will not do it, warning will
not effect it. The Lord by the Key of David unlock your hearts, that what has
been spoken to you may prevail with you; That you may shun the evil and choose
the good, and though you cannot avoid Death, you may avoid, what you can, the
sting of Death which is sin.

There is a supposed Victory or Conquest which the Enemy for a time has over
all men, yea over the Elect themselves. O Grave thy Victory! Therefore death
has dominion over them that are dead.
Romans 6.9. Death has no more dominion over Christ, Romans 5. v. 14. Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, this Reign of Death presupposes a Victory that
Death has obtained, v. 16. Death reigned by one. Psalm. 55.4. The terrors of
Death. Why terrors? because every one that conquers is still terrible to them
he conquers. Cant. 8.6. Love is as strong as Death. Victorious over our Lives;
It as easily dissolving the hands and twists that hold soul and body together
as Sampson did the cords and withes with which he was bound. Prima mors animam
pellit volentem a corpore, secunda mors animam volentem tenet in corpore. Aug.
de Civ. Dei.
b This is that which cuts asunder that golden Link that knits the matter and
form, the body and soul into one compound, and so dissolves the composition.
This is that Bill of Divorce that severs not only two that were one flesh, but
two that were one person, one man. This is that two-edged sword, not that
divides between the joints and the marrow, the soul and spirit, for that is the
Word of God, but that which cuts betwixt the soul and body, the spiritual and
fleshy part. This is that sword that cuts the knot at one blow, which
perfection of constitution and diligence about Diet together with the Art of
the Physician has seemed to make up indissoluble.

It is victorious over our Bodies being dead, for it keeps them down to
corruption. Psalm. 16.10. Spoken of Christ, but cannot be said of us. Psalm.
49.9. that should still live and not see corruption. It never leaves stamping
and trampling upon us till it has beaten us to As Moses did the Moltencalf.
dust.

It drives us to the very walls of our first matter.
It is a most insulting victorious Enemy, it even then treads and insults over
us when we are down. It never leaves us so long as it can find but one inch
left of these mortal Bodies. No such tyrant as death, because no tyrant can
tyrannize more than by inflicting death.
Nay, so it tyrannizes over us, that it makes even the Worms that rise out of
us to devour us. Over our very memories. For it makes us in a short to be
forgotten as if we had never been. Psalm. 31.12. I am forgotten as a dead man
out of mind, I am like a broken vessel. The Psalmist puts them fitly
together, as a dead man, and as a broken Vessel, because the dead man is as a
broken Vessel. Eccles. 9.5. The memory of them is forgotten. (...) viz. Of
those that are dead. Not only they are forgotten, but their memory, if they
have been memorable, yet they are forgotten. How many millions of men that have
lived upon earth, and that to old age, and yet have left no print or footsteps
of themselves behind them. Dignum certe est ut ipsorum memoria maneat. Muscul.
in Math. 26.
Yet this is not universally true of all, some having been so famous in their
generations, such especially as are recorded in the Word of God, as no time
shall eat them out of remembrance, no age but shall speak of them.

The manner how. 1. By divine permission irresistibly, Eccles. 8.8. There is no
man has power over the spirit to retain the spirit, neither has he power in
the day of death. It will force the Scholar to lay aside his books, because
no arguments can confute Death; no Rhetorique persuade it; nay no Enchantments
can take hold of it: It will cause the Soldier to lay down his sword, or take
it per force out of his hand; no weapon can kill, nor strength repulse it. It
will force the Emperor to lay down his Crown, and let fall his Scepter; for
no power can master it, no authority can overruled it. It is in vain to lay
ambushments, or to contrive any Stratagems; for this Conqueror cannot be
ensnared: It is in vain to raise any batteries, or plant any Ordnance against
it; for no violence can over-master it: It is in vain to dig any mines, to lay
any traps; for Death will counter-mine a^l undertakings and underworkings
against it self.

2. According to the course of Nature irrevocably; so that if we look no higher
than that, this all-conquering Enemy shall go on conquering, and never be
conquered: For Sed haec fides ut est in primis necessaria, ita difficillima
semper habitat fuit, quod humanae rationis intelligentia quam maxim videretur
esse remota. Estius in sentent. lib. 4. part. 2. dest. 43. Res est creditu
dissicilis, ubi putredine consumpta fuerint corpora, tandem suo tempore
resurrectura esse. Itaque cum multi ex philosophis asseruerint immortales esse
animas, carnis resurrectio a paucis probata fuit, in quo etsi nulla fuit
excusatio, inde tamen monemur rem esse magis arduam, quam ut hominum sensus ad
se trahat. Calv. Institut. lib. 3. ver. 25. Sect. 3.
Nature does not teach a Resurrection, but rather furnishes us with arguments
against it. Acts 17.32. When they heard of the Resurrection, some mocked. Men
led only by principles of Philosophy will jeere at such a Doctrine.

By experience it conquers universally; Veni, vidi, vici, I have come, seen,
and overcome, may well be the devise in Deaths black colors. It has passed
over all men, and reigned over all men: Vnde non importune neque incongrue
arbitror accidisse, etsi non humna industria judicio for^asse divino, ut
hoc-verbum quod est moritur in latina lingua, nec grammatici declinare
potuerint ea regula qua caetera talia declinantur, et c. Aug. de civit. Dei,
lib. 13. cap. 11.
Which made Augustine wittily gloss upon the word moritur: I know not, says
he, how it comes to pass that this word is not declined as other words; for
mortuus does not come regulary of moritur, as ortus of oritur; Cenvenienter, ut
quemadmodum id quod significat non potest agendo, ita verbum non potest
declinari loquendo, very congruously and fitly, that as the thing cannot be
declined in action, so neither the word by way of speaking.

Considering the effects, it conquers bloodily, multo sanguine and vulneribus,
etc. Death cannot but be a deadly enemy: Sometimes great Victories are obtained
by the flight of an enemy out of the field, sometimes by taking many prisoners
without much blood shed; but In exorahilc fatum. Virgil.
death gives no quarter, spares no man's life; but whereas other conquerors save
alive, this does not. It was said of Pompey, he triumphed in Asia, Europe, and
Afric, won 1000 Castles, and 800 Cities, and as many Ships; so that
Octavius wished himself Pompeii felicitatem. It is written of Julius Caesar,
that he overcame Europe by severity, Asia by his celerity, and Afric by his
sagacity; and that he never had but three foyles: but the Grave can say the
like, it was never deceived of Victory but three times especially; viz. at the
Qui nec dum mortem gustavit ut aeternitatis candidatus jam nobis ostenderet,
etc. Tertull. advers. Iud. Quod hodie Enoch et Elias nondum resurrectionis
idspuncti, quia nec mortefuncti, qua tamen de orb t^anslati, et hoc ipso jam
aeternitatis candidati, ab omni vitio, et ab omni damno, et ab omni injuria et
contumelia, immunitatem carnis ediscunt. Id. de resurrect. carn.
translation of Enoch, at the ascension of Eliah, and at the resurrection of
Christ; else it has conquered all the world with no less severitie then
celeritie and vicissim.

1 Use. Is the Grave so victorious? Then do not I wonder to see so many
Trophies of death every where. How is it that so many Churches have their
Escucheons and Flags hang upon their walls? Are not these the Colors that
Death has won? How is it that I see the mourners walk in ranks? Is it not
Death leading a man in triumph to the Earth? How is it that I see so many
monuments within, and without doors? Are not these as pillars upon Rachels
grave? Are not these as the Columnae rostratae.
Statues and Columns which among the Romans were erected to their Conquerors?
Surely all these Solemnities show no less then that Death is the great Victor
and Conqueror of the World.

2. Use. Let not us that are poor mortals, set up our crests, speak high, look
big, or be like the Jer. 2.24.
wild Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure:
we must at last stoop to this irresistible Commander. But here is the comfort
of every man that is in Christ, though he may be conquered by Death and the
Grave for a time, he shall at last be conqueror, and obtain the victory, when
shall be brought to pass that saying that is written (and this most certainly
shall be brought to pass) O Death, etc. Part 4. Observe. 4.
That Death and the Grave shall one day be conquered: Sub quo? By what
Commander? by whose Militia? Resol. By Christ, Heb. 2.10. called the Captain
of our salvation. (...) Quod Erasmus and alij quidam principem vertunt, sed
constat etiam authorem, inventorem archietectum ea voce significari. Estius in
loc.
the Author, or Architect, or the Captain. They shall be His forces that shall
destroy Death. 2. Quando, when? Resol. See verse 54. When corruption, etc. at
the Resurrection of the dead, when the Trumpet shall sound to bid battle to
Death: when that (...) mentioned 2 Pet. 3.10. shall be as the beating of the
Drum, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and all the world shall
be in a flame, as a beacon kindled, to let Death know that the Conqueror of
death is landed, and Christ's word shall be Mors moriatur, let Death die.

3. Vbi? All the Earth, the whole Globe, Sea and Land shall be all one field in
which this battle shall be fought: He shall pursue his deadly enemy Death into
all Countries and Nations, and do continual execution in the pursuit: where
ever Death has vanquished, it shall be vanquished.

4. Quomodo, how? Death shall be disarmed, the sting shall be taken out. To
take poison out of a serpent, or to draw out the sting we clap a red cloth
into their jaws, a piece of that garment that was red from Bozrah, will draw
out the sting. Object. The sting was taken out at the time of death; for a man
ceases to sin. Resol. But the power of sin continues whilst we are held under
Death. Death shall be destroyed by Death, as David killed Goliath with his own
sword. Heb. 2.14. He took upon him flesh and blood, that by death he might
destroy him that had the power of death (g) which is the devil. Diabolus habet
imperium mortis, sicut carnifex habet imperium rotae patibuli, non utique
absolute sed ex nutu superioris et c. Pareus in Heb. c. 2. v. 14.


5. For whom is this great Victory? It is for man. 1. Not for Angels, they are
not dead but live; they wear no corruptible dying bodies, and so they do not
die. 2. For righteous men, not for evil men; for though they shall live the
second time, yet they shall live the second time, that they may die the second
death, not by separation of the soul from the body, but by separation both of
soul and body from God, who is the fountain of life, nay who is the life of
our lives; who as he is natura naturans, nature that gives nature, so he is
vita vivificans, l fe giving life; who, as the soul is actus corporis
organici, is actus orbis universi, who (...) Aristot. Metaph. lib. 3. (...).
Aristot. de mundo cap. 6.
moves all things, himself immovable.

This great and last Victory will be for their sakes, who have fought and
conquered for his sake: This great fight shall be in their behalf, who have
fought the good fight; for their sakes who have overcome the world by prayer,
the flesh by fasting, and the devil by watching and reststiing: for their sakes
who have overcome their sins by mortification, their trials by patience, their
lets by perseverance, their fears by hope, their sense by faith, and their
enemies by Christ the Captain of their salvation. So that we shall be able to
say as it is said of Babylon, Ier. 50.22, 23. A sound of battle is in the land,
how is the Hoc est Babylon, quae quasi malleus adamantinus percussit et
contudit totam terram: ita ut nihil quantumvis durum vel aeneumei resistere,
aut ejus ictum sustinere possit, quin confringereturet dissil^ret. A Lapid. in
loc. Haec ipsa de morte dici possunt quae omnia confringit, a Christo tandem
confrigenda.
hammer of the whole earth cut asunder? that like Iael's hammer does not only
kill, but nails us to the earth for a certain time. Romans 16.20. The God of
peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly: So Death under your feet
shortly, to show that we are to enjoy the benefit of this Victory. But God
shall bruise, to show that he must have the glory of the Victory; and therefore
Christ triumphed over his own death when he was carried up into heaven in a
cloud as in a chariot, for so Elias his vehiculum was called; my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. And one will have it, that when
Christ ascended up to Heaven, the Angels went before and proclaimed, Lift up
your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in.

6. Why is this great Victory obtained?

1. That no enemy may be left, and this is the last enemy. Object. But is not
the hell of wicked men an enemy? No: To them it is an enemy, but not to
Christ, and his Members, because it is the very execution of his enemies; This
Ark will not leave one Dagon standing.

2. That man may be made up again, that Death has taken and kept asunder.

3. That his wonderful Power may be manifest. Victory declares Power. Psalm.
49.15. We read of the power of the Grave, but Christ will have all the World
to see that which now only some of the World believes, that his power is
greater than the power of the Grave. Psalm. 106.8. He saved Israel at the Red
Sea to make his power to be known.

4. That his glory may appear in his power, as his power in Victory. And having
spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in it. Vt autem praeclaram hanc Christi victoriam mentis nostrae
oculis visendam praebeat, utitur illustribus metaohoris desumptis a
consuetudine triumphantum imperatorum. Nam illud verbum (...) alludit ad illam
consuetudinem, qua victores solebant victos armis spoliare, eadem que pro
trophaeo illic figere, ubi in fugam hosts versi sunt. Quod autem addit (...),
spectat illam triumphantium pompam in qua solebant ignominiae causa ducis
captivos inter se junctos agere, ante curium suum triumphalem, toto populo
inspectante and acclamante. Cicero in Pisonem, hunc morem triumphantium hisce
verbis depingit: quid tandem habet iste currus? quid vincti ante currum duces?
quid simulacra oppidorum? quid aurum? quid argentum? et c. Daven. in Coloss.
Coloss. 2.15. He will raise himself glory out of the confusion of his Enemies,
and honor out of the destruction of his Adversaries.

Shall Death be disarmed, and the Grave conquered? Christ overcome for us
hereafter, and shall not we overcome for him now? Are we such perfect men, and
such complete Saints, that we have no lusts to mortify, no temptations to
vanquish? Poor men! Lusts (God knows) too many, and temptations too frequent,
but we neither feel the burden of the one, nor know the danger of the other.
When King Francis the first of that name was resolved to go into Italy to
recover the Dukedom of Milan, he advised with his Privy Council which way to
get into Italy, his Fool met him as he came from the Councel-board, and told
him his Council had dealt unwisely with him, for they had told him how to get
into Italy, but not how he should get out again. It is so with us, our carnal
Friends can show us the way into dangerous temptations, into Noli conscentire
concuiscentiae tuae. Non est unde concipiat nisi de te. Aug. homil. 42. cap. 8.
consuming lusts, that consume our Estates by prodigality, our bodies by
luxury, our repute by infamy, but they cannot show us the way out again, but
leave us in the lurch. Thou feeble, faint-hearted Christian, whom every slight
temptation proves a Coward, who know not how to deny the inticements of a
sinner either to commit a sin, or to do that which probably will lead thee to
commission of sin, remember what is written. Rev. 2.7. To him that Insidiae
repunt in hoc seculo, et in cautos repent occupant. Repentes autem tentationes
quis numerat? Repunt, sed cave ne surripiant, vigiletur in ligno, et c. Aug. in
Psalm. 103. enarratio conci. quart.
overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life; not to him that is overcome.
1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of thy mind, be sober and hope to the end.
Ephesians. 6.14. Stand therefore having your loins girt with truth, and having on
the breast plate of Righteousness. It is better to conquer with pains than to
yield with sorrow. To him that is regenerate sin is worse than Death, and grace
is better than life. Let him never look to have a share in the Conquest of the
Death of the body that has not before a share in the Conquest of the body of
Death.

Thanks be to God who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Glory be to God on high, the mighty God that gives Victories, the merciful God
that gives us this Victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. What praises can we
use to set out this benefit, or what words can we use to set out his praise?
who when he searches into things hidden is above all most wise. When he rewards
every man is most just. When he bestows his Gifts is most liberal. And when he
conquers his Enemies is most valiant. And who is it for? for us. Has given us
the Victory. Us? Why should the great God bestow so much honor on us? What are
we, or what is our fathers house that we should have such Victory given us?
Nonne fragiliores sumus, qua^ si vitrei essemus? vitrum enim etsi fragile tamen
servatum diu durat, et invenis calices ab avis et proavis in quibus bibunt
nepotes et pronepotes. Aug. hom. 28. c. 7.
We whose original is dust, whose excellency is vanity, and whose life is sin.
We that have received so many Benefits, returned so little thanks, and deserved
so much anger. Whom before our Conversion no Benefits could persuade to come to
God; whom since our Conversion no mercies can engage to walk close with God.

3. When is this? The Apostle says, he has done it, to show that it is as
certain as if it were done already. But it is then when in all outward
appearance we are both hopeless and helpless. When Death and the Grave have
gone on conquering, and to conquer to the last Generation of men. But Gratias
misericordiae ipsius. Quid dicam aliud quam gratias gratiae ipsius? Nos enim
gratias agimus: non damus, nec reddimus, nec referimus, nec rependimus gratiam,
si tantum verbis agimus, retribuimus. Aug. in Psalm. 88. Enarrat.
what shall we content our selves to be only thankful in Word, shall we not
add Action to it also? We read of an Hunter in Italy, that at first when he
ever took any thing in the Forest or Field by hunting, he used to offer up the
head and the feet to Diana, but happening once to catch a Boar of a vast
bigness, he resolved to leave off that Custom in part, and said Diana should be
content with the head only, which he hung upon a Tree, but falling a sleep the
head fell down and gave him a bruise of which he died. The Moral of this
historical Fable may teach us to take heed how we content our selves to give
God only our head in praising him, so as to invent and utter praises, but even
our hands and our feet, to act to his praise, and to walk to his glory. For
whilst we profess, we honor God in our lips, and dishonor him in our lives,
the very head will fall upon us, our very Words will condemn us.

I am sorry I have not Time to urge this Duty, all that I now desire is that
you may overcome my over bold prolixity with your patience, and that I may
overcome the rest of my work with such truth and sobriety that whilst I speak
somewhat of our deceased. Brother, I may neither weary you, nor flatter him,
but may only lay before you the hopes I have that for his sake also, and to
his comfort the saying shall come to pass which is written, O Death where is
thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?

One of the Kings of Athens made a Law, that when any one died, at the Funeral
there should be a speech made to them that were nearest of kin. Some People are
so satirical they cannot endure to hear any thing spoken in honor of the Dead,
but when we go about by the sweet unguent of their good name to anoint them to
their Burial, they are ready to say, Why was all this waste? This waste time,
and these waste words? If there be any such here (as perhaps among so many
there may be many) I hope they will give me leave to speak of him amongst his
Kindred, of which here is a considerable number: Sure a man may without any
offense Nothing sooner stirs up children to virtue then the example of parents,
as contrariwise nothing sooner corrupt them then their ill example. Si natura
jubet velocius and citius nos corrumpunt vitiormm exempla domestica, magnis cum
subeant animos authoribus. Iuven. Satyr. 14. ubi quam plurima de hoc argumento.
propound the example of a Father to his Sons. Syri non cremabant, sed
condiebant, cadavera myrrha, aloe, ced^o, melle, sale, bitumine et resina,
odoribus et unguentis delibuta. Alexand. ab Alexandr. lib. 3.
They use in many places to stick the Corpse or Coffin with sweet smelling
herbs and flowers; I know not why I may not also stick a flower or two in the
Coffin of this well-deserving person lately deceased Master Henry English.
Something therefore would be spoken, but yet at present but little.

It is true indeed, at present Death seems to triumph over him, and to lead him
here in Triumph to the Grave: But, O Grave, is this thy Victory, to insult over
a man full of years, and full of pains, and full of weakness? Well, I doubt not
but the day is coming apace, when in his behalf it shall be said, as in the
behalf of all other dead in Christ, O Death where is thy sting? etc. I make no
doubt of it, but as it was said of Christ, He lead Captivity captive: so he and
all others dead in the Lord shall through the power of Christ, for the merits
of Christ, and to the praise of Christ, trample on Death being disarmed,
triumph over the Grave being overcome: nay, I expect that he and all others
shall not only be Conquerers, but more than Conquerers. Romans 8.37. (...). 1.
More than Conquerers. Because Conquerers in the World gain the Victory by
power, but we in weakness, they by resisting, but we by persisting, they by
kill ng, but we by being killed, it may be said of all that die for Christ,
that they are more than Conquerers, because they cannot conquer but by being
conquered. 2. More than Conquerers, because the Victory is so easily attained,
Christ fights and we get the Victory, etc. 3. More than Conquerers, that is,
triumphant Conquerers, such as reap the fruit of their Conquest.

The Apostle says, Cor. 9.2. He that gets the Mastery is tempera^e in all
things. He must be a well tempered man that must be a victorious man. 1. Well
tempered in his speeches, not rash, not censorious, not quarrelsome, not
contentions then when he has means and opportunity so to be. 2. Well tempered
too for his desires, either to pleasures or profits, to be free from luxury on
one hand, or avarice on the other hand. When Riches increase, not to set the
heart on them, and when they are multiplied not prodigally to waste them: such
a tempered man was the deceased. There is also a very good temper which is
temperamentum ad justitiam, not in the Philosophers sense. How ever he had many
men to deal withal, and that in many things, know not the man alive that can
tax him with any fraudulency or injustice. Agnos^unt omnes sani justitiam esse
omnium moximum communissimumque bonum -- et postea -- apud philosophos totum
chorum virtutum significat juxta versum. (...). Illyr. Clav. Iustitia est
reddere unicuique quod suum est. Tribue ergo tribus qua sua sunt: superiori,
aequali, inseriori, etc. Bern.
And this truly is so excellent a virtue that all virtues toward men are often
called Righteousness, yea all graces are frequently termed by this name: and
therefore as Anselm says well, Justice gives to every one according to their
worth, according to their condition: to our Betters reverence, to our Equals
correspondence, to our Inferiors favor, to God obedience, to our selves
sobriety, to our Enemies patience, to the needy mercy. And to such large
promises are made in Scripture. Prove. 2.21. The upright shall dwell in the
Land. But what dwelling shall he have? Prove. 3.33. He blesses the habitation
of the just. But with what manner of Blessing? Prove. 14.11. The tabernacle of
the upright shall flourish. And indeed however he is pleased to suspend the
performance of this from many of his precious servants for their Trial: yet
all this was made good to him, though not for his righteousness: for God did
bless his increase by a special providence, putting such undertakings at such
times and seasons into his hands, when they might be most advantageous to him.
3. To be well tempered in matter of Religion. For I observe there are four
Constitutions in Religion as well as in bodily Compositions. Angeli sine zelo
nihil sunt, et substantiae suae amittunt praer^gativam nisi eam zeli ardore
sustentent. Ambr. in Ps. 118.
1. There are some in whom a phlegmatic temper is too predominant that are too
cold and too slow to any profession, you cannot get them forward to any Duties,
sluggish, and drowsy Christians. Matthew. 24.12. The love of many w^xes cold: so
the zeal, the prayers, the discourse of many waxes cold, they want heat. 2.
Some like these of a melancholy temper, discontented with every way, pleased
with no way. 3. Some again, are over sanguine and credulous, in love with any
Doctrine, constant to none, giving entertainment to any, but keeping true
correspondency with none at all. 4. Others again are over choleric and furious
in their way, will hear no reason, admit of no argumentation. But in this our
worthy deceased Brother there was such a temper as might well recommend him for
an excellent Example of Religion: he was no lukewarm Laodicean, contenting
himself with a form of goliness, but denying the power thereof. None of those
that think enough that God have service, but care not what service it be,
either how sluttishly performed in one extreme, or how apishly in another, how
irreverently performed on one hand, or how superstitiously on the other. He
professed himself an Enemy as well to all suspicious adorations as to all
odious confusions in Gods service. I must confess, I never came into his
company but I came away heated with his godly zeal, what earnest Expressions
have I heard from him, to see the Church of God in all places settled in peace,
to see Religion here at home settled in the true power and purity, to see a
just and powerful Magistracy in the Nation, to see a pious and learned
Ministry in the Church, to see an orderly spiritual heavenly service in Gods
house, to see a spiritual charitable concord amongst all Christians worshipping
the same God, believing in the same Christ, sanctified by the same Spirit,
professing the same faith, rinsed by the same Baptism, joined in the same Body,
redeemed by the same Blood, and joynt-heirs of the same Glory. This was true
heat, the true zeal of Gods house, no feverish distempered heat, proceeding
from the predominancy of Choler, or from a malignant humor, but a zeal
sweetened with charity, and enlightened with knowledge. And whilst I mention
knowledge, I have often wondered, that considering his manifold Employments in
his middle and elder part of his life, how he should attain to so great a
measure of knowledge as he had in so many godly Books, but above all in the
Book of God. But it was not such knowledge as is spoken of 1 Cor. 8.1. Which
puffs up. There is too much of this swelling knowledge in these Times,
gunpowder knowledge which puffes men up to undertakings too high for them, when
people commence per saltum, from catechumeni to become prebyteri. It was not so
with this religious personage, who although rich inwardly, in abundance of
knowledge, yet was one of the most humble, lowly minded men that I have met
withal. O Humility, the Pedestal of all Graces! the Copy of Christ, Learn of
me! the glory of Saints! I am but dust and ashes, says Abraham. I am but a
worm and no man, says David. I am not worthy thou should come under my roof,
says the Centurion. I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, says the most
painful and skillful Apostle. In Music the higher any note stands upon the
range, the smaller it is in sound. The higher we are in excellency, the less
should we seem at least to our selves.
The more Endowments Gods servants have, the less they see. Laodicea
contrariwise was never so poor as when she thought her self so rich: Because
thou say I am rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and
know not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. Rev. 3.17.

Never was a fitter Time to preach Humility to you, and to set such an Example
of Humility before you than in these proud Times, wherein men make themselves
what they should not be, think themselves what they are not, and are not what
to others they seem to be. Never a fitter Time to learn this Lesson than in
such Times, when so many that teach others, teach any Lesson besides thi^* It
is with Religion as with all other things, there is a medium and two extremes,
and therefore it is called the narrow way: as Pythagoras said, (...), In diet
let a man eat too little he sterves himself, let him eat too much he surfets
himself. Let a man build a house too high and it will stand over him, let him
build too low and he cannot stand in his house; lay too little ballast in the
ship and it oversets, lay too much into it and so it may sink; let a scholar
neglect his study he proves a Dunce, let him be unreasonably intent and he may
break his brains; use too little Physic and the body not being acquainted with
it may be overthrown, use too much and the body being over-used it finds no
benefit. Nilus if it flow less than twelve Cubits makes a Famine, and if it
flow more than eighteen cubits, it also makes a Famine. There are a kind of
Birds that either lie flat on their breasts on the earth or else are
continually flying in the air, for they have no feet: it is so in Religion,
understand me aright, I mean, Quoad specificationem actus, not Quoad exercitum:
the way or kind of Religion, not the exercise. When you have found the right
way, make what haste in it you will, press forward toward the mark of the high
Calling, etc. In my judgment he is a wise Christian whom no errors can make
erroneous, he a strong Christian whom no scandals can make to fall, who because
he finds the frigid Zone too cold runs not presently into the torrid, or
because he finds the torrid too hot runs not straight into the frigid, but
avoiding both Excesses keeps himself within the temperate Climate of sound
Religion: of this temper was the deceased, and one that sailed warily betwixt
Scylla and Charybdis, being as unwilling to be swallowed up of one as to be
split upon the other. A good firm Protestant proportionably careful of the
Truths purity, and of the Churches unity. And now in this his last sickness
wherein he verily apprehended that Death waited for him, his Discourse was (as
I am informed) wholly of things spiritual and heavenly, not suffering any
earthly thing so much as to be interlined, or come within a parenthesis,
showing to all about him a weariness of the world, a desire of a change, and a
thirst after Heaven; and in his earnest Prayers bewailing the calamities of
Christ's Church, and the sad condition of Gods true and faithful People,
recommended the Church of God to the Mercies of God. And O that the merciful
God would hear the Prayer of humble minded men, and that his faithful ones
would give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise
in the earth. That our dross may be taken away from our silver, and our wine
may no longer be mixed with water. When, when will the indignation be over-past?
O that it might be but a little moment: till then we will hide our selves under
his wings, that we may be safe under his feathers. Ye that are the Neighbors
and Allies of the Deceased, I have set before you the Pattern of a good and
virtuous man, but especially ye that are the Issue and Offspring of him, I have
proposed to ye the Example of a good Father, he has entitled ye to his name,
least to ye his earthly Mansions, bequeathed to ye his earthly Possessions, be
ye also Inheritours of his exemplary virtues: God Almighty grant ye the former
blessing of your Father here, and the present hoped blessedness of your Father
hereafter, that ye may live plentifully, and walk piously here, and die happily
hereafter, conquering all sin at the time of Death, and conquering Death at the
Resurrection, for then in the behalf of all those that are Christ's shall be
made good the saying that is written, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the title page, for (...) read (...). In Epist. to the reader, for
Hercules, r. Achilles. for way apologized, r. was apologized. for impartial, r.
partial. for impartiality, r. partiality. for taught, r. touched. In the Sermon.
p. 3. in marg. for Paulum r. Paulam. l. 24. f. (...) r (...). f. (...) r.
(...). p. 5. marg. f. adjuncto r. adunco. p. 6. l. r 3. f. this is as r. this
is as. p. 9 marg. f. transit r. transitus, f. laborem r. labor. p. 13. marg.
f. volentem r. nolentem. p. 14. f. (...) r. (...) p. 15. marg. f. habitat. r.
habita.


