PANTHALIA: OR THE Royal Romance.

A DISCOURSE Stored with infinite variety in relation to STATE-GOVERNMENT And
Passages of matchless affection gracefully interveined, And presented on a
Theater of Tragical and Comical State, in a successive continuation to these
Times.

Faithfully and ingenuously rendered.

Qui se scire dicit quod nescit, temerarius est:
Qui se negat scire quod scit, ingratus est.
AUG. LONDON, Printed by J. G. and are to be sold by Anthony Williamson at the
Queens-Arm^s in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659

Charles ye second, by ye grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland. Defender of the Faith etc:
portrait of Charles II

The Opinion of a Native Candiot touching this ROYAL ROMANCE.
HEre is presented to your judicious view, candid Gentlemen, (for to you I make
this address, whose Judgments are clear, and senses unbyassed) a Discourse of
infinite consequence, not only in its useful relation to these present times,
but as it may properly reflect in a succeeding continuation to Posterity.

It was an excellent Observation of an eminent Statesman, then whom none more
exquisite in the discovery or survey of the qualities, natures, and
temperatures of Nations; That nothing is more requisite, then to be familiarly
and intimately versed with the humors, garbs and conditions of such people,
with whom we are by interchange of Commerce (the staple of every active and
flourishing State) to negotiate. Of what high consequence then may this
Relation appear, having to life so exactly portray'd the Laws, Natures, and
Qualities, serious and amorous, with the distinct tempers of neighboring
Nations, with which we have continued formerly so free and frequent Commerce,
so familiar and assiduate converse? And in both these highly advantageous to
the individual Union and Constitution of a State.

As for the style, dialect and method of the Author, I shall render you an
account seriously and succinctly: He has with a pleasing facility (an Argument
of much ingenuity) observed punctually that course in this Excellent Romance,
which may serve for a Directory to every equal and sinewy Author, who by his
integrity, purity and candor, vindicates his sincere Labor from the least
jealousy of a rigid Censure. To second this Opinion (for my Pen was never
engaged to assentation) you shall find in this National Survey, neatly
interwoven with sundry delightful passages; those three Requisites highly
approved in Subjects of thi^ nature.

1. Fruitfulness in the Relation.

2. An apt composedness in his Digestion.

3. And a native quickness in his Expression.

So as, if Homer (that Honor of his Age) was so highly commended for his
contracted sweetness, in reducing his memorable Iliad to the compass of a Nut;
what opinion may you retain of this Relators industry, who with such
perspicuity, brevity, and facetious elegancy has enlarged his Assay to so
curious and copious a discovery? The attest whereof, with a free and ingenuous
appeal to your own Judgment, is here transmitted to your perusal, by

Your well-wishing Friend FLORENCIO TRIBACCIO.

An Advertisement to the judicious Reader.
SO keen and eager were the Talons of our Statizing Censors, as this Royal
Romance would not upon its first production or presentation be admitted to the
Press. It came too near Truths heels to be entertained as a welcome Guest. The
Stationer, to whom it was at first addressed, though he held close to the
Principles of a just Monarchy; and in the most distracted and Anarchical times
(may this redound ever to his honor) has never given acceptance nor
countenance to any Copy, that might saucily detract from the High Prerogative
of his Great Master, durst not make it his Land-adventure to afford it a
publication, lest his attempt should incur a public censure. But since the
Dolphin (by means of a prudent re-assembled Synod, which made their constant
care for constitution and conservation of a Republic, their sole Interest)
kept aloof from the shore, which divined a calm; PANTHALIA, bearing the title
of this Royal Romance, has taken upon her the spirit to show her self to the
world, without an intended ground of exception to any, an amicable compliance
with all; where such is her confidence grounded on the strength of Reason, and
judicious Opinion, she stands at defiance against all corky and unballanc'd
judgments. And having now got the boldness to speak Loyalty, and with the
resolution of Hiero and Leaena, to spit in the face of Treason: she blusheth
not in coming abroad into the world, being equipag'd with the livery of
Loyalty. Neither is it in her to harbor the least occasional fear of coming
off with as much honor in the scale of an equal censure, as ever any Subject
has hitherto done of this nature, though in these, many with much eminency, to
the infinite delight and improvement of Posterity, bestowed their labor. Such
variety and propriety (those native Beauties of an History) shall the Reader
find in her relations. So as though Epicurus became highly taxed for having his
Table better furnished then his Dishes were seasoned; And Epimenides's
prodigality, for his having too much meat, and too little sauce; And
Eriphilus's curiosity, in his having too much sauce, but too little meat; Your
pallat, be it never so accurate, shall find Panthalia's provision sufficient in
both, deficient in neither: Viands so well seasoned, as they shall give a
pleasing relish to your taste; and so well ordered, as they shall render a
delightful satiety, without cloying to your fancy. Neither am I so personally
obliged to Panthalia, as to flatter her; nor such a stranger to the Essence of
desert, as to hold the quality of Goodness in a capacity, either of being
over-priz'd or overprais'd: To the enlargement then of her Honor, I shall
leave her to her own expresses to accomplish her.

To his highly meriting Friend, upon his genuine Composure of this Complete
Work, Entitled PANTHALIA: Or the ROYAL ROMANCE.
ENcomiastick Bards want weight to raise
With their best Lays
His Work, whose Worth deserves Apollo's Bays.
His happy Wit
Improves their Judgment who approves it.
Look, Reader, look
Into the pure Elixer of this Book,
And thou shall find
A Mine of treasure from a matchless Mind
Retriv'd and gained
To thy advantage, where it only aimed.
This is rich Oil,
Else must we blame our unmanured Soil;
Whose only sense,
Wit, Learning, Judgment come by Influence;
Where Academicks are for Bug-bears taken,
Till mad men may recall their Wits again:
And this changed Clime in folly lose her claim.
AMADIN BARCLAY.

To the living memory of Castalion Pomerano, Author of Panthalia: Or the Royal
Romance.
CAstalion and Pamoleus I have read,
Josephus Castalion Aencomitanus. Jo. Pamoieus Genuensis, Julius Capilupus
Mantuan.
With Capilupus that famed Mantuan,
But none of these my Fancy ravished,
Like the Romance of Royal Pomeran;
Who though he were a Native Genuan,
Princely Parnassus so inspired his Quill,
Each line-deriv'd invention from that Hill,
And Schooled the Quire with universal Skill.
Each line gives life and influence to Love
Nursed in the breasts of State; where choicest Flowers
Breath forth their perfume, and where Turtles move
In Ida's Chariot, and bestow their hours
On fair but pure Embraces: -- the Paramour
Is not admitted, but shut out a-dore.
Chaste Beauties be the Subjects of his Pen,
And his contentment in admiring them.
O ye who make expense of precious time,
In sacrificing Mornings to your Glass,
Poize in Loves scale the weight of every line,
And you will conclude, his passion did surpass
Inferior Fancies, -- that HE only was
The Mirror of his Age full fraught with sense,
Enameled with a native Eloquence!
Native and unaffected; threads never spun
On a Mechanic Loom; But such as showed
As if they were by Pallas lately done:
Morellio's testimony to perpetuate his memory.
Each Comm', Point, Colon, and Distinction good;
It Is pity Death should put his Period;
Yet having traced the track where Mortals trod,
'This rich Romance this sentence on him gives,
'He dies to life, yet in his death he lives.
-- Dion. Morellio.
Come, Gentiles, come, if hither you resort,
You may find Vesta in a Venus Court.
State-Stories intervein'd with amorous Tales,
Rare loyal love breathed on with prosperous Gales;
Discursive Treats from the Palace to the Grange,
And if these please not Ladies, it were strange.
PANTHALIA: OR, The Royal ROMANCE.
IN Candy, by all Historians ancient and modern, related to be most happy for
pleasure of Seat and fertility of Soil: stored with variety of all fruits: and
refreshed with an equal temperature of air, to render more spirit, increase
and vivacity to those fruits; there reigned sometimes a Princess called Cusano
calls her Athalia; but d^fferent from other Authors.
Bellingeria: a Lady of a masculine spirit, and above the effeminacy of her
Sex, and delicacy of her Education, warlike and courageous. All her reign she
lived a single life: singularly endowed with all eminent virtues and princely
Ornaments suitable to a person of her quality: affecting nothing more then to
present personal state corresponding with the dignity of her place: and to
imprint a grateful emulation in those Ladies of Honor, that attended her of
admiring, if not of imitating so incomparable a pattern of becoming state,
presence and majesty. Main and many were her Interests with foreign Nations:
whose Embassies (so generally versed she was in all tongues) She ever answered
in her own person, without the hell of any Interpretour. Neither was she at any
time observed to dismiss these without satisfaction: so copiously happy she
appeared in her express, so expedite in her dispatch. Many professed themselves
her Servants; amongst which one Monsieur Artesio; a gentleman of eminent
Family, and singularly imbellished with all corres^onding qualities to ennoble
his descent: but her innate affection to a single l^fe would stoup to no lure.
Though Censure, which is ever shooting her impoyson'd shafts at persons of
highest place, would not stick to tax her of too much freedom in entertaining
Favorites. And of these, Clarentio; whom she was thought to receive with far
more intimacy and familiarity then any of her rest, as he well deserved: For
his actions were amiable: and his disposition so sweetly tempered; as he became
popular without seeking it: and generally beloved without any obsequious
officiating of it. But this continent Lady; whose actions were richly
interlay'd with Princely Strains of Modesty and Majesty; holding it not
sufficient to be innocent; that she might decline all occasion of aspersion,
apt to traduce the purest and refinedst tempers; she intimated her constant
resolvs to her much endeered Clarentio: and putting pen to paper: cautioned
him, forth of a tender relation to her Honor, in this manner: Although
Clarentio, I am confident that your thoughts are so pure, as you make it the
lowest of your scorn, to entertain an unbecoming and inordinate affection: so
it behooves us to reflect on whatsoever may properly conduce to the advancement
or improvement of our honor. Fame is a precious Odor: but never so fresh nor
fragrant, as when it breaths in the bosom-border of eminent Personages: whose
virtues appear most transparent, when they diffuse their rays from the face of
Greatness. We will not Clarentio, enlarge our selves too much, lest we should
perplex your thoughts with a tedious Preamble, before we acquaint you with our
aim. Truth is, my much endeered Clarentio, that the whole Court has taken
n^t^ce of your free and frequent access unto us: The facility of your
admittance; with our liberty and freedom of discourse. That excellent
Statesman had made an exact Survey and Discovery of Princes Courts, who
charactred them full of Eyes and Ears: Eyes, to pry and observe: Ears, to
hear and traduce. This has begot in us that circumspection: as our address must
be to appear in that Robe of Innocence to the eye of the World, which we
cordially profess: And as an inestim^ble Jewel in our secretst Cabinet above
all other Ornaments, which either Art or Nature can possibly confer upon us, we
carefully retain. Our Injunction then Clarentio, must be this; that you
henceforth discontinue our visits, and leave us to our self. Yet that it may
appear, how your zeal and alacrity in your service to us both at home and
abroad; retains a constant impression in your Princess: and that she is as
prompt to exhibit as to receive Favors: accept this Ring here enclosed for an
affectionate pledge and tender of your loyalty: which merits an higher guerdon:
though I must ingenu^usly tell you, my loyal Clarentio; that this token, though
at first sight of small consequence, may redound to your advantage. I am not
ignorant of your condition; how you are or may be encountered with many
occurrences. Professed Enemies and private ompe^i^ors to your rising greatness.
These, when they see my eyes averted from you; will work upon your distance: and
mould some design or other to your precipice. But let not this amate you; when
you are exposed to the extremest of danger, so tender am I of your safety and
honor: that this Ring returned to us, shall secure you, and bring you fairly
off, in spi^e of all opposition. Private Presents are exempted from jealousies:
and inioyn an acceptance, compassionating the persons distance. No more; let
this confirm me thy constant and affectionate Protectress, while I am,

Bellingeria.




This unexpected Letter was not with that discretion relished; nor with that
moderation digested, as became his condition. For apprehending, as his
distempered thoughts suggested to him, who these active Instruments mi^ht be,
by whose subtle undermining, he became thus, debarred of all access to his
endee^ed Princess: as one highly transported with passion (as what will not the
heat of Competition do?) he resolved to take revenge of his suspected
Corrivals, or to perish in his design. And to fortify him in his resolvs the
better, he joins Licorus and Merannes unto him; Persons of power: and such as
retained no good o^inion of Licinio; being the very same whom Clarentio
suspected, and mortally hated.

Licorus had some grounded reasons to pursue the Quest of Clarentio's design;
having received sundry affronts, and those insupportable to his Heroic spirit,
from an inferior Favorite to the Princess: so as no occasion could be more
welcome then this forward attempt of discontented Clarentio. Which within few
days after (with so impetuous a Career was the torrent of their revenge
hurried) broke forth into an o^en commotion.

The prime Seat, where at that ti^e the Princess kept her Court, became wholly
discomposed, the Citizens variously affected, and into factions divided. Some
out of their love to Clarentio, as none more generally endeered, nor popularly
interessed. Others of lower Fortunes, desiring nothing more then to Fish in
troubled waters, itched eagerly after Innovation, the only Object of ma^ignant
spirits: but weak and sandy is the Founda^ion of that Building, which rears the
Arches of ^er Fabric upon Po^ular affection. The giddy ^^ltitude, consisting
of undisciplined men; whose ^e^cefull Education had initiated them more to ^hop
then Camp, after some light ^icqueers and ^asie repulses, left unfortunate
Clarentio to all ^xtreames; which afterward threw him into an ^reparable
Precipice. For though he with his few ^dherents demeaned themselves with
incompa^able resolution; yet at last oppressed with num^er; by Licinio's
inter^osing himself (as it highly ^oncerned him) and dissuading such as
appeared ^ssistants to Clarentio: from exposing themselves and Fortunes to
manifest ruin, by neglecting ^^eir loyalty; and adhering to a public
Incendi^y, whose pursuit after private ends and ungrate^ll requital of his
Princes favors, had sufficiently manifested to the World, whereto his
ambitious designs were levelled, and with what a Tragical period closed.
Those, who had professed themselv^ his to death, deserted him; preferring the
safety of their Persons, before their engaged reputation. Such was the
mutability of Plebeian assurances. All this while, Clarentio with his few
Assistants, stood upon their guard; resolved to sell their blood at as dear a
rate as they could. But being first advised to try the affections of those who
appeared wavering: and by declaration of his loyal intendments to decline
their defection and falling from him; he expressed himself in this manner, to
satisfy such as stood for him; as likewise those who were fluctuant in their
resolvs, or suspected him: that his actions, maugre all sinister mistakes, were
wholly grounded on terms of honor.

Gentlemen, how much I have been traduced in the progress of this action, by
some censorious spirits misstyled an Insurrection; I am not wholly ignorant But
I have so much charity, as to pity their Error. It is well known to all such
as have been intimately conversant with me during all my servic^ abroad: and
since my recall home, in my carriag^ at Court, how my addresses have had no
other aim then how they might advance your ende^red privileges; not only to
preserve but enlarge the Liberty o^ all freeborn Sub^ects: and procure public
peace (...) your Nation. For if my ambition had entertain'^ any other thoughts;
time I had, and opportunity enough to have pro^ected my ends, and required the
utmost pitch and period of my desires in the pursui^ of Sovereignty. But the
loyal recluse of this breast never harbored any such thought. My endeavors
were ever addressed for my Princes and Countries honor; though lately
misconstrued, or rather purposely perverted: to make my actions appear more
odious: and my Person an immerited spectacle of disregard in the eye of the
Court and presence of my Princess. Neither can these subtle Cubbs, my priva^e
Underminers, walk with such secrecy in the clouds, as they can privilege their
malicious designs from an apparent discovery. That politic Parasite Licinio,
though Nemesis sit upon his shoulders: and with much security skrue him into
the opinion of the State, shall not in the prostituted lapp of his insatiate
Pavedone, traduce mine honor nor the incomparable value of these noble Persons
who here assist me; and stand upon the same terms of Justification in relation
to their actions equally as my self, without condign revenge. These
Carpet-Curtain-Knights are those professed Tetters of Martial honor; that
though our perils secure their Persons: our highest actions must undergo their
censure, and by their misconstruction become branded with dishonor. I shall
not much fear to appeal even to those whose affections have been aversest from
me: and whose ambitious thoughts, envying Competitors, have ever soared with
Eagles wings to build their Nests in the tallest Cedars: To these, (I say) I
ingenuously appeal, if their strictest scrutiny or discovery of all my actions
domestic or foreign, may justly render me guilty of the least deviation from
the track of honor: or during my reside in the Court or my assiduate
attendance upon my Princess: by preferring any un^ust request or incompetible
suit to the prejudice of a Subjects liberty: or any self Interest in my daily
appliance and continued address to her sacred Majesty. Look upon me, I beseech
you, not with so contemptible an eye; as if I were wholly in my Eclipse; or
totally declining. The Divine powers, under which I stand or fall, have
clothed me with that spirit of resolution, as it can encounter with the
sinistrest and crossest occurrents: and smile with a serene eye upon the
unprosperousest Overtures. I have oftimes looked in the face of death for the
preservation of my Countries honor: and with a resolute zeal grappled with the
apparentst Objects of danger. Then were there times, when by the prowess of my
Souldery, whose spirits were armed for the highest assayes: and whose cordial
affections were so espoused to me: as from the highest to the lowest there was
none in all my Army, were he private Soldier or Commander, but he would expose
his life to the utmost of danger, to secure me. Then, I say, had my desires
opportunity enough to work upon; and to accomplish their ends: if I had
entertained any such ambitious thirst of aspiring to a Crown: or of abusing my
Mistress confidence, (whose advancement, both in title of Honor and
Sovereignty, it shall be my endeavor with much alacrity and loyal fervor
constantly to promote.) No; ye noble and ever endeered Citizens, of whose
affections I have hitherto amply pertakt: and whose numerous respects I shall
no less readily then really study to requite: my loyally-disposed breast became
never yet fired with any such irregular heat: Licinio was the sole Object of my
revenge: who under pretense of a prudent and discreet management of our State;
whereof he will not stick to boast, how he by his vigilant care and incessant
devoire sits at the Stern: skrues himself into the opinion of our complyingst
Favorites: enriching his own Coffers with the revenues of the Crown: and
reering the foundation of his fortunes upon the Merchants ruin: by raising
injurious Imposts: and making others adventures; the sole ground of his
advancement. Compassionate then his condition, whose hand has been ever ready
to support you; when the worst of extremes incountred you. You cannot be
ignorant with what solicitous and incessant care I have labored not only the
continuance, but also for the enlargement of your Charter: and with what
instancy I pursued it to the engagement of mine honor. Look then upon
Clarentio, as he has ever in your greatest straits devotionally served you. Let
him enjoy by your mutual assistance, the liberty of a Subject; and privilege
of a Peer: especially upon this score; standing in competition with a Mushrom
of Honor: whose descent had its Original and late derivall from a Deske. Now
is the time of manifesting those arguments which of love you have so numerously
expressed: wherein should you fail, he irreparably falls who highly valued you,
and who upon the word of Honor would have sacrificed his life for your safety.

This Speech, though delivered by a gallant spirit and a Rhetorical tongue
(being no less Mercuriall then Martial) was not so well relished as he
expected. So full of levity and inconstancy is vulgar favor; being not backed
nor seconded by sager nor stronger heads then a confused Rabble, or disordered
Multitude can any way afford: as may appear by the sequel. For he found his
speech to be an inconsiderable breath, no sooner uttered then slighted.

For their Mechanic spirits quickly cooled and recoiled. Friendless Clarentio;
then whom none more nobly endowed, nor constantly resolved, after some small
resistance of the City-Guards, which came thick upon him; finding his useless
valor, and the declining strength of his affectionate assistants Lycorus and
Merannes to fall off still to their great disadvantage: he was advised to give
way to necessity: and to apply to so desperate a sore, a relenting remedy. A
remedy, I confess, which his brave spirit would not easily incline to: for
nothing held a greater distance with his heroic thoughts then laying down his
Arms by submission; albeit he could not visibly apprehend any other refuge for
safety to his own person or his weak supplies. Attached he must be and
Committed too of High Treason: For under that notion Licinio, his mortal Enemy
styled it: and highly aggravated it: that he might more indelebly lay an
aspersion upon his untainted honor: and beget him a lasting Odium with his
Princess, which was his summary Labor. Some few days after (for the cruel
subtilty of Licinio, would admit no delay) a Council of State was convened,
wherein Clarentio with his Adhaerents were brought to a Judicial Trial. In
which trial the Prisoners, being brought to Bar, might be displayed by their
discovery of several passions or affections. For Clarentio, as one
commiserating the sad condition of those Gentlemen, whom their endeered love
and personal affection to him and his concerns, had drawn into this action, was
observed to be ever praying: in relation to their security, more then his own
safety. Lycorus, whose thoughts were not conscious of the least tincture of
treason, as he conceived, at the time of his trial, played. But Merannes,
whither it was out of pusillanimity or too deep a resentment of his misery, I
know not: but too much effeminate passion was he observed to discover, by such
as stood near the Bar, all the time while his Evidence was in reading: for he
wept; which detracted much from a spirit supposed to be spritely and resolute.
Magirides and Pernio being Delegats for this trial: as they were Intimates to
Licinio, left nothing unsaid or undone, that might any way aggravate their
Crime: or exasperate the Jurors, on whose verdict their lives depended, against
them. In fine, they were all found guilty: which Sentence Magirides was pleased
in a Rhetorical way (an improper Scheme of Elocution upon so Tragical an
occasion) to dilate on in this manner.

My Lords, you hear the quality of your Crimes, whereof you are all found
guilty: yet in my opinion, they admit a main and consequent difference. Though
your attempts hold relation in the identitie of their Object: They are of
diverse qualifications in respect of the persons acting. The Act, as you hear,
manifestly proved, extends to Treason: the Object or person at whom your
impoisoned arrows were levelled, was your Sovereign: a Princess, then whom none
more gracious: nor to some of you more immeritoriously bounteous. Excuse me, my
Lord Clarentio, if I come home to you. No doubt, if you retain the least
Impression of civil gratitude, an innate quality to persons of Honor, but you
must necessarily acknowledge what a multitude of unde^erving Favors have been
conferred, nay accumulated by your Princesses singular bounty upon you. And
how ^^rangely you have recompensed those royal extensions of he Highness, I
appeal unto your self: was it not sufficient for you to receive from her
princely hand incom^arable additions and transcendencies of h^nour; but your
ambitious aims must aspire unto a C^own: and by your disloial and ungrateful
designs, make it your sole endeavor to divest her of all regal honor? Have
you not at all times had her ear ready to give attention to your Suit? her
Exchequer open to enlarge your Estate? her Letters of Command to empower you
both by Sea and Land? Yet all these would not confine your vast and illimited
thoughts to those just and conscientious bounds of Loialtie, which National
conformity obliged you to: Neither, has it been enough for you in this
president of Treason to act your own interest: but to inwreath others, whose
native affection to allegiance had impressed in their innocence better
principles, in the like preci^ice. If these merit not a penal and personal
judgment above example, I know not whereto the bent of Justice aims.

Upon his high and rigid aggravation of these in this manner, Clarentio in a
composed and civil address being ready to make a reply: He was interrupted:
and not permitted to speak either in his own or Assistants defense: but
returned with the rest to their Commitment, with an express day assigned for
their Execution, according to the sentence already pronounced.

It was now high time for Clarentio, as he tendered his own or his Adhaerents
safety; to bethink himself of some way or other how to divert the imminent
danger whereto they were exposed; and the more inevitable, in regard of his
Enemies infatigable pursuit for expediting the course of Justice: which they
went on with by their Officious Beagles so speedily: as nothing could be acted
with more secrecy or subtilty: fe^ring, as might be probably collected by all
consequence, that the Clemency of his Princess by some powerful interceed,
might reverse the sentence already delivered: and receive them to mercy: which
might fall heavy upon them (as they had good reason to fear) if ever Clarentio
came in to Command, to vindicate the indignities he had formerly suffered: and
their severe Judgment which they had lately pronounced. It was no time then
for Clarentio, who stood now a Condemned man, to trifle minutes: but seasonably
to recollect his thoughts: by applying a Sovereign cure to so desperate a
sore* and by way of prevention either to decline or adjourne the approaching
hour of their Execution. Amidst his perplexed thoughts, he happily called to
mind, that gage and token which it pleased his Princess to bestow upon him at
his departure from her: and his hevy receed from the Court. That Ring, the
pledge of her Princely affection he happily recalled to memory with these very
word she spoke unto him at the same time by letters, for no other Communication
would be admitted.

Accept this Ring here enclosed for and affectionate pledge and tender of your
loyalty: which merits an higher guerdon: though I must ingenuously tell you,
my loyal Clarentio; that this Token, though at first fight of small
consequence; it may redound to your advantage. I am not ignorant of your
Condition; how you are, or may be incountred with many occurrences; Professed
Enemies and private Competitors to your rising greatness. (Which proved within
short time after a true divination.) These, when they see my Eyes averted from
you; will wo^ke upon your distance: and mould some design or other to their
precipice. But let not this amate you; when you are exposed to the extremest
of danger (so tender am I of your safety and honor:) that this Ring returned
to us, shall secure you: and bring you fairly off, in spite of all Opposition.

The memory and enjoyment of so precious a pledge could not choose but be a
Sovereign receipt in a time of such peril, wherein both life's and livelihoods
lay at st^ke. Forthwith then, to remove all delays which might prove fatally
noxious to his condition: He made choice of one Athalia, a Lady of honor: and
of high esteem with his Princess, to return this Ring; which he enclosed in a
paper containing these lines.

Madam, these very last words which you spoke unto me upon my unhappy departure
from you; I have now good cause to hold them true diviners of my present
misery. Your loyal Servant Clarentio is become a condemned man: and expects
daily a separation from the world: as he before received a proscription from
your Court. Innocence, it seems, is not sufficient, where enemies are
malicious and prepotent. I was attached and injuriously impeached of a Crime,
which I call heaven to record, I ever abhorred. My trembling soul so
commiserates the integrity of my disposition: aggravated with the infelicity of
my present condition: as she blusheth to leave a line conscious of it. -- Shall
my unwilling pen whisper it! Treason! -- with what a fevorish temper do I
mutter it! O my dear Princess, may this token of your gracious favor here
enclosed, nere speak for me; if ever my loyal heart, dedicated to your
service in all faithful allegiance, harbored so ungrateful a thought. My
life I value not; mortality will injoyne it a Period. But honor is of a more
durable temper; being the preciousest Pearl, man can enjoy living: and the
sweetest perfume, that can embalme him dying. My captivity does not at all
afflict me: nor the malicious designs of my implacable Enemies amate me: my
spirit is spheared far above their spleen; their spite verg'd far beneath my
scorn. should I lose the opinion of fidelity in the piercing and
quick-discerning judgment of your Majesty; I should hold the encounter of death
an easy Combat to such a to^ture. I shall deserve to live no longer then a
pure and unblemished fame adjudgeth me worthy of it. It is neither the Sentence
of death already pronounced: nor the fury of my Competitors clearly discovered;
that can perplex me. I stand or fall in the skale of your opinion. Retain but
that conceit of me, which my actions have merited: and which to my last gasp
shall be inviolably continued: and death shall be hugged as a welcome Guest by

Condemned Clarentio.


The Ring enclosed in these lines was given to Athalia; with promise that his
desires should be effectually seconded: nor no opportunity omitted to expedite
the Princess answer in this particular. But Athalia, either through neglect,
or overborn by the adverse part, injuriously deprived him of the benefit of
his Present. So mutable and generally unfaithful advancers be these
Court-favorites of distressed Plaintiffs suits. But we must impute this to
Clarentio's unhappy fate, in making choice of such a Messenger; whose affection
was either so cool in relation to his safety: or so insensible of his
Captivity; as her surfets in Court, or dis-respect to his Person; begot in her
an Act of Oblivion: making her wholly forgetful of his dis-consolate Condition.

Many days had not the Phoebean beauty bespangled this inferior Orb with his
Oriental Iustre; til care was taken by his hostile actuaries for preparing and
erecting a Tragic Scaffold. Where, He with his two Assisting Lords at a
precise hour were to suffer. The Execution was intended to be done with more
privacy, for those Cautions forementioned, then it could possibly be performed.
For the report of Clarentio's death became so dispersed, that the whole City
was filled with the fame of it. Wherewith several persons, as they stood
variously affected, became strangly surprised. Many, and those of the
eminenrest quality, bemoaned his premature fall: Relating the noble actions he
had done to the surviving honor of his Country: and high approvement of his
loyalty: imputing the grounds of his Impeachment to no guilt of his, but to his
Enemies malignant humor: whose sole bent it was, as they conceived, to improve
their future advancement by his Dishonor. But others there were far otherwise
prepossessed. For these, being of the Plebeian Rank, and consequently more
easy to be wrought upon by the adverse part: too credulously inclined to the
report which his malicious Adversaries had spread abroad concerning him:
pretending, that Clarentio by his factious Instruments, had practiced the
Cities ruin: intending to seize upon their Treasury: and by the sinews thereof
to leavie Arms, Ammunition and men to act his own usurping interest. The hour
now approaching for this fatal and immerited execution: a great confluence of
people assembled, contrary to the intention of the malignants; Never was any
design carried on with more secrecy and subtilty, as we receive it from the
Original History.
who designed nothing more then privacy to vail it from the Eye and Ear of that
Supreme Soveraigntie, whereof they remained ever jealous, lest the discovery
might produce an unseasonable prevention of their bloody intendment. Clarentio
was presented first upon this sable Stage of State: the other two Personages
only appearing; to whom under a counterfeit color of Clemency a Reprieve was
granted. The fatal Axe and Block being now prepared: and the Executioner ready
to perform his Office: Licinio, Magirides and Pernio being secretly shrouded,
to be glad Spectators of this Theatral Tragedy, Clarentio with an undaunted
and fortified spirit (as nothing could be less expected from a Person of that
gallantrie) addressed himself in this sort to his funeral farewell.

My Lords and Gentlemen, you may here see to what a Catastrophe the progression
of my loyal service has reduced me! Neither do I impute this to the levity of
my Prince: of whose gracious favors I have so amply partak't: but the
ingratitude of time, and the mortal Enmity of my Opposers: who with one unite
consent pitch upon this result; to ground their rising upon my ruin. And so
far be my thoughts distanced from envying their imaginary happiness: or
maligning their surreptitious greatness: that I here protest before you all,
Gentlemen, and attest Heaven to record it: that I freely and cordially remit
those numerous and insupportable indignities they have done me: not only in
designing my death: for that is the lowest in the skale of my sufferings: and
the least in my dimension: but in their traducing of my fame: and blemishing
mine honor, which might descend (if the Charity of good men should not remove
it) in after-ages to my posterity. These, I say, in this my last account to
Nature, I really pardon: wishing, they may receive the like entertain in
Heaven, as I render them now cancelled in this my receed from Earth. Now to
confirm your opinion of my innocence, I beseech you lend me your attention with
a firm confidence of what I deliver to be authentic truth. The words of dying
men should enforce the deepest impression, and receive most credit.

I here vow before him that made me: and before whom I am to stand or fall:
that this breast never fostered such a thought, as might tend to Treason: or
any seditious project against my Prince or the Constitution of her State. I was
ever more retentive of those Graces and Privileges of Honor I had received;
then to blaunch them with an Act of such palpable ingratitude. It is not
unknown to most of you, my Noble Lords, how personal Enmity and self-interests
were the activest instruments of my fall. If they were here in presence, whom I
only glance at: for my time, as it is short, so most improper for vindication
of wrongs, or impeaching of persons; They could not with modesty deny, with
what instancy they have solicited my compliance: and with what plansive
pretenses they labourd to train me to their Lure. Which I could never in
honor acquiesce to: finding their aims to be mercenary: and grounded on
indirect Principles: yet this, to this hour I never discovered; so tender I
was of preserving their reputes; who now make my Passage hence, their most
Comicall and delightful pastime.

I shall request one suit more of you my Lords; but especially of you, my L.
Stratonico; being most versed in the Court: and most frequently in the eye of
my Prince; that you would vouchsafe me that honor, as to present the most
humble and devotionall Obeisance of a dying Servant to her Majesty. Whose last
votive Sacrifice unto God, shall be for her long, happy and prosperous
Continuance in this her flourishing State and Imperial Command of Candy. And
to support this so glorious a Fabric of State, may she have a grave and
conscientious Counsel to advise her in the manage and government of her
affairs. And that her prudentiall Senate may be ever purged of those ulcerous
members, whose imposthum'd condition might corrupt the Constitution of her
State. -- Now good night to all the world: -- Executioner perform thy Office.
My peace is made.

The Executioner, more sensible it seemed of Clarentio's suffering, then he was
of his own; holding it an ungrateful Act to take off his head, who had
formerly saved his life; became surpised with such a Panick fear; as his
trembling hand, knew not how to direct the Axe. Which Clarentio observing,
encouraged him to do his work; saying, Be not so discourteous to me, Funello,
for the favor I once showed thee; as to delay the expected minute of my
remove: Trust me, I suffer more in thy protraction, then I shall in the
performance of thine office. But these words did but lightly allay his fears;
which appeared at the very instant of this Execution. For such a trembling
paralyticall motion indisposed his hand, as his Axe missing the joint at which
he aimed wounded him twice or thrice, terribly in his shoulder; before he took
off his head: which was presently put into a damask bag: and his body, though
privately; yet with much decency conveyed and interred in a Vault anciently
belonging to his Family.

Many hours were not past, till the Relation of this Tragical Action came to
the ear of the Princess, either from the hand of Stratonico; a Favorite of
principal esteem: and to whom Clarentio had at his death made his address for
presenting his humblest Service to her Majesty: or from Athalia; who, as you
forme^ly heard, had either neglected or injuriously slighted that pious and
amicable office of delivering those lines and Ring to the perplexed Princess,
which Clarentio had recommended to her care and charge.

And by all probability it came from Athalia, who having a deep resentment of
her unexpiable guilt: the very Evening after this Execution done; she repaired
to the Court: and going up to the Princess Bedchamber; discovered with much
passion what was befaln Clarentio: with her neglect of that office which she
was obliged to perform. Wherewith the Princess, as one surpised with fear of
the issue, no less quickly then passionately interrupting her; what office
might that be whereto you flood obliged, Athalia; and failed in your
performance? In my not presenting those lines with a Ring enclosed to your
Majesty. What lines? what Ring? and from whom? with tear-swoln eyes, and a
weak-breathing accent, she replied, from Clarentio. Oh then, have we lost
eternally, Clarentio! May Iliads of miseries pursue thee, faithless Athalia. Be
a stranger to our Court for ever; for ruining him; whose actions completed him
in every Charge that our Commands imposed on him, an absolute Person of honor.
More would not her Princely passion either give way to hear; nor inquire: but
retiring to her Closet, with a severe injunction of Athalias absence from her
Court: She remained as one extaciz'd for many days after; admitting none to
her presence.

Not long after this uncouth solitude and dis-passionate retirement, Stratonico
was suffered to acquaint her with the whole Series of this Proceeding against
Clarentio, and by whom he was with most vehemency and rigor prosecuted;
together with his free and ingenuous attestation upon the Scaffold, of his
integrious thoughts during the whole carriage of his imploiments in his
relations to loyalty and constant fidelity, which he would with all alacrity
seal, (to clear his Family of any such tincture) with the Sacrifice of his
blood. This Narration recruted her passion: and imprinted in her royal
affections a stronger apprehension Of his virtues. But alas, within short time
this conceit of his approved integrity: and his immerited Censure so strongly
wrought upon her, as it brought her into a great indisposition of health: but
attempered nothing of her heat, in pursuing his revenge against those active
Instruments of his ruin. For Magirides, and Pernio, who were his Rhadamanthean
Judges were shortly after degraded: and with Writts of Ease justly rewarded.
And for Licinio the prime Actor in this Tragedy; had not a noisome disease
abridged his days; an heavy and exemplarie Sentence of Proscription had
attached him.

Now to Epitomize the Excellencies of this Princess Bellingeria, it were easy
to collect hence; the nobleness and purity of her disposition; in reteining
the memory of such as had bestowed their Endeavors in the Carriage of her
affairs with fidelity: and her care to vindicate their honors, whom
irregular Command or injustice of Proceeding, to the prejudice of her Court,
had illegally censured. Favorites she would admit none, save such as favored
virtue. For Councillors of State; she made choice of none, but where Judgment
and Conscience were Concomitants. Humane Learning she affected; as an
Imbellishment to higher Studies. State-reading she made singular use of: and to
times and occasions prudently applied those requisites. Though unprovoked, she
appeared of a benign and peaceable nature, liable to no feminine nor weak
humor; yet if assaulted, or by any invasive Force were it never so formidable
disgusted; She would appear a Princely Martialist: and in time of danger, give
ample testimonies of her incomparable valor: for she would not stick to go
before her Soldiers with her Leading Staff in her hand: and play the General
in the Field, to encourage her men by her example to fight.

So accomplished was Bellingeria; and of such Princely endowments, being no
less formidable to her Enemies; then infinitely winning and affectionate to
her own: as she might appeal to the whole progress of her flourishing
Government, if ever any State were managed with more Foreign fear and
Domestic love. A president to present times: and memorial to future Ages. Yet
the purest Cloth may admit it is stain: and the integriousest person incurr a
blemish.

This I might instance in this unparalled Princess; a Lady memorable for her
virile and masculine valor; and no less generally famed for her virgin honor.
Whose royal repute received a deep taint or tincture in one action; which, to
contract our story with more brevity, closed thus.

There was one Mariana, a Lady for state and magnifiscence, a Sophonisba; for
bounty and munificence a Berenice; who was nearly linkt in blood to Berengeria.
She, for diverse occurrences thwartly incountring her, was advised to leave her
Country, where she had so many powerful Enemies: and to retire to the Confines
of Candy; where she might be confident of a free and graceful Hospitality;
with all such princely accommodations as might hold correspondence with a
Person of her quality. With these fair and plausive promises was Mariana
induced to decline her Country: and repair to Candy. Where she had not long
sojourned; till some unworthy Instruments of State, pretending a zeal to the
Princess; suggested to her too credulous spirit; what ambitious thoughts
Mariana had of usurping a Sovereignty: and how her recourse to Candy, although
it pretended personal safety: was to ingratiate the eminentst Peers to second
her in the pursuit of her regal Title; in succession to the Kingdom; whereto
she held her self nearest by a lineall and hereditary descent, to the Crown.

This private suggestion infinitely perplexed the Princess; neither would she
at first give ear unto it: interpreting all things, according to the goodness
of her nature, to the best sense. But at last by long persuasion, and sundry
arguments of probability to induce her belief; she became doubtful of
Mariana's fidelity. And within few days after, enjoined her a restraint: and
that so easy, as it abridg'd not much her Liberty. But this jealousy,
fomented by some officious Agents, became daily increased; and by degrees to
such height, as she became attached of High Treason (which to clear the
Princess innocence, she was wholly unknown to.) The Malignants of this
distressed Lady, were main and many. And to expedite their design, she became
soon impeached. Artists they could not want to execute their work. At Famorgned
was a Stately Scaffold shortly erected, where this unfortunate Lady was to
sacrifice her life. Where she appeared with a cheerful and amicable
Countenance: (as what will not innocence clothed with a noble spirit
personate) and calling upon her Gentlewomen Philanthe; wished her not to be at
all amated with her death: though it be a Censure, said she, that I neither
expected nor merited. My innocence incourageth me, and bids me boldly look
death in the face.

After she had taken a turn or two over the Scaffold; and eying the
Exetutioner: I am persuaded, said she, that thou art more fearful of executing
thy Office, then I shall be in suffering the stroke of Justice. But it behooves
me to speak something in my own defense: though I could not be admitted to that
favor at the time of my judgment. Then inclining her body with a majestic
grace (as no Person could put on Majesty with a more becoming or unaffected
posture) she delivered herself in these words.

Gentlemen, and you that are Persons of honor; be pleased to hear the last
words of a condemned Stranger; One, the innocence of whose actions never
deserved any such censure.

I came here for Sanctuary; and behold the fruits of Candies hospitality! I
came here for safety; and the Sacrifice of my life assures me of Security. To
tell you what I am, I shall not need much to acquaint you: few of you spheared
in the rank of Nobility, but are known to my descent; I leave it to the
purity of my Soul to attest my desert. But the Cause is soon pleaded, where no
Advocate will be admitted. Before I came forth of my own Country, I heard
great fame of your Princess goodness: and Candies benignity. My Entrance was
no Design of disloyalty, but an action of apparent necessity; hoping to find
that entertain abroad, which I could not partake of at home. I cannot but
acknowledge my lineal right, but to reach at a Crown before it fell due: or to
usurp a Command from an others interest, was the least of my thoughts, the
lowest of my scorn. To my knowledge, my demean has not merited any of these
high indignities from any of your Peerage. My life has been hitherto of more
retirement, then to imbroile my Person in any foreign affairs, or to fish in
troubled waters; whe^^in active and unquiet spirits are most verss'd. ^^t to
what end do I discourse the forepast Condition of my life, drawing so near a
period?

My Lords, I know there be some of you, who out of a native compassion (the
express Character of a noble nature) will commiserate my fall: and retein an
harsh conceit of those that were such eager hunters after my blood. To you I
appeal as vindicators of mine honor; which upon the word of a distressed
Princess, you may safely act without the least blemish to your unquestioned
repute. It was the Clandestine practice and conspiracy of my Enemies, who
designed my ruin, that winged my course for Candy. And by some eminent
persons, as their assurance by Letters will manifest; I was made to believe (so
apt was my innocence to become credulous) that nothing could be wanting, that
might suit with a person of my quality in the Puncto of Honor, or any proper
accommodation corresponding to so acceptable a Stranger. But my too late
experience taxes now my indiscreet Credulity. It had been much better for me
to have perished in my own Confines with honor: then to die in another, and
remain branded with an ignominious Censure. But we must not contest with Fate:
nor condemn Heaven of Injustice. Fit it is that Superior Powers should
exercise their dominion over Inferior Bodies. Such high Decretals admit no
Prohibitions. But I assume too much privilege upon your patience: this
unnecessarie spinning out of time, may some argue, implies a pusillanimitie of
spirit: which, thanks to my Maker, stands at great distance with the resolution
of my temper. We have hitherto, for the most part of our time, sailed on a
rough and turbulent Ocean: and arriving now near our Harbor, what should we
fear? Farewell to all; with a free remitment to those who pursued me to death.
Then calling upon Philanthe; who all this while appeared like another Niobe,
drenched in tears. Lend me thine hand, said she, Philanthe: and pay thy last
duty to thy dying Lady. Where laying her Head, (above a feminine composure)
upon the Block; with a princely majesty elevating her Eyes to heaven, where no
doubt, her thoughts and fervorous desires were already fixed, she undergoed
with incomparable patience, and soveraigntie over her passions, the stroke of
death.

This immerited Action lay a foul aspersion upon Bellingeria: taxing her both
for her too light credulity; and too much cruelty.

First of Credulity; in opening her bosom to such groundless reports as the
malignancie of her Foes had merely suggested. Secondly, of Cruelty; in
embruing her imperial hand in her Kinswomans blood; who fled to her Court for
succor: and not to be proceeded withal, as a Traitor. Hence it was, that some
of her nearest, and those of the purest and clearest Judgment spared not to
say; That it was an apparent breach of National amity: and a flat violation of
Hospitality; which might be by these Evidences clearly attested.

For, in the first place, there had been a firm Juncto and constant
correspondence, confirmed by mutual presents and arguments of affection,
cemented more strongly by the tie of Consanguinitie; betwixt these two Royal
Ladies. Usual assistances upon occasional interests, reciprocally afforded;
Commerce amicably without disturbance continued: with interchange of all civil
offices: and respects of love equally communicated. Be^ides, Bellingeria might
remain amply satisfied ^ouching Mariana's fidelity: for though she had ^een
advised, nay seriously instanced to pursue the Quest of her Title: and to
ingratiate herself with such as sat at the Stern: lest her strangeness to
Persons of Command and Quality might impede her legal and lineal challenge to
her Soveraigntie: yet would she never give ear nor attention to all their
persuasive inducements: saying, she was neither so jealous of the Prince of
Candies goodness: nor so diffident of the validity of her own Claim; but when
opportunity gave way to her just demands, she might without opposition be
admitted to that Monarchical State, whereto both Law and Blood had entitled
her. And to leap into the sadle, before the right Owner were dismounted: or had
diseased himself of it; argued impudence or manifest injustice. No, said she, I
am none of those Lapwings who fly to their Nests with shells on their heads.
Preparation with mature Judgment shall accompany my Title before I ascend the
Throne.

These just and pious Resolvs of so princely a Lady; might have returned a
plenary and sufficient ^estimonie of her loyal and affectionate tender to her
Royal Kinswoman, without dispute. But Crowns and Nuptial Beds, as they admit no
Competitors: ^o their enjoyment begets, many times, sundry causeless fears;
which by degrees usually break forth into Tragical Extremes.

Yet in the discovery of all these heavy passages, trenching so highly upon
Bellingeria's honor; if we should take an impartial survey of some particulars
tending to her vindication; we shall find sundry effectual motives, and those
strongly enducing us to entertain a clearer construction of Bellingeria's
proceeding against Mariana. True it is, indeed, that upon some persuasive
suggestions, hammered by Persons nearly interested to the State; the Princess
gave way to her Commitment; which might be taken rather for an easy
confinement, then any strict restraint. But in relation to the Judgment
pronounced; or the Act of Justice executed, she was wholly ignorant: as might
appear by sundry pregnant circumstances: which might be collected hence.
First, this Princess after such time as she had received certain advertisement
of the weight and rigor of those proceedings against her injured Kinswoman;
she could never endure to admit any of her Prosecutors to her presence:
displacing such as were Gownmen and persons of Judicature: and estranging those
Favorites from her Court, who had any hand in the hastening of her dispatch.
Nay, in her Princely Progress, it was ever observed; when at any time her Jests
lay near that Place where Mariana suffered; in resentment of her death, she
would usually take her Evening Procession, one of her Ladies only attending
her, to the place of her Interment: where she would solemnize her Memory with
pious tears: causing a fair Monument of Ebony to be erected, and with an
elegant Inscription beautified. Though by her next Successor, her body became
afterward removed, and with much solemnity translated, to a Fane or Temple of
more honor: where it now remains registered among the Eminenst Princes of Candy.

Thus have we, and no less then deservingly, with an easy Sponge wiped off
those aspersions which licentious Calumny arising from the Corruption of time,
had thrown upon the same of this unparalled Lady. Whose renown has been the
Subject of many ingenious Fancies; not only to eternize her fame: but in
improving their own judgment, in making choice of so rare and exquisite a
Subject.

But we are now to descend from the description of this absolute Idea of all
Princes in her time; to her farewell on earth. You are now to imagine this
Orient Sun, after she had attained to a ripe and full age, being already got to
her Climactericall year inveloped in a Cloud, that fable Shroud of mortality.

Albeit, it was generally thought, that the Constitution of her body
considered: and her excellent temper in her directions of diet observed; She
might, to the joy of her Subjects, have lived much longer: had not some
occurrents violently incountring with her passions, enfeebled her health and
contracted the Course of Nature. Neither was this passionate Conflict
discovered in any personal Object more, then in the loss of her Clarentio:
which name with an assiduate Tribute of tears, all along during the time of
her Sickness, she usually repeated and reiterated: such deep impressions of
affection had the Opinion of his Loyal Service imprinted in her heart. But
forced at last to yield to Nature; she seemed infinitely to rejoice in her
Remove, thanking Fate with a pleasing smile, for winning her address to so
faithful a Friend: and serviceable an Instrument of State. But some there were
who imputed these ravings and distempers to the extremity of her Sickness:
which we shall not here dispute. It appeared that her memory continued perfect
to her death: for she gave express Commands some days before, that Lycorus and
Merannes with all those that adheared to Clarentio's faction should be enlarged
and restored to their Estates.

After such time as Bellingeria's Funerals had been with all Princely
magnificence solemnized. Candy became infinitely distracted, touching the
Nomination of their next Prince. For though they were satisfied in relation to
his descent: being indubitable Heir to the deceased Princess: yet bore they a
great disgust to the Nation from whence he was to come: being Illiria; a People
naturally servile, uncivile and pusillanimous. Neither could it be supposed as
most men thought, that the Illirian could challenge his own without great
opposition: or enjoy his Crown without much effusion of blood: and that some
Electorate Estate would be speedily constituted to cross the Illirian descent.
Which fared much otherwise; for Cicelio, a grave, serious and prudent person;
though naturally averse from Martial affairs, had so ingratiated the Peers
and principal Members of State (as what will not Gifts effect?) as he entered
the Isle with general approvement and acclamation. None to oppose him: all
with alacrious spirits ready to attend him: and to prepare away tahis
Coronation; which within few days after was accomplished: and with such
Solemnity as it drove the Illirian Prince, now Candies Sovereign, into an high
amazement. Justs, Tilts and Tournaments; Dramatick Enterludes, Masks, and
Pagentry of all sorts, presented with incomparable state and infinite cost by
the Citizens of Thamisopolis; where these Coronation Shows were contrived,
prepared and perfected. Cesterns ran abundantly with Claret, White and Rhenish,
as if they had sprung from the Celtick rivolets. Neither could this high
presentment of State beget less then amazement in the Illirian Prince; seeing
his own indigent, rude and illiterate Nation, never entertained his Eyes with
any such rarities. His royal Consort, a Princess of a gallant composure and
stately deportment, was with the choicest voices and airs, wherewith she was
infinitely delighted, after the completing of these Solemnities, gracefully
received. Where the Lady Honetta and Devonessa by their incomparable voices and
accomplished demean wrought so strongly upon her affection: as no society,
treat, Ball nor Presentment could appear grateful to this Princess without
their presence. And in very deed the free and frolic humors of these two
Ladies suited nearly with the Princess disposition. For her Husband, being
naturally addicted to retirement: or such Contemplative studies as disrelished
much her palate; being a Lady dedicated to pleasure, by his privacy gave her way
to all Courtly Liberty. Great was her content in Masks and Revels: wherein, if
she chanced to observe any person more gracefully eminent, or actively
performing then the rest; to do him the honor and complete the presentment in
a more absolute manner, she would with much cheerfulness and princely alacrity
join with him in the Measure: and testify her grateful acceptance with an
appropriate favor.

This begot in her young Court-Damasella's an infinite affection: An Idea or
Model of a New Court.
joying much in the change of their condition: For Bellingeria in her reign
could not enjoin the Attendants of her Court more regular restraint, then this
Princess after her short reside in the Court, initiated them in principles of
liberty. State Affairs were not so much as thought on. New-fashion'd habits,
melodious aires, amorous parlies, with a Mintage of quaint devised complements,
such as the rustic incivilities of the Illirian Nation had never made their
Princes acquainted withal.

All this time, Honetta and Dionessa, Ladies dededicated to pleasure, and who
had formerly to too much freedom exposed their honor, ceased not to present
objects of Fancy to their frolic Soveraigness; Which could not be so privately
suggested, but it was in the Ear of the Court closely dispersed. Which her slow
and supine Prince either never heard of, or took no notice of: having the
happiness not so much as to unlock the well-ordered Cabinet of his heart to any
thought of Jealousy. For the activeness of his Spirit was wholly employed in
Field-pleasures: and such Sociable Complies, as relished more the palate; then
any other youthful or amorous address. Which those two wanton voluptuous Ladies
nimbly and artfully wrought upon in their application to his Consort.

One Evening in a free Career of Discourse (in a close Arbor delightfully
impaled with Myrtles, Emblems to a love-parley) Honetta an Excellent Tutoresse
in loves Principles, told her Princess, how in her Survey of a Court life,
wherein she had been versed from her Infancy, she found nothing more
consentaneous to a free and enlarged spirit then a rational and corresponding
Favorite, to whom any Lady with reservancy to her honor, might impart the
secrecy of her affection: and receive assistance in the fair pursuit of her
Desires.

What might these Favorites be, answered the Princess, on whom, my dear
Honetta, you are pleased to bestow so fair a title, and so clear a Character?
Madam, quoth she, my Expresses shall be short and real. Though Plato be dead,
his Platonicks survive. We have many here of that complete Sect, that will
labor by their fair deportment to merit your acceptance: who be those, said
the Princess, whom amongst thy Select ones, may receive so free admittance to
our relations? None of all our Courtiers, answered Honetta, more corresponding
then Lycorus, (a person formerly engaged in an action of infinite consequence
and probable peril.) Devonessa hearing the name of Lycorus commended to the
Princess for her Platonic; was not a little disrelished with Honettas choice;
being a person whom she had formerly entertained in her bosom before all
others: and to whom with much intimacy she had devoted her affection. O by no
means, Madam, make Lycorus none of your Platonicks (replied Dionessa) he cannot
possibly prove faithful in retention of your secrets, who has professed himself a
Servant to many Mistresses. I could commend one to you, Madam, said Devonessa,
whose personage, as it might beget in you a merited acceptance, so the
approvement of his secrecy, in whatsoever may highly concern your honor,
deservingly correspond with your admittance. And this is Merannes; a Person of
a Courtly garb and amiable presence. This choice tendered to the Princess (by
way of revenge, for otherwise it could not be construed) did not a little
nettle Honetta; for none more bosomly dear then Merannes nor familiarly
affectionate: though with a pleasant compliance she wisely covered it: as if
her thoughts were wholly estranged from any such Object. But Devonessa knew
well, that Honetta could not but hold herself fully requited for her proposal
of Lycorus to the Princess.

Time thus run on rather in amorous discourses and introductions to Love then
any other actual expresses. Wherein though the Princess Ismenia showed her
self a Soveraignesse of Pleasure; yet there appeared in her no discovery of any
Select Favorite; so cautious she was in her Choice: and so observant in the
points of honor. Albeit some light Censors of the Court, who measured the
levity of others affections by their own scantling; and whose eyes were no less
suspicious, then tongues liberal; spread a report of her intimacy with
Lycorus; whose discreet composure was never known to transgress the limits of
honor: nor engage his repute to an inhibited pleasure. But some ground there
was (and weak is that ground which censorious jealousy cannot build on) and
it arose from hence: Basilius, her retired Consort, a Person wholly devoted to
privacy and Comtemplative Studies, unless some other lighter Pleasure for
recreation-sake, entertained him: walking one Evening in his Garden; and
finding Lycorus in pleasant private discourse with his Lady: I approve this
highly (said Basilius) I see we are all for Platonic Learning.

This Speech, without ground, begot an opinion in those light jealous
Courtiers, but especially the Ladies, who variously rendered those words of
Basilius, and much different from his meaning: That this weak Prince more
espoused to Learning then Love; being conscious of his own deficiency, had
dis-interessed himself of his Princess: and freely recommended her to the
Tutelage of a Platonic Lord. Which traduce no sooner came to Ismenias ear,
whose innocent freedom might clearly vindicate it self from any such groundless
imputation, she could not be at rest till she acquitted this Charge of honor
in this manner. The words are rendered according to their Original tenure.

Ladies, wherein has my freedom so highly offended, that it should nurse in you
this opinion? Cannot discourse be entertained without lightness: nor the
admittance of a Courtier without suspicion of wantonness? I am as yet but a
stranger in your Court: and I wish with all mine heart, that I had never been
initiated in it, if it stand so affected. A diadem is a precious Ornament, but
inferior to fame. -- This I had before I came among you: and enjoyed my
dignity with as much liberty, and more honor. Surely, I cannot think
otherwise, but that there raigns much infection in that Court; where harmeless
affection appears so infectious. I should prove as cruel to each accent of my
delivery, as the Ostridge to her eggs, if they should produce a discovery of
lightness in their issue. I have heard from some of you Ladies, whose long
discipline has sufficiently schooled you in the mode and rarity of Courts,
that Platonic society might be admitted without the least touch or blemish of
dishonor. And must a Rule of Exception be enjoined to a Princess which admits
none to the freedom of her Ladies? Must our restraint enlarge your liberty? How
far better then is it to embrace Subjection then Severaignty? If the felicity
of Princes consist in dominion; why should it not discover it self most in
priority of affection? Are we to be lower in our love, because higher in our
line?

Ancient Records render us this testimony of our glorious Predecessor Athalia
sometimes Princess of Candy; that though her life was single, expressing in it
singular Continence: her Parts exquisite, accomplished withal Princely
Excellence; her exploits admirable, manifesting her prowess and happiness: yet
did she allow her self State-favorites, to enable her in Rules of Politic
Government, without the least Sentiment of Lightness. Her life was eminent: and
her death to the quality of her life correspondent. Let me obtain this boon
of you, fair Ladies; that I may freely enjoy without Censure, what my
Progenitors did without least diminution to their honor. But if this may not
be admitted me, I will propose unto you Ladies a more regular Copy of
austerity. Platonicks shall be to us strangers: and our Needles our constant
Consorts. A straid look shall incur a Forfeiture. And for the Court, The
Queens side shall become a Cloister; let my Liege use his at his pleasure.
This, I hope, will prevent all jealousy: and free us from all scandalous
reports and immerited infamy. For dye had we rather with Fame, then live in
dishonor.

This drove such a cold qualme into those young Ladies hearts; as they knew not
by what means to bring their injuried and highly incensed Princess to her
Former temper. The Court grew quite out a tune. A sad and uncouth Melancholy, a
strange Guest to that Place, had sabled every Room. The Queens side appeared
like a Tragical Tyring house. But long did not these Sudds of Sorrow nor dumps
of discontent continue. That Italian Proverb confirmed it self true in this
Catastrophe. Short is Sorrows surfeit, where Court-pleasure makes her Palet. New
Presentiments enlivened spritely and active affections. The Platonic State, so
lately disheartened by Ismenia's disgust, in a more refined and count garb
begun to resume its former beauty and liberty. Tilts and Tournaments with other
Martial Exercises, wherein the Peerage were formerly employed; became
Addresses of too virile a quality.

Carpet-Knights were not for Campe-Service: nor Court-Couches convertible to
Field-Bedds. Schools and Academies of Love stored with choicest Lectures of
pure and attractive Rhetoric, to make their dialect a more powerful
Solicitor to Fancy, were erected: and Masters of Revells appointed and amply
endowed; and these were employed in contriving and inventing variety of Comic
and Pastoral delights: which were usually presented in their private Court
Theaters, purposely erected for such Enterludes and Comicall Inventions. And
good opportunity had Ismenia with her amorous Ladies to play the Platonic
Courtiers: seeing Basilius made the Wild Forest the Place of his solace and
recreation. Whence some virulent Spirits would not stick to traduce Ismenia:
and make her honor suspected: saying, that so long as Actaeon pursued his
Chase: his Alcione might securley make choice of her Game. But those who were
known to her Conjugall Condition (though too much freedom might blemish her
Fame) might witness for her, that her Princely thoughts mounted above the
sphere of such servile affections. Being such an absolute Empress of her
desires; as in those Platonic Encounters; where the strength of Continency was
many times brought to a trial: if her Pretending Platonic transported too
much with confidence should divert from their addressed discourse, were it
moral, historical or mixed: and assume to himself a freedom less becoming:
though more amorously glancing: she would not forbear sharply to reprove him
saying, that he had transgressed Plato's Laws: For some of his Works she had
read lately rendered in her own Native dialect: but never found him act the part
of a sensual Suitor.

Molidorus indeed, was holden her Eminent Favorite: and ever received, upon his
appliance to her, with a graceful Entertain. But never more then modesty
might admit: For in private visits, after that aspersion thrown on her, upon
her reported intimacy with Lycorus, no Courtier, were he never so accomplished,
could have access or admittance to her, without the presence of some of her
Ladies of Honor. So as in this, so in other Objects of Fancy, her unblemished
Fame was injuriously traduced. But her masculine resolution from a nobleness of
Spirit, slighted all such palpable aspersions.

Neither could the purity of her Fame be more really clear from Infamy, then
Bazilius honest heart was of the least thought of Jealousy.

Neither did this indifferency to Feminine Objects, nor his affection to the
contrary Sex, proceed (as some weakly conceipted) from frigidity of Nature: nor
any inordinate degeneracy: but rather from the gust of those active recreations
and exercises which he affected: and in their quality more suitable to men then
women. But we are not here to weave Apologies. Historians with an integrious
and impartial pen are to relate, but not to render an account of the actions of
those Persons, whereof they treat. Those import their own interest: and as they
acted upon the Stage; so must they receive their applause and approvement by
the vogue and voice of their Spectators. In a word, as to sooth Princes in
their pursuit of an unbecoming liberty, is noxious: so too curiously to make
inspection into the secrecy of their actions, is very dangerous. Domitian
could not endure a discovery of his delight in the pursuit of Flies. Such toys
are held serious employments with trifling Commanders: who lay not the ground
of their undertakings upon what beseems them, but on what delights them.

But let us return to our Court, bathed in all pleasures that either the height
of Fancy or complement of State could contrive. Neither had Candy at that time,
as you may collect by the Sequel, much to employ herself withal, save only
with sumptuous Entertains, delicious Treats, and gorgeous Dress. For so happy
was she in the enjoyment of a peaceable Prince: as by bounteous gifts and other
obliging ways, he had not only made neighboring Princes his Friends: but
possessed himself of that opinion of prudence and Princely policy: as no
difference arose among them, which with unanimous consent they would not refer
to his decision. This graceful and long-continued habit of peace, as it enricht
the State with plenty: so it begot in the Inhabitants an incommodious
security. For those virile and masculine spirits, which formerly proclaimed
the^ Heirs of Honor, were become now strangers to actions and exploits of
valor, being wholly unexercis'd to those Martial affairs, wherewith their first
Assaies of Youth had been inured. Neither would those Stoical Censors of the
State who professed themselves mortal Antagonists to all Masks, Treats, Balls and
reer-visits, stick to enveigh against the sensual liberty of their
Pusillanimous Peerage: Saying that Crabtree-grafts inoculated in generous
Stocks had quite spoiled the Nurserie of Candy. And indeed what by the
effeminacy of that present State, whose long peace and secu^ity had brought
most of the Nobility to that delicacy; that as their Spirits were averse from
the Exercises of Arms; so were their intellectual parts and inward abilities so
weakened, or rather estranged from civil Consultations and affairs of State, as
in their Election for Supply of such qualified Persons as might perform those
Offices of high Concern (and wherein their Top-branches and Ciens of the
eminenst Families had been formerly employed) there was not one found of all
that conspicuous line capable of such high undertaking: being better known to a
Game at Tenis: then the performance of any State-service.

Thus past these times with many vicissitudes and turns: while the Palms of
Peace so impaled the Frontiers of Candy, as it had no occasion to dream of an
Enemy. Mean while, the Court had wars; but they were amorous Encounters: Foes,
but they were Corrivals. Amongst which Melidorus, that constant Favorite, and
Ismenia's individual Platonic, continued his visits, being encouraged by the
Princess Connivence and her Ladies easy admittance; who usually attended her,
to pursue his quest. Which could not be carried on with such secrecy: but it
became an Argument of private Discourse amongst those Court-Ladies: who could
no way shadow nor conceal the joy they apprehended upon their Princess
reduction to her former Career of Pleasure: the only Object which their
affectionate liberty aimed at. In this number, but much different from their
nature, was one Aretina, a Person of virtuous and choice repute: and one nearly
allied to Melidorus: who hearing with what Freedom this private Censure had
dispersed it self amongst those Ladies of Honor: and how much it derogated
from her kinsmans Fame; which she so highly valued: as she could not with
patience, (being otherwise of a Composed temper) hear them whisper touching
any such Platonic Encounter, if it reflected on Melidorus; but she would stand
up in vindication of his honor, not without sharp reproof of the greatest
Lady, who out of an assumed Confidence durst oppose her. Till at last convinced
with pregnant probabilities of usual Platonic visits: and those at
unseasonable times: which might beget Foments of jealousy to suspicious Eyes:
and of rumor enough to jealous Ears: as one extased with a pious tender of
her kinsmans honor; she set pen to paper, expressing her discontents in
relation to his bleeding Fame, after this manner: transcribed from her own
style and character.

Sir; I am sorry to hear that the grandeur and burden of honor, under which
you labor, should make you so secure, nay remiss in preserving it: you
profess your self a Platonic; but sure, though I was never much read in his
Philosophy: nor schooled in his Principles of Morality; I cannot suffer my self
to have so much Faith, as to believe that so sage and prudent a Master could
give his Scholars such light lessons, as to fix their affections on prohibited
Objects. Go to Sir; Is there none but your Princess to Court for your
Mistress? Look about you, and observe, (if your Fancy has not already begot in
you a Phrensy) upon what two fatal shelves you run your crazy vessel, by
playing the ambitious pursuer of such a precipitous Pleasure; two inevitable
rocks, danger, and dishonor. The nearer Jove, the more subject to the stroke
of thunder. And nearly, sure, you desire to be, when you would partake in his
Right: and share in his Choice. You know well how Conjugall Bedds and Regal
diadems admit no Competitors: affection being impatient of Competition. And if
Common Beds challenge this Privilege: what may we think of the Prerogative of
Princes?

Give me leave, Melidorus, to come home to you: the least drop of blood that
takes its course through your veins, cannot receive a stain; but it must
necessarily beget in me a glowing blush; from our near relations and
propinquity of Families. Be not then so cruel to your self, as to neglect
your own Fame. Pity us who be your Allies, if you have no resentment of your
own Condition. The Eyes of Our whole Court, like so many Stars in a Frosty
Evening, shoot out and bestow their reflections on you.

It is not the privacy of your Arbours; though never so retired: nor the
vigilance of your Agents, be they never so circumspect; that can clear a Cloud
inveloped with such thickness of infamy: or with all their art shadow the
prostitution of your honor. The Splendor of Fame retains a pure complexion:
and such as will admit of no borrowed Colors. This lost, never regained: how
tender then ought a Branch of Nobility to be of preserving that which so highly
conduces not only to the beautifying but accomplishing of a Family? And this
I am sure, you cannot choose but reflect^on. You cannot, if you look upon the
many descents lineally derived from your Ancestry (...) but acknowledge your
self infinitely obliged to the Superior Powers; who have thus far and thus
long continued the Succession of your Line, and preserved i^ without stain.
And must a minute of usurped pleasure impair the repute of so flourishing a
descent? How many Eminent Families have we known shrinking under this burden;
and these, perchance, not so conscious of such apparent guilt, as your
suspected Converse has discovered? But you will say, what can be held
suspicious, where the Person most interested will not suffer his breast to
entertain such thoughts: nor give credit to any such report, were it with
never so much constancy dispersed? If this be your only Objection, it seems,
Melidorus; you work much upon advantage. But answer me, must your Princess
innocence authorize your lightness? Admit his thoughts retain in them a
Freedom: must that gallant Sovereignty or dominion over his affections, beget
in you a security of transgressing? Vnshrowde your self, Sir, and lay your
actions open to an impartial discovery.

Though Basilius acquit his noble and serene Spirit from harboring any
Conceit of his Ladies strayed thoughts: or of your unseasonable visits: His
Court will not cast so light a veil over it. His clearness from jealousy must
not promise to your Errors an impunity. Nay, let me tell you, your Loyalty
should produce in you Motives of more piety. When any Treasure is committed to
our Care and Custody; we might justly hold it a violation or infringment of
trust; to give up our Charge, or betray it to an Enemy. You are Elected the
Princess Chamberlain; let that treasure with you deposited, be never impaired
nor impeached.

Desist then, I beseech you, (with a Sacrifice of teare-swollen Eyes I beg it
of you) from ministering any just occasion of suspicion to a Censorious State.
Walk with a clean foot near the lions den. For though he, with a conniving
Eye pass by your Folly, and smile at your levity; you cannot be ignorant of the
Apothegme of the Lions Jack; (and many such he has in his Court;) who by their
Call will endeavor to rouse up their enraged Master: and expose your ambitious
folly, a deplorable Object to his fury. We shall usually find Revenge most
watchful, when it seems most asleep. Be not then so secure of your own
safety, as to engage it for an imaginary felicity; which like a vading shade,
vanishes quickly, and leaves the unhappy Pursuer to the acknowledgment of his
shame. Such is your Case, which a timely prevention may decline: and
consequently restore you to your pristine esteem: which shall incomparably
suite with the affectionate wishes of,

Your highly indeered Aretina.


This Letter, though it came from a Friendly hand and a Free heart; yet it
wonderfully disgusted Melidorus: Fearing, as he rightly apprehended, that these
suspicious reports, though they bare not the face of truth; might by the
mis-interpretation of such as were his Competitors; and maligners of his
greatness, beget him an Odium with Basilius: and by his incensement procure him
an heavy Censure from the State. He wisely recalled to mind the Apologue; If
the Foxes Ears were held for horns; he were a stout Orator that durst oppose
it. Upon a serious recollection therefore of his own ways: with a resentment
of his hazardous Condition, He fixed upon this result: to make use of such
Instruments in the Court; whose Credit might bear him up, against all
traducing reports; which, though privately dispersed, had not then got
admittance to Basilius ear: which though Chersines, a secret Enemy of his
sought to accelerate, purposely to quicken his disgrace; yet this Incendiary
either failed in his opportunity of acting what he had designed: or rather
found the noble thoughts of Basilius so orderly composed and fortified against
all such groundless surmizes, as he perceived all his Labor to be lost, though
he omitted no time to expedite his injurious assaies. Mean time, those Persons
whom Melidorus had made use of to vindicate his honor, expressed themselves
Faithful Agents in performing that Office of love which they had professed.
And in calming the rumor of those reports, which had got too deep an
impression, to be razed or removed at the first repulse; Melidorus pretended
himself sick; to excuse his absence from the Court: and decline those Evening
Visits which he had usually frequented. And to satisfy Aretina's desires by
way of Letter, in this his seeming languishing Condition (being more surpised
with fear of future censure and engagement of honor, then any other
distemper) He returned her an Answer to her severe reproof in this manner.

Aretina, I could not peruse your ca^^ lines without remembering that ancient
Proverb: No jealousy comparable to that of a woman. Being apt to mint, where
it can find no cause. You have known me long; but never lavish of my Fame. And
I would be now infinitely sorry, to be held so foolish, as to become so weary of
my head, as to desire the removal of it from my sh^ulders. But my comfort is
this, Aretina, that I cannot be more free of mine Honor, then you are of your
Censure. You object, that a dispersed report has already proclaimed my guilt.
Light Ears be those that will be so deluded. If either privacy of place; or
opportunity of time could have wrought these effects on me; that precious and
unvaluable Gemme, which I incomparably prefer before all humane relations, had
been long since blemished. But Honor, substance, nay subsistence where lowly
verg'd in my Esteem, where true Reputation, without any additionall title or
tinsell of adulterate Greatness, might, retain its just posture, proportion
and value. Neither have I in the whole Progress of my Course, acted ought that
might beget in my unmanag'd thoughts an unsuitable Change. You tax me highly,
Aretina, in asking me, if I had no other Mistress, to present my Platonic
service to, but my Soveraigness! And I must answer you in the same dialect:
that there was none to whom I stood more obliged in loyalty to serve: nor who
deserved in the Puncto of honor, the assiduate attendence of a Subject more.
Besides, if you complain of my private and frequent visits; my Place, whereto
I was designed, could exact no less from me. I was, indeed, upon my Sovereigns
opinion of me, appointed her Chamberlain; but with that modest limitation and
Composure; as I spit defiance in his face, that shall dare to tax my thoughts
of the least touch of dishonor. This I write from a sick and languishing Bed,
where our Protests should be free from dissembling; because our weak Condition
imports a probability of dissolving. You tell me, that a Treasure was committed
to my trust: and it were a violation of faith in me, to infringe that trust in
me reposed: by suffering so precious a Treasure to be injuriously impaired,
imbezled or impeached. I confess it, Aretina, that an inestimable Treasure was
in my Custody deposited; and it has been my constant care to preserve it pure
and inviolate: yea rather then it should any way suffer in relation to honor;
I should hold it an acceptable Task to sacrifice my dearest life, in
vindication of it.

But to curdle my blood the more: or infuse (for rather so do I desire to
expound it) a religious loyal Fear in your Kinsmans breast; you offer to my
Consideration the inviolable Privileges of a Princes Bed. Sure, you retain a
better Opinion of me, then your lines signify. Can your discretion suggest
this imposture to you; that my late lightness should take away all thoughts of
goodness? Or that I am become such a sensual Libertine; as for an inexpiable
Act of levity, to engage, nay, make forfeture of my Loyalty? Surely, if our
bloods (as you write) so nearly participate; you cannot in charity, nor
propriety to your self, judge so severely of me; but you must fear some
Corruption springing from your own veins; seeing, they so nearly partake with
mine, as they derive their Origin from One Fountain. But I must not chide you;
Be it your goodness, Aretina, to desist from Suspecting; as I shall in this my
retirement from giving occasion. And may I beget this belief in you; that a
minute of perfunctory and penitentiary pleasure shall never make me forgetful
of the test nor tender of mine honor. Fear it not, I shall observe your
advice; in walking with a clean Foot near the Lions Cave: and a clear heart
to my Grave. For which provision, the residue of his pilgrim-hours are summed
up by,

Your most affectionate, Melidorus.


This Answer, though it were interlaid with some sprinklings of a wormwood
Lecture; infinitely relished the palate of Aretina: whose only serious Object
was the Salving of Melidorus suspected honor. Whereof she appeared the more
tender, not only in regard of their alliance: but of their joint Education;
the continued enjoyment whereof had largely improved and highly enlarged this
endeerment. This it was, that made his personal safety dear unto her; but much
more, the Conservation of his honor. Such lineal coherence holds Fame in the
descendent branches of a Family. But these lines coming from a sick bed (as he
pretended) became such Cordial Receipts to Aretina's jealous thoughts; as she
could not apprehend the least conceit of her Kinsmans miscarriage: appearing
upon all occasions, a Confident Champion in defense of his honor. But all such
fears (as we formerly touched) had their rising from Sandy grounds. For neither
did Melidorus frequent visits merit any such Construction, nor the free
admittance of Ismenia (a Princess of unquestioned fame) any such irregular
traduce. Her too much freedom only might deservingly incur Censure. Seeing
Princes and eminent Persons show their glory best at distance. Whereas too
general and familiar intercourse begets either an apparent Contempt; or
disvalue to their Relations. Neither, indeed, should Censure rack it self to
the highest pin, could it fall heavier upon Ismenia, then upon her too frequent
repair to Places of Concourse, as Theatral Presentiments with other Public
Solemnities: and that with such privacy and nakedness of Reteiners; as she
appeared much below her self. Yet those who were more intimately known to her
disposition, could more heartily shadow this: and acquaint the World, how her
smallness of Retinue proceeded not from any narrow nor parcimonious humor: but
rather from a desire of retirement from popular aspect: coming more to see then
to be seen: and frequenting these public places of Resort, not to make choice
(as some sinisterly expounded it) of Servants or Favorites suitable to her
affection: but to hear the humors of the time wittily discovered, and to life
acted: which might (as she of times expressed) highly deserve the applause and
approvement of the Eminentest Persons. In her coming abroad she retained no
unusual port nor magnificence of State; lest it might beget in her an opinion
of pride, which was ever a stranger to her thoughts: but in her princely
demean so affable and debonaire, as she ever returned a graceful aspect and
pleasing salute to all Persons according to their quality and degree: which in
every place gave her an addition to her demerited honor: with arguments of
popular affection wheresoever she appeared. And to leave her a real Character;
before she take her last farewell of her Court with all other Earthly
enjoyments: she never made Choice of any Favorite as a light Platonic, to
lessen her Spousall affection; though the Corruption of time, and levity of
some Persons about her, were apt enough to bestow their Censure, upon
reflection of their own vicious Condition; (judging all to be like unto
themselves,) on the absolutest Objects of Honor. Her gallantry too, mixed with
a princely compassion, was in this remarkable: That She never presented any
Suit to the prejudice of the State: but for relief of such as were injured, a
ready Supplicant. But Candy was not worthy of her; for shortly after, having
her body much inflamed through immoderate exercise (which she purposely used to
bring down her body, naturally inclining to Corpulency;) or through intemperate
Bathing, as others opinion'd: or through excess of Hydroptick humors daily
increasing and surprising her; with a composed and more then a Feminine spirit
she paid her debt to nature. But before her departure, to leave a testimony to
the World of her untainted honor; She desired much that Basilius, her endeered
Spouse might be sent for: in whose presence, and accompanied with sundry Ladies
of Honor; She disburdned her self of what troubled her most: expressing her
Sufferings in this manner.

My Lord, I am now after a long and and troublesome Sea-fare, drawing near my
Haven. Much I shall not speak, for my weakness will not suffer me. Only let
me obtain this favor from you, that these last Expresses which I shall ever
upon Earth deliver unto you, may receive that credit and impression, which the
words of a dying Princess may justly exact.

My dear Lord, we have long time enjoyed the rarities of a free and profuse
Court: where Honor, which should be the resplendentst Star in that Orb, has
been much obscured. And what with grief I speak in this my approaching Period,
the Innocent oftimes incurred the heaviest Censure: while others by a smooth
palliating of their lightness; preserved their Fame, though not the Essence of
their Honor. Amongst those unhappy ones, I my self might be numbered; yet in
this I account my self happy, that your pure and noble thoughts, my Lord, were
fortified against all those Criminal aspersions: for which I humbly thank you.
And though they were not worthy your belief: yet might my freedom of admittance
merit your reproof. But farther, as I am near to my last breathing, I never
inclined to your dishonor. But Innocence is not sufficient in such a Royal
Courtly Continent.

Noble Ladies, of whom I am now to take my long adue; retain this Memorial;
and value it as an inest^mable Jewel. "Be not contented with the bare Title of
Ladies of Honor; unless your Care be to preserve that Style from the reach of
Censure. Nobility is but gilded Clay, if Reputation hold at distance with it.
You cannot grace your Sovereign more, nor these precious Pledges which I have
had by him, and now leave with him, then by apearing Presidents of Piety, and
initiating their Infancy in the like Principles of Moral goodness and Civility.

-- My Liege and you honorable Ladies, farewell on Earth for ever: Nature
injoynes me silence: be tender of your honor.

But little needed this serious protest of Conjugal fidelity in this Excellent
Lady; enjoying such a Consort, whose noble heart was endued with such
resolution, as it remained steeled against the strength of Rumor and all
groundless aspersions: which one day he was pleased more fully to express in a
poetical dimension, whereto he was naturally affected, and for the Person of a
Prince sufficiently accomplished. His meaning with a Diamond he left engraven
in the window of his Bedchamber in this manner: altering only the name of his
Ismenia to Clara.

Clara Platonicks loves, but these are such,
No man nor Woman likes them save herself;
At such Competitors I think not much,
But rather pity them; to run a-shelf
Both Fame and States at once: -- Such fancies be
Acts tending more to Alms then Jealousy.
Thus my Chaste Clara her affection clothes
With pure desires, which lighter fancy loathes.
And to minister a Loves Powder in this poetical humor, to reconcile two
distanc'd Pairs divided one from the other, for Allowance or Alimony (as the
Lady seemed to urge it, or some other discontent, privately known to herself)
in the very Ladies Chamber window, who appeared most aggrieved, he writ these
verses: No worldly variance should divide
A prudent Consort from his Brid^.
Each should with other jointly share
In mental joy and mutual care.
No Jointure must this Juncto part,
One Home, one Helm, one Help, one Heart.
Sound Oeconomical Counsel.
This sound advice did Plato give,
So may you like Platonicks live:
While every thought resolvs to love,
"Dear Mates below, pure Saints above.
Your affectionate Philogamist.


At vacant and retired hours; such Composures as these were his usual
Recreations: neither did he make them as a Labor, but a Play, to quicken and
set an edge upon his Fancy. Some intercursive passages relishing more of
Pleasure then Passion would many times fall betwixt Ismenia and Himself: but
ever tempered and allayed with that Candor, as they ended ever with a Comical
Conclusion: as may appear by those lines of reconciliation intended to Ismenia,
Meaning some State-d^scontents at that time perplexing him: but prudently
carried and peaceably composed.
though covertly shadowed under the Name of Mariana.

What, once again distraught! -- Pray thee no more,
Thou know my Magazen has laid in store
Of Bosom-griefs: whose nightly pressures keep
My Senses waking, when my Eyes would sleep.
Have thou lost all th'good Nature that thou had
By adding Sorrows to a Soul so sad?
Share with thy Consort; 'twere too great a blow
To suffer both in Wife and Subjects too,
An unprepensed Passion is no Curse;
Recall that Clause, " For better and for worse,
It will enjoin thee Patience: -- discreet wit
Will either still a Storm or temper it.
Meet me then with a Smile, to clear this wether,
It shall unite us while we live together.
Decad's of years in Spousal love bestowed
Should not admit acquaintance with a Cloud. Affection being nothing else then
a Cordial Impression. Fellis tui acrimoniam non redarguo, quia tali omnem
laborare hominem sentio. Aphorism. Antiq.

If there be Itch in love as there is in skin,
It cannot choose but like impression win.
A present heat can never be styled hate,
"Minds free from these partake an Angels state.
When Mutius was taxed of too much ire
By th'Roman Prefect; in his home-retire
He blamed his wife, that she would not condemn
That fault in him was taxed by other Men:
"Excuse me, Sir, said she; I would not touch
"Your gall, because I thought all had as much.
Which Answer did his Patience so revive,
As he became the mildest man a-live.
Do so; 'twill ground a perfect harmony
Whether we Princes or Inferiors be.
But to go on with the Continuation of our Story; we shall not here much need
to dilate upon those Ritual Ceremonies observed at the interment of that
incomparable Princess. Let it suffice, that nothing was omitted, which might
properly tend to the Solemnization of those Royal Obsequies, either for
magnificence of State, then which no Ceremonial more sumptuous: nor confluence
of Attendance, then which none ever more populous. Neither were her Funerals
accompanied with more solemnity of state, nor affluence of charge, then an
universal sorrow of the whole Court: so generally was this Excellent Lady
beloved and bemoaned. The sad Prince, her widdowed Consort, now deprived of so
inestimable a Jewel; as became a careful Father, begun to recollect himself:
and lay a provision, both for matter of Education and future preferment of
those deer Pledges which were left him by his affectionate Ismenia. By whom he
had two Sons; of different dispositions: For Cyrenius, the Elder was wholly
addicted to the Camp: but Rosicles the younger to his Book, wherein he grew a
singular Proficient. Now the fame of Cyrenius his youthful valor became so
dispersed and rumor'd abroad; as many, and those of approved Judgment, were of
opinion, that it abridg'd his days: and that some neighboring Prince
emulating, or rather fearing his rising spirit and incomparable courage;
practiced by some inferior Instruments (unworthy the style of so eminent a
Profession) his speedy dispatch. Though some others, quite of another opinion,
(to vindicate, perchance, the repute of their Country) and that he dyed upon a
Surfeit of grapes taken in Natolia. But the former Opinion might appear more
probable, in regard of a distastful message which this hopeful Prince, no long
time before his Sickness, had sent to his Fathers Enemy: and nearly confining
to his Native Country: That he was then bandying balls with his Racket: but it
should not be long, till he had casten those Balls into another Mould: which
the strongest Forts and Fortresses in his Kingdom should shortly hear of. But
touching the manner of his death, it is the safest way to suspend our judgment,
being so variously descanted, and not as yet positively resolved. Let us only
conclude, great was his Fame, and premature his Fate: being One, on whom all
Candy treasured their hope. Basilius being now rest in his declining years of
so strong a stay and staff to his age; took advice of the Council of his
State, what Match might be held most suitable for the young Prince his Son
Rosicles, the only remainder of his Line: and Supportance of his decreasing
life.

Various and different were the Councils opinions in this grand Consult; but at
last, like so many lines closing in one center, they unanimously concluded;
that the young Princess of Hetruria was the suitablest Match for state,
strength and corresponding alliance that could be made choice of: and to
expedite this main concern (the speedy progression whereof Basilius infinitely
importuned) Silures a Court-Favorite; and one of eminent esteem with Basilius,
was designed to be his Attendant and Interpreter in his address to the
Hetrurian Court. And to return you a character of this Silures; He was of a
graceful and winning deportment: of pleasing discourse and Courtly presence:
though much affected to a native lightness: which he could artfully shadow
(albeit the help of Moral Arts had not much enabled him) and delude the Eye of
his Observer with a formal color of pretended modesty. Which he might easily
do; for though not in Books, yet sufficiently had he by his long reside and
converse in Court, read in Men, how he might best please: and fall off too,
with best advantage in palliating his unmanag'd affections. An excellent
artifice, which he usually practiced, in his Morning Sacrifice to his Glass and
constant visits of attractive beauties!

It is above belief with what general acceptance and princely entertain,
Rosicles this virtuous Suitor was received: nay admitted to the presence of
Parthenia (an unwonted freedom in that Court) and not only so, but to enter
into free parliance of Sponsal love with this incomparable Lady. Whose Princely
appearance held ever such a comely distance: as it did neither promise too much
forwardness, nor averseness in the Object of affection. Many days were not
past in these Love-pursuing Treaties; till the enamored Rosicles might raise
his living hopes to a probable fruition of his desires, if Lycanthes Father to
his indeared choice, would answer the fair Proposals of his aged Father with
his clear assent and approvement. Which was so quickly and cheerfully seconded,
as nothing was wanting to consummate their happiness (so individually were
their hearts united) but those Sacred Rites, which admit all Loving Pairs a
free enjoyment of what their longing thoughts so eagerly pursued.

But alas; what sprinklings of bitterness intermixe themselves amidst the
absolutest sweetes! You shall hear a Catastrophe unexpectly accompanying this
amorous Comedy. A diversion beyond Conceit: and beneath Fear. Which (not to
perplex your thoughts with unnecessary delays, apt to tire your Fancy: nor
fruitless digressions to surcharge your memory) befell in this manner.

Silures, a Person singularly accomplished, as far as the Court of Candy could
complete him; being no less confident of his own abilities, then what Nature or
the imbellishments of Art could confer upon him; became infinitely taken with
Valeria, an incomparable beauty of the Hetrurian Court. Whom only (being as
yet in the Infancy of his affection) he attempted to make his, by amorous
interbreaths, passionate sighs, with other signal arguments, legible enough to
any judgment that had ever practiced the service of a Mistress: or had read a
Lecture of Love. But Valeria, a Lady no less wise then fair, knew well enough
how to vye with him at that Game: and could bestow a Look, where she never meant
to fix her Love. Neither did it behove Her, to be too liberal in the throwing
forth of those affectionate Lures: being married to a Gentleman of a noble
Family: and beyond compare, gracious in the eye of the Court. Truth is,
Rosicles could not be more hot in the pursuit of his legal addresses: then
Silures was in his prohibited delights. Never was more passion shown in fewer
words: nor more real love, as it was shadowed, with more silence. This the
Lady observed, joying much that her taking beauty, whereof her Morning-Glass
had sufficiently dictated to her, should purchase her so speedy and unexpected
a victory. Neither is it to be questioned, but that Eminent Ladies who know the
value and attractive effects of beauty, triumph in nothing more then in this
Sovereignty of love: taking usually more content in their Command, then
Fruition of that Object whereto they pretend. Such was the humor of this
gallant Lady; then whom none ever knew how to Court state with mo^e becoming
and unaffected Majesty: nor entertain a Servant with more attractive
reservancy. Mean time, Silures fearing that his long forbearing to deliver his
devotionall affection to her; might beget in her either a Conceit of weakness
and timidity: or of coolness and indifferency in the pursuit of his Fancy;
Which opportunity was contrived and designed by Tripensa, a notable Court
Coy-duck, not without promise of a great reward.
He resolved one day (and better opportunity could not be possibly presented
him) being in a close Myrtle Arbor, where he addressed his First Encounter:
And where in the best dress and dialect of love (disclaiming all further
acquaintance with dull silence) He discovered the reality of a faithful
Servant in this sort.

Madam, Excuse my Former silence; whereto an unexpressible affection and Zeal
to your self did injoyne me: and now my boldness in this admittance of my
presentment of his affectionate service, who remains wholly dedicated to your
Honors disposal: holding his life in this only happy, that it may bestow it
self on the accomplishment of your Commands.

Noble Sir; said She, you highly oblige me in this immerited Character you are
pleased to bestow: neither is it in me with any equivalent Favor to regratiate
you: only know, that there is no respect confined to the limits of honor,
which I shall not with much promptness re-tender you. But trust me. dear Sir,
these private Addresses and shady Retirements suit not well with our Habit. And
beshrow me, if I can conjecture how my Spousall innocence should be betrayed to
this unexpected intercourse.

How, Madam, betrayed! I hope your affectionate thoughts are far from
harboring such a sinister Conceit. We may prove Traitors to our own surprised
hearts, by too intentive fixing on such incomparable Subjects of fancy; but for
you, Divine Souls, to be betrayed by your Servants, who make the pursuit of
your Commands their supreme happiness; were such a Ridle, as the wisest Lover
could never assoyle: nor whose violation the devoutest Flamins absolve. Such
real Servants were rare attractive Adamants, quoth she, in these impurer
times; where plausive pretenses weave up the web of a deceiving Fancy: and
self-interest, or to give its proper attribute, sensual delight, bear sway in
Loves Regiment.

Surely Madam, it has been your unhappy Fortune to encounter with ungrateful
or indiscreet Servants upon this relation. For he deserves not the enjoyment of
a deserving Mistress; who to accomplish her content; would not hold the
Sacrifice of his life a competent gage for such a Purchase.

May you rest ever happy, answered Valeria, in the enjoyment of such a
Mistress; that may merit the constant attendance of so deserving a Servant.
Love is ever best balanced with love: neither can there be any Eclipse in that
Passion: where goodness may challenge an influence over affection. Nor can I be
so indigent of Charity: nor hold such distance with Civility; as to hold a
Stranger le^^ in esteem then a loyal Lover. But pray Sir, ingenuously tell me,
whereto these Obliging Expresses which might work strongly upon a Subject o^
Frailty, may pretend!

Upon no other Object then the happy Enjoyment of your self. Wherein, Sir, your
Choice an^ my Change might make us of all others most unhappy, for I am enjoyed
already.

For loves sake, Madam, what Mortal so soveraignizingly commanding, or by the
destinies so powerfully enabled, that has such Privilege over your beauty, as
to make of it a Monopoly? Must the Splendour of that Sun which might diffuse its
beams upon the Universe, be confined to one Angle? Is Nature so prodigal to
One; and so parcimonious to Others? Reflect upon your incomparable indowments,
and that priority of Feature in relation to your exquisite Composure (Excellent
Lady) and sure you cannot be such an Enemy to your self; as to encloister those
accomplishments, which even humane Society had ordained to be Communicable.
What do you mean by Encloistring? A Spousall Condition suits not with a
Cloister; answered Valeria. But give me leave to inform your judgment better,
lest you might suffer by inclining to an irrevocable Error. In your overvaluing
my low abilities, you highly derogate from his Perfections to whom I owe my
self. Neither can I otherwise think, but that the Clearness of your Intellect
has already discovered a flaw in my Judgment; to make there my Choice, where
there might be a probable desire or admittance of Change. Pray Sir, acquaint
me; be your Country Ladies so apt to receive Servants: or to entertain the
pretended affection of a Forraigner without condign Censure? Reputation, Sir,
I can assure you is here in Hetruria, held an Ornament of higher value. Neither
shall that word of Priority, which your rare dialect bestows upon me, beget in
me a Conceit above merit: or too credulous an attention to a personal praise,
taking breath rather from volubility of dialect and Facility of tongue; then
grounded effects and solidity of truth. For my part, Sir, since I first
breathed Court air, I have ever reaped more profit by dis-esteem then
self-esteem. The one lifts us up, and transports us beyond the bounds of
Reason, by presenting to our deluded Fancies, imaginary shadows of our own
Conceipted Excellence; which always closes with a dangerous Catastrophe, by
inslaving our selves to our own Fancy. Whereas a just disesteem of our own
abilities may be properly compared to that exquisite Receipt which the wise
Ulysses carefully used to decline those Siren-sugred enchantments which had
miserably inveagled and surprised him, if he had not seasonably prevented those
perilous Charms by Cautious Fears.

Neither would I have you think, Noble Sir, but if there were in me any such
priority as you pleasingly pretend, but that person who has all right and just
propriety in it, should without danger of Competition solely enjoy it.

This resolution of Valeria lessened the hopes of Silures in this amorous Suit:
yet not so wholly discouraged him; as with this easy repulse wholly to raise
his Siege: And the rather, for that he had formerly received some private
Encourageme^ts from such persons as had more intimate knowledge of Valeria's
pliable disposition: that her native levity seconded by the delicacy of her
Education could assure him of no less success, then a graceful acception and
admittance to the fruition of what he sued for: if some light skirmishes and
slight repulses did not amate his Spirit: nor tire his patience with delays.
Neither, indeed, could Silures promise to his hopes less happiness, upon his
last encounter and their departure one from the other. For she bestowed upon
him such an affectionate smile in her recede from the Arbor, as it could
assure nothing less then an assurance of a further Favor: though her
resolution seemed to be of a more reluctant and unmalleable temper. Such
singular art have some women attained in presenting smooth Looks and speaking
Eyes; when their Expresses are with most niceness and subtlety palliated.
Mean time, her noble Consort, Versivalo; though he had apparent grounds of
suspecting much; yet his strong opinion and long Experience of her Constancy,
made his clear thoughts strangers to Fear. For as she was held for beauty and
bravery in all the Hetrarian Court most absolute: so her usual rejection of
sundry Persons of eminent esteem had confirmed her a Countess of incomparable
Continence. All this time, Prince Rosicles no less solicitously then
successively pursued his Quest. Neither was Parthenia's endeavors, to perfect
their longing desires, and ceremonially complete what their mutual affections
had already signed. Nothing unassay'd not left unacted that might usefully
conduce to the final accomplishment of this great Address. For Lycanthes Father
to Parthenia, had wholly condescended to all such Proposals or Articles of
Marriage as were returned him by Silures: with other additional emoluments,
manifest expressions of his entire affection to Rosicles.

But honest Nuptial love was not only here in agitation: Silures had quite
forgot his Office of an Intelligencer; through the pursuit of an incontinent
Lover. He prefers the purchase of Valeriae, if he might have the fortune to
obtain it, before any other employment, were it never so considerable, whereto
in loyalty he stood obliged. To prepare then his amorous address: and to bring
his continued Motion to a fair period and conclusion; being flanker'd with
sundry officious Agents; who nibling at the Bait of Reward; the attractivest
booty to servile Spirits; promised not only their best assistance, but assured
him of present success, if his Honor would give way to their advice. Being
then not only put on but infinitely encouraged by these officious Instruments
to the re-assault of this Excellent Lady; and having presented her first with a
rich Carknet (a Present intended for princely Partheniae, but detained by
Silures as a Reserve for a depraved beauty;) He labors with far more Courtly
art then moral honesty or real modesty, to delineate his Passions begot of ill
Principles in this manner.

Madam Valeria; I have purchased, but from what hand I know not since our last
inter course, which showed a strange aversness in your affection; an hope
enlivened above compare. Neither indeed could I expect ought less from a Lady
so singularly accomplished; and of so sweet and resenting a temper: A structure
of that Composure could not long hold out siedge to an affectionate Stranger:
whose life was thrown wholly upon your Mercy: and whose highest contentment
depended on your acceptance. I must freely and clearly, as becomes a
devotionall Servant, inform your judgment in one particular, nearly relating
to that impressive Zeal my affectionatest thoughts had tendered to your Honor.
This it was that embarked Silures first for Hetruria; although that great
Address of my Princes Marriage with your Lady Parthenia carried on the
design. And never was occasion with more pleasure presented: nor more
cheerfully pursued. My Personal distance from you, rendered me sufficient
Experience of the infallible truth of that Maxim: "How Love divided from its
Object became more violent. But my happy voyage has brought on this Conclusion:
that a glad representation and fruition of so long a desired Object Cancells
the date of those discontents, which a necessitated distance had formerly
procured. Your subscription to time and place I shall not here commit to paper:
in both these propose what may appear most suitable to your desires and
preservation of honor. Mean time, accept this Token from his hand, whose
heart you are already seaz'd on: and whose sole subsistence relies on the
incomparable Valeria, so long as the destinies permit a Being to

Silures.


This Letter and Present were with all care and s^eed sent to this Noble Lady:
receiving them with more admiration then affection. For her pure innocent
thoughts had never given harbor to the admittance of a light or licentious
Suitor. Neither could she imagine by whose means or erring Suggestion this
Credulous Stranger should become so confident of a Conquest; seeing their last
intercourse promised nothing less. Many ways did she cast about to retreive
this Secrecy: and with much ado she came to a discovery of this grand Design
(a seeming Project of undermining or betraying honor) which, to avoid
impertinent digressions, had been thus contrived.

There was one Argiricidas, a professed Broaker in illegitimate Contracts: who
understanding with what impetuous sollicitancy Silures importuned the affection
of Valeria; pretending his intimacy with this Lady, offered him his service:
and how he doubted not but to become a prevalent Agent in this Employment, if
he pleased to transmit the Carriage of so high a Concern to his management and
disposure.

Argiricidas could not be more apt to ingratiate (in which art he was singular,
being his Master-prize) then Love-transported Silures to entertain: grounding
his belief on this mercenary Agents pretense of his known esteem in the Court:
and his easy access and prevalency with this Lady; on whom he so infinitely
doated. No Ear could be more credulously attentive to this Impostors plausive
encouragements: promising him an ample reward upon his success; which with a
frontless boldness he assured him, should every way answer his desires. Many
days were not past, till this deluding Solicitor thirsty of the reward
promised him; without ever imparting his Suit to the Lady: or remonstrance of
Silures affection continued to her; he frames a Letter and directs it to this
pitiful perplexed Lover in this manner.

Sir; you have heard how frequent drops will pierce the hardest stone; and I
have found it true. That Breast which seemed lately as impenetrable as a Rock
of Adamant; by much working (as what means unassay'd that might successively
operate to the issue of this design:) becomes sensible of the Effects of love:
and the apprehension of a deserving and obsequious Servant. The Conquest is
got; and your way laid to arrive at the Port of your desires. This Task, I must
needs confess, had it not been pursued seriously and seasonably, had
irrecoverably perished before it had attained its maturity. But your interest
made my Morning Visits and Evening attendance equally pleasing.

The very last day I had access unto her, and upon this Theme took occasion to
converse with her, was crowned with so cheerful an Evening; as her graceful
compliance and assent infinitely sweetened and attempered my doubtful
endeavors: much like a wearied Traveller, who chafed with sultry heat, allays
the extremity of his toil and heat with the seasonable refreshment of a shady
Arbor or cool Christ all Spring. I shall not need to importune your pursuit;
I know well, how your affection cannot choose but be winged with speedy desires:
having so imcomparable an Object with all freedom ready to receive you: and
with the choicest delights that Fancy may contrive, or an ingenious Lady
devise, to entertain you.

Take this, Sir, for so I account it, for the happiest employment, that could
be by your self commanded, or commended to the successive endeavors of

Your most obliged servant Argiricidas.


A rare boldness! This Letter of Credence is received; his reward returned: and
Silures with such aerie hopes strangely transported, as instead of brains, his
head is wholly taken up with Chymeras. And these were the grounds of Silures
confidence: wherewith the wisest man might have been deluded; much more a
fantastic Lover. This it was that caused him to play the part of a Conceipted
Secretary: and like another Ixion to be cozened with a Cloud. For we shall go
on in a continued Maze of Errors: and in our extrication find them all highly
reflecting on Silures honor.

When Valeria had received that strange Letter from the hand of her Confident
Lover; she knew not well what to make of it: but having found out the Author;
she resolved to continuate this Error: and to bring Silures to the knowledge of
the Estimate of a Ladies honor: and to contrive this Scene the better; she
pretends love, where she means not to place it: and under a colorable
profession, to present a Face of love, where she never intends to bestow it.
Neither, indeed, could his assiduate visits and unseasonable Courtings do less
then highly incense her: being a Lady of highest rank in Court: and the only
attractive Person for Majesty and Beauty. And consequently, One upon whom the
Eyes of most of the Eminentest personages of honor were constantly fixed.
Besides, her Husband descended from one of the flourishingst Families in all
Mantua; might justly take it as a derogation to the quality of his Person, to
have so daring an intruder pressing into his Interest. These Considerable
Motives quickened her Revenge, and that in such Exquisite a manner: as nothing
could extend to an higher degree of severity in her: nor of more ignominy to
him.

And in this sort she moulds her Plot; not without her Consorts assistance, as
may be probably conjectured, holding himself equally concerned in this insolent
attempt and insupportable affront shown them both. The Revenge, as the Sto^y
renders it, was no less expeditely acted then plotted: And to Posterity a
Surviving Memorial. The Lady Valeria resolved to feed him in his own humor,
that his Catastrophe in the unexpected Change of the Act might appear more
heavy; suits her dissembled love in the like dress, to bring him the sooner to
her Lure: and publish his shame under the vizard of love. Quick and concise was
her Character, implying the impatient desires of a passionate Lover.

Trust me, Sir, such pretenders to love, as you appear to be, (for your too
prevalent lines have enjoined me to a Belief that your undiscerning Choice has
made me the Mistress of your heart, and sole Soveraigness of your affection)
such, I say, are dangerous Pioners to converse with. For in truth, we cannot
challenge any propriety in our selves; so long as it is in your hand to draw
the latch of our affection; which by your persuasion and over-working, becomes
capable of any impression. We must then with Patience be casten in your Mould:
and appear frail vessels at the pleasure of the Moulder.

I dare not say I love you; and yet, methinks, my Tongue begins to tax me;
nay, in express words tell me, that my dialect is not true. My Bosom too,
which has been ever a professed Stranger to unlawful heats; should I whisper to
it a Tale of Foreign Love; it would turn Infidel and not believe me: having
ever held such distance with Passions of that quality. -- But ay me! I must
love, you say: and I must ingenuously confess, my Frailty, and your Fervor
perplexe me a thousand ways in return of my Answer. But the Suit is soon
obtained, where the Petitioner may play the Commander, by challenging an
influence upon the Party to whom He presents his Suit. -- Go to Sir, you must
play the Conqueror; but let me conjure you, by all those religious protests
which you have so frequently and fervorously breathed: and with so many
ceremonious attests confirmed, that you triumph not too much in your Spoil;
let it be sufficient for your goodness to have gained the Gole, whereto the
instancy of your desires aspired. Do not blemish that which your Judgment has
so highly valued. That Lapidary might be justly taxed of indiscretion or want
of knowledge; who will carelessly suffer a Foil to be laid on that Gemme or
Pearl which he esteems of price: you have since your first sollicitancy set
your honor at an high rate. Be equally tender of both our Fames in this
relation. Let not the fruition of your desires make you too lavish in your
express: nor too immoderate in your Excess of joy. These might prove two
hazardous precipices to both our honors; which I am confident your discreet
love will study to decline in this pursuit and enjoyment of -- I know not how
to render it, a mutual acquiescence of a dangerous prohibited pleasure. As you
tender then the Object, to whom you pretend so high an honor, in this your
affectionate Cariere, (which must be assented to, because, so prevalent a
Suitor commands it) let this be your prime Endeavor. You have obliged me many
ways by votive Expressions, powerful lines and now in Tokens. To regratiate
which tribute, I shall assure you Sir, by the word of honor; that SHE, whom by
all likelihood you are to enjoy, seeing it cannot be otherwise prevented, shall
wear that Pledge of yours as an indeered Favor upon your access and private
admittance to her. This is enough; could lines blush, I had not writ so much:
yet if my Jealousy of intercepting these lines had not suggested to my
timorous spirit fresh Fears, I had enlarged my self more. Only this; your safe
conduct and arrival to the acquisition of your desires, cannot be less then
entirely wished by

Your indeered Valeria.


The gladsome Receipt of this Letter so strangely surpized the deluded thoughts
of our inamoured Silures; as he found that ancient Adage true by his own
Experience: Delay was bitter in the Quest of love. With winged Speed He
resolves to pursue his tendered Interest: and upon his access to her, finds her
casten in a new Mould. Her deportment had made it self a stranger to niceness.
No look but it retained a relation to love. Nothing could be delivered by him,
but it did infinitely please. And to close this intercourse with a pleasing
Period; time, place with all conveniences are designed for the accomplishment
of his desires: from the Expediting whereof Valeria showed no averseness at all.

When the Phebean Chariot after a long delatory progress (for so it appeared
to Silures) had finished his Course: and given way to Latona with her Sable
Curtains to ore-canopy the inferior Orb; it was no time for this longing
Amorist to foreslow his admittance to his imaginary Valeria: being made so well
acquainted with his Lodging: and with what privacy, without the Conduct of any
Lights, He was directed to enter the Chamber, in relation to her honor, whom
he did so incomparably tender. Where He found a Bedfellow, but of another hue,
though he could not at first discover it, then he expected. But feeling the
Carknet about her neck, which Valeria had writ unto him, 'Even she should
wear, whom by all probability He was to enjoy; apprehending no Fallacy in it;
as one satisfied with his Choice; He lay close inwreath'd in the arms of his
uncouth Consort an Exposed Prostitute; a Moorish Woman, of an obscure quality,
an infectious and diseased body. So as, when the Sun had displayed his
burnished locks, his radiant splendour over the Universe: and Morpheus cloyed
with a long nights slumber, had drawn aside his Curtains, that he might better
discover the deformity of his Inmate; in a Furious and madding passion, as one
quite distracted with that ugly Object of his loathed pleasure; Silures leaps
out of his Bed, vowing revenge for this his unexemplary dishonor, if either
Force or Policy could possibly contrive it. But for the present, he held no
Practice more useful, not for effecting his revenge more behoovfull; then to
make it his principal design (a Practice most prejudicial to the State of
Candy) how to dissolve that Treaty of Marriage; by cooling the affection of
Prince Rosicles to his virtuous Parthenia, and to commence a difference betwixt
the two States of Hetruria and Candy. This design admitted no protraction: for
though he could not with all his subtle and serpentine persuasions aliene the
grounded affection of Rosicles to that incomparable Lady: so deeply were those
impressions fixed: yet by incendiary Letters privately and speedily transmitted
to the old King; who through increase of years and decrease of constancy in
adhearing to advice, became wholly led by the Council of his Favorites:
amongst whom, none more eminent, nor in higher trust then Silures. Such was the
liberty of the time: and the infelicity of a State to derive their advice and
assistance from those Lapwing Statists, who either would not, or could not
manage those high considerable affairs so mainly conducing to the safety,
peace and security of their Country. Now Silures, this corrupt Intelligencer,
highly inflamed with the swelling Fury of an implacable revenge, amongst other
pernicious Messages merely commenced without Color of Truth; advertised the
Council of State, (especially such as were Feathers of his wing) what
derogation it would be to the Flourishing Sovereignty of Candy to become
subject to the Commands of an Inferior State; which he had expressly collected
by sundry Hetrurian braves: and those seconded by persons of the eminentst
quality in all the Nation; that this alliance should make them so happy, that
though they were Subjects in Hetruria; They might by their prowess become
Commanders over Candy. And to decline their joint approvements from this
Capitulation; He assured them more (no less ementitious then the former) how
the Hetrurian Prince had ^^ready made so bold with their Prerogative Royal;
nay, with the ancient Crests and Signals of their Princes Family: as they
blushed not to quarter his Coat: and to boast publicly, how the Constitution
of our State of Candy, was raised out of ashes by the Hetrurian valor.

These Relations, raked up from the Cinders of Revenge, which Silures had so
lately imbosom'd, so highly incensed those inconsiderate Statists, to whom his
Letters were directed, as with joint voice and vote they resolved to make their
address to Basilius the old King, and to importune the necessity of his assent
for dissolving the Treaty with the Hetrurian Prince, and for calling back his
Son Rosicles, with express Command of forbearing to proceed in any such
intentional way of Alliance. This was no sooner proposed by those young
Statesmen; then it was readily inclined to by Basilius. Whose content rested
principally in a free indulging of his aged appetite, rather then any
management or address of State.

It is not easy to apprehend the grief nor perplexed distemper of Rosicles
upon receipt of this severe and unwelcom Message. But Silures so deeply
blanched with dishonor, hastened his departure; but appeared as one wholly
guiltless and unknown to the grounds of any such Command. But he could not so
artfully nor subtilely color it; but most of the eminenst Persons conversant
about the Court, were acquainted with the Occasion of it: and afterward became
a Comical Argument (or a Satirical subject rather) to the choicest and
exquisitest Roscio's about the Court, both to exercise their Fancies, and
actively to present them. Though the Hetrurian Prince distasting such invective
Presentiments, out of a native modesty and princely clemency, prohibited all
such detractive Scenes, darting personally upon any ones honor, to be
publicly acted.

Now must we leave Parthenia bemoaning her hard fate; to be thus deserted
without cause: and divided from the absolute Object of her pure affection
without ground. So as she remained over-resolv'd to bid adue to the world: and
to betake herself to a private Claustral life. Neither was it her purpose to
alter that resolve: had not more impressive advice or a superior Command
diverted her retired course: Being afterward espoused to a Prince of high
Extraction: and singular endowments: yet would she never hear of any such
motion; till she received certain intelligence of Rosicles marriage: so
constantly and devotionally stood she affected.

It was high time now for Silures to pack away, having run his Fame on so
desperate a Shelf: as those very Foists and Buffoons, who in an inferior
officiating way retained to the Court, would usually point at him; and in a
disgraceful manner twit him; and say: There strutts that brave Foreign
Intelligencer, who has lately got a stroke over shinnes with a French Faggot:
or a Snappe by a Neapolitan Ferret. It is easy then to imagine with what
celerity he winged his Course, to decline his shame. No time was reserved to
take his long Farewell of his Grand Revenger Valeria nor his Moor Tripensa:
from whom He had received more then he could claw off in haste: For that
professed Haxter was noted for such a Mercenary Prostitute, as she was held a
dangerous Inhabitant under the Torrid Zone: One, apt to infect more then a
Public Pest.

Those Ladies then and dainty doxes of the Hetrurian Court, must hold him
excused; for neglect of those Caresses and Civil adues; which, if all things
had gone right, had been, doubtlesly, returned a with a graceful and
complementall dimension.

Now, suppose these two launching forth into the Maine Ocean; where Calm Seas
and prosperous gales accompanied them: being far more successive in their
Passage by Sea, then Address by Land: lost in the One, but safely arrived by
the clear Convoy and propitiousness of the Other. And with such assistance had
Silures fortified his approach and access to the Court of Candy: as all his
transactions were highly approved: his breach of the Match generally received
as an incomparable Blessing to their State: instilling into vulgar Ears, who
were apt to believe, what they had not the happiness to conceive; that next to
the Providence of Heaven, They were to attribute the prudent and prosperous
management of that great Act of State, to the cautious and circumspect Carriage
of Silures, in preventing by a timely foresight the Conclusive Heads of that
high and most Considerable Treaty. The production whereof, if once assented to,
might have accelerated the ruin of Candy. Wherein some particulars were
instanced, and those mainly insisted on, to beget in their Commonalty the
stronger belief of the happy issue of this prevention. As first, how the
Principles of Politic Government had not been only much weakened, but quite
dissolved by this Alliance: For the Form and Method of their Sovereignty, was
ever much different to the Hetrurian Posture: and so ambitious was the Nature
of those People; (so they pretended) as they would not be content with the free
enjoyment of their own Privileges and National Constitutions, but they must
invade others Liberties; by reducing their Laws to their scantling. Neither was
this all the inconvenience that might probably occur to their Flourishing State
by this incommodious Alliance: For the discipline of their Church held no
Consent nor harmony with them. How warily then and wisely was this prevented,
e're any thing were positively concluded?

These Reasons, though in an equal and judicious Skale, they might clearly
appear light and inconsiderable; they left such Impressions in the hearts of
the Citizens; as they accounted of Silures for a Semi-deity; but if they had
perused his Conditions rightly, they would have found him a Light one (such as
the Poets feigned their Heathen Gods to be:) but too much honor, as they
thought, could not be conferred on a person of that quality; whose timely care
and vi^ilancy had preserved their Country: by freeing them from that Juncto or
Alliance, the Consequence whereof might have involved them in the miseries of a
perpetual Slavery. These sugared pretenses were those Motives, which caused them
to receive him into the City with those Applauses and Acclamations, Bonefires,
Conduits streaming with wine; Theatral Shows and Presentiments both by Land and
Water: with sundry Encomiastick Peans in magnifying his actions (so ignorant
was the pen of the quality of his merits;) whereby it appeared, that these
deluded Plebeians ascribed more to Silures lightness: then they did to Rosicles
composed and temperate Carriage.

But the prevention of this insuccessiue match must make way to a new Address:
For the hopes of the Kingdom being wholly treasured in the Posterity of
Basilius: and Rosicles the only top-branch of that Royal Stem; the
necessity of his Election in the Choice of a Consort, might admit no long
debate. Ferrara was the Place where He was to set up his rest: and make his
Choice. And this tractable Prince returns a fair and free Condescension to
their definite resolve: though the memory of Parthenia's perfections, then
which none more accomplished, retained in him that deep impression, as his
affianc'd heart could hardly find harbor for any new affection. But on he must
to this re-address, seconded by the attendance of his late Intelligencer. Who
though he pretended an indisposition to health (as he might well, for the Fire
was not yet quite out of the Furnace, nor his Cornelian Tub wholly removed) and
by his Nightcap, which he shadowed with the handsome pretext of an Hectic
Fever; though intended to cover the Scalpe of an Adamite, left as naked as a
moulted Scaledrak: with his unarmed Fingers, for they had lost their nails by
fastening too eagerly upon an infectious beauty: Though he might object these
Infirmities (as never better vital parts were seaz'd of more) on he must to
this new Adventure: wherein, no doubt, his late misfortune would make him more
tender of preserving the Constitution of his enfeebled Honor. Now to their
Convoy and arrival.

Their access to the Court of Hetruria was not with more state nor magnificence
presented to Prince Rosicles and his noble Retinue; then it was with a
Majestic kind of distance at his first coming to Court, accoutred by the
Prince and his daughter Irina; with whom he was, as the State had debated it,
upon his departure from Candy, to enter marriage. All the Court put on a shie
countenance: nor did the Lady herself appear with less niceness, if at any time
(which was rare) she took occasion to encounter Rosicles, or be in his
presence. The grounds of which strangeness neither he nor his Intelligencer
could at first discover; till one day an especial Favorite, one who had been
formerly educated in the Court of Candy, imparted his mind with much freedom
unto Rosicles; unshadowing to him what had appeared before most intricate: and
withal, that his affectionate zeal might be a-wanting in no considerable
respect conducing to so fair an Address, he chalks him forth away how he might
alter the face of that strangeness in his Mistress: and possess the Court with
a better opinion of him; then they had yet in their Entertain demonstrated.
His words, upon their serious Conference in the Palace Garden, were these.

Sir, I must ingenuously tell you, for I am none of these that would willingly
delude you, having been formerly so much obliged to your Fathers Court for my
Education; that your Highness goes the wrong way to the wood in this pursuit of
your affection. The Princess of Ferrara bears a more supercilious front then to
be content with the Gleanings of the compleatest Suitor in Europe.

She has heard, and so has the whole Council of State, with the eminenst
Persons in our Court, what a devotional Servant you have professed yourself to
the Princess Parthenia in the Court of Hetruria; where having received a
dishonorable repulse, like a rejected or deserted Lover, you fly hither to
supply your loss with the choice of a new Mistress. But our Ladies here be of
an higher temper: and more coy by nature, to sit down with the husk, when they
may have the kernel: or rest satisfied with Leavings, where they may be
presented with the very first and best Fruits. Let me then advise from that
intimacy of service I owe you; to make it your first Task to vindicate your
honor; by making it appear to our Princess Iri^a, how this dispersed report
erroneously grounded, has highly injured you; in faming you to be rejected by
Parthenia, (nor have I heard ought less;) seeing the Objects of your affection
was elsewhere stated: and now in its proper Center closed: and in the
acquisition of your desires happily crowned. Beget once this belief in her: and
you must necessarily go on in a smooth track. Wherein the real wishes and
actual offices of a Constant Servant shall ever go along with you.

These encouragements highly enlivened the drooping hopes of perplexed
Rosicles: who with these unexpected oppositions had nearly razed out of his
remembrance the late impressive Idea of his deserted Mistress. And to put this
faithful Favorites Counsel in practice; He called to mind a Letter formerly
writ unto him by Parthenia: and amplified with various expresses of much
endeerment; which he had firmly resolved to carry ever about him: not to that
end as he afterward employed it, but to ingrave in his memory a deeper
character of her constancy. The lines were short but pithy: laboring to put
Loves tongue to silence with the virgin style of modesty.

Sir, Parthenia could say she loves you, but she dares not; lest it should put
upon you that confidence that might betray her discretion, by giving way to
your strength to triumph over her weakness. And yet she dares credit you: For
though there be no faith to be reposed in the face; there is a line of Honor
that cannot be crooked. Fame cannot be liable to hazard in such a family. Your
goodness has been pleased to delineate your love in sundry ample Expresses: and
Parthenia can truly though blushingly tell you, that if you knew her heart, you
could not but confess how she thankfully a^swers you. Her only Injunction,
derived from a cordial affection closes in this: Appear the same you seem,
as you shall ever find in

Your constant Parthenia.


This letter by his appliance to Euriola, Some have taxt Rosicles for
scattering this Letter: holding it a betraying of the modesty of his Mistress.
one of her intimate Attendants, he caused to be scattered at the bottom of the
Lobby, where she usually upon occasion repaired to. And what influence wrought
upon his disdainful Mistress, shall appear by the Sequel.

When his coy Irina had taken up this letter (scattered at unawares, as she
imagined) and seriously perused it; as she received from one part of it
satisfaction; so from the other, a conceit of his mutability and irresolution.
She remained satisfied by the Contents of it, that Rosicles had rather deserted
Parthenia; then Parthenia Rosicles. But she found another Flaw in it; which
perplexed her as much as the other pleased her: and that was his apparent
inconstancy; in deserting a Lady so entirely his, and of deservings beyond
exception; without the least ground of di^taste, which brought her to this
mature expostulation with her self.

How now Irina! Has time reserved you for no employment; but to bestow your
precious hours in perusing letters that concern you not? Play not the wanton
fly in sporting too much with the Flame of Fancy; lest your singed wings become
a booty to Loves Fury. Engage not your liberty to a Stranger, lest the
Forfeiture bring you off with dishonor. What is Rosicles to Irina, or Irina to
Rosicles? Have you none to bestow your affection on; but on such an One, as can
suit his Fancy to all Objects: and pretend Faith, when he intends to color it
with the cunning artifice of Fraud? what privilege of Exemption may you
challenge above his deserted Parthenia? None could (as it well appears, and I
commiserate her injuried condition) Sacrifice to Loves Altar with more fervor,
nor unveil her Conjugal desires with more innocent Candor; yet must she be
rejected where her affection was most individually fixed and unextinguishably
fired. An excellent cautionary Lecture for an inconsiderate Lover. Desist then,
and keep thine eyes within their Lodges: thy Fancy communicable to none but
thine own Bosom. This will secure thee from the thraldom of a light Suitor: and
return thee a freedom of enjoying thy self, incomparably more valuable then
these ceremonious protests of any Complemental Lover. The whole world (if thou
should take thy Survey) presents but in a Land-skip, a continued counterfeit
Love-mask; wherein appears variety of Faces, but they are not native nor
genuine; but borrowed vizards. And, sure, if Paint be so odious a tincture to
real beauty; what may we think of these adulterate Colors of painted Fancy:
when we seem least that we are: and are most what we seem least? -- But ay me!
Tenderd love, which may be real and without any such flaw, merits no such heavy
construction: nor any such Criticism. Digest then thy thoughts better: and
suspend thy Judgment, till truth, the daughter of time shall discover his
Carriage in that Hetrurian Suit: with all the Circumstances necessarily
accompanying so main and important an address. Neither will this appear a Task
of any such difficulty as not to be atcheived: being pursued with industry, and
discreet secrecy. I am confident a politic head might (if all other ways
were obstructed) plough the ground with his own Heifers: and that I hold to be
the clearest and expeditest course.

It were easy to gather by this pretty amorous Expostulation, how Irina for
all her pretended motion or aversion from the suit of Rosicles, stood cordially
affected: which she more clearly discovered by her diligent inquiry.

This by the assisting means of her Gentlewoman Euriola, came in very short
time to be effected. For one Philaster a person of especial account with
Rosicles, but no well wisher to Silures, professing much love to This Euriola
was a native Cretan: though Ferrara gave her Education.
Euriola, and desiring nothing more then to become her intimate Servant:
entering one day into a Familiar discourse with this Mistress of his affection
(for so he styled her) touching the Carriage of that great business in
Hetru^ia; and being very inquisitive, according to her Ladies direction, of
sundry particulars, both in relation to their proceedings, and unexpected
breach in the Conclusion: He fully acquainted her with their whole Progress,
and occasional division in this sort.

Madam Euriola, none can more punctually satisfy your obliging Commands in
this Relation then my self; which I shall do more willingly; because it may
vindicate the honor of some who have the nearest interest in it: and lay the
blame on those who by their irregular comportment justly deserve it. Most
injuriously has our noble Prince been traduced: nay, privately taxed, (so far
as the malignancy of their report would pass for current,) of levity and
inconstancy in the pursuit of his affection: And how ungratefully Parthenia's
loyal Expresses were requited. But these Criminations may be wiped off with an
easy Sponge: For his fair and well-compos'd demean was royally affectionate;
his Carriage modest and temperate, in no Course dis-proportionate to the
Greatness of himself: desiring nothing more fervorously (and herein closed his
desires most Princely) then to have that business expedirely effected, which
had been so generally approved and advanced. But I must tell you, my dearest
Mistress, that there was an unclean Beast (I must freely unbosome my self to
your Commands) that troubled the smooth passage of this Christalline Current.
One, who should have been a principal Agent in promoting it: but bemoane a
Remora in our Proceedings. For that amiable thread of love, which the Prince my
Master; had woven: and by a mutual contexture brought nearly to perfection;
(for no difference nor disparity appeared in their Choice:) his sensual
desires untwisted: dissolving in one day, what many weeks had contracted: and
what two equally united hearts had so freely entertained.

Euriola here interrupting him; earnestly besought him to know who might be the
unhappy Actor of such a mischief?

Excuse your Servant, Madam, replied Philaster, I shall not much need to
display him any further: his dishonor has more then sufficiently published his
disorder. He has been a Servant of such long continuance unto sense: as it has
fortified him against all shame. In one word, this Sybarite, to give him
according to his dimention a just Character; is a professed violator of honor:
and to the grief of a distempered State be it spoken, an individual Minion to
Him who sits at the Stern. This is the Portraiture unto life of a light
Intelligencer.

So, said Euriola; now I have you. I have heard him, indeed, called the
Catamite of our time. But Fame is apt to belie those that are in place.
Howsoever, in this He showed himself an Instrument of unexemplary baseness.

Madam, you apprehend it rightly: and if with modesty I could discover every
particular, how it was projected and acted, it might make up an Annal to
Posterity, and leave the Actor to a stigmatized memory. Lines cannot blush; I
shall in a Scedule leave to my Excellent Mistress, what I cannot return with
Freedom by way of discourse. Penns be the best Pencils, where Pictures are to
be shadowed: Or the Subjects we treat of, shadowingly couched.

Neither was Philaster unmindfull of his promise, for within few days after,
he returned Euriola a lively Story of Silures Folly. Which with all convenient
speed she presented to her Lady. Upon perusal whereof, as the Narrative of the
deluded Sensualis^, being taken in his own Gin, did much delight her: so the
unexpected Overtures of the two dis-appointed Lovers did much perplex her.

But above all others, that strict Command of the Old King and his Council; so
peremptorily injoyning Prince Rosicles to dissolve the Treaty: and with all
speed to return to Candy. Yet her Compassion became counterpoiz'd by a late
inbred affection. For being now in every particular satisfied of Rosicles
gallant deportment: and that He was guiltless of what she most suspected;
inconstancy in the dereliction of his Mistress, she begun to feel a glowing
warmth in her own bosom, so as, what she commiserated in another, she became
sensible of, in a representative view of her own Condition.

These Impressions grew so firmly fixed in her virgin affections, as love, to
whose Name, Nature and definition she was so lately a Novice; was now
entertained as her nearest and dearest Consort. She disclaimed all distance now
with Rosicles; in whose presence though she had enjoined her tongue a Silence;
she had aspired to that perfection in her Progress of Fancy, as she had
Speaking Eyes: which any Intelligible Lover, had he been never so weakly
disciplined in the Service of a Mistress, might upon the very first reflection
have easily apprehended. So as his suit will admit no long demur: His Person
and abilities being so well approved: his Family every way corresponding to her
Choice. Wisely then, lest some smister occurrent, as she had read of before,
might obstruct her intended choice; she applied herself to her Mother-Queen
(for her noble victorious Father had been not long before dispatched by a
desperate Assassine) imparting freely to her, the affection she bare to Prince
Rosicles. He was desperately stabbed by Clariva in his Chariot.
This discreet choice of Irina's was no way distastful to her Mother;
apprehending rightly how this in^ended match might highly conduce to the
assistance of the State of Ferrara, then imbroiled in ^undry Divisions both at
home and abroad: the Fury whereof, as she wisely thought, might be more
seasonably composed and attempered by this useful alliance. So as upon a very
short debate, being much quickened by the Queen Mother, who might gather her
Daughters heat by her own youthful temper: a marriage betwixt these two
illustrious Princes was by the Council of State condescended to; though by a
Contingency of high Consequence, Prince Rosicles was called home, before these
Espousals could be, as was intended, personally solemnized. Which was within
few weeks after Solemnly performed by Proxy: and the Lady safely transported
to Verdo: and there received with all state and royal magnificence: From
whence she was conducted by the Eminentst Persons of the whole Nation to
Thamopolis: where she was with much joy and indeerment entertained by Rosicles.
But very soon after, those Festival Solemnities which were to accompany these
Nuptials, became upon this occasion unexpectedly abridged.

The old King Basilius keeping his Court then at Sibalt; fell sick unto death:
whereof diverse reports were dispersed: and being sudden, begot more
jealousies. Some were of opinion that his distemper arose from his intemperate
Feeding (...) and that his crazy and unhealthful body being not only sated but
much inflamed with luscious Fare and sweet Wines, too strong for his declining
Constitution, had begot in him such hydropick humors, with other contingent
infirmities, as they shortened his days. Though Others, and some of those,
Experienced Physicians and Philosophers, would not stick to say expressly, that
this good old King died of Poison. Which they constantly affirmed, should
manifestly appear by sundry impregnable arguments, if the State would give way
to a discussion and discovery of it. And Silures, One who all his time had been
an intimate Favorite to Basilius; (and upon that score more ungrateful then
Imagination may reach to,) became publicly accused and impeached before a
Convene of State, as a principal Instrument of this Regicide. Which
accusations, though too full of presumption, were within few days wholly
suppressed by the especial grace and Favor of Prince Rosicles (which was
strangly interpreted by many:) such was the temporary Felicity of Silures, as
he became a successive Favorite to two Princes. But highly odious to all
humanity, if an Agent in his death, whose immerited affection raised him to
that height. But whether the grounds of his accusations were just or no, we
shall not here determine. They are left to an higher scrutiny, whose judicial
eyes cannot be deluded; nor by favor dissuaded; nor Fear deterred; nor reward
corrupted; nor any by-respect diverted. To whose doom we leave him, to stand or
fall.

But to return you, by way of Digression, a strait and impartial survey of this
Basilius, as we should account him a rare Lapidary, whose Cabinet stored with all variety, cannot render one stone that admits a discernible flaw in it: so
might we justly conclude of Old Basilius; who, though he were enricht with
sundry excellent parts suitable to his princely quality: and which, no doubt,
might merit imitation by his Posterity: yet there might be discovered some
unbecoming blemishes highly derogating from the Splendour of those Parts
wherewith he was adorned: and Dignity of that Place whereto he was advanced.
And to omit the rest, by instancing in one more remarkable then any of the
rest; you may collect by what has been formerly observed of his infinite
affection to Favorites, that it lessened that esteem in the opinion of his
People, especially of those who sat near the Sternage of the State, which his
endowments, embellished with a native humility, otherwise deserved.

Now, amongst others of his Bosom-Minions, who partak't freely of his bounty
(being a Person of a large heart, though a remiss Spirit) there was one
Tremoses an Illirian born, and of an uncourtly demean; wholly molded to the
rude condition and Education of his Mountainous Country; yet of an amiable
aspect, and comely personage; whom the Prince was pleased to receive
principally into his favor: and to confer great honors and revenues upon him.
But neither the height nor heat of his desires became so bounded. For in that
Royal Court where this eminent Favorite was highly graced, it happened that one
Polygama, a Lady of incomparable beauty and brave presence set her love upon
him. But there was a main impediment to thwart her design: For her desires
aimed at nothing more then to be married to him: which she could not lawfully
do, being long before espoused to a Person of noble Extraction: and some years
after personally employed in the Senats Service. But what may not affection, be
it never so illegally grounded, speedily effect, being seconded by powerful
assistance; which Tremose^ could not want through his reliance on Basilius. So
as, though this great Favorite had been much dissuaded from assenting to any
such Match; especially, by Enthimio, his faithful Secretary; who out of his
zeal and fidelity told him expressly, that his acquiesce to that Marriage would
beget him a lasting Odium with all the Peerage; besides, that it was so highly
piacular, as it would admit no Dispensation: which honest counsel became fatal
to the Counselor, and no way prevalent over the wild affection of this
unfortunate Lover. For no sooner had Tremoses imparted this to Polygama; then
she inflamed with the fury of Revenge, procured his speedy dispatch with a
Spanish fig, by means of her Parasites and mercenarie Accomplices, fitting
Assacinats for her Service.

The Arch-Flamin first, with some others of the rest, jointly legitimating this
Divorce.
Neither was this all; for when this amorous Lady could not compass her purpose
any other way: she was advised to press a Divorce, in regard of the debilitie
of Vaxedor her Husband: which she not only prosecuted eagerly, but effected
succesfully; being encouraged by some Claw-back Flamins, who to gratify
Basilius in favor to his endeered Minion, returned their positive Opinions, So
Injuriously too were clear ingenuous spirits dealt withal; as an Excellent
Parnassian in those days, taking the modest freedom of inveying against the
illegalitie of those Spousals, was sharply censured.
that this Divorce was lawful and warrantable; in case of his Insufficiency.
Which was accomplished by a cunning smooth way, or shrouded imposture; having
her person changed, upon view, as was supposed, to make good the Testimony of
her virgin unpenetrated Condition. All which, this Basilius, (of so easy an
inclination was he to his Favorite) with much connivence passed over: nay, not
so much, as adjudging to a demerited death, (though formally pretended and
judicially sentenced) those who were principal Actors in Enthimio's murder.

Such was his easiness to those whom he intimately affected; as his hand was
ever ready to bestow, and his over-wrought Clemency to remit; more then
either the revenues of his Exchequer would well permit: or the Equity of their
Cause deserve. Which Lenity was held by some for Pusillanimitie; whereto in
very truth he was naturally inclined; as his posture in the presence of
Strangers every where discovered.

But the injuried Vaxedor became a Revenger of the wrong he had received from
the Father; in accepting the Title of a Commander by the Senats vote in manning
and managing those Civil Wars against his Son.

The sinister issue whereof closed unexemplarily fatal.

A strange but true Divination occasionally ensued, as was credibly reported,
upon this unlawful Marriage. A Person wholly unknown to Basilius, took the
confidence to press into his Presence; using these expressions: O Basilius as
thou have rest an Ewe of her true Owner; So shall thy Kingdom be rent from thee.

This amused Rosicles, being there present, which his Father observing;
Rosicles, said He, Let not the words of a Madman trouble thee: He Is
distracted, let him pass.

The Imagination is apt to contrive sinister consequences from dangerous
principles. A Person of singular native parts, rare indowments, persuasive
tongue, rich fancy, and graceful affability.
Only thus much let me acquaint you withal, in relation to the declining
Condition of Silures being no more then what was observed by the whole State of
Candy; that after Basilius death (wherein his hand was reported to be
isntrumental) Silures never prospered in any design either by Land or Sea:
appearing in every action fatal to his Friends; Fortunate to his Foes: and in
the end, most Tragical to himself, being in the heat of his youth, and growth
of his fame, by a Common Soldier, under color of a personal injury deprived
of life: and bereft of all those attractive Objects of sensual love. Yet let
me tell you, though this Gent. were subject to many gross infirmities, and
humane frailties; such as eclipsed much from that eminence of place whereto he
was advanced; and those High Offices wherewith He was invested; this Courtly
Libertine was enriched with singular abilities; and such as did infinitely
become him. And amongst others, give me leave to recount this as an especial
One; wherein he was ever observed most absolute.

It had been oftimes his Fortune (an unfortunate Condition in a Martial
Commander) to fall deep in arreers with his Soldiers, but most of all with his
Mariners; a dangerous Society to contest with: yet these, though in great
Companies they would oftimes mutinously and in a tumultuous manner not only
enclose, but violently and with implacable Fury rush into his Lodging: upon his
approach and conference with them; (such was his felicity in the Rhetorical art
of persuading) as these enraged men never departed from him unsatisfied; albeit
not one penny of their long arreeres were discharged. This had been many times
observed, and he infinitely admired for it.

Besides, Foils are most discernible in the preciou'st Pearls.
he was of a seemly complete deportment; an affable winning presence, an
amiable Countenance: and graceful in all suitable habiliments of honor:
defective in nothing, but Command of his affections, which darkened the splendour
of all his actions. -- But we must now return to our Court of Candy, The
tincture of one predominant vice darkneth the splendour of many eminent virtues.
where we left the Solemnity of a Princely Nuptial contracted by the
unexpected intervene of a premature Funeral. Rosicles having now succeeded
Basilius: and entered marriage with Irina that gallant young Princess of
Ferrara; the Court begun to put on an unaccustomed State; nothing more
affected, nor with more freedom embraced then an unrestrained liberty, which
Rosicles easily gave way to, because he perceived his young amorous Queen to be
a Person of pleasure: and to imbitter the Current of her delights with an
unseasonable opposition now in the Spring and initiation of them, as he
thought, would seem harsh and unsavory. But Habits are dangerous, when grounded
on faulty Principles. These boundless strains of liberty broke forth into
licencious issues. The Prince became a Subject to his Queens Command: and she
to the pursuit of her own pleasure. A conjugall love enjoined him to obey: and
a native affection to Courtly delights begot in her an easy Sovereignty to
Command. Neither yet was this so absolute in her as to glory in it: nor so
remiss in him, as not to countermand it. Howsoever, so taking is the bait of
pleasure, as Rosicles, one naturally much addicted to Learning, of an improved
Scholar became a Complete Courtier: not so much out of a love that he bore to
that Change, as the satisfaction of his Choice: seeing Irinae would have it so.
Neither were these enjoyments so free, A virtuous Princess, and highly
accomplished, injuriously traduced: and through popular hate shamefully
dishonored.
as they could be in the strictest sense construed, Blemishes to modesty.
Though the age, from what distaste Heaven knows, began to grow more Censorious:
and to tax their Princess Irina, of lightness, for her familiarity with a late
entertained Favorite Claridamus: whose person nor parts could not in any equal
and unbias'd judgment merit the affection of such a Mistress. But set Rumor
abroad and it will find wings to fly. The groundless distasts the Ilanders
conceived against him and his Princess were artfully palliated, and with such
subtle pretenses shadowed, as an older head then Rosicles had, could scarcely
discover them.

The Origin or Source whereof sprung up first in a State-diet; called at
Strewmintes. Wherein upon their first Convene, (to mould their unexperienced
Prince to their own ends) they promised to advance him in dignity, and
affluence of Treasure above all his Predecessors: nay, that never any preceeded
him that could match him: (which fell out most truly, as they afterward used
him.)

With these gilded Pills, or golden pretenses, Likewise from that hatred,
which was conceived against him by the People, sundry Critic Prophecies were
dispersed: divining "How Actaeon should be worried by his own Currs.
mere Shadows of imaginary Greatness, suffering himself to be deluded, They
conclude many Arts derogatory to his Government: and infinitely prejudicial to
his Commands. And to exasperate his Subjects against his personal Sovereignty;
Pasquills and Stationary Libells were every where dipersed: and frontlesly
pasted on his own Gates. The Fuel of State-division being by these Incendiaries
thus fomented: Civil wars began: and with such fury, as Rosicles and Irina were
brought into extreme Straits. The one out of her own Frontiers expulsed: the
other to the hazard of an unnatural war exposed.

And to instance you in One Conjecturall ground of his continued misfortune;
then which none ever hung more heavy upon a Royal Family: Count Hadorf, a
Person highly Serviceable to this distressed Prince in all his undertakings;
observing his insuccessive Addresses all a-long; with what strange and
incredible Overtures his Majesty became constantly incountred, made bold one
day to impart his mind to Rosicles with much freedom in this manner.

Sir, said this Count, may I make bold to ask your Majesty one Question (...)
Go on, said He, my present Condition has armed me with that Patience (the only
Salve I find to allay the extremity of my unexemplary suffering) as there is
nothing my Friend can speak, which I have not a stomach to digest. Pray then,
answered the Count; resolve your Servant in this. Did your Majesty never engage
nor Sacrimentally oblige your self to Parthenia, before your Espousalls with
Irina? Ay me! replied Rosicles, herein you wound me above all my misfortunes.
And after a troubled and abrupt Pause, as if he Had more deposited in his
Heart, then He could disburden himself of by expression of Tongue.

I confess to you ingenuously, said the Prince, that as none could be more
indeer'd to the merits of a Religious Lady in relation to love; So none could
be more indispensably engaged in my Vows to her self: I held nothing more
incomparably dear then to enjoy her: nor ought striking more desperately at the
Root of mine Honor, then the violation of my Protests unto her.

Which Confession so perplexed the Count, as it forslowed his resolution in
proceeding any further in this Quarrel. For betaking himself to a private
Retire; the only assistance He all his time after contributed to his
unfortunate Sovereign, were pious Prayers and loyal wishes: holding his
breach in so high an Interest to be a dangerous Omen to his future Success.

Many Fields were fought; much Civil blood shed; Families in themselves
divided: Father against Son: and Son against Father engaged. Naught but Fire
and Fury: yet such was their Folly, as none knew well what they fought for.

For Rosicles, being of a malleable and easy temper, rather inclined to the
height of their demands, to his great disadvantage; without any opposition at
all to the Proceedings of his Diet: concluding ever in this calm and composed
manner: That all such Proceedings whereto he addressed his course, closed in
this peaceable period; and confined their pursuit to this Point. The defense of
the Law of the Land, Of the Liberty and Property of the Subject, regulated by
that line and Rule of Justice; by which those Preceding Princes of Candy for
many Successions had managed and prudently governed their affairs. Nay, to
imprint the deeper belief in his distasted Synod; who with light attention gave
ear to his Protests, freely and in a full Assembly He invoked the Superior
Powers for witnesses (a rare and unusual attest in Candy, a people no less
nice in making their vows, then serious in performing them;) How his only Care
and Industry was to defend and protect the Liberty of the Subject, the Law of
the Kingdom, His Regal just Rights, and his Honor, much more precious then
life, as He affirmed. Neither was it, (as He in the presence of those Select
Statists declared) in the power of any persons to incline Him to take Arms
against his native Subjects, nor miserably to imbroil the Island in Civil wars:
and that his Carriage all along had given sufficient evidence to the world how
much his Affections had abhorred, and his heart bled at the apprehension of a
Civil war.

But whereto tended all this? Their previous resolution had obstructed
attention. They could not Find hearts to believe: where they could find none to
love.

Loialty appears ever an attentive hearer; whereas Sedition proves an indocile
Scholar. Lectures of Moral discipline or legal obedience are of hard
digestion to such fiery spirits. It is true; The Law is the safeguard; The
Custody of all private Interests; Personal Honors, Lives, Liberties, and
Estates are all in the keeping of the Law; without this, no Sovereignty; no
Propriety; every man has a like right to any thing.

Yet this Law so necessarily conducing to the Conservation of all Estates is to
be molded after the Lesbian Rule: it is to be evenly squared: aptly
proportioned in so fair and equal a distance: as it neither undiametrically
ascend too high; nor descend too low. For His Maxim in this is true, though it
came from a dangerous Headpiece: If the Prerogative of the King overwhelme the
liberty of the people, it will be turned to Tyranny; If Liberty undermine the
Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchy. An even hand is ever fittest to guide
the helm of a State. But it is affection that gives best Calking to the
Vessel: which once lost, the Endeavors of the wisest Princes fall out
insuccesfully, because not entertained with a correspondent loyalty. Many ways
sought unfortunate Rosicles to ingratiate himself with his own. As first, by
disburdening his Subjects of those heavy Impositions that had been Formerly
laid upon them. As likewise, to encourage the adventures of the Merchant; and
revive Commerce, which was then at a stand; He sent forth his express Edict,
That there should be a Suspension of the execution of the Pramatica's (or
restraint of Commerce) until such a Season; purposely to improve traffic, and
consequently gain their affection. But Princes are brought to a great strait,
when they must beg acceptance from their Subjects: and at last, lessen their
Power by yielding too much. This distressed Rosicles by bitter Experience had
sufficiently tasted: being disowned of his own: and deserted by those Heads (to
that height was Faction grown) who by their prudent advice and loyal
assistance should have supported the State: and diverted those dangerous
Consequences, which soon after brought miserable rents and divisions in their
Government Politic. While some stood for an Anarchical Independency; Others
for a Platonic parity, One for a democratick, another for an Aristocratick:
others, and those of the Popular Leaders for an Oligarchick Power. Neither was
it at all to be wondered, that the Members should become thus distracted, being
from their Head divided. Truth is, these distempers were imputed by the adverse
party to the levity of Rosicles Council, who (as they balanced them) were too
light in the Skale, to debate of any considerable design: far apter to corrupt
their Prince, then to direct him in any action tending to his honor, or
improvement of the Public. Neither, indeed, to speak ingenuously, were all his
Senators Solons; being generally persons dedicated to pleasure, or adhearing
to self-interest, an infection that soveraignizeth too domineeringly over the
world. Such were these; whose small care for the Public accelerated the ruin
of that unfortunate Prince; as you shall more fully hear by our ensuing
Discourse: being a Continuation of the calamitous Condition of a Princely
declining Family.

Private and inconsiderable differences set abroach by fiery and discontented
Spirits oftimes breaks forth into fearful Combustions. Rosicles denounces open
war against the Plebeians: and the Plebeians abate him nothing: For being backed
by the Synod of one side: and assisted by experienced Commanders on the other,
they appear as ready to engage their Estates and Persons in the^e Civil Wars;
as the Prince could be. He for his Prerogative Royal: They in defense of the
Liberty and propriety of Subjects. And to strengthen them the more in these sad
undertakings (for now their Fury grew implacable) they procured the Association
of the Eliota, a slavish mercenary People, naturally addicted more to plunder
then to fight. By whose confederacy seconded with foreign assistance far more
formidable; in sundry pitched Fields they ever put Rosicles to the worse. The
grounds whereof might probably arise from two Considerable Reasons. First in
relation to them; who, upon any defeat received a present Recruit by means of
the Public Treasury, which was ever ready to return them Fresh supplies: and
with those sinews of war, to re-furnish them upon all Extrems. Whereas those
who took part with Rosicles, had no other pay then their own Revenues to
maintain them; which exhausted, they remained wholly destitute of any hope of
future relief. Besides, as the Plebeian Forces were infinitely vigilant and
cautious in all their designs: attempting nothing without mature advice,
policy and discretion. Nor more happy to get a victory, then ready to make use
of it. So the Princes Party was in their undertakings more rash and
precipitate. Far more apt to get a victory, then to use it wisely: Nay, rather
contenting themselves with a piece of a victory, without pursuing it: which
redounded to their great disadvantage, in all their Proceedings. For being
transported with a part of a Conquest, like Libertines more then prudent
Soldiers, they would not stick to Carouse the whole night to the honor of an
halfe-got victory: which oftimes became a whole One to the other Party, before
the next night approch'd. Nor could it be expected but Rosicles success in such
disadvantageous grounds must be answerable, seeing whatsoever he lost could no
way be supplied: but whereinsoever they suffered, was quickly recruted. Besides
the difference, which appeared in the quality of their Forces. For He hazarded
Gold to Gravel.

The eminenst Commander for the Plebeians, after the death of Ravedox, in these
Transactions, was Bellonius; whose description we shall here return you, as the
Original renders him.

He was a Person, who had more strength in his hand, then sage in his pate. Far
more active then solid: having more of Ajax in him, then of Ulysses. His Lady
Verona, descending from a Family stored with valor and titles of honor;
discovered to the world a derivative spirit from so Heroic a lineage: although
in this particular she might ^eem to decline from those Principles of her
Memorable Ancestors. Who, as they were lineally valiant, so in their Fidelity
they appeared ever most constant. Whereas Verona excited her weak Consort both
by Letters, with other assiduate persuasions, apt enough to work upon such an
Headpiece; to these undertakings: and especially in this private
Curtain-Lecture which she with much vehemence read unto him, a little before he
stood engaged upon this Service.

Verona's persuasive Speech to Bellonius.
Sir; do you not, observe how Rosicles under the pretext of a Sovereign
pursues the Course of a Syracusan Tyrant? do not your Ears glow with the
report of his indisposed and mis-mannaged Government? Is not the Court become
by the sensual liberty of a Ferrara Lady; who courts her endeered Favorite
Claridamus, as if he were her espoused Consort, a Roman Suburra? Do not o^r
Public Streets and Stages Echo with Scens of their dishonor? Must the
Privileges and ancient Liberties suffer: and none interpose to wipe off this
scandal and indelible shame to our Nation? Sir, reflect upon your Education;
you have been bred up in Arms. You cannot embrace a Fairer occasion of reviving
your practice in Arms: nor improving your honor: nor of gaining an eminent
opinion with good men: nor of redressing the numerous injuries of those who
have insupportably suffered: nor of regulating an effeminate Court now wholly
debaucht and disordered. Let Fame then, I beseech you, and the bleeding Wounds
of your Country awake you. The Senate and their Plebeians look upon you, as a
mark of valor. On then, with these Embraces I beg it of you, and secure your
Country to your Fame and redemption of her honor. Never shall any action
appear in more beauty, nor shine with more splendour.

This persuasive Lecture delivered by a tongue that had a commanding influence
over him, became so prevalent with Bellonius, as it quickly raised and roused
him from a secure sleep: enlivening his thoughts with actions of an higher
temper. Ambition now begun strongly to work upon him. And in the first place he
considers, and with the Conceit of it apprehends no small joy; how the Synod
of Candy, and the Plebeians had made choice of him, from the singular opinion
they retained of his valor and martial experience: How he was likewise to
receive the Title of General: a style of incomparable honor.

You may suppose him then going on with all alacrity to his Charge. Where with
far more Courage he enters the Field, then with discipline to manage a Camp.
Though infinitely prosperous he became in all his Exploits: wonderfully
hazardous in all, but inauspicious in none: as fortune usually favors (to make
use of the Proverb) those men, to whom the gifts of Nature are most sparingly
imparted. Nor, indeed, for personal action could the whole State of Candy make
choice of a more resolute Commander: nor one more eagerly pursuing the vading
shadow of honor: Being One (to return him his true Character) wholly for
action, nothing for design. Which proved well with some (and those the
Principallest Instruments in that Service) who stood at distance with danger,
making use of Bellonius Forwardness, as the Fox did of the Cats paw in the
Apothegme: making bold with the help of her Foot to pull out the Chessenut from
the Embers. An excellent politic way, to secure their persons from peril: and
yet to share with the activest spirit in the Fame of the Conquest. On still
goes Bellonius successively in all his adventures: desiring nothing more then
to Cope with Actions of difficulty, which it was his happiness to atchieve
prosperously, with the general applause of the Army.

And what may seem more remarkable: Though it was his use, especially in
doubtful occurrences, to appear ever in the Van: suffering no Soldier under
his Command, to be more personally engaged then himself, nor more exposed to
apparent danger: yet came He never off wounded, saving Once, in all those
desperate Encounters.

Having brought on this Great work of the Plebeians to such unexpected success:
his Lady Verona, after a due and serious discussion of these unfortunate
Brawls; begun wisely to recollect her self, with the approaching Miseries of her
distracted and distressed Country. And amidst those thoughts, falling upon a
deep resentment of the Princes sad overtures, and the justness of his Cause,
which she never before fully apprehended, she highly repented, that her
persuasion should ever produce that injurious effect; by exciting her Husband
to an undertaking so unjustifiable: and to her judgment, being now reclaimed
from her Former error, most irregular to the Course of Justice. Upon her due
recollection of these, she expostulated the Cause with her self in this sort.

How now Verona! was it not sufficient for thee to connive at those grievous
indignities done to thy Prince, unfortunate Rosicles; but thou must
additionally enlarge them with thy injurious persuasions? Say Verona, did ever
thy wronged Prince merit this at thine hand? Thou pretended the redress of a
State: but what relief may this deluded People hope to derive from these
disastrous and Tragical Events? Has our perplexed State (then which none more
happy, if it could have conceipted its own happiness) changed her Face for a
better Complexion: or taken this strong Physic to purge her Body of crude and
corrupt humors: and consequently enable or enliven her Constitution? No; it is
rather to be feared; by sending forth one seditious Legion, we have redoubled
the number, and brought more in. Apollo's Temple is dishonored, Diana's
impiously profaned; their ancient Rites and Ceremonies either wholly
contemned: or shamefully abused. And wereas we pretended to expulse a Tyrant;
heavens grant, that this pretensive exclusion of One, introduce not a
Multitude. Well, Verona; let not the occasional Source of these menacing
mischiefs arise from thy breast. Thou have done more then enough already;
redeem this injury by appeasing the Storm. Thy tongue drew Bellonius into the
Field; be it thy endeavor to call him back with thy pen.

Neither did she foreslow her resolution: For without more ado, desirous to
undo, what her too rash advice had induced him to undertake, with an ingenuous
retraction of her former encouragement to so unjust a design, she addressed her
request to Bellonius being then highly engaged in the State-service, in this
manner.

It must be my Task now, Sir, to dissuade you by my pen, to what I formerly
persuaded you to by word of mouth. Second thoughts are ever held wisest,
because grounded upon maturer advice. Your continued success, as I have
collected from the Circumstances of this Cause for which you fight, may
prejudict the declining Condition of a good Prince: but no wa^ rectify the
Corruption of a distempered State. You engage the safety of your Person merely
for others Interests: who make you but a Stale for their indire^ ends: or a
Staire to their immerited advancemen^ Your atcheivements be they never so
prosperous, cannon appear to any judicious Eye, really glorious, when their
event in all probability must close in Scens of blood, (...) the ruin of a
flourishing State, and fearful dissolution of all Political Order. Withdraw
then I beseech you; let not your hand bear record against you in this Fatal
Catastrophe. He who fights against his Fidelity; cannot purchase any Fame with
the Presentment of the Eminentst victory. Neither is it valor to fight, where
Justice accompanies not the^ Cause.

My Eyes incessantly flowing, may be impartial^ Witnesses, how much I have
bemoaned my indi^creet Council. It will be some redemption to ha^^ retracted:
and infinite content to your endeered Verona for you to second it. Your
prowess has got you too much Fame, receiving breath from so inglorious a
Fight. Hasten then your departure from the Camp; you may believe me; I am not
my self till I see you.

These lines winged his course for the Country; taking first a solemn leave of
the inferior Officers and Commanders in his Army: pretending an indisposition
to health: with a seeming unwillingness of deserting his Charge; if the
infirmity of his body did not enjoin him to a necessary retire. But truth is,
he had so expedited the work: and by his ^umerous victories, so fleshed and
animated his ^ouldiers; as the remainder of the work might in ^^ort time be
brought to perfection. For the un^ortunate Rosicles, though he had some Forces
of ^^e Cavalry left him, and those full of gallantry, and spritely resolution;
yet was he destitute of ^uch accommodations an necessary Supplies as were
requisite for support of an Army. Money, Magazin and Munition he was stripped of;
and at that time those loyal Adherents which stuck closest to him, had
exhausted all their revenues in this tedious and insuccessive service. But want
of means could not beget in their brave minds a defection of spirit: nor
decrease of loyalty; so devotionally were they dedicated to him, amidst the
^oughest and sharpest Encounters of hostility. Re^olving to sell their lives at
as dear a rate as they ^ould: and by their Deaths to improve their Prin^^ (...)
quarrel as much as they might. But though ^^ections and desires render much
strength to military Forces: yet those Forces cannot appear strong; that are
accompanied only by affections.

After Bellonius recede from the Army, and his private retire to the Country;
(such influence had his commanding Verona over him;) he resolved wholly to
surcease from Arms; apprehending some light resentment of what his Forwardness
had acted in his assistance of the Synod and Plebeians against the just
Proceedings of distressed Rosicles. Whose Condition by his continued success,
grew daily more desperate. For though there appeared some hopes to this
injuried Prince of repai^ing his loss in his first attempts and progression of
this war; yet men, who generally balance the goodness of the Cause by the
event, observing his success, contrary to all probability of reason, to prove
so finister; the greater number begun to fall off from his assistence no less
speedily, then he declined in his Fortune. True it is; though one Swallow make
not Summer; yet one man's Summer makes many Swallows: as might appear by the
Plebeian Party. Which (and in this observe the gratitude of vulgar spirits)
though they had nearly acquitted the end of their desires by the prosperous
atchievments of their late retired General; yet upon dereliction of his Charge
(necessitated, as he pretended, by the indisposition of his Body) they made no
better account of him, then a Cashiered Soldier: all his exploits were quite
forgotten; the memory of his forepast actions razed; so justly was his valor
in a Service of disloyalty requited. We shall here enlarge our discourse in the
relation of one Instance, and so proceed in our Story.

This Bellonius having one only Daughter, and invested in great possessions;
desired much to match her with a Person of descent, merit and Family. Verona
his imperious Lady, whose affections stood lately more for Rosicles then the
Plebeian Party; freely discovered her thoughts to Bellonius; ^ambu^a suspected
for private Intelligence.
that no match could be proposed more corresponding with Nigella their
Daughters quality and fortune; then one Bambuca, descended from the House of
Silures that eminent Favorite. Who, though He had all along sided with
Rosicles: yet upon some private, and as was supposed, unworthy service, by
Intelligence or some other treacherous Office done unto the Synod, purposely to
ingratiate himself with the enemy, being then grown the far stronger Party, as
an Instrument to their side, though not much useful, He was by vote recalled
from Exile whereto his Fortunes had driven him: and permitted to return home,
and for a season to enjoy his own. Now Bellonius, who opposed his Verona in
nothing, easily inclined to her Proposalls. And by private Agents, powerful
enough as he thought, to accomplish so equal a request, He solicited the
Councill-Board for their assent. Which he did by Verona's advice, to prevent
all inconveniences. For Bambuca being reputed an Enemy to the State (though
privately reconciled) it could not be held safe to enter upon any such terms
with him without their approvement. Which in all reason could not seem
otherwise then a feasible Condition. But so strangely was his suit slighted;
as their late ingratiated Consort, was by Command peremptorily enjoined, upon
penalty of life, within such a time, to depart the Territories of Candy: and to
return to the place of his Exile; with confiscation of all his Estate to be
disposed of by the Public. So Nigella became deprived of the Object of her
affection: and He by this suit exposed to a worse Condition. A fair Reward for
so long and hazardous a service.

Albeit, when least expected, these Articles of Marriage by Verona's instancy
were not only revived: but this Match privately solemnized; to the great
disgust of the Council of State: but especially to Climenes, who sitting at
the Stern, could not in policy relish such dangerous Allyances.

But in very deed, the Plebeians little needed at that time the assistance of
Bellonius; Fortune breathed prosperously upon their Sails. Albeit their
slighted General importuned much to know the g ounds of this repulse: which
was soon returned to him in these words: That the State could not hold it self
secure upon their assent of so strong an alliance: especially in a time so
variously fluctuant and unsettled. And this was all he could receive from them.
Climenes, Lamachus, and Muratus were the only men in esteem: and such as sat
at the Stern of the State. All which, as by the long Continuance of those
Civil Wars, as they were grown eminent in the discipline of Arms, so to give
them their distinct Characters, they might be properly described thus.

Climenes was a person of a piercing and subtle judgment. An exact Reader and
discoverer of men. Serious and solid in his discourse; familiar with few;
seemingly affable to all. Much affected to Intelligence, which highly improved
his knowledge. No less happy then speedy in dispatch. Confident in his designs:
and a Constant Secretary to his own Counsels. He knew well by a Cunning way of
pretending to make his mouth a stranger to his heart: having ever an open
embrace to his professed Foe. He had got that Tiberian, art, or rather it was
innate with him, to walk in the Clouds: and to shroud his dangerousest Projects
with smoother appearances. A man hardly to be re-gain'd, being once lost: nor
long to be enjoyed, unless preciously retained. An infinite Obliger, if his
words would engage him: seeming bountiful, but naturally Close-fisted: so as
never any pretended more by his liberality to merit a title of honor; who
enlarged more the Revenues of his private Exchequer. He was ever jealous of a
strange Face, as he might well: for never had any more Foes without, nor Fears
within: none outwardly better armed against assaults: nor inwardly more naked,
nor affrightfully exposed to alarms. A religious Professor; yet no Sect whereto
He would not adheere: and profess himself a Favourer. He was very suspicious of
the Carriage of any Commanders, unless they were of his own Election; and to
his own Family in relation. So as his own Allies were generally designed to the
Highest Commands. His Extraction was good; but Ambition depraved it. No
Engineer on Earth more expeditely nor experimentally artfull for acquiring his
own ends.

He was held in the opinion of men stout enough: and wise enough too in the
heat and height of the Battle; as to tender the safety of his Honor, by a
secure distancing of his Person from danger.

It was usual with him to counterfeit an humble dress and express in the
management of his affairs; ascribing little to himself or the prudent Conduct
of his Forces by his direction: yet might you easily collect by the Series of
his discourse, that the period of the Action were it never so glorious, pointed
at him: Which he shadowingly sought to discover, by lessening the valor or
inconsistency of the advice of such as were his Colleagues: or by some cursory
digression, impe in his own personal adventure to close the issue with
relation to his honor. It is to be confessed by all that knew him, that none had
ever more Art in deluding the apprehensions of men, by seeming to be what he
was least. Yet somethings he did which undisguis'd him, by displaying him to
the World, to be an eager pursuer after popular Fame: nay, that Ambition was
his Minion amidst all those deceiving pretenses or dazlings of humility, which
he had casten before the eyes of undiscerning men. Wherein, to speak truth, his
vainglory proclaimed his Folly.

For even in Sacred Places, where the eminenst Monuments of the ancienst and
reverendst Statists were erected; he caused his own Statue to be reered: and
from the very Materials of their memorable Mausolea's irreverendly raised.
Which Art, as it discovered his arrogance more then all his visible appearences
of humility could repair: so the erection of it tended more to his scorn, then
it any way redounded to his fame. So as some in contempt of him, in their
passing by it, would not stick to say, That it was great pity such a fair
Lodging should want a Guest. After such time as by the splendour of his success
he was grown to a more absolute Command over the State; he practiced one
device, which of all others was most quaint and remarkable, and it was this:
Proditionem saepissime fingeret, quo effictae clementiae fuc^ subditum
falleret. Sabel. in Decam.
He would usually mint treason, to beget an opinion of Clemency and Compassion
in the supposed Offender: and delude the Subject with a belief of a mild and
relenting temper, by remitting or mitigating the Censure of an innocent
Traitor. It was his fortune ever to get the Mastery sooner over his Enemies,
then over his Passions; especially after such time as his Commands became
Independent. Which might be instanced in this, to omit many others.

Being one day made acquainted with the small store of Treasure remaining in
his Exchequer: he uttered these words in great passion, at his coming from
Samia. My Soldiers grow rich, and I poor. -- Not Six pence in the Exchequer!
-- Zounds- I could wish with all my heart that I might meet Rosicles, if his
Wagons were well supplied with ten thousand men in the Field^: I should have
hope either to get money by booty; or dye bravely. From which insatiate appetite
and hydropick thirst of avarice in this Commander, Candy could not then be
compared to any Creature more properly then to a Cremona Goose in Italy; where
they have a way to fatten only the Heart of the Goose; but in doing so, they
weaken, and make the rest of the whole body grow lean and lank. Or to the
Spleen, the growth and fullness whereof begets a decay or Consumption to the
whole body.

But in imitation of that Lacedemonian Agis, he took an excellent Course for
calming this distemper: for to cure this fury, as if he had been stung with the
Tarantula, he would forthwith call for Music (to which Musical aires he was
affection atly devoted:) or else he would cause some little Children of his own
relation; in whose Company he would so cheer himself; in riding on Cock-horse,
or such like Childish Exercise: as in short time he could attemper his choler,
and become his own man. Though at last his distemper grew so violent: as a
Jealousy of his own safety made himself a perpetual Prisoner to himself:
Guards without could not secure him, when such Legions of Fears did inwardly
accompany him. This it was to command others, and to be a stranger to his own
Commands. I shall not enlarge this Character any further: you may take
dimension of the Eagle by his talons; of Alcides by his Foot: and so we leave
him.

Now for Lamachus, he was more active then designing. One, on whose easiness
Climenes wrought much for his own advance: and afterward as meanly required
for his affectionate service. In the whole process of those Civil
Imbroilments, Lamachus had ever a full share. No considerable Scene, wherein he
acted not his part: and came not off with much Fame. He was of a generous
winning nature: and much beloved of the Souldery. Of whose affection and
professed zeal unto him, if he had seasonably made use; he might not only have
paralleled Climenes; but performed an incomparable Office of piety and loyal
duty to his distressed Sovereign. Whose heavy condition at that time, merited
more pity then it could attract Envy.

And certainly his natural disposition, had it not been mis-guided by
irregular Principles, would never have fallen upon any such Extrems; being
inclined to a just and loyal generosity. And surely He had the happiness to
have sundry opportunities offered, if they had not been by his unhappiness
neglected, of appearing an useful Instrument for his Restoration, whom
intentionally he seemed to tender: and to commiserate his Condition, whose sad
disasters had brought his unfortunate Family to that pitch of misery, as never
were branches sprung from so royal a Root so dis-rent nor irreparably divided
from their Original Stem. Which glorious action had it been timely pursued,
as it was opportunely presented; it had not only advanced but settled Lamachus
in such a flowrishing and stable Condition: as it had raised its Foundation
above the reach of a Corrival: or the Envy of any disloyal Malignant; to whose
Censure his cleanest actions became afterward liable. Neither is it to be
doubted, but if his more apprehensive thoughts could have divined what hard
measure his meriting Service was to reap from Climenes, to whom he had been so
useful and successful a Colleague since the very first grounds of those
unhappy distractions: He would have been so sensible of his present Condition
and future safety: as to Crown the Evening of his actions with an Exploit of
^iety. Which he might have done without much difficulty, being so countenanced
by the Souldery, especially at that time, when Climenes being then in pursuit
of a Title which dis-relished the Army: and which all along during that tedious
Tract of a Civil war He with all his Accomplices had seriously and solemnly
dis-avowed: had begot to himself and his Allies a general Odium. This was an
excellent occasion, if it had been Lamachus fortune to make use of it: for him,
after a loyal reconciliation, to have united his Forces with Rosicles, and by
that happy Juncto, seconded by Bellonius auxiliaries, who in a retired
discontent, had a deep resentment of his own indignities; might have
accomplished the work, redounding no less to his honor; then his reparation
and restitution to whom he ought himself. But the Fates had otherwise decreed.

For nothing could Rosicles design: nor in his course of Warfare undertake,
which ever promised success; were it with never such care, vigilance or
circumspection pursued. Which we must leave to the sacred-secret Cabinet of a
superior Council; transcending far the inferior light of our Intellect.

For the ambition of Climenes in his pursuit of a Titular Regality had not
only disgusted, but wholly aliened the affections of those who were his Equals
in the Field: besides other personal injuries which his uncontrouled liberty
had acted: so as even Fania's honor, Lamachus his endeered Consort (a Lady of
approved continence) by his too much freedom, became suspected: and by the
aspersive pen of a Satyrizing Pamphleter basely traduced: yet all these
Consequences (so sinister was his Fate) conduced not at all to Rosicles
advantage.

This Lamachus, whose Character we here render you; was not only addicted from
his youth to all generous Exercises; as Horsmanship, Artilery, Music and the
like: But by the help of Pratensis, he became an excellent Florist: in which
study he used to bestow many hours, till he had attained to an exact perfection
of it. With Papillus too, a Country Limner he consorted familiarly; by whose
direction he was initiated in the pleasant Art of Delineature: wherein after
his coming to Thamipolis, upon acquaintance with Perocu, and his dextrous
Fancy, he became exquisite. The Exercise of these Studies brought him to the
true estimate of time: holding nothing more precious, then the expense of those
hours which conduced to the improvement of his Knowledge. But to these
Sedentary addresses he never seriously applied his endeavors, till the heat of
those wars begun to be more cool and temperate: unless at such spare and
succidaneous Minutes, as he might bestow himself in these without dis-advantage
to his higher employments: which he ever pursued with much promptness and
alacrity. He was ever observed to be spare in the relation of his own
adventures: Nulla unquam amicitia minore acquirenda est sumptu, quam clementia.
and had the real way, without any adulterate art, of winning affection; which
he procured by his native affability, and usual Clemency. The only Cement,
which with least Cost both knitteth and dilateth the Sinews of Amity.

Lastly, for his Extraction it was good: but his actions enlarged his fame.
Which had climbed to an higher Story, had he not with Medaea taken the worser
part.

Now for Muratus; to limne him to life, he was a Piece tact up in Shreads of
vain glory. Yet to do the Puffin right, he did such good Service in those Parts
whereto he was designed, as he became infinitely prosperous in his
undertakings. This dispersed his Fame abroad; and in short time gave him the
name of Conqueror in those Places where he resided and governed.

The report of his valor and success, whether it came from the relation of
his own pen, (as he was ever held for a singular Amanuensis in the publishing
of his own fame) or from the hand of others, so highly transported his Lady
Mazinella (a Creature of the same mould and temper in the pursuit of honor) as
she grew madded with the daily report of his Victories: neither could she
contain her passion, without discovery of her folly in directing her fantastic
Letters to him: and venting strange Imaginary whimsies, such as her airy brain
conceited of her Muratus, during his Employment in Umbria; where he and his
victorious Forces at that time lodged. And to instance One for all; we have
here inserted the Copy of one; which may to life portray the fancy of this Lady.

Mazinella's Letter to Muratus.
O my Muratus, how thy daily victories over thy contemptible Foes enliven the
spirits of thy Mazinella! Can thy fame fly higher then it has already? Is there
any region in the universe that has not partak't of the report of thine
actions? I shall infinitely tax the Poets, my invincible Muratus, for feigning
Atlas to be the Worlds Supporter, when my imaginary eye represents to my Fancy
the Sinewey Shouldiers of my Herculean Muratus. Where shall not thy Statue be
erected; thy Insigns displayed; thy Trophies reered; that thy memory not only
in Candy, but in every Country may be eternized? Ay me! The world is too
strait for the Circumference of thy fame. Time must find out a shriller Triton
to publish the glory of thine actions. What was it to dig through Athos; or
level Isthmus: or with populous Armies to drink up maine Rivers? These, were
they congested all in One, could not equal the least Enterprise of my Muratus.
Be thine own still, for none can be like thee; nor for achievements near
thee. Thou can not conceit with what indeered arms thy Mazinella does
inwreath thee, when she is farthest distanc'd from thee. O what Hectors may we
expect arising from our Progeny; when such native valor appears in our Family!

If thou will believe me, my Hannibal and I was lately taken up with Hecuba's
dream: for methought I was conceived of a Flaming Torch: and our Augurs here
told me, that it divined a gallant victorious Birth, that should make such a
fire in Crete, as all her frontier Assistants could not quench. Another night,
and it was very lately, for it was since the report of thy incomparable
conquest in the West, I was infinitely troubled with Mandanes vision;
presenting to my conceit a Broad-spreading Vine ove-shadowing the whole Isle
of Candy with her distended branches. This I durst not impart to any: nor
receive the divination of it from any: lest it might trouble the State: and
beget in Climenes, who acts for an absolute Sovereignty, a private jealousy of
the arising growth or aspiring of our Family. These be rare Presages, which we
are to leave to Superior Powers to ordinate.

I must play the dissembler with my affections: and forbear from calling thee
home, lest my too much instancy might clip the wings of thy Fame: though I
could wish thee lodged here, as well as encamped there: that I might hear thy
tongue the relator of thine own actions: and amidst that rhetorical fancy,
really enjoy

Thy Mazinella.


The perusal of this Letter begot a thousand imaginary Conceits in Muratus.
Nor could he possibly be so successful in the Progress of his affairs; as He
was swollen high with the opinion of his victories. So strongly had vainglory
possessed him; seconded with the applause of people; whose Eyes are usually so
fixed on the rising Sun, as they can scarcely admit of a possibility that it
should ever set. But, indeed, Muratus his native humor was such, as he
affected nothing more then to be admired. So as, He had got a suitable Consort
to feed him with the Fuel of his own Fancy. Whose pleasing lines He resolved
to answer, not without an ample discovery of his later actions, in this manner.

Muratus Answer to Mazinella's Letter.
How well do thou deserve, Mazinella, to be a sharer in my acquisition of
honor: with those victorious Trophies which either Time has, or Posterity may
erect to my memory; who reservest such a faithful Annal of all mine actions?
Neither is it to be doubted, but that my late exploits, if they have not
already come to thine Ear, will return thee more additionall lines to enlarge
thy Calendar. There is no day wherein I raise not one Story higher in this
structure of fame, which I have on so fair and firm a foundation reered.

Muratus name is now grown formidable: So as, I have now made that Caesarian
Impreze mine own: I come; I see; I overcome. I encounter with no Remora, where
ere my adventures lead me, to frustrate my design: or divert my Conquest. And
though Honor be mine highest Object; I meet with Materials to feather my Nest.
I have been lately courted to foreign undertakings: but the Interest of Candy
hanging so heavily on my shoulders ( Atlantic as thou styles them) requires my
personal attendance. Neither can my successful service (then which none ever
more prosperously continued nor achieved) expect less then a grateful
remuneration: otherwise I shall manifest it to the Highest in Command, that
they have not to deal with a Person either undeserving or undiscerning. But
this is the least of my fear: they dare not lose Muratus, so long as they have
an Enemy in the Field.

Thy Dreams divine no more then I expect. The Branches of my Military Forces
have already overshadowed the face of these Coasts. Under whose umbrage they
hold themselves happy that may be received. The state must find me new ground
and more valiant Foes; or my prowess in the highest Carere of our actions, for
want of opposition must sleep. Thou can not make use of that gallant
Land-skip in thy Garden-Gallery, where those Heroic Statues of our Ancient
Worthies are to life presented, but thou must necessarily reflect on thy
Muratus: and conceit him ranked in the same file. Themistocles could not sleep
for the emulation he bore to Miltiades. After-ages shall find this verified in
the Survey of our numerous Conquests. Which succeeding times may more easily
emulate then imitate. Sundry Pieces of our Field-fights have been of late
artfully drawn; but as Aenaeas said to Dido, they want that life wherewith they
were acted. Muratus could do more in an hour with his pike, then Apelles could
in an age with his pencil.

For the management of a Family, it is the least of my fears; such relations
cannot choose but flowrish, where the Master of the Meniey so highly inlargeth
his Fame. My desires lodge with thee; while this pursuit of Honor divides me
from thee. When we have vanquished all, and no less is nearly effected: after
these Iliads of surprises and myriads of prizes, expect the victorious return
of thy

Muratus.


Thus have we heard how sociably these two Consorts suit in their humor:
nothing but flashes of vainglory, as if Muratus had procured a Monopoly from
the hand of Fortune (of whose mutability he was not sensible, being puffed up
with the opinion of a continued success) of Conquering wheresoever he came, and
with whomsoever He was to encounter. But Mazinella, who held her Consort such a
deity; nay such an indeered Minion to Fortune, as the tide should never turn.
Nor the Sunbeams of his shady happiness suffer Eclipse: found by sad
experience the weakness of humane Confidence: and how foolish it was, to sing a
Song of Triumph before the victory. For within few days after, Prince Rosicles
having rallied some few of his scattered Forces, re-assaulted this invincible
Muratus: and in a pitched Field routed him (more by valor then number) with all
his Forces. After which shameful defeat, a Messenger who had secured his Person
by flight, winging his course for refuge toward Muratus his Mansion House; his
Lady out of her Belcone seeing this speedy Messenger, as one infinitely desirous
to partake more in the report of her Consorts victories; Eheu! Muratus non
vincit sed vincitur: Hostis Eum sequitur, non Ille Hostem. Uno die fama
longaevi temporis extinguitur: Hostem in fugam non vertit, sed vertitur. Ammian.
could not with patience contain her self; but before he was well dismounted,
with much confidence and alacrity of spirit, accosted him in this manner.
Relate unto me, I beseech you, (for my desires soar with aerie wings) where is
my victorious Muratus now chasing the Enemy? To whom this amated Messenger with
a dejected Countenance, returned this Answer: No, indeed, Madam, I am to
acquaint your Lady-ship much otherwise: For I can assure you, Madam, that the
Enemy is chasing him. These unexpected tidings could not choose but transform
this Lady to a tear swollen Niobe: Seeing one hour had quite obscured the
splendour of all his preceding victories. So inconstantly had Fortune turned her
wheel; and laid this great Hannibals honor in the dust: causing his Fame and
Fidelity to perish both together: a just reward for his immeriting service.

We shall now take occasion to discourse of some small reviving hopes in
Rosicles, of regaining what his misfortunes had made his composed Spirit, apt
to entertain all adverse occurrences with a serene Countenance to bear: and
the grounds of his recovery were derived from these consequent Motives.

Prince Rosicles being at that time with those few dis-united Forces he had,
disposed for his winterquarter to remain at Bovado within the Confines of
Maeonia: a Place for all conveniences singularly seated: as likewise the most
eminent Seminary for all humane learning that the Universe could afford. Which
flourishing Academy, though it had been long time begirt with a strait and
impetuous Siege, yet so constantly it adhered to those Principles of
Allegiance, wherein it had been ever educated, as it came off bravely, and
acquitted her walls of the Enemy with much resolution and gallantry. Rosicles,
I say, here residing, there came an unexpected Message from the Eliots (after
they had joined with the Ilanders against him) pretending themselves zealous of
his welfare: and to palliate their counterfeit posture (to that mercenary Nation
an innate humor) alleging, how they commiserated his declining Condition: and
through a present resentment of his pious Sufferings, how it repented them much
of what they had done; being induced thereto (to give a better Color to their
hateful defection) through a constant desire and united vote (or perfidious
Contract, for so it might be more properly notion'd) for preserving of their
known Liberties and Ceremonies of Hammon. And to publish to the world what they
intended; they had with joint consent resolved, and to Articles subscribed and
signed the very next Spring to enter the Field: and in his assistance to die or
live.

Rosicles, though he had small cause to confide; yet his present Condition
enjoined him to connive: and to cancel the memory of his forepast in^uries
with an Act of Oblivion. Fortune had taught him to bear an even Sail in the
roughest storms: and to receive a reconciled Enemy with a seeming Complacency.

Men, be they ranked in what quality or condition soever being reduced to those
Extreme, wherein Rosicles through his sad mishap was im^lunged, must be glad to
dispense with time: and embrace any Instrumental means for repairing their own
interests.

This unexpected offer of assistance, howsoever he were cordially affected,
seemingly overjoyed him. Better a weak alliance then none: though his affiance
could be but very small, where his late Experience had presented to his
remembrance such apparent arguments of distrust.

But the frequency of their interceedes, with the seriousness of their protests
so won in upon him, as his disposition, being naturally flexible and pliable
to any impression, begun to retain a good Conceit of them: and that they
would by their valor (whereof they never appeared guilty redeem their
disloyalty: and so by degrees through their assistance, which their protests
had confirmed unto him, recover what he had lost by the Fortune of war. But
feeble is that relyance which is grounded on deceiving Principles; as you may
gather by the sequel of our History: so constantly sinister appeared Fortune in
her pursuit of this Princes succeeding miseries.

The very next Spring, so soon as the season would afford Foreign with other
necessary accommodations for a military service: Rosicles removed in a private
disguise, fearing the interception of his Enemies; which were in those parts
plenteously quartered, and too numerous for his weak Forces to oppose; from
Bovado to Nevergon; where the Eliots, as they pretended, purposely waited for
his speedy repair. And upon his approach, with a seeming alacrity received him
cheerfully: being prepared with men and munition, as they made their credulous
Prince believe, to go on in the work; and re-estate him in his own. But a
Treaty was held fitting, in the first place, to determine the quarrel by Fair
Proposalls: and to decline that effusion of blood, which might necessarily be
occasioned by the sad Consequences of a New war. Which was without much
sollicitancy condescended to by the adverse Party: knowing well, as they had
subtilely wrought it, that the issue of this Treaty would conduce much to their
advantage. For Climenes, who had the prime Oar in this adventure: and whose
timely intelligence had sufficiently discovered to him, how those Persons with
whom they were to deal, stood affected; had got the art of ploughing with
Rosicles Heyfers. His Cabinet Counsel would admit no lock. Nothing so privately
carried, which was not by Climenes artifice quickly discovered. Such a singular
Privy-Counsellor, was he grown to from a Private Soldier. Short was this
Treaty, but sharp for Rosicles. So far were these perfidious Eliots from
contributing their assistance; as to their surviving ignominy, they set a price
of their betrayed Prince: exposing him to the mercy of a professed Enemy. Thus
became he not only deprived of his Sovereignty, but restrained by his own from
humane liberty. Study his escape he might, but acquire it he could not: for his
Designs were as soon disclosed as they were thought on. In this pensive plight
for some Months remained this Captive Prince: none admitted him to consort
with, to whom he might impart his griefs: or by whom he might receive the least
dimension of Comfort amidst the burden of such pressures.

In these retired and resenting hours; He oftimes recollected himself: and as
one unmindful of his own Fortunes, then which none more visibly calamitous, in
a pious reflection on the heavy condition of his Exiled Lady, he would usually
vent his Passions; though he had none to commiserate them, nor with a discreet
reply to allay them.

O, would he often say, what an unhappy Consort is he, who makes the Innocent a
Consort with him in his unhappiness! was it not enough for me to suffer all the
Extremes that Fortune by the fury of perfidious hands could inflict upon me:
but I must make her a Sharer in my misery, whose actions were ever full of
honor and princely majesty? was this the end I brought her from Ferrara, to
inslave her; and of an illustrious Princess to make her below a Subject? She
might w^^^^h a Nuptial had been converted to a Fun^^^ For what got she by her
access to Candy, but an immerited hate, and a Name steeped in Calumny? This
gives an addition to the weight of my miseries. Since her unfortunate Choice
has brought her to a disconsolate Change. And how should I, poor I, apply to
her undeserving sufferings a Cure: when I cannot allay the least sting of a
Cordial Cure in my self? -- O my dear heart; how I do sympathize with thee;
while others, who owe themselves unto me, take the boldness to severaignize
over me! How deplorable a thing it is to fall below ones self: and become
subject to those, who in reason ought to obey! If Princes have no preeminence
on Earth: sure I am, they have none in Earth: what a weak Structure then
presents this Pile of Princely honor? If Diadems be stuck with thorns while we
wear them; how do we feel our selves eased, when we are rest of them? O
nothing! nothing! The ambition of Princes is such: that though these Thorns
prick them, they do not feel them. But the continued progress of my misfortunes
have made me more sensible of an humane condition. O, to what height had my
Descent raised me: and to what a low descension has that deceiving height pressed
me! To see one Branch shred or cut off from a fair flourishing Stock, is not to
be wondered at nor much bemoaned, for it may give an additional increase or
nutrition to the rest. But to see the Stock it self and all those hopeful Ciens
that spring from it to perish, might justly exact Compassion. Sometim^s has my
distressed Family appeared plenteou^^ ^red both with fruit and flourish.
Neither d^^^y hard Fate hold it sufficient to lay an heavy hand only on me and
my succeeding Progeny: but on Her innocence, who suffers both in her Fame and
Fortunes through my unhappiness.

Upon this pensive Soliloquie and passionate Expostulation, there came in
suddenly a Retainer to that surly Keeper, to whose Custody he was with a
strict charge committed: acquainting the Prince (then a disconsolate Prisoner)
how there was a Messenger lately arrived from Ferrara with a Letter from his
Queen, importing present dispatch; as he pretended. The Prince commanded him to
be forthwith called in: from whose hand having received the Letter, with
intimation of her health (the very first question he demanded upon the
Messengers Entry) with a fervorous desire by the permission and in the hearing
of his Keepers, he perused his Lady Irina's Letter; which he might do without
exception or distaste to his strict Guard, being in Contents thus.

Irina to Rosicles.
My dearest heart; Subjects of Concern are strangers to me: these lines are
only made Inquisitors after thine health, the only absolute hope now left me.
I desire infinitely to know how the Eliots have borne themselves toward thee. I
am very jealous of their dealing: having appeared so perfidious from the
beginning? O how often, when inveloped with the Sable Curtains of Night,
confined to a sad Recluse of Silence and Sorrow, has thine Exiled Irina
bemoaned the anxious Condition of thee, my dearest Rosicles; being driven to
that inextricable strait; as to rely on such weak and suspicious Means!

I reside here, Sir, where upon my long dependence on a voluntary but
necessitated Pension, such is my fear, I shall in short time grow an
ungrateful Guest. Relations, be they never so near, become onerous; when
their Sojourne becomes long, and their Attendance numerous. Obligations of this
nature, have been from my youth up such strangers to me; as they have appeared
to me more active then passive: Being from that Family whence I descended, ^ore
accustamed to oblige then be obliged. Be thou, my dear Heart more princely
disposed, and more charitably opinion'd of thine Irina; then Plebeian votes
have delivered their temeracy reports. These hold, that a Princess cannot keep
correspondence nor a formal Familiarity with a deserving Favorite, without a
touch, nay, an apparent taint of honor. Charidamus I can either keep or leave
without any such irregular love. I shall never look so far below my self; as to
make my Servant, my Copesmate. They who think otherwise of me, I shall with
much patience suffer them to be deceived, and smile at their Folly, seeing them
so palpably deluded, yet I shall hardly stoop to so much lowness, as to labor
the art of undeceiving them, by removing Charidamus, whom they term my
intimate Favorite, from my attendance. Their groundless jealousies shall not
work to my inconvenience. I know Claridamus to be just and Faithful: and He
that conceits him to be otherwise, knows not Claridamus.

We are stated here in a Nation, from whence we derive our Pension: which,
though native to me, my thoughts suggest to me, it retains no Cordial
affection to you. Those numerous injuries your Predecessors have done to
Ferrara; will as yet, entertain no Act of Oblivion. Though for the present
they contribute to the maintenance of yours; their intestine hate is implacable
to you. I shall not aggravate it, Time to your greatest diadvantage will
discover it. Be cautious, dear soul, of thine Intelligence. The fairest
pretending Face is aptest to infringe the Solemnest Juncto of Faith. This
Caution highly concerns thee. Intelligencers are become State-Pioners, they
dig deep, where they look for rich Ore.

Seeing, my dear, thine own appear thy Mortallst Malignants; do nothing
beneath thy self. No outward Occurrent, be it never so consequent, can possibly
make Man inwardly unhappy; unless the servile dejection of his mind hale him to
that unfortunate Condition. It is the gloriousest Character of any Prince to
entertain the braves of Fortune with a smile: and her flatteries with a scorn.
This have our Eminentst Heroes in Former times practiced: and by their
excellent temper become inwardly happy through their outward infelicity. But I
shall little need to insist on this Subject; thy Constancy has approved thee,
truly Princely in all thy deportment.

Thou may believe me, my bosom does nightly find a Lodging for thee, when
thine own Irina is most distanc'd from thee. If more Calm Halcyon days shine
upon us, we shall appear equal sharers: and if otherwise, let our resolution
teach us to be patient Bearers.

Let me have the happiness to enjoy thy pen, till opportunity make me happy in
the Fruition of thy Person. Lines may unite us, when at most distance. This
Comfort, in her separation from all others, is yet remaining to

Thine own Irina.


It is not easily to be expressed what deep resentment these lines upon their
perusal wrought on the troubled affections of distressed Rosicles. Though his
Condition were heavy, and in relation to his Family, most unexemplary; yet he
could have wished that it might have been shrouded and concealed from the Eyes
of the World: especially from those, to whom He stood so much indeer'd as to
Irina; who upon report of his Sufferings, could not choose but infinitely
compassionate his miseries: yet upon a more serious recollection, He held it
not so fitting to keep secret from her what all neighboring Coasts had not
only taken notice of: but would shortly, if not done already, by way of
Commerce be communicated to other Foreign Countries: especially to Ferrara, a
State, whereto the Candiots both by alliance and other necessary
correspondences held free and frequent recourse. He chus'd rather then to
become his own Amanuensis in the relation of his late disasters, then to have
the Continuation of his perplexed Condition displayed by the Gazetta's of the
time; which usually delude their Hearers either by abridging or exceeding truth
in their Narrations. To prevent which obvious Errors, and to ^ender his Irina
all speedy satisfaction during his immerited durance, of his Condition and
quality of his sufferings; He returned her these Lines in a brief but
effectual Summary; as none for facility nor felicity of pen, accounted more
absolute, in this contracted manner.

Rosicles answer to Irina's Letter.
I shall second thy desires, my dear Irina; but let me conjure thee, by that
inviolable pledge of Sponsall love which first united us; that this real
discovery of my present condition, whereto my hard Fates by those ungrateful
Instruments designing my total ruin have forced me, operate not too
passionately on thy tender affection. Thy Rosicles is betrayed in his trust:
and remains now restrained by them, who were legally to derive from Him, their
Previledges, Subsistence and Liberty. I should be infinitely amated with the
grandeur of these pressures; if my innocence fortified me not against all
Oppositions. Never was Family pretending to Greatness, and without color of
usurpation so justly planted; by injurious hands so violently surprised, nor
impetuously seized. My Natives they were who have made their Merchandise on me.
And if protests or vows even to the Altar could have retained an influence upon
their undertakings, or brought them to a sense of humanity; my lineall right
and just assumed State had not closed in this Catastrophe. Thou advisest me,
and I thank thee, for it is an advice that arises from a Spirit that breaths
nothing but Majesty; to do nothing beneath my self: And I shall resolve thee,
(to clear thy Fears from any Act that may dart the least opinion of
unworthiness in me) that my thoughts shall never stoop so low, as to purchase
my liberty, or regaine a Sovereignty by aspersing the least blemish or
dishonor on my Family. No (my Heart) though they have brought me as low as
Earth can make me: my mind shall hold a diametrall proportion with my pristine
State, though my Body cannot. It is not a Grate that can immure the Spirit of a
Prince; unless he has lost himself as well as his Seat. My hopes are not yet
confined, though my Person be. There be some good men yet breathing, who can
and will distinguish the justness of a Cause: and indew'd with a generous pity,
or native piety, commiserate my Condition: and from a reflection of my wrongs,
derive an apprehension and serious impression of what may befall themselves.
And though it be true, that it imports more happiness to be envied then pitied;
yet pity well assisted and amicably seconded; may bring those who were lately
pitied, to be afterward envyed by those by whom they were distressed. In the
heaviest of my Extrems am I thus suppo^ted. Lower I may be in the account of
Fortune: but nothing lighter in the Scale of Resolution.

For those injurious aspersions thrown on thy virtuous name; let the stings of
such traducing tongues never move thee; thy innocence retains a clear and
integ^ious opinion in my breast: thou needs not attest it with vows: Those make
it their endeavor (which is but washing of the Aethiop) to defame thy Spousall
honor, who beg attendance on the Time: and looking on the Rising-Sun, never
deigne to cast an Eye upon that Great Light which the opacous shadow of their
Moon has eclipsed. Thy pure breast may entertain these Time-traduces with a
Smile or a Scorn; as thou were it pleased in thine to teach me how to receive
Fortune. That were an unparalled beauty that could exempt its attractive
quality from the reach of Censure: or a Person, who had incurred a Plebeian
hate, for such an One to free himself from a touch of dishonor, were a
Prodigy, as Time makes it, in the Course of Nature.

I know well (for so much has Morality taught me) that all Justice is
comprehended in Innocence: and that Innocence reprehends all Injustice: thy
purity then may plead thine Apology. Being pure in the Estimate of thine own,
Thou art secured from the meldew of vulgar Fame. For what Archers be these who
shoot at thine honor, but Plebeian Timists or State-shadows: injurious
Purchasers of Others rights; Professed doers of wrong and impudent detracters
from others Fame. And can these impeach thy repute?

Truth will never maintain those who are ashamed of her. And some there be to
my knowledge, and those, such as nestle under the branches of Cedars, who have
palpably declined from the real profession of Truth to their shame.

As for Ferrara, my dear, though a Sacred Tie has allied me to it; yet shall I
never cordially rely upon it. It is to be ingenuously confessed by all, that it
has received too many indignities from Candy to raze out the prints or
impressures of them: But none of these were ever acted by thy Rosicles, but his
Predecessors: which might attemper the quarrel in my particular: but in
relation to thy Person especially, my indeered Irina; who art enforced there to
make thy Reside, or rather thine Exile, where thou breathed thy first native
air: deriving thy extraction from that Heroic line, whose unequalled prowess
highly improved the honor of that Nation; though they sleep now in the bed of
dust. Here to partake (being necessitated thereto by thy Consorts misfortune)
of useful accommodations corresponding with thy Condition; were but a Civil
hospitality in them: and no less then with princely modesty and without the
notion of beholdingness (a word of too hard digestion to a gallant and
dis-ingaged Spirit) thy lineall descent, to omit other relations, might justly
exact. But our Fortunes will not permit us to contest either with Fate or Foe.

If any Balm will cure us, or allay this Alloes Potion of affliction that so
imbitters us; it must be a patient composure of our minds: this it is that must
calm our distempers.

I have enlarged my self more then I intended; but excuse it, my dear One; for
methinks, every line here addressed to thee, enliveneth me in this unsociable
Cell of my Restraint. Mean time, let us anchor our hopes in this, that the
Superior Powers, who reserve an influence over all our Actions, and under
whose hand it is for us either to rise or fall, will afford us more cheerful
beams of reviving Comfort; by crowning our Cloudy day with a Clear Evening: and
so reunite us, or by a gladsome Translation impose a period to our suffering:
and jointly eternize us.

Thine own Rosicles.


These were the last lines which the Princess ever received from her Captived
Rosicles: being so strictly guarded by Special Command from the Senate, as all
intercourse was obstructed either by Letter or address of Friends during his
restraint; so irreconcilable was this division grown betwixt this distressed
Prince and his People.

Yet amidst these distempers, He had ever some well-wishers left, who to their
power so far as their Forces would extend to, desisted not from contributing
their best assistance to his defense, with an integrious demonstrance of their
loyalty. Amongst which, one An Illirian of high Extraction.
Lycanthes pretending infinite zeal to this injuried Prince; but how he stood
inwardly affected, his Cloudy and immasked thoughts knew best; levied a strong
and Formidable Army; and with these puissant Forces (far more numerous then
orderly managed) He invades the Territories of Candy: where with more
confidence then valor or martial prowess, He marched along, but in a posture
much unsuitable to an experienced Soldier. For he appeared in his ga^ish and
pompous Colors (like a vain Popinjay) as if he had been going rather to a
Morice or May Game, then any Martial adventure; vanting all along in this his
undisciplined Progress (for so might his march be truly styled) of an assured
victory, before he faced the Enemy. Neither surely could any thing less have
been expected; if such Considerable Forces had been under the conduct of a
serious and successful Leader: but as that wise Politician well observed:
Better it is to have an Army of Hearts, with a Lion to their Leader: then an
Army of Lions with an Heart to their Conducter: Such influence has a discreet
and resolute Commander in the success of his Army. Which Lycanthes found true
to his bitter experience. For though his Forces were singularly well prepared;
yet his indiscreet confidence suffered them to be so dis-joynted and in their
March so strangely distanced, as they appeared more like Forragers then
Soldiers: more apt for booty then to attempt a victory: and in pillage they
feathered their Nests sufficiently: making every Coast, where they so freely
exercised their rapine and injurious plunder, their Mortal Enemy. But the
Event of this Battle returned them a demerited guerdon. For having met their
Foe, whom Lycanthes so little feared; and over whom he so bravingly triumphed,
before He became engaged, They wholly discomfited him; without much resistance;
to Lycanthes great dishonor, and his defeated Forces unexemplary slaughter. So
as that very Place where this Victory with so small difficulty was acquired,
became so purpled and with dislaughter'd Corpses so numerously and confusedly
covered; as there scarce appeared sufficient purprize of ground to afford them
Graves. That small remainder of them whose Fortune it was to be preserved from
the edge of the Sword: were made subject to as heavy a Fate: being generally
sold for Bondslaves, and at so easy and contemptible a rate: as their value
might appear conformable to their valor: their despicable price, to the
estimate of their pufillanimous prowess.

As for the rest of his discattered Forces, by the slow Conduct of their March,
and their distance from the Battle, (having never approch'd the Face of the
Enemy) they retreited back both with safety and Spoil: impoverishing the
Country wherever they marched: returning to their penurious Homes, no less
full-handed then faint-hearted.

Now to give you the true Character of this Lycanthes; though he were of
eminent extraction; He was ever held to partake more of a dissolute then
resolute disposition; One, who could easily dispense with his faith; infringe
his promise; violate his vow: and a cunning designer, and disguiser too of his
intendments for his own Interest. Yet was he never known in those designs,
(were they never so subtilely couched nor carried) to appear prosperous.
Neither was it thought by Those, who held nearest correspondence with him: and
eyed his actions with the prudentst inspection, that his intention in this
Expedition was clear or candid: but that he looked more upon himself, and how
he might advance his own interest; then how to vindicate the injuries of his
distressed Prince: who remained still a restrained person; destitute of all
humane succor or assistance. But those high and inscrutable Judgments of the
Superior Power, which startleth those who are most secure and insensible of
their irregular Condition, though they seem for a while to sleep, they seldom
ss^^pe: as might be instanced to life in the Tragical Period of this
unfortunate Politician: who cut off in the height of his ambition, was enforced
(without the attendance of many real or cordial Mourners) to become a
Spectacle to the World, and to perform his last act upon the Scaffold: and
sacrifice his projecting head on the Block. Which, though he sought by all
submissive ways and mercenary means to prevent: yet all his Contrivements
could not operate to his safety.

Two others of remarkable quality there were besides himself, who having
received the irrevocable Sentence of death, were to die with him: which three
were usually in Candy thus distinguished. One a Courtier, and no Soldier. The
Second a Soldier, and no professed Courtier. The Third neither Soldier nor
Courtier. Which was meant by Lycanthes; being a person naturally surly and
uncivil: and in Martial affairs ignorant.

After this great discomfiture; from whence so much was expected, and so little
accomplished: the Senatual and Plebeian State continued in a flourishing peace;
having no Assailants either privately to oppose them, or publicly to invade
them. For the Captive Prince was secured; and his weak Allies deterred from
designing, much more from acting any thing considerable to a Democratick
disadvantage. During which Calm, or peaceable Cessation, the Candiots became
infinitely prosperous (as their valor well merited) in sundry consequent
adventures.

For their Generalissimo Moccenigo burnt ten Turkish ships and fourteen
Saiques; and took the Tribute of Rhodes amounting to 200000 Crowns; with the
loss of 100 of his men, and 300 wounded. After which gallant exploit, he joined
with the Roman Galleys and those of Malt^: and with their united Forces,
invincible for their resolution, they went jointly again to the Dardanelles, to
obstruct all such Vessels which carried provision to Constantinople: and were
resolved (so highly were they inflamed with the heat and pursuit of their
victories) to fight the great Turkish Fleet, intending at that time to keep
their Rendevous at Scio. Such noble assayes with answerable success did these
victorious Ilanders not only attempt, but bravely to their surviving memory
perform: during those short interbreaths and intermissive respirations of Civil
war. Whence it may be easily collected, what memorable actions and Conquests
might have been achieved and to the succeeding glory of Candy continued; by
those Heroic Spirits, whose viril veins had their blood wholly exhausted in
those Civil wars.

Yet during this seeming Calm and Cessation from Arms, the Synodical and
Plebeian Faction were not wholly acquitted of Foes nor Fears. All stood not
well-affected to that mixed and confused state of Government. For there were
ever Some (and those not of the meanest quality, though their Feverish Spirits
were not elevated to any public action) who confidently expected and eagerly
desired, that their new-introduced Anarchy might be suppressed, and Rosicles to
his own restored.

Others there were who stood aloof, giving aim to the Events of those times:
and having their Hutches well stored: and their Nests well feathred at home,
would not lose a plume to preserve their fidelity. Whereas others were casten
in a purer and more refined Mould: sticking not at all publicly to manifest
their Loyalty. Some whereof (and those of the eminenst, and best disciplined)
were bestowed in Garrisons; upon neighboring Castles, Cittadels, Forts and
Fortresses, most defensive, offensive and tenable. From whence they usually
made their excursions for suppliance or accommodation; whenever any
opportunity presented it self to their advantage. And I shall here take
occasion to relate some pleasant Passages, varied and interwoven with much
delight (as an Alloy to our more serious discourse:) which we shall return to
you in a modest dress; without the least touch of levity or petulant
scurrility: for such light trimming should be out of request and quite
estranged from the native body or Contexture of an History.

The Pleasant Passages of Panthalia, the Pretty Peddler.
IN the Continuation of these divisions; there were many young Gentlemen,
especially such as were younger Brothers, and had no other Fortunes but the
resolution of their Spirits to rely on, who engaged themselves freely in this
Service. But all Pitched Fields being now determined; they were enforced to
associate and unite themselves to such as had disposed their persons, and
reposed their last hopes, and fortunes with whatsoever seemed dear unto them in
Garrisons.

Amongst which, there was one Acolasto (neither had he his Name given him for
nothing, for he was of a prodigal and profuse humor:) and could find way to
spend it, if his Revenues had been raised to an Empire. This free-bred Spark,
having now ran so far on score, as Chalk would give him no more credit; nor his
Acquaintance afford him supplies or fuel to his boundless Expense; he takes
upon him this resolution to take Sanctuary in one of those Garrisons: the only
Subterfuge to his exhausted Fortunes. But finding one Obstacle of maine and
irremovable Consequence to his necessitated design; it was his endeavor, but
all in vain, to remove it.

This Acolasto had been privately contracted to an handsome young Damsel; one
for beauty accounted the Pearl of her Country. Her this Prodigal youth
acquaints with his intendment: and how his present impoverished estate, being
reduced to a forlorn Condition, would not permit him any longer repose nor
reside in those parts. But all these Objections, though persuasive enough,
would not work any impression upon her youth: expressly telling him that if he
fixed upon any such resolution, he should not want a Companion, for she would
follow him. Though at last, on his serious protest that he would sojourn no
longer then such a time as he proposed and limited to her, after much
solicitancy with the shady hopes of his preferment, she consented to his
request.

Straight to a Garrison does Acolasto address his course; where by some
assisting means he was not only received, but admitted to an inferior place,
convenient enough for his subsistence, and conformable to the quality of his
Commands. But the only benefit he extracted from thence, was a Lecture of
Temperance: for the Garrison was not guilty of too much excess: in which form of
discipline had this young Soldier been seasonably indoctrinated, he might have
remained with his Panthalia, in a secure plenty, without engagement or defiance
of an unknown Enemy.

The prefixed time of his return being now arrived and past; and this amorous
Damasella hearing nothing of him; saving only of the Place of his abode, but
whether removed or no she had not heard: and becoming infinitely impatient of
his delay; resolved to direct her course toward the Garrison, where she was
informed Acolasto was not only received but preferred. Many pregnant reasons
were given her, to dissuade her, from an Assay so full of danger, and
prejudicial to her honor: but none of these could evince her: nor with all the
pretended Fears they could object, decline her. Her resolution was pitched; and
the day of her perilous Progress immutably fixed: and that she might without
discovery go on in her Journey, she took upon her a disguise much below her
extraction; the habit of a Peddler; with points and Laces about her neck: and
all other accommodations suitable to so indigent a Calling.

But mean had that Commodity been, which such a beauty could not put off.
Along she goes thus attired; taking with her Pandione an Alliance of hers (a
Maid of singular modesty and graceful demean) ^or her Attendant. With much
cheerful discourse and pleasant parlyance did these two amiable way-mates
entertain the time, and allay the difficulty of their Journey.

O would Panthalia say; what, do thou think, Pandione, that Acolasto will
say, when he sees me thus habited: how do imagine, will he receive his
Peddler? I cannot, replied Pandione conceit the Caresses of Fancy: nor what
these imaginary Conceptions of love may aspire to, being such strange Guests to
my virgin bosom, as to this hour they were never there admitted.

But surely the tediousness of the way, and dangers that accompanied it might
to any unbiased judgment merit well a free and graceful acceptance. I gather
well by your alacrity, the strength and vigor of your Fancy. Labors become
Pleasures, when the Object we aim at deligts us. What Obligations have thou
laid on me, answered Panthalia; who art so willing to share with me in this
Journey, without hope of partaking with me in the like Joy? You might easily
injoyne me to a Task of more difficulty, might my Service facilitate your
content in any measure. But I am much afraid, said Pandione, that we have not
yet past the Pikes; we have more emergent, if not imminent perils to encounter
with: for we may hear how Soldiers are dispersed every where; whose
incivilities how might our weakness avoid, or by what means evade, if their
unbounded and licencious Fury assault us? I have resolved of a Cure for that
Sore, replied Panthalia. I know well, the Habit nor Profession of Pedlers will
not secure us; though it has thus far disguised us from our Natives. We will
therefore change these Feminine Habits, to preserve our Honors: and take more
virile habiliments upon us. Heavens grant, said Pandione, that I shame not my
self in that shape: for I am confident, I shall never regu^arly nor without
suspicion conform my posture to a pair of Breeches: but I shall follow your
direction: and mould my pace to your gate as well as I can. Their New-form'd
Habits being accordingly provided; they went on in their address. But they had
scarcely drilled on a league or two further; till they were advertised for
certain by a Country Bore, that the Garrison whereto they shaped their Course
was so straightly blockt up, and on each side so beleagured, as no passage could
be admitted to it, nor Egress from it.

These unexpected News infinitely perplexed Panthalia: fearing much, as she
might very probably conjecture, that in this pursuit after her beleagured
Acolasto, she had wholly lost her labor. But being now near Night, they
hastened on toward an adjoining Village, where they were informed, they might
receive convenient accommodation for their Lodging. And passing along heavily;
for all their merry parliance was now converted to sad Scens; not far distant
from thence; They happily incountred with an ancient Gentleman taking his
Evening walk in a Field adjacent to his House. Who seeing these two late
transhap'd Pilgrims; and desiring to know what way they addressed their course,
Panthalia told him, that their occasion lay for the next Garrison; purposely to
visit a dear and intimate Ally of theirs, and to accommodate him in those
necessitous times with some competent supplies.

Alas, answered the Gentleman! I am much afraid lest your Journey prove as
fruitless as it has been tedious, if your Address did extend it self to any
considerable distance. No less remote then Landek, being near the utmost
Confines of Candy, replied Panthalia. Too long a tract to appear effectless.
And I shall freely communicate the the grounds of my Fear unto you: for the
probability of the issue I shall leave to your own Judgments, being of such
near concern to your selves. You shall know Gentlemen, that this Fort, or
place of Garrison, known commonly by the name of Pontisk, were impregnable, I
must confess, if the besieged had provision, but necessity must enforce them,
were their Spirits never so resolute, to a speedy reddition. For it is
beleagured round and with such assiduate violence assaulted, as it cannot be
tenable long. Mean time, neither ingress nor regress is admitted: where if any
one chance to be inconsiderately suprized; all hostility without mercy is
inflicted on him.

Be then advised, young Gentlemen, by One who has been sometimes reduced to the
like Straits that you are brought to; decline your engagement upon these
desperate Extremes. No long time will be admitted, as the Case stands, for
completing this Siege. The exigent Condition of the Party beleagured is such,
that they must either yield, and timely too, or they expose themselves to the
Fury of an implacable Enemy: so small reliance or hope of mercy is to be
expected from the hand of Cruelty.

This passionate relation wrought so strongly on the endeered affection of
Panthaliae, as her eyes were resolved into rivolets of tears. Though she
shadowed her resentment with as much art as her present condition, impaled in
the purprize or such affliction, could possibly permit. But she could not so
artfully dissemble it, but this grave Gentleman quickly apprehended it, and in
a generous Compassion seemingly partakt with her in it. But to minister a
Cordial to these dispassionate qualmes: and allay their Sufferings, which
appeared to him above expression, he proceeded in the affectionate tender of
his hospitable Entertain in this manner. Young Gentlemen, said he, for your
names I know not. With a modest interruption, replied Panthalia, my Name is
Melicertes: and my Kinsmans Dulcippus. May you long flourish in the Splendour of
your names and relations, said he; but you must excuse me, if in this
commiseration of your adventures (for never could a more inopportunate time nor
hazardous assay call you forth of your own Country) I return you my advice,
disgustful, it may be, at the first view; because the alacrity of your youthful
Spirits may be such as it will admit no impedes, but rather pursue then prevent
danger.

No, answered Panthalia; though our desires breath into an infinite fervor of
visiting so endeered a Friend: yet must we with patience give way to the
extremity of time: and with much thankfulness submit our selves and our
perplexed affairs to your prudent advice and direction. For our Condition rests
now, as those who sail in a Pinnace, ballac'd with an heavy burden, but without
anchor; exposed to storms, shelvs and every approaching danger. Let me then
play your Pilot; I shall find you Sea-room at least, to secure you from an
imminent peril. With all serious attention they gave ear unto him: advising
them with much prudence and affability in this sort, for their present
Security. It has been your fortune, Gentlemen, to come to this Grange; where
you may rest confident of a free and Friendly welcome; and though not so
accurate, as it may be, your qu^lities merit, yet not altogether unworthy your
acceptance, as your Pilgrim Condition, accompanied with so many inevitable
obstructions, necessitates it. I shall then enjoin you, out of a pious care to
your welfare, and hospitable respect to the ingagment of your Persons, to take
your Repose here with me and my Family: till these violent and impetuous
storms be over-blown. Long they cannot continue in relation to this Siege. For
the beleagured Party, must either yield, and that shortly, or suffer without
mercy; as has been lately with extreme menaces imparted to them by the Enemy.

With a cheerful gratitude They entertained his generous Offer. In variety of
discourses a part of the night was bestowed: and after a Free and liberal
repast, the old Gentleman sensible of the weariness of their Journey; gave
direction to his daughter In an Abstract of this Romance called Lysippe.
Aretina to accommodate them with all conveniences: and to lodge them in one of
the best Rooms, suitable, as he imagined, to their condition; though in modesty
they appeared silent in discovery of it. By this it grew Bedtime for this
ancient Gentleman; whose due observance of seasonable hours had enlarged his
years with much health and fresh vigor. And having now taken his leave of
these two late transhap'd Gentlewomen, with wishes to their good rest; He
departed the room, recommending them to the serious care, diposure and
accommodation of his daughter.

Now this Aretina was his only Child; One who had been often in the way of
Marriage but ever mist it. One Remora or other still interposed the Object of
her preferment. Neither were her desires cold in the pursuance of her
affection. But either her Suitors Fortunes were below or above her Condition:
or the freedom of her disposition sprinkled their Suit with a dis-relish: So
as, she was grown now as ancient in years, as Fervent in her desires: and
commonly distinguished in those parts by the title of the Mother of the Maids,
or the Maiden-Matron; the Vestall Virgin, or the Virgin Votaress; or more
commonly by the Prioress of Cardel. But no such religious nor abstemious a
votaress, as to reject the affection of a pretending Servant: or discourage the
amorous Assayes of any spritely or alacrious Gallant: being as flexible and apt
to receive an impression of love: as any youthful Lover (were his protests
never such strangers to his breast) was addressed to tender it. You may easily
suppose then, what a pleasing and acceptable charge this Task was, being so
seriously recommended to her by her Father. Beauty is a dangerous bait; as apt
to take, if it be nibled at, as to be taken. This proved an attractive Object
to Aretina. Who might discover in her two affectionate Guests so much native
beauty; as it could not possibly actuate less then irresistible flames in the
bosom of Fancy: nor become less, if not timely opposed, then a dangerous
Incendiary to young blood. Time, we know, is precious; and Aretina weighs the
estimate of every grain or minute at the highest rate, during her Custody of
these two amiable Sojourners. And Panthalia, accomplished with no less
quickness of Fancy in apprehending; then excellence of Beauty in surprising; to
delude her enamored Guardian, and shadow her own disguise; expressed so much
art, as she answered look with look: and with that amorous kind of reflection,
as her smiles presented language enough; to operate this coneipt in Aretina;
that she was no less taken then her self: directing their affections mutually
on one Object: so strongly did this imaginary influence act upon the enlivened
thoughts of that ancient amorist. These apprehensions interwoven with other
suitable discourse spinned out the night longer then these two wearied Pilgrims
well desired; but these Civilities of Aretina's attendance with other obliging
Treats could not mannerly permit them to discover their weariness, nor
importune her departure. At last with a pleasant smile (an intelligible regret
of what she meant) she took her leave, leaving them to their rest: whereof, no
doubt, they partak't more fully then Aretina did: whose active thoughts had
made sleep a stranger to her eyes.

These two being in bed, Pandione was very inquisitive of Panthalia, what an
opinion she ^ad o^ Aretina; Sleep, Girl, quoth she; Thou need'st not doubt but
she would prove kind enough, if we were Consorts to correspond with her
desires: neither do I think, but if she knew our Sex, which I would by no means
have yet discovered, but our accommodation might appear less, and her care in
relation to us, more remiss.

The sable Curtains of Night were no sooner displayed: and Latona resigned her
shady government; but Aurora disheviling her golden tresses awakned lovesick
Aretina; whose care solely fixed upon her Charge (the delightfull'st Task that
ever her aged Father enjoined her) winged her speed to these two scarce-awakt
Pilgrims; Morning Cordials, with whatsoever might most indulge the sense, could
not be wanting, for Panthalia was the Idea whereon she affectionately fixed; the
only Earthly Deity to whom she offered, and for whom she reserved her entirest
Orisons. Never was Creature upon the first interview more deluded, nor
strangely surprised. All the next day, after their usual repasts, which were
with far more curiosity prepared and dished then had been formerly; they
bestowed in Arbour-discourses, with other time-beguiling Recreations: and with
that variety as if she had set her whole Family a-work to entertain these
Stran, gers with raritie of Inventions. For her aged Father, an ancient
hospitable Housekeeper had imposed a period to all secular cares, and
recommended all the charge and provision of Oeconomick affairs to his Daughter,
who knew well how to retain an hanke, and abridge that profuseness of bounty,
if her providence had not been over-master'd by Fancy. Neither in very truth,
did Panthalia, whose education had been inured to delicacy, disgust this
freedom of Entertain: who, though she were engaged in pursuit of another Allay;
yet had she ever a reserve for Sense; which with much complacencie her desires
were ever strongly bent to satisfy.

When night came, they bestowed it no less delightfully in other trifling
pleasures; as in making Gooslings in the ashes; draw gloves, Purposes, Ridles and
the like: wherein Panthalia had been much versed: and appeared, especially to
Aretina, infinitely ingenious. Neither in these only, but in Exercises of
Poesy, to shroud their Sexes effeminacy; they would frequently endeavor to
express their pregnancy: but their Subjects were ever drawn from love in the
Choice of a Mistress, of such like Fancy, which suited handsomely with
Aretina's humor: and left deeper impressions in her affection.

One day, (upon a prepared resolution betwixt them) Panthalia with her diamond
wrote in a window of her Lodging, being directly opposite to Aretina's Entry:
and from whence she usually made her Prospect to a delightful Garden, near
adjoining, these lines: That wench for me, and none but she,
That Is neither froward nor too free.


And Pandione, to cover her self with the like veil; being in her Election for
the same Sex, answered her in this sort: That wench, I vow, Shall be my Joy,
That Is neither forward nor too coy.


Aretina chancing next morning to read these verses, laughed heartily, Alas,
poor Fools, quoth she! How pitifully are we weak women taxed, to be forward,
froward, coy, and what not? whereas you subtle men be those Coy-ducks that
lure us to your Nouze, and then unhappily leave us. For when you have got your
desires, they beget satiety, and by degrees prepare fresh fuel for new Fires.
Yet, trust me, methinks Love is a pretty thing: and I could find with all my
heart to love; so I might find One that would do the like. Panthalia standing
at her back, presently interrupted her, saying: Why, Lady, retain you that
harsh opinion of us; as if all mankind were adulterate metal; and no pure
bulloigne amongst us? No, replied Aretina, I am not infected with any such
Criticisme. I am confident, Melicertes, you could love, and constantly; if your
Curious eye could once fix on an Object that might like you. And the Object I
could really fix on, answered Panthalia, (desiring nothing more then to
inwreath her still in this Labyrinth of love) is very near me. Speak cordially,
Sir, have your thoughts a real inclination to love? Do not hold me, sweet
Mistress, all Cucumber: your Servant (if I may assume so meriting a title) has
native vital heat; affectionate desires enabled with active Faculties as other
Creatures have.

Trust me you make me put on complexion; no doubt, Sir, your Constitution
retains no Symptoms of a Consumption; but promises more alacrity in action,
then reality of affection. And yet I will not judge rashly, methinks such a
Feature should partake as well of Constancy as Fancy: yes, Madam, if the
Expressions of a Stranger were not accounted of as aerie motions, you might find
something in Melicertes to merit your good affection: seeing, as he may safely
protest, your indeering Entertain and obliging Favors have won so much ground
of him; and acquired such Command over him; as incomparable feminine beauty was
the very first that He idolized, or courted for a Mistress; and that she should
be the sole and absolute Object of his Choice, if it might be his happiness to
deserve that acceptance, that ever he meant to espouse of her Sex.

This infinitely transported Aretina; so as she could scarcely contain her
self from sealing her free assent and acquiescence with the gage of her lips:
but Pandiones hasty coming in prevented the Seal: so as no more of any amorous
discourse was admitted at that time: only muttering with her lips, (and that
with much privacy, lest her fellow-traveller should partake of this secrecy,
and consequently impede the hopes of her approaching felicity) that such a fair
face Could not possibly harbor a false heart. So easily she suffered her self
to be deluded with a mere Chymera of Fancy.

When night came, she designed another way not only to initiate but accomplish
the pitch of her desires; which she projected in this manner, away to
prostitute her honor for the speedier enjoyment of her pleasure. To expedite
this, she gave especial direction that these two Guests should belodged in
several rooms: and Panthalia next her own. Which done, Aretina opportunatly
suited with the darkness of Night to vail the immodesty of her address; laid
hold upon that seasonable occasion, with much silence to leave her own Bed: and
as one fearful to lie alone, made bold to acquaint herself with an unexpecting
Bedfellow. Panthalia betwixt sleeping and waking, imagining her to be
Pandione, you keep unseasonable hours, Girl. Which words Aretina took to her
self; little thinking that Pandione could pass under that notion. Mean time,
Panthalia unmindfull of her new Consort, either seemingly or really appeared,
as if she had recommended her self, in a sweet repose, to Endimions lap.
Thunder could scarce awake her; much less the fruitless embraces of an
intrusive Guest. Nearer and nearer did Aretina, (so much sovereignty had
unbounded sense got over Reason) creep toward Panthalia; who at last as one
half awake used these words: "Pray thee Pandione lie not so near me. Alas,
sweet Soul, said Aretina; what a strong Conceit has the remembrance of his
beleagured Friend begot in him! This Pandione, doubtless, is the same Gentleman
whom they desire so much to visit. He must needs prove constant to his
Mistress, appearing so faithful to his absent Friend. Then with a low feigned
voice, as one fearful either to disturb her quiet: or conscious of her own
boldness, whispering closely, She told Her, she was not Pandione but Aretina:
and that her devotional affection to him, had caused her to dispense with
prudence and virgin continence: and that his ^iety would not censure this act,
as an apparent argument of impudence, but entire zeal and obsequious service.
Neither was it the Satisfaction of a sensual desire, but the happy fruition of
his Society, that had estranged her from her rest. This was strange dissembling
Rhetoric, deserving rather to be admired then believed: yet it might pass for
current, being instilled into her ear, who Dulcina-like, either seemed to sleep
or was asleep: while Aretina more watchful then an Hesperian Sister, continued
her repose, hourly expecting a grateful requital from an hand that had no power
to give it. Thus was this inamor'd Lady in all her Assay^ deluded; expecting
more then she enjoyed: by fixing the Eye of her mis-guided fancy on an
incompetible Object.

By this time had Latona rendered up his Commands to the Government of Phoebus.
Those to ack and resplendent beams, so long distanced from diffusing their
glory on this inferior Orb; as if they had infinitely desired to partake of
the view of so incomparable beauty as Panthalia's: (for Aretina's she could not
be a^bitious of it) peer'd secretly through the Cranies of her Lodging: which
this vigilant Aretina observing lept presently out of Bed; fearing (as such
light Assaies must needs foment fears) lest Pandione or some of the domestics
might come in, and discover her unexcusable boldness. Mean time, Panthalia
awaking (and whether awake before or no, it were not easy to be determined)
and seeing Aretina; she raised her self a little upon her pillow, using these
words: You are an early Huswife, Aretina. It seems you cannot keep your Bed
for want of a Bedfellow. It is as good, said she, for Aretina to have none, as
to have a cold One. Parthenia knew well enough her meaning, but would neither
discuss it nor discover it: no, nor dive too inquisitively into it, lest her
temperance might be censured bashfullness: her modesty a natural frigidity or
imbecility. This therefore she discreetly shadowed: so as, though she well
perceived that Aretina showed a Countenance more averse from her, then she had
formerly done; yet this abated nothing of her cheerfulness; pretending infinite
affection to her: and upon occasion wantonly disporting with her: as if more
virile heat appeared in her; then her approvement could apprehend.

Yet it pleased her not a little; to observe with what a seemly and amorous
dalliance Panthalia expressed her affectionate Zeal to Aretina; which made her
confident of a future contentment with more freedom: so irresistibly had these
aerie influences wrought upon her: engaging her to sundry dispassionate
encounters, and permitting no opportunity to pass by her, that might suitably
correspond with her desires, or more clearly accelerate them. And no doubt,,
some new dialogue of love had been really moved by the One, and no less
faignedly approved by the Other; had not Pandione come suddenly in and
prevented this re-encounter. At whose entrance, Aretina hastened down from
Pathalia's Chamber; letting a paper drop from her as she left the Room, but so
apparently as Panthalia, to whom it was shadowingly addressed, could not choose
but take notice of it: the lines were these.

The purest Ornament of Continence,
If opportunity give way to sense
By entering Combat may receive a foi^e,
Yet such a Stain is but a native soil:
You know my meaning: -- let the closing Night
Combine two Lovers in a joint delight.
Be same you seem, SIR; Nature will admire
That the Weaker should be stronger in desire.
Panthalia taking up the Paper Pandione desired much to partake of the Content
of it; being persuaded, by sundry Symptoms which she discovered, and by which
she gathered, that Aretina's infirmity stood in need of some sovereign
Lovepotion: and that no Physician, were his art never so exact, could perfect
the Cure, but that eye which gave the wound: and that the only Weapon-salve to
allay her distemper was in Panthalia's power, though her modesty would make no
discovery of it.

But though Pandione was very importunate for perusing those lines; yet
Panthalia would by no means communicate them unto her. Only she told her,
that one day, if their Journey produced a cheerful issue; those very lines
which she so much desired to peruse, would afford them an excellent Scene of
mirth; but as then she would not disclose it.

But your Countenance, answered Pandione, is such a legible Index, as one may
apprehend it it without an Interpreter. Go to, Madam; I pity the poor deluded
Girl; that she can find no other Object to suit her affection; but such an one
as must necessarily deceive her straid hopes in their Fruition.

How strangely thou talkst, said Panthalia! Must her free and hospitable
Entertain be interpreted Love? Much Civility, I must confess, there is in it:
and a generous resentment of our Condition: but this is not to bear the Notion
of sensual love, or any other indisposed affection. Not only Aretina, but her
whole Family has laid many Obligations on us both, for their numerous Favors
so amply contributed in our greatest Extremes. Whereof I shall ever retain a
grateful record: as for any other obligements or relations, they derive their
suppositious grounds only from the help of your Invention, Pandione.

I shall not demean my self so unmannerly as to become a busy Inquisitor,
where I may not without disgust appear a partaker. But give me leave to enjoy
my own confidence: and make my thoughts their own Secretaries: Such light and
merry-conceipted Loves as these, if such there be; may be entertained with
indifference, and continued without prejudice. Such Issues will not lay a
Charge on the Parish where they are nursed: nor cause the Parents to bemoane
their hard Fate, in bringing forth an untimely birth.

Trust me, thou art a shrewd Girl, answered Panhalia: but lest my wench should
long for what she cannot partake: and consequently incur a malady through my
too much secrecy; especially, seeing these innocent Love-sallies (as thou
termst them) are not only to be entertained but discoursed of with such
indifferency, as their relation can infer no prejudice; lend me thine
attention; or if thou love to be an Interpreter of thine own Jealousies,
peruse these scattered lines, and from them draw the line of her distempers.
Pandione laughing heartily at the perusal of the paper; Trust me, said she, I
perceive feminine beauty becomes very dangerous in a Masculine shape. It
seems, Madam, if you either want Fortunes or a Mistress, you might be
sufficiently supplied with both.

But pray you resolve me, what receipt hold you convenient to apply to this
enamored Creature to recover her inthralled senses (for I conceit her to be
infinitely distracted:) for trust me, it is far above my Cure. Let that be the
least of thy care; answered Panthalia; she is not so deeply distempered, but
she may be timely recovered.

If the Tarantula or Calenture may be capable of cure; this discomposure in
Aretina cannot be without hope of recovery. It is but a deception of sense, the
worst you can make of it: and such a deluded Fancy (hold it if thou please for
a Phrency) cannot make Art a Fool, by despairing of a remedy. Well; said
Pandione, I shall wish your application may produce good effect. But I could
not choose but suspect something more then ordinary, when our Lodgings were so
strangely divided: and no apparent necessity to induce it. But my comfort was,
the issue of such blind love could not prove less then innocent, howsoever her
intendments were designed. Bare hopes were the greatest by th she could
conceive with, or your affectionate embraces procure. Well, replied Panthalia,
I am sorry that any scattered looks should fall from me, to work this effect:
but her present cure shall be my constant care. At this very instant came in
the old Gentleman her Father, which occasionally broke off their further
discourse: for doubtlesly had he been made privy to it; the story would not
have relished well to his pallat: hearing his daughter so pitifully deluded,
and his civil Hospitality so ungratefully requited. Now the News which this
Gent. brought was of such consequence, as the communicating of them might well
produce a twofold effect, joy and fear; which may appear by these
Circumstances grounded upon his own relation, which He no less seriously then
discreetly delivered in this manner.

Gentlemen, I am made acquainted this Morning by infallible Intelligence; and
such as you may rely on: That this Castle, whereto you intended to address
your Course, is now upon Capitulation to be yielded up, after so long Siege
stoutly continued, and maintained: and now upon no less honorable terms
rendered. Three days are only assigned to the Party beleagured to acquit the
Fort, and to depart, after that time limited, with Colors displayed and
ordinary arms, and in their march to be so conducted by the Enemy to the next
Garrison (which they have already made choice of) as no violence nor incivility
shall be done them, but secured, according to the Law of Arms, from all
hostility.

The former part of this relation sounded with a cheerful accent in the Ear of
Panthalia: but the latter was accompanied with jealousies and Fears. She
delighted much to hear of the reddition of the Castle; hoping by that means to
come to the enjoyment of Acolasto: but hearing of their remove to another
Garrison, she raised to her troubled thoughts just occasion of Fear:
conjecturing, that he would march along in that remove: and out of his youthful
heat, wherewith he had been infinitely transported, become wholly forgetful of
his former obligements; which to prevent, she thought it fit to expedite her
address: rendering first a fair acknowledgment to the Gentleman for his free and
liberal entertainment during their repose with him: resolving withal, to go on
with their adventure the next morning by time, if there intercurred no apparent
Obstacle to impede it. And with much convenience for this design; upon the
Gentleman's departure from her Lodging, Aretina came opportunately in,
fruitlesly expecting what her desires pursued: upon whose approach, Panthalia in
a pensive and contristate manner (as one much perplexed with the late message)
accoasted her in this fort.

Madam, we have now received intelligence by your Fathers relation; that we
shall very shortly acquit your noble Family of two troublesome Guests. A
grateful acknowledgment for your numerous Civilities is all the retribution
that can be expected for the present from our estranged condition which shall
leave a deep impression, with a constant intendment of a future gratification,
whenever an happy o^portunity of requital may present it self.

Upon this hint, giving a private hint to Pandione, to withdraw; she proceeded
in this manner: Your many immerited Favors contributed to me, Lady, have
obliged me perpetually to be your Servant: but to undeceave you in one
particular, I hold it a civil duty, for otherwise I should fall into deep
arreers upon the score of your approved affection. The Paper which you lately
scattered, dictated to my thoughts an unexpected Conceit of your favor, nay
fervor of love toward me. But whence derived I could not easily discover: For
if from beauty (as I was never Narcissus-like opinion'd of it) I should with
Sputimius, have rather disfigured it, then suffer it to be an occasion of such
dangerous and discomposed effects. But your discretion will, no doubt, quickly
order these distempers by recollecting your self, and rectifying those mistakes
which begot these easy errors. In reply to your lines, I made bold, Madam to
return a paper, and to fix it in your Chamber window: which if you have not
already partak't, you may be pleased to peruse. It will amply render you my
condition, portraiture and constitution. What I am, and in what capacity I may
be yours: The Draught will discover, what my hand cannot so mannerly deliver.

Aretina with pace no less accelerate, then heart affectionate hastened toward
the paper, promising, as she conceipted, such satisfaction, as her desires
could enlarge themselves no higher: which she found expressed in these lines:
Ixion was deluded by a Cloud,
So laure at Daphne from Apollo slipped,
So Danae, so Semele sought to shroud
Their Virgin beauties: -- If our fancies dipped
Deep into such Chymera's; let us remove
Such aerie fantasies, and leave to love.
You love me well, and so I wish you should,
Although I cannot answer your desire,
For she you love is of another mould
Then to effect what your affects require.
Where if your erring fancy run a shelf,
Blame not Panthalia's beauty but your self.
I am not same I seem; for if I were,
I should not Acolasto thus pursue;
Fix then your fancy in a proper Sphere;
Since I partake no more of Man then you.
For this disguised Habit was put on
To shield mine honor, which I stand upon.
'Leave then this Love, which having once given over,
'That Maiden lives not, who shall love you more.


The Contents of these lines begot in Aretina more admiration then
dis-affection. She, who before pursued Panthalia, as a Conjugal Lover; begins
now to embrace her as a natural Sister. Her mistakes she only labors to
apologize: which is no sooner modestly pressed, then it is freely granted.
Though her Sex seem to be changed: Aretina reteins an affectionate bosom for
her; ready to contribute in any measure wherein she may gratify her, whom so
lately in a virile habit she did so intimately tender. These friendly Offers,
and unexpected Offices suited fitly with Panthalia's occasions; which induced
her to return this Civil regreet, as an ingenuous agnition of her continued
respect; which she infinitely feared, might receive a Check upon the Change of
her Shape.

Madam, I see well, no habit nor shape can alter the form nor impressive figure
of your love. Your free and hospitable entertain has already obliged us highly:
and now at our farewell, it is your pleasure to enlarge your goodness higher:
and to engage us to your Civilities deeper. I must ingenuously acquaint you
with my resolves: and in these rely upon your assistance.

I am now after a long and tedious Journey to complete my address. I hear by
your Fathers relation, how this Garrison here adjoining is to be dissolved: the
Castle rendered: and Acolasto amongst many others to be removed: and in other
places of Fortification disposed, as for conveniencie they shall make choice
on. Now my jealousy is great (from that interest I have in Acolasto) lest
these occurrencies should make him forget, what his former vows and solemn
protests oblige him to perform. My resolution then is to resume my own habit,
and appear the same Panthalia that I am: but a Place of retirement is my
desire: and this so near the Garrison, as I may address a message to Acolasto:
wherein I purpose to inform him with the place of my reside: with my expectance
of his return. But the conveniencie and contiguity of this Place are equally
requisite: wherein I shall wholly rely upon your advice and direction.

Lady Panthalia, said she, for now I know your Name; there is no affectionate
office wherein I shall appear defective, so it may be useful or accommodate
to your virtuous designs: and shall hold my self infinitely happy in expediting
them. In the first place then, I shall be serviceable to you both in preparing
you habits according to your desire, And for your Place of retire, there is a
Recluse not half a league distant from the Garrison, where you may securely
reside, till you have dispatched your address. Of what Condition is that
Recluse, said Panthalia?

It is a Monastery or Votary, replied Aretina, dedicated to Delia. Where many
of our Sex are usually received: and after their time of Probation, united to
their Society or Sisterhood. Nor need you to fear of a fair and friendly
Entertain, for they are Persons infinitely Civil: especially to all such as
pretend honor to the Patroness of their Society.

Shortly after, these two being singularly well accommodated both for habit and
other necessaries by the especial care and provision of Aretina; having first
taken a solemn and grateful leave of the Old Gentleman: and returned some
tokens as testimonies of their thankfulness, to his Family; by Aretina's
affectionate Conduct, they were brought on their way, till they came to a fair
Prospective Hill, not far distant from the House where those Delian Votaresses
were bestowed. And there Aretina left them; but not without tears, you may
well suppose, so acceptable was their Society; as to be deprived of it,
appeared to her more bitter then death it self.

Having entered the Votary, they were entertained with all Civility by an
ancient Matron, the Governess of that Family, or rather Prioress of that
Society. by whom they were led into a beautiful Chapel; curiously adorned
with sundry exquisite Statues, emblematizing Diana and her Nimphs: which were
so to life portrayed, as nothing could work more impressively upon the
imagination of the Spectator. The Pillars of the Temple were of Porphyrite
Marble. The Monuments erected within, were of Jacinth, Topaz, or Rock-Pearle;
whereon were engraven diverse Epitaphs, expressing much elegancy of Conceit,
to perpetuate the memory of those Sisters of that Society there interred.

After the Survey of these; Panthalia seeming desirous to know what Privileges
of Immunities were anciently conferred on their Society; the Governess related
to her at large with what antiquity in many successions they had been
continued; by whom conferred: and with what care preserved. Which done, that it
might appear to these Strangers, that she would not be a-wanting in any Civil
Office, tending to the satisfaction of their desires or improvement of their
knowledge; She returned her an exact Catalogue, in the nature of a Concordance,
containing the Rites and Ceremonies solemnly used in their Society: As also
after what manner the Sisters of that Family, and dedicated to Delia, were
received into their House.

You do passing well, Reverend Votaress, said Panthalia, in making me
acquainted with the Customs, Orders and Ceremonies of your Society; who after
some time of Probation, may probably become One of your Family.

Neither would it be any derogation to you, daughter, replied the Governess, to
incorporate your self in our Fellowship: seeing sundry eminent persons; even
some who descended lineally from the loins of Princes, have dis-valued their
styles of honor; laid their diadems aside: and confined themselves within
these walls.

May I, Sister, be so happy as partake of the knowledge of your Nation and
Extraction?

I am nationally a Candiot, answered Panthalia: and now on my address to an
affectionate Ally here remaining in your Garrison. May you prosper in your
designs, replied the Governess. But the report of your Nation puts me in mind
of a sad relation, which I have oftimes heard spoke of in these parts: and it
was of the heavy and calamitous Condition of a Prince of that Country: how
disloyally he was deserted by his own: and afterward restrained of his
Liberty; which his distressed Princess no sooner received notice of, then she
relinquished the world: encloister'd herself; making a singular virtue of
necessity; in partaking more absolute felicity in her enjoyment of an inward
then outward liberty. Whence I collect, how in the extremest Encounters of
Fortune, this private retirement within a Cloister, may afford that which the
whole world cannot minister.

It is true, Reverend Matron, said Panthalia; when her exiled Condition was
most imbittered with gusts of affliction; it was her use to bestow her
seriousest hours upon devotion: But for a Cloistered life, which you are
pleased to commend so much, her affection never stood for that long. Though in
relation to her safety, she might seem to pretend to that kind of privacy: For
her disposition was naturally otherwise biassed: having her Education so much
dedicated to youth: as her maturer years had ever a reserve for the like
freedom. Though this might be truly said of her, that no Princess enjoyed more
pleasure with a constant regard to her honor.

It has been much wondered at, replied the Governess, how her Husband, never
deservingly censured for any predominant vice, should so precipitously fall
from such an height of Command, into so deep a gulf of misery: seeing his
equal temper of Government was such; as his facility could neither accuse him
of too much remisseness: nor his severity of too much roughness. It was an
heavy Fate for him to suffer, being endowed with so princely temper.

It has been ever the unhappy condition of most Countries, and with grief I
speak it, particularly of mine own, said Panthalia; when fullness of Fortune,
famed by a long continuance of peace, has begot in them a surfeit, never to be
content when they were well. This have our Natives of Candy sufficient
experience of. For though they enjoyed plenty in a full measure; yet grew they
weary of their Condition. Either did their Sovereign displease pretending that
he did Lord it too much over them: or that his Council was corrupt or viciously
affected: or their Laws and Liberties too much abridged: or their Impositions
so heavy as not to be supported: you have heard the Fable of the Froggs. They
itched after a new Commander, which at last they got; but repented them of
their Change. Secure we were from Foes without, and Foes within: but innovating
our State, we became subject to both.

Never was Government so distracted, being before so orderly settled: and
harmoniously disposed. For to enumerate those three blessings; which make every
State in its Constitution truly happy: and in others winters, to retein a fair
complexion and flourishing beauty; to wit, Commodity, Liberty and Tranquillity:
none could be more amply blessed in the plenary possession nor full fruition of
all these. For the first, none more rich within, nor more improved by
Commodious traffic abroad. Our general peace, being in league with all, calmed
our Seas: making us liable to the fear of none. Gladly did Foreign Nations
commerce with us; ready to furnish us with what we wanted: as our Coast was in
affording them Supplies of what they needed: yea, to repeat that elegant
Observation of our Native Bard.

Candy for rich Supplies was such an one,
All stood in need of her, and she of none.
Secondly, for Liberty none more amply enlarged. Their Privileges enjoyed
without restraint. No Servitude nor Vassalage permitted in so free a Nation.
The Subject had an absolute propriety in his own. No incroaching hand without
due Censure durst pretend to his interest. Men might safely without fear of a
mercenary Informer communicate their thoughts: and exhibit their Complaints if
any indignities were done them in relation to their Fame Fortunes or Persons.
No tongue could admit a privilege to traduce: neither could Greatness become
such a Subterfuge to Guiltiness, as to give it an impunity to offend. Neither
were our Laws such Spider-webbs, as to give way to great Ones to break out, and
to Little Ones to keep in: Being so equally balanced, as neither price, prayer
nor power could pervert them. Such was their free and impartial dispensation
of Justice. Which neighboring Countries (so hard it was to observe these rare
Presidents) were more apt to admire then imitate: to approve, then improve
their practice by them.

Lastly, for Tranquillity; neither public nor private Estate could possibly
flowrish with more security. No Foreign Powers to invade: no indigent Persons
at home, to purloine. No Court-Parasite, nor State-Minion was admitted to
prefer an injurious suit: if it imported an unjust challenge, or an illegal
request; the Solliciter was to undergo a Mulct: or recceive a personal Censure.
Neither could the fury of an Enemy engage their security: for there was neither
Guard nor Garrison, unless there were one upon the Princes Person: and that with
such reservancy, as if the regality of his Place had not exacted it; he could
well have dispenst with it.

It seems Candy, said the Governess, became seaz'd of a violent Phrency. A
constitution so distempered, required a continued Purge. Bodies Politic being
so full of vicious humors cannot be long healthful. It is most true, replied
Panthalia: and you collect rightly the indisposition of Candy. It was a deep
Surfeit that first begot in my Country this infirmity. A Surfeit of peace, which
caused her to be more remiss in the prudent managment of her State. For so long
as we had Foes abroad; we could be content to love our Friends at home: but
when our Coast became clear of Foes, we begun to make Foes of our Friends. We
thought the yoke of one Sovereign too heavy. And in stead of one, we are now
under the Subjection of many. Here One assumes to himself the Prerogative;
while others in Competition, having equally born the heat of the day, repine at
his ambition. These recollect with themselves the dangers they have past: and
how their valor and martial service were of as high Concern in the
accomplishment of the work; as he who sits at the Stern, and attributes the
honor of the day solely to his own undertaking. Which would, no doubt, beget
infinite number of fractions in a State so weakly settled; if the wise and
cautious carriage of Climenes; who from a private Soldier had raised himself
to an absolute Commander, had not made up those breaches, which a distracted
State had produced: wherein he declared himself a singular Artizan in the
successful pursuit of his own aspiring interest, as he proved that Maxim
infallibly good: A designing head was to be preferred before a number of active
hands.

For though the employments of others, in this mutation of Government, had been
no less distructive to Rosicles Forces then Climenes: yet it was ever his good
Fortune to make use of a victory, and to instill this opinion into his
Soldiers (who, indeed, became wholly his) that his discreet Commands were the
only ground of their success: and the rest, mere Ciphers or Shadows made to
follow him, and consequently directed by his Light. This he carried so
smoothly, as even those who were his Accomplices could not with all their
ingenuity discover it. For he had got into the art of insinuating into their
affections, and with a formality of hugging them, wheresoever he encountered
them. Nor was this all; for there was no person being of his relation, but he
sought privately to advance to one Place of Command or other: so as in very
short time, all considerable Offices were solely conferred upon those in whom
he might confide, and become his powerful Assistants, in case of opposition.
Thus did his policy act for his future security.

Has your distressed Prince, demanded the Governess, hope of no Foreign
succors to relieve him? This, methinks, much concerns neighboring States to
reflect on. Such deposing Presidents dart fearfully on other Princes.

Much has been expected, but weakly seconded; replied Panthalia; Such Princes
as might probably contribute their assistance, are at odds amongst themselves:
which distractions fall out sinisterly to his advantage. Besides, Those, on
whom by affinity or alliance he might in reason most depend on, in a joint
association to the adverse Party; profess themselves his mortal Foes: which
sprung, indeed, from some unhappy Incendiaries of his own: but the revenge
falls heavy on his enfeebled Party. Only some scattered Forces there remain of
his own; as may appear by their unsuccessive Attempts: for their exploits
conduce weakly to his interest: and no wonder, being so destitute of the sinews
of war; as they want necessary Supplies for their own relief. But I shall tire
you with the continuation of these sad occurrences, which few States can
parallel.

I shall now return to my own address. Wherein, reverend Matron, though a
stranger to you and your virtuous Society, I must presume of your assistance.

No Stranger, of what quality soever, makes recourse to our Cell, answered the
Governess, whom by the Rules and Constitutions of our Order, we are not bound
to assist. Piety were useless, were it not communicative. Relate your
occasions, and our best advice shall not be awanting.

Panthalia encouraged with the free tender of such obliging Courtesies,
imparted to her amply what her desires were; being only in effect, to procure
her a faithful Messenger for delivery of a Letter to an affectionate Ally of
hers, called Acolasto: of whose safety she desired much to be satisfied, with
some other particulars of Concern, without the least hint of any nearer
intimacy or relation to him: which she purposely concealed for some private
respects best known to herself.

The courteous Matron wished her to prepare her Letter, and according to her
direction, it should be carefully delivered.

Taking hold upon this opportunity, she wrote to Acolasto in this manner.

Panthalia to Acolasto.
SIR,
I verily believe that your Rules in martial discipline have estranged you
from the Rules of loyal affection. Vows and Protests since you became a
Soldier, have got a dispensation in the heart of a Lover. But know Sir, though
women be of the weaker Sex, which implies their imbecility; they have so much
sense, as to be capable of an injury. You will say, perchance, this is but a
shadowing of Fancy: and that my long Journey argued an individual retention of
affection.

Pray; Sir, suffer not your self to be deceived: I can with as much ease
dispense with that small interest of love betwixt us, as I can put off my
habit. Our Contract is not so firm, but I may as freely dispense with it, as
you with your Faith. A Field-Bed may suit well with a Martial mould: But such
a repose would rot relish well with Panthalia's mind. Your Profession proclaims
your valor: may it redound to your honor; so as Panthalia, your unexemplarily
wronged Panthalia, may be henceforth to you and your actions an everlasting
stranger. I have suffered enough; I mean not to be so unpittifull to my self,
as to enlarge sufferings with fresh fears or inconstant Fancies. You may
believe me, Sir, I have taken a long leave of love: it is my only grief that
ever I imbosom'd it; but it is not my Fortune alone. It has been the fate of
many kind hearts, to open their bosom to a Viper before they knew its nature.
If ever I give Entertain to such an unquiet Guest; it shall be upon securer
grounds, and better acquaintance then I have hitherto done. Unhappy is that
woman in her Choice, whose levity will admit of Change; or dispense with Faith.

As for this tedious address which I lately undertook; have not the least
thought, that it was any intentionall design in me, to make this inquiry as a
relative Object of Fancy: in conceipting otherwise, you infinitely delude your
self. This task was to divorce us, not unite us: wherein I remain so
satisfied, as no Argument, be it never so evincing, may oppose it: or decline
my resolution from being confirmed in it.

Private Contracts being not accompanied with other Ceremonial Observances and
Conjugall Offices (especially where just occasions of difference are
scandalously offered) may legally admit a dispensation. Now cast your Eyes,
Acolasto, upon your own vagrant and debaucht Course, and it will give you
matter enough to approve my resolution. Your causeless desertion imposed a
period to my affection. Vows and Protests had no power to tie you; the time of
your prefixed return neglected by you; the remainder of your Patrimony, which
should raise a Subsistence to a Family (if not timely prevented) aliened from
you. And is your Person so valuable, as to injoyne love, where there is no
possibility to subsist? But I shall not press your Fortunes, being deprest
enough already. I must igenuously tell you, they are held in the Skale of
knowing men (walk you never so obscurely) to be scarcely competent for the
Equipage of One, much less for the supportance of many. But if Panthalia might
have confided in your constancy, and that She had not in a clear contrary way,
found in your unm^nag'd Course so much levity: your Fortunes should have
admitted no exception, had they been ranked in the lowest-condition.

I am informed, how after the yielding up of your Fort, and breaking up of your
Siedge; you are for removing to another Garrison: the Gods guide you; only
before your departure, let me acquaint you with my resolve, which shall
manifest my zeal more to devotion, then any humane affection: know that
Panthalia stands so much affected to these Rites, Ceremonies and religious
Rules of this Goddess Delia, in whose Society I here remain, that her firm and
immutable resolution, is to be united to their Order. The day of my
approbation, admission and initiation is designed, with the assent of our
Governesse, the second day after your receipt of these, and for the Place of my
Institution, it is ordered to be in the private Fane of Dionissa. Where, if you
please, you may by permission of our Society become a witness of Panthalia's
desertion of the world, and all other secular interests: which, as it shall
confirm my Election without Change, so it may prepare your affection for a new
Choice. Howsoever, let not these lines divert your remove. Your designs (as
they have been ever) are maine and many. Mine reduced to One, the happy
enjoyment of a divine Fancy.

Your deserted Panthalia.


This letter was more speedily returned, then it was cheerfully received. Never
came heavier tidings to Acolasto's ear, then this unexpected resolution of his
highly-incensed Mistress. For after his long ab^ence from her; he had pitched
upon this determinate course; presently after their yielding up of the Fort
Royal, to remove to no other Garrison, as had been suggested to Panthalia; but
to return with winged speed to his Native Country; and with a just excuse
attemper his Mistress prejudicate Conceit touching his retardancy. How dee^ly
then might He appear extasiz'd in the perusal of these lines; being, by their
intervene, as he conceived, wholly prevented of his aims. So as, his
reflection upon these, drove him in the silence of the night, into these
extreme and disconsolate passions.

Unhappy Acolasto, thou have at last found how justly the Superior Powers have
dealt with thee for thy continued track of folly. Thou had but one absolute
comfort left thee, to allay thy distempers; dis-value the braves of Fortune;
slight the insults of Foes; or atone the distasts of Friends: and this ONE
thy debaucht Course has irrecoverably lost: whe^eto will thou wander, deserted
Lover? Be thine intentions bent to remove to another Garrison, to try the issue
of thy Fortune: or first to be a personal witness of Panthalia's profession;
who deservingly has left thee, because thou have left thy self? yes; take thy
solemn farewell of her, whom thou shall never see hereafter.

Lines are effectless; be it thy resolve to attend her aversion from thee, and
conversion to that Sacred Deity, whereto she has so religiously dedicated her
Vi^ginity. This done (as thy last living obsequies to her indeered memory
(commend thy self to those designs, for which the Fates, have reserved thee.
The utmost period of thy disasters, thou have already attained: worse cannot
befall thee, then thou have encountered. If any cheerful ray of future happiness
smile on thee, a^ it is beyond hope; so if any adverse occurrent engage thee to
an inevitable danger, it shall be without the compass of fear. For what can be
left to him either for hope or fear; whom neither hope may possibly raise
higher: nor Fear bring down lower: but in the extremest degree of a forlorn
condition; hopeless of the one, and helpless in the other? Rest then in a
restless retire, till this approaching day shall summon thee to accompany her
Change, on whom thy Fancy did once so immutably (though carelessly) fix thy
Choice. And may my Change by a speedy dissolution terminate my misery; since
her vows, to whom I owed my self, has shut up her bosom from a resentment of my
infelicity, or capacity of mercy.

In this short intervall of time; the Governess apprehending an inclinable
affection in Panthalia to be received into their Order; as one infinitely
desirous to become a Patroness to so accomplished a Sister, made choice of one
Saladine, one of her Society, and an excellent Oratress in the pursuit of such
religious designs; injoyning her to be persuasive in the effectual contriving
and accomplishment of this work: intimating withal, how useful it would be to
their Society, to have such an One initiated in their Order, whose parts and
Person might highly conduce to their Honor: and withal, how she had upon
private discourse, found in her a plyableness that way; which she would not at
that time too eagerly pursue, but modestly silenced it, intending to make it
Saladines work, being more familiarly to be transacted by a Sister in relation
to their mutual Society; then the Governesses more awful Command. Neither
could any thing occur more opportunely: for upon this very hint came in
Panthalia; upon whose approach, after a Civil and Matron-like Salute, she
withdrew, giving way to Saladine to pursue the design; whereto with a composed
alacrity She addressed her self in this manner.

Madam Panthalia (o that it were my happiness to enstile you Sister!) Your
sweet and amiable Society has seaz'd so strongly on our Governess, and on us
who live herein all Obedience under her Commands, as nothing could be equally
grateful nor corresponding to the general Vote and Suffrage of our House, as
your reception into our Society. Neither, Madam, should you find with us any
such Stoical or unsociable Condition; that it might beget in you a tedious or
undelightful Communion. For though our incloister'd Walls promise little or
nothing suitable to a Secular Content: we can in this retirement enlarge our
desires in the fullest measure, to the freest enjoyment of themselves. We have
here spacious and delightful Walks; Odoriferous Gardens; and Osier Arbours for
recreation: cheerful and ingenious Sisters to converse with: Pleasures and
Disports proper for every Season. There is nothing that an innocent liberty can
require, which you may not here partake.

And though we have here no Courting nor Love-Sallies in request; yet we can
religiously, with a discreet Ceremony, imitate it: and personate a Sister for a
Complete Courtier, and a Courtly Suitor: and though Strangers to the Complexion
of Art, yet Artists to the Conservation of Nature. We can here Time it without
affectation: and though Strangers to Apish love, pretend a formal garb of
affection. Our Ambition is confined to these Walls; wherein we enjoy more in
having little, then others have in possessing much.

We have long since published a divorce to a Conjugal State; though we never
yet knew, what Husbands meant. Our greatest Foreigners are mundane cares.
Neither do we find any thing, in our Survey of Earth, worthy the entertainment
of a tear or a Sigh. For how should we in discretion languish in our desires
for enjoyment of that which cannot fill us: or repine for the loss of that;
from which the Course of Time must necessarily divide us? Our constant Lectures
of Mortality, have sufficiently Schooled us in all Principles of Morality. The
recollection of these have made our day-tasks our delightfull'st Consorts:
making our Evening the days Ephemerides. Thus is our Society employed: and our
hours improved, by communicating our Knowledge; reading and conferring our
Observations one with another. This, unless blind Fancy have prepossest the
Fortress of the heart; cannot choose but infinitely surprise the affection of a
Contemplative Soul: which the seriousness of your Conceit, if I do not
mistake, seems to incline to.

Excuse me, Madam, if the Fervor of my desires have too amply enlarged my
discourse. Let my Cordial affection weave an Apology for this presumption.
Only let me truly tell you, if your disposition bend that way, no Society
shall ever answer your Content with more suitable Harmony.

These polite and passionate Persuasions of Saladine, seemed to work so
effectually upon Panthalia; as if her discourse had wholly weaned her from any
further Familiarity with the world, by a devotionall intendment to be initiated
and inrowled a Sister of the Delian Order. Neither did she conceal her
resolves (howsoever inwardly disguised) but imparted her self freely to her in
this sort.

How much a Stranger stands obliged to your indeerments, Sister Saladine (for I
shall highly rejoice in the conferment of that Title) though I cannot in your
manner, so rhetorically express it; yet shall I with my best endeavors study
to deserve it.

My coming hither I shall ever hold the highest happiness that ever befell me.
For it has brought me to an enjoyment of my self: and to dis-value that which
formerly (nor can I remember it without tears) had an absolute Sovereignty
over me.

What singular Object might that be, replied Saladine, that could make so
gallant a Spirit its Subject?

Oh, for loves sake, do not ask me; it does so much distaste me, as nothing
now can be more opposite to my thoughts, then what sometimes sported most with
my conceit: inwreathing me in an inextricable Labyrinth of Folly.

Come Sister (since you will have me call you so) deal ingenuously with me; was
it not Fancy, that merry Folly, that so entangled you?

You divine rightly, said Panthalia; it was Fancy, that amorous Phrency, that
miserably deluded me.

I must confess really, that in the prime Flower of my youth, before I could
distinguish Faces, my wandering Eye begun to play the cunning Impostor, and to
lay Snares how to deceive my heart. Youthful beauty became such an attractive
bait, as my distempered Fancy regulated only by the appearence of an outward
posture, drove my misguided affection into many irregular extremes. For though
sundry Fortunes were presented me; and those no way unsuitably accompanied: For
the Owners of those Fortunes were of eminent descent, and for Personage,
graceful enough to any competible or impartial Eye; yet such curiosity
attended my Choice, or such diversity of Features begot in me an assiduate
desire of Change, as what I loved one day, produced a distaste in the next.

It suited much with mine humor to be courted by a multitude of Servants. In
general to retain many; but in Special to entertain none. Self-opinion is a
dangerous darling: a bosom-Idol; no sooner admired then adored.

I begun to have a Conceit of my own parts, and ingeniously to jeer those,
whom not long before I seemed to affect.

Thus played I with Fancy, as if I should never have been taken by it: Thus
nibbled I at the bait, as one without fear to be entangled with it: but in the
end I found the Proverb experimentally true: 'So often the frisking fly sports
with the flame,
'Till her Seere wings are singed in the same.


For at last my dis-compos'd Fancy fixed it self on an Object, whose Person
might be a Motive sufficient enough to induce love: but it was invested with
other inward qualities; which in the eye of discretion, might have retarded my
Choice. For to render him his just Character; He was a youth wholly dedicated
to pleasure: a mere Stranger to his Estate: making it his only aim to fuel
his unbounded expense with fresh supplies.

Many disswasions I received from entertaining the affection of so profuse a
Suitor into my bosom; and Some of his own were the assiduatest Agents in this
business. But imagining this to be rather a design for their own ends then my
content: and that the smallness of my Portion induced them to practice the
withdrawing of my Fancy from him, rather then any other Essential ground;
Those Allies of his could not be more instant in dissuading, then I was
constant in persisting: preferring Him whom I formerly affected, before all
others, who by my Friends approvement, were afterward brought on and
presented.

Yet I must tell you Saladine, though my youthful fancy were in this manner
seated; our marriage to this hour was never ceremonially solemnized. Which I
shall ever impute rather to my good Fortune then my Wit. For that was long
before gone a wooll-gathering: though it was my desire, in this eager pursuit
of love, to protract time, purposely to discover, whereto the youthful Cariere
of his licentious Fancy would arrive, and in what period it would close.

It seems strange to me, replied Saladine, how your affection should so far
estrange it self from discretion, What sensible qualms and undefinable Passions
distressed Lovers have felt, may be seen in Ariost. Elegies. Archiloch.
Simonid. Pind.
as to fix your Choice, where your judgment found such probable arguments of
Change. You suffered your self, in my Opinion, to be too prematurely drenched
in Love where your Object was too apt to fly out, and out of his native levity,
to be taken with every Lure.

O Sister Saladine, it seems you never shot yet in Cupids bow! Else you would
confess, what amorous Girls generally know: and what by bitter experience they
have sufficiently felt: how a freedom and liberty even to profuseness, acts
more powerfully in the quest of love; then any bashful or modest posture.

Active Youth cannot choose but beget love: whereas a sober and remiss Civility
dulls the edge of Fancy.

But thanks to the Superior Powers for my arrival here; I am now wholly drawn
off from all such light thoughts, as formerly nestled in my Virgin bosom. For
as the irregularity of his Course gave me small hope of his recovery: so the
recollection of my Succeeding Fortune, poized with the freedom of my present
condition, has made mine heart an Alien to the indiscreet entertainment of any
such youthful Fancy.

Though I must tell you, Sister, so fervorous were my desires in the pursuit of
his Happiness; as I shall ever wish him well, and hold it one of my prime
earthly felicities, to hear him succeed prosperously in the world, with the
improvement of his endangered reputation, and gallant deportment in military
affairs: all which, the future management of his actions (being no less then
his Person promises) may hereafter deserve.

It were easy to collect from hence, said Saladine, that there remain still
some small Sparks of Fancy raked up in the Embers; which would quickly take
fire if they were fomented.

No doubt, Sister Saladine, but you have read so much Philosophy, as may
sufficiently inform your judgment, and revive your knowledge in the Mysteries
of Love: the Discipline whereof, (though the Devotional retirement of your
Monastic life has made you a Stranger to the Practice of it,) has long since
discovered to your Reading the nature and quality of that influence. It will
tell you what powerful effects it produces: how it can transanimate the Spirit
of the Lover to the Bosom of the Object beloved. It can unite two hearts in
One, and by an individual juncture, incorporate two distinct Bodies in one
Mind. Neither should I have so easily dispensed with these imaginary Fancies;
had not my happy admittance into your regular Society, brought me to a more
sensible apprehension of my former condition, by dis-relishing those amorous
Potions or Circean Impostures, wherewith the folly of my youth, had inthrall'd
me.

May we then, replied Saladine, derive these hopes from you; that you will
become one of us: and inrowle your self in our Family?

You shall not need to doubt of it; my resolvs are so fixed, as the reality of
my Profession shall witness it: and attest your whole Society to second it.
Neither will the relation to my own Condition, nor the devotion I cordially
tender to your religious Order, suffer me to play the Dissembler. What I have
here imparted to you in private; when the prefixed time of your admittance shall
call me to this Task of Obedience; shall sincerely and without any gilded
pretenses (which make a gallery of Sanctity) manifest it self. For I perceive
clearly (so sovereign is that Eye Salve which I have not only received, but
usefully applied, by the assistance of your Company) that if I should wanton
any longer in the fruitless Delights of Sensual love; my reputation would
suffer a loss: and my Discretion (being so well schooled both by Precept and
Example) suffer an irreparable foil.

This will be pleasant news to our Governess, answered Saladine; For none ever
of late years came to our Foundation, to be admitted, who was more generally
indeered, or by our Commandress more highly valued.

Their immerited esteem of me, my humble Observance of your Orders shall make
it the highest of my endeavors to requite: and as I am the youngest in your
Order, so shall the lowest of your Commands approve me your
humbly-affectionatest Sister and Servant.

While these two lately adopted Sisters were bandying Civilities in this manner
One with the Other; Their Governess came unexpectedly in; desirous, as it might
be probably gathered, what good effect Saladines advice to Panthalia had
produced: or what hope she might entertain in the reception of so promising
and acceptable a daughter. But Saladine, rejoicing much in her success; and
quickening her address unto her: told her, how she had made way for enlarging
her Foundation. What do you mean, said the Governess? Our Foundation holds
correspondence with our Revenues. So we may preserve it to Posterity: and
enrich it with a virtuous Family, we shall hold it sufficiently enlarged: these
Cyens of piety are those large-spreading branches that shall best dilate it,
and with their cheerful umbrage safeliest secure it.

Madam, said Saladine, you have here one hopeful branch more to beautify your
Family: and we here present her to your discreet government: and pointing to
Panthalia; the Governess, as One surprised with incredible joy, embraced her:
Saying, none could be more welcome to their Society: and proposing Saladine to
be her Bedfellow; as one suiting best with her disposition; She requested
Panthalia to make choice of what day She pleased for her initiation and
reception into their Order: which we intend, said she, shall be observed with
that solemnity, as our due honor to a Stranger, shall express what content we
apprehend in the enjoyment of so absolute a Sister.

Panthalia, seemingly transported with the joy of this Election; was not so
forgetful of her Lesson, as not to remember the prefixed day mentioned in her
Letter to Acolasto: which, though She could not be confident of the issue,
whereto her intendments were addressed; her Care accompanied with much Secrecy,
so fitly prepared; as the grounds of her design promised fair, howsoever the
event might second it.

The very same day therefore was appointed for performing these Ceremonies,
which She had in her Letter formerly expressed.

Mean time, none could appear more Observant nor morigerous to the Orders of
the House, then Panthalia; but the Course of her Probation was but short: for
the day of Acolasto's remove from his Garrison, and the approaching time of her
dedication, would not permit the expense of many hours.

And much had She to think upon, before this pregnant birth, being but as yet
in it is Embrio, could be brought to perfection. For such was the promptness of
her Conceit, as she loved to show wit in the greatest extrems: and to entangle
the expectance with smooth deceptions: as may appear by the issue of this
Narration.

The modesty of Pandione her Fellow-traveller, declined her from interessing
her self in this Secrecy: yet could not their private and assiduate Conference
free her from jealousy. Some strange thing, as she suggested to her self, was
in moulding, when She desired much to partake. Till now at last her opinion
became confirmed, by what she had casually overheard: for by playing the
Cunning Eve-dropper, she came to a discovery of Panthalia's resolvs: and how
her long and tedious Journey had diverted that aim, whereto it was addressed, by
taking a long farewell of love, and confining her Travail, which she had so
patiently endured, to the Walls of a Sanctuary. This though she could hardly
believe (for as yet she had found no such mortified affections in Panthalia)
yet reflecting upon her near relation to Acolasto, she intended to try
further. So as, having so fair an opportunity offered her as Panthalia's
privacy; with much modesty and winning sweetness, She accosted her after this
manner.

Madam, I perceive by your late and unexpected resoves, though Civility, as
well beseem'd me, would not allow me so much boldness as to insinuate my self
into the Knowledge of them, how your Monastic Zeal has turned love out
a-doore. Your sometimes indeered Lover must now seek his Mistress in a
Cloister, or else he must never have the hope to find her.

What do thou mean by this, Pandione, replied Panthalia; thy discourse
seems a Riddle to me: and my Fancy no such Oedipus as to assoile it.

No, Lady, said She; I understand your Fancy is of no such circumference as it
has been formerly. Love is now fallen off from the hinges. Your affection is
become thawed, and resolved into devotion: and your late zeal to a Cloister,
has quite estranged your thoughts from the visit of a Garrison. Vesta has put
out the Tapers of Hymen. But pursue your Course, Madam, I shall not make it my
Task to dissuade you from your design. Only, be it your goodness to excuse
Pandione, if her resolvs be not dedicated to this Society. For She has professed
her self such a Votaresse, as never to lead Apes in Hell: nor walk in the
Elysian Fields without a Mate.

Tell me Pandione, can any one enjoy more felicity in the world, then to
Soveraignize over the Cares of the World? To what period have my numerous
desires brought me? Have I not all this time snatched at a shadow, and lost the
reality of Content? Have I not in pursuit of a Consort, lost my self? Were not
all these gilded promises, wherewith I miserably deluded my affection, and
have not these closed fairly (through an unexpected Catastrophe) by making
their period in devotion?

And might not that Period have been drawn before we undertook this Journey?
Had you not Recluses dedicated to devotion in your own Country; wherein you
might have been received in to a Vestall Society, if you had not been
transported with the heat Fancy?

This Relation will sound strangely, when it comes to the Ears of your
Friends, That Panthalia, the Western beauty, should play the amorous Pilgrim:
and in the end of her Journall, Sacrifice the relics of her Fancy to a
Monastery.

An Incence better bestowed then on loose love. Panthalias reply.
With an even hand I have seriously considered with my self: and in a
competible Skale balanced my present condition, with the blasted fruits of a
doubtful affection. And in One Skale, I presented Him, whom I sometimes
valued: and in the Other, the perfection of that divine State whereto I addressed
my resolvs.

In my recollection of these; and comparing One with the Other, I found an
infinite difference. The one assuring me of an accomplished content, without
any probable incounters to disturb it. The other objecting to my thoughts many
Obstacles: being such, as they could not choose but suggest sundry occasional
disgusts and distempers to the best composed and regulated Spirit.

Then a Contemplative life (being what the Supreme Powers affect) what more
happy? Then an indisposed Consort (whereto even the most approved patience
cannot give acquiescence) what more heavy?

I appeal to your self, Pandione, whether the memory of Acolasto's dissolute
Course could relish with your Fancy! His continuance in the Country, before his
employment became Military, proclaimed him sufficiently; and can you think the
Profession of a Soldier should make him better: or reduce him to a more Civil
Order? It were a strange cure for a youthful course.

Give me leave, Lady, replied Pandione, to impart my self freely, and in such
manner as shall neither tax your Servant of presumption, nor suffer my
thoughts, which have been ever dedicated with all obsequious reality to your
virtuous Commands, to fall short in any express that may essentially conduce to
your honor: or may divert Calumny, which traducing Spirits are no less apt to
disperse then to harbor. These be Assays of different nature, neither shall I
hold it a Task of higher importance to advance the one, then to prevent the
other.

It is not possible that you should forget the grounds which first induced you
to this hazardous adventure: wherein my humblest desires have constantly
addressed their best endeavors to your service, was not then Acolasto your
sole aim? How should it happen, that your Fancy, the only Actua^y in this
tedious Journey, should become so eclipsed as to dis-value that Object most,
which your Conceit had formerly ranked the highest in your Books? But your
wisdom now after a small revolution of time, has found out a new distinction
betwixt affection and discretion. You loved the man, but not his levity; his
person, but not his quality. Resolve me, Madam, did you not know all this
before we put on our disguize? was not Acolasto the very same he is, in your
opinion? No, you will say, his Martial discipline has unciviliz'd him for the
office of Love. Oh, do not oppose your own judgment in this debate! Mars, if we
may give credit unto Poetry, whose divine influence has ever descanted the best
upon Fancy; was every way as Complete a Courtier as a Warrier. A Field-bed was
not his only Repose. That Lemnian Ram found him more amorously lodged. When
his Fury was resolved to Fancy, he appeared a Servant more suitable for Court
then Camp. But to divert from this adventitious Discourse, and return to your
self; did not the freedom of your affection wing your speed toward this
Garrison? were you not then resolved of his military imploiment? what then
should beget in you this alteration? If devotion be the ground, it bestows on
love the more grace: but if a pretense of devotion make the Fruits of love
abortive, it will prove a disguize rather to delude, then improve your
profession.

But certainly this Matrons advice has produced some strange operation in your
declining affection! And what sinister effects may probably arise from thence;
you apprehend not. This may enliven your Fancy with an interior Flame: and
make you wholly forgetful of your errand: mean time you consider not the
perplexed condition of your deserted Friend: who cannot choose but wonder at your
inconstancy; when such experimental tokens of your settled and immutable love
had confirmed you his. A decrease or easy falling off from a pen-feathred
affection, being weakly grounded and tenderly imp'd, may be without much
difficulty dispensed withal. It never retained such heat as to operate in the
heart: nor act distempers in the brain. Whereas the continuance of your Fancy
has aspired to more maturity. You were pleased to relinquish many, and those of
eminent quality, to enjoy him: and shall a shadow of late-pretended zeal
imbellish'd with Vestal Ceremonies divide him from you? Trust me, Madam, if
ever my youth attain to that felicity, (and who knows what the Destinies have
decreed for me?) that I may justly challenge an interest in a deserving
Consort; rather then I will dis-ingage him whom I love, I will freely engage my
life, and expose my humane Being to the worst of Extremes.

It were great pity, said Panthalia, that such a tender and kind-hearted Turtle
should want her Mate. But who knows not that it is much easier to prescribe a
Cure, then to submit or give way to the Receipt. I was sometimes as resolute in
the obliging respects of a Servant, as either you could be, or any Amorist
living. But when experience informs my judgment to life; that if my indiscreet
Fancy transported with the heat of unbounded youth, had inclined to the advice
of Friends: or with an unbiased affection had evenly weighed those sad
Consequences which frequently arise from inconsiderate love: I could no way
have chus'd but blush at my rash Choice; and infinitely repented in suffering
Sense, which periods its content in a moment of Delight, to retain such a
predominant hand over Reason.

That approved Observation of wise Girls, who measure love by discretion,
cannot be unknown unto thee Pandione: No sooner makes Poverty into any
possession a seazure; then by that Forcible Entry it ejects love, and makes it
a stranger. And might not this have proved my Case, The best Choice that admits
no occasional grounds of Change.
if I had run on in my track of Folly, by exposing my self and my deplorable.
Fortunes to a remediless misery; in giving way to the Conduct of a blind and
inconsiderate Fancy? Reflect upon Acolasto's riotous and profuse excess; and
tell me if my unhappie Choice could have expected ought less. O Pandione, how
wisely is that love planted, when it is discreetly seasoned? It looks not so
much upon a Sprigg of Rosemarie; nor the taking off a Nuptial Garter; as the
mutual interchange of bosom-respects; the fruition of real and essential
Comforts: with a just provisional care for a Posterity, whenever time shall
answer their hopes, and accomplish their desires in the enjoyment of so
incomparable a Blessing.

This is a Lecture, replied Pandione, which to this day I never heard you read.
But it seems, this Cloister has put you into a Siege above the quality or
capacity of an ordinary Lover. I have known sometimes when the wind was in
another door. Your modesty could once have vouchsafed to be taken into a
Rash-bearing: and to have broke a Cracknell or drunk a Sillibub with the youth
of our Parish. A whole afternoons story of the joys of a Marriage life would
at that time have seemed short. Activity was in those days preferred before a
Patrimony, else had the Image of your deserted Acolasto never retained such a
deep impression: nor enjoined you to so long and hazardous a Journie; being an
apparent argument of your immutable affection.

It is never too soon to prevent an ensuing mishap (said Panthalia) especially
in an Assay of such high concern; the success whereof, if prudently
entertained, proviseth a continual holy day: but if wildly and indiscreetly
transacted, may admit one Marriage-day, but the sequel a Tragic Scene without
all hope of a Comicall Conclusion.

I must confess, a timely discussion of these probable Events might to my
greater advantage have been recollected, and more seasonably digested: but such
was the indisputable fervor of my desires, as it hurled me headlong upon this
tedious and perilous Journey. The most virile and Masculine spirits have not
at all times their wits near them; well then may our resolvs arising from the
weakness of our Sex, receive excuse. Howsoever, my late alteration in the
Course of my affection may incur a popular Censure, I cannot be less then
confident, but my late hazardous Travel has sufficiently gratified his
coolness in the pursuit of what he so seriously professed. His Proposal was
definite; at such a prefixed time to return back from this unnecessary Service:
wherein he engaged his Person without constraint, or probability of preferment:
But the title of a Soldier cancelled in him the thoughts of a Lover. Acolasto
appeared not the same he was. His eclipsed Fancy discovered a dificience in the
slowness of his performance. And am I so restrained in the strict Rules of
Love, as to be deprived of the like liberty? This were an injury to our Sex.
To have our affections managed by the stronger hand: to make us their
Mistresses no longer then at their pleasure: and to Cashiere us as unsuitable
Reformades in an humor.

These riotous Servants, who appear more prodigal in their Expresses, then
real in performance; can artfully pretend us love, so long as we have the
power to oppose our own wills; and in the unjustest Commands, subject our selves
to their imperious interests. Whereas, if we should at any time, even in
impertinences, cross them, how quickly would the edge of Fancy become rebated?
were it not then far better to intertaine that Condition with much freedom and
composedness of Spirit; wherein we may remain secure from these domestic
Clashings, and enjoy our Contents in a sweet and delightful discourse, then to
engage our liberty to a Conjugall tyranny?

Your late Claustrall Resolvs, answered Pandione, have brought you into a
strange point of Heresy. It will repent you, er'e it be long, if you continue
in this erroneous opinion, that this World had a Creation; For you oppose the
means of Generation: and no People, no Society; and no Society, no World. Thus
would your Monastic Conceit make the World a wilderness: Humane Habitations
Deserts.

But give me leave to tell you, that these religious Anachorites who have
divorced themselves from the world, are unsociable Consorts for those that have
to do in the World. They partake too much of the nature of the Ostridge to be
suitable Friends, or amicable Companions. The discourse of a Grave: or a
discovery of the Elysian-Fields (extracted from the pregnancy of Poets brains)
must take up the whole hour. And are these Subjects for young years, or green
thoughts? why should they not, replied Panthalia? What inferior subjects can
in weight of reason be held comparable to those which operate in the inward
affections of the mind a settled peace? Are we not so long as we are here
sojourning, properly resembling light and unsteared Vessels floating on the
Maine, and by means of cross and adverse winds, driven from our designed Coast,
or intended Harbor? Is it not then high time to prepare our selves against the
encounters of so hazardous and tempestuous a voyage? Those many storms and
menacing Shelvs which interpose us in this perilous Passage, advise us
seasonably to provide for a Convenient place of Landing. The life of a wise man
is to return to God: this was the positive opinion of divine Plato. But how
should we retain in our selves either a capacity or possibility of returning;
if we take no content in meditating of the Place, nor contemplating the
delights which we are to enjoy in the fruition of that Place whereto we address
our Course? It is the Conceit of the Object, that makes our Journey easy:
whereas our rarity in conversing with Heaven, begets a distance in our
thoughts, and make them strangers to their Country.

Epist. 90.
Seneca wished for Philosophy; that as the face of the universal world comes
into view, so that might be presented to us as a Spectacle most unlike unto the
World. And I shall ever wish the like with that Divine Moralist. For the
influence of a better world can never animate strongly on the Faculties of any
dull or Sublunary Spirit, that suffers it self to become Subject to the
Despicable Sovereignty of Earth.

It seems, Madam, said Pandione, that you are grown to be a Philosopher, since
you became a Monastic Professor: and that you have been lately so
indoctrinated in Timons School, as you will in time publish to the whole world,
that you are an Enemy to your own Sex: For in your contempt of love (a woman's
bosom-consort) you can appear nothing less. Had your Progenitors retained this
opinion: and expressed it in their hate to generation, where then had been your
Being?

You mistake my meaning answered Panthalia. I profess my self a Satyr only to
light love. When Fancy grounds it self upon a fantastic habit, or an
outlandish Cringe, or an affected tongue; wantonly descanting on a Theme of
love: I cannot more properly compare such a distempered Amorist, then to
Pigmalions fond love and doting Complement to his marble Mistress. And what
joy in such a formal Statue, which admits no such active motion, as may either
procure or deserve affection? This, though an Object to the eye, would prove an
Abject to the heart.

If in mutual and neighbourly relations such difference of Countenances
appear, through the cross Occurrents of Fortune; where poverty oftimes
weakneth, if it wholly dissolve not the band of amity; we may collect hence
what the heavy effects of want may produce in the nearest endeerments. O
Pandione, let Reason go before every Enterprise, and Counsel before every
Action! Which Precept if I had seasonably observed: my straying steps might
have been better directed; my rash affections more discreetly managed, and no
occasional motive of discontent to thy self ministered, in relation to thy long
and wearisom Journal: nor no ground of repentance to my glowing youth in
admitting, and too credulously inclining to the easy protests of so light a
Suitor. But thanks to my better Fates; these distractions are reduced to a
calmer and clearer period. It is an happiness sometimes to have erred;
especially where the recollection of our Error calls us home to a knowledge of
our selves, and an acknowledgment of our Failings: For by this means, we become
not only wiser in the apprehension, but much happier in desertion of that
Error which we formerly affected.

I shall not argue with you, Madam, replied Pandione, touching the Subject of
love; but leave you to your own Choice: But if the ripeness of youth beget not
in your devotion a Change, I shall hold you to be of strange metal. For my own
part, though I have ever really loved you, in your late Conversion I never mean
to follow you. Age when it is in a decline fuits best with a Cloister; but
youthful heat with the embraces of a Lover.

Secrecy and Celerity be the two moving wheels of succesfull fancy.
At the very instant while they were thus discoursing, there came unexpectedly a
Messenger with a Letter from Acolasto; with much secrecy directed, and by the
Convoy of a Select Friend carefully presented: after the Contents whereof
Pandione out of her accustomed modesty, would not appear inquisitive: but
walking aside, left her to the perusal of Acolasto's character; which rendered
it self in this manner, Acolasto to Panthalia.
Panthalia (if you will vouchsafe so much favor to your deserted Servant as to
use your Name, whom you have so causelessly estranged from your affection) be
pleased to cast an eye upon his lines, though you have shut your bosom from the
receipt of love: and hear him in his last Expresses; whereto your unexpected
resolvs and his deplorable Condition have brought him. Compassion in a
well-disposed Enemy may be easily procured; when his dying Foe with his last
breathing words beggs a pardon: craving nothing more, with teare-thrilling Eyes
and throbbing heart then reconciliation in the closing period of his
approaching dissolution. Hold your sometimes indeered Acolasto to be at this
very instant in the same case. Be pleased then to entertain these funeral
enterbreaths with a pious pity, though your estranged thoughts dart upon their
unfortunate Author a regardless scorn. Dying men's words ever retain the
deepest impression: especially when we consider how that very mouth which so
lately uttered those words shall be enjoined to a perpetual silence, and never
impart the least accent or syllable of a word (as a message from his mind) to
the world any more. Conceit not this as a disguise nor a pretensive Color to
abuse you: your rejected Lover surprised with such a remediless distemper,
cannot possibly at this time act the part of a dissembler. I have already run
over the difficulties of my disconsolate Course: and am now performing my last
Act, if the best Artists designed for our Garrison, do not deceive themselves.
Eye me then with a pious pity, paying my last debt to Nature. Whereto I should
invite you, if such a Spectacle of mortality might deserve your virtuous
presence. But alas, the illimited freedom of my actions merit no such favor.
Yet, as you were pleased, upon your late resolvs, to importune my attest to
your new unexpected Profession; so being no less known to your approved piety
then my own Folly; I might presume to expect most, where I deserved least.

Mean time, be it your goodness to commiserate where you cannot Cure: and to
cast your Eye of pity upon your expiring Servant; though it be within the Walls
of your Cloister; for to an higher honor my weak ambition dare not aspire. Of
such Modells by way of Landscape our Seamen make excellent use when furthest
divided from Land: And in a Compassionate reflexe on his languishing Condition,
who cordially honored you, wish him more rest, by his peaceable Passage from
hence, then ever he could enjoy here.

And now give me leave to unrippe my bosom in the discovery of my youthful
levity; For which I shall make bold to beg your pardon; not in relation to my
immeriting affection, but the present weakness of my Condition.

I confess Madam; and I am ashamed of my self, in the agnition of my Error:
that you were pleased sometimes to bestow your Favor upon an undeserving
Object. One, who might have appeared incomparably happy, if he had known what
felicity rested in the fruition of a divine Fancy. But in his inconstancy
brought him to this brink of misery. Yet let me not tax my self of a Crime,
whereof I was never guilty. That inconstancy which I speak of, never to this
hour wherein I ly dying, could be by the rigidst Censure discovered in my
hope; for that was pure and unstained; though the many discomposures of my
youth rendered me profusely dis-ordered, and unworthy the acceptance of so
incomparable a Choice. None ever more entirely loved, and more vainly deluded
with Excursive delights. These I repent, though I cannot redeem. For you may
believe me, seeing my present distemper will not suffer me to deceive you; that
I should embrace death cheerfully, if it might be my happiness to recall what I
have lost by my Fol^y. It is now too la^e for me to capitulate with Heaven: or
promise the inexorable Fates upon hope of a Reprieve, a dereliction of what I
formerly affected: with a se^vorous desire of embracing what my unseasoned
youth formerly distasted.

Let it suffice, that these last words and vows of your unfortunate Servant,
obsequiously confirm, as in life so now in death

Solely Panthalia's.




What strange and variously dispassionate effect: the sad perusal of these
lines wrought in the relenting heart of his perplexed Mistress, were no^ easy
to discover. His sad condition she infinitely bemoans: His accomplishments she
presents to her thoughts; and finds in them many things worthy loving: as for
his defects arising from the frailty of youth, she so excuses or extenuates
them, as they appear not to her judgment liable to reproof. With numerous
tears and affectionate Sighs, she often repents her self of writing so rough
and disconsolate a Letter: imputing the blame to her inconsiderate Character,
and from thence the Source of his distemper.

Her resolution formerly entertained for a religious Profession; became now
more strengthened then before. For that Only Object which she seemed to slight,
though her bosom perhaps could have dictated otherwise, being as she verily
thought, removed from Earth: her Contemplation could not be better directed,
nor her hours more affectionately dedicated; then where they might be with most
content and least distraction bestowed. Yet could not this intended separation
from secular cares estrange her sequestered thoughts wholly from those amorous
passages, which she with a passionate content remembered during her free
entertainment and affectionate enjoyment of her Servant.

O how happy (would she say) might we have been Acolasto, had not youthful
Folly challenged too much influence over thy Fancy! Fate had not thus unhappily
divided us: nor our Nuptial hopes resolved their joys into Funeral tears --
Farewell forever; only let me beg this of thee: to forgive the unkindnesse
of my lines; as I shall entirely the Errors of thy love.

Pandione having been but a small space distanc'd from her, and observing her
thus strangely perplexed or extasi'd rather with grief, hastened toward her,
compassionately demanding of her the Cause of her discontent. Of discontent in
me, Pandione! Can thou see any such alteration in my Countenance, that it
should present to thy thoughts any such visible Symptom? But I shall clear thy
doubts. Thou can not but know Pandione, how my resolvs are pitched upon an
high Concern, an utter desertion of the world, and my espousall to a Monastic
life: Now, pray thee tell me; is it possible that any Companion should bid a
lasting adue to his long continued acquaintance without a transitive sigh, of
some small appearence of grief? I have had a Free enjoyment of the world, and
interlaced my Secular employments with Choicest refreshments and is it easy to
forgo all these in the prime of ones youth, without the Sacrifice of one tear?
Though I must confess that the Choice of this Profession was voluntary and
without coercion and sundry maine inducements to dissuade me from this
resolution.

Some whereof no doubt, replied Pandione, retain a deep impression in you.
None of those, which thou conceivest to have the strongest influence over me;
said Panthalia. Neither can thou object any argument in relation to love, to
foreslow my desires, nor divert my designs. For this Letter has cancelled the
thought of a Lover. Thy Kinsman Acolasto, whose premature fare I shall ever
obsequiously bemoane, is, as this Letter renders him, paying his last debt to
Nature.

Alas, poor wretch; the more is his happiness. His death may merit your pity,
though his life became estranged from the acceptance of your Fancy. In paying
that debt, He has discharged those deep Obligations, which He stood engaged in,
to your beauty. This Sacrifice, being the last Tribute of a dying Lover, may
justly expiate the Errors of his youth, and consequently regaine your good
opinion by the innocence of his death, which he could not retain by the late
progress of his indisposed life.

Tears prevented Panthalia's reply; the burden of her grief was so heavy, as
it enjoined her pensive tongue a necessitated Silence, Still ascribing the
prime grounds of his distemper, to proceed from the harsh dialect of her Letter.

Pandione after this sad relation of Acolasto's death, for better she could not
expect from the circumstances of Panthalia's discourse; seemed very desirous
that Evening to depart from the Monastery, and leave this dis-consolate Lady to
her intended Profession; the next day being designed for her initiation. But
Panthalia's importunity so far wrought upon her, as she consented to the
attendance of those Solemnities usually observed in such religious initiations;
though for her self she neither affected any of those disciplinary Rites; being
too regular for her youthful temper: nor to be so far divided from her native
Country, being the choicest reside, as she accounted it, for the enjoyment of
her Fancy.

Solemn Ceremonies ordained for PANTHALIA'S Institution, and ACOLASTO'S
unexpected prevention.
Scarce h^d the Orient Sun diffused his radiant Spangles on the Earth: or
extracted his pearled Dews from the Diapred Meads; till the vigilant Governess
joyful of the reception of so hopeful a Daughter: called up the Votaresses
designed to her Charge: wishing them to take special Care that nothing might be
omitted suitable to the performance of those accustomed Ceremonies observed in
the initiation and Election of Professants. Neither could she be more serious
in her Commands, then they in their obedience: which to Delia's honor, and the
approvement of a new Sister; was performed in this manner.

The Pavement being with much curiosity and uniformity impav'd with Porphyrite
Marble, was strowed all along with fresh and fragrant Flowers from the gate of
the Monastery to the Temple Porch; from the prime Portal or Entrance of the
Fane, the Passage directing to the Main Quire was odoriferously perfumed; the
Altar, where their Delian Ceremonies were usually solemnixed, richly Syndoned;
upon every Column were Lamps, wax Lights and Tapers in golden Candlesticks
erected; Musical Instruments enlivned with the choicest and refinedst ayrs each
where resounded: nothing was awanting that might properly conduce to the
accomplishment of those Ceremonial Observances. But lest we should hold your
eyes too long fixed upon the Surface, and so keep you from a more serious and
intentive reflection upon the beauty of this inward Structure, and by too ample
a relation of the Ceremony, darken the Splendour of the Story; we are now to
present to your view the presence and deportment of the Governess, whose care
was not only bestowed upon the decoring and beautifying of these ritual
Solemnities: but how to expedite the main work, for which these decent
accommodations were prepared. Taking therefore this initiated Professant (
Panthalia we mean) by the hand, with a graceful demean, the rest of the Order
likewise following her, she mounted the stayrs leading to the Altar, where the
Habit, wherewith Panthalia was to be attired, was shown her: which she eyed
with a pleasing and graceful aspect, as if no Present could be more acceptable
to her. Here the Governess took occasion to address her discourse to Panthalia
with much cheerfulness; assuring her that she could never disburse honor with
more alacrity to any Votaress entering that Society; which expressive favor
coming from the mouth of so Reverend a Guardiness, Panthalia gratefully
requited with all humble obeisance; wishing nothing more then that her due
Obedience to her pious Commands might have the happiness to merit her virtuous
acceptance; which should be ever the highest pitch of her desires. Neither,
indeed, howsoever her resolvs were formerly fixed, did she appear in this way
of her Profession, to play the Dissembler: For remaining now half persuaded
that her deserted Servant Acolasto had taken his long leave of Earth; She took
upon her this resolution never to return into her Native Country, nor to
receive into her bosom the Conceit of any new Fancy: but to bid adue to all
youthful Folly, by changing the world with a Monastery, and the affection of a
translated Friend, with the devotion of a sequestered lif^.

By this time, had the Governess presented Panthalia to One of the Sali, or
Ministers of the Ceremonies; who had formerly been versed among the Persians,
and held in high esteem, bearing the Office of Mithras, or Chief Priest of the
Sun: and afterward ordained Prince Patriark to the Delian Order. Whose
function it was, amongst other especial privileges of his Place, to offer up
the Votaresse, at her initiation, to the tuition or devotion of the Governess,
and to complete the Ceremonies usually observed by that Society, at the time of
her dedication.

And by what divine Fate, Heaven knows, even at the very instant when this Lady
was to be presented, and into the Society received; came unexpectedly in the
late-seeming languishing Acolasto, who by the safe Conduct of an intimate
Friend of the Patriarks, was with much secrecy and security brought into the
Temple; without the least discovery of what he either intended, or designed.

It is not to be imagined what strange perplexities this unexpected sight begot
in his amazed Panthalia. But her Face, the truest Index of the heart, by her
interchange and variety of Colors, growing now pale and then red displayed
what her enforced composure labored to conceal, seeming to vye Colors with
the Chamelion, though unchangeable in the ground color of her affection.

Long time she mused, and as one intransed with some attractive Object, gave
little attention to whatsoever that Ceremonial Minister delivered; which was
generally observed by all, but especially by the Governess; who, as she was a
devout reverencer of those Monastical Rites and Institutions of her self: So
could she not endure that any of her Order should appear remiss in their
honor to such ancient Solemnities: but with au^icular attention and Cordial
devotion to apply themselves to those Ministerial Observations of her Temple.

But the Agent of these Ceremonies, being intentive to his Office, took small
notice of such divertisements; so as, receiving Panthalia upon the Governesses
presentation, into his hand; according to their accustomed Rites in such
Dedications observed: with a reverend deportment he used these words unto her.
Daughter we are made known to your pious intention, and with what fervor you
desire to be received into this religious Society: wherein there be three
things which you are constantly to retein in memory, to enable you the better
for your serviceable employments in this Family. These three which are so
necessarily to attend you, and whose attendance may accomplish you; are
Humility, Industry and Continency. Huminity, in observing the Commands of your
Superior. Industry, in bestowing your time constantly upon some useful
endeavor. And Continenty, in admitting no discourse nor sociable intercourse
that may detract from your Honor. These three duly observed, Daughter, will
make a Complete Professor.

But now to the work of your Initiation; whereon all the Eyes of your religious
Sisters ^refixed; as on some glorious or resplendent light newly created to
give an additament to their inferior reflections. To you then Daughter, as a
Monastic Deo-dand, am I to address my Speech: To whom are you pleased that I
shall give you?

To this Gentleman, answered she, for He has the greatest interest in me.

This answer could not perplex the whole Society more, then it transported
Acolasto with joy. Whose unexpected acceptance imparadis'd the extasi'd
thoughts of this deserted Lover: who of an amorous Captive, was become a
Princely Conqueror. For never did Prince triumph more in the enjoyment of a
Sovereignty, then this late seeming-sick Acolasto did in the seazure of her
beauty.

But such Nuptial meetings were not to be admitted in this Family: wherefore
being excluded from the Tutelage and Devotion of the Governess, not without
apparent tokens of indignation, these two loving Turtles with their overjoyed
Companion Pandione, were commanded to pack thence with all speed, menacing them
too, that if they stayed above their time limited in those parts; their gross
deluding of so ancient and reverend a Society, should not pass uncensured nor
escape with impunity. But Delay was as tedious to these Lovers, as it could be
to their Commanders: From thence they departed with all cheerfulness and
alacrity: albeit Panthalia, to express a grateful Civility to the Governess and
all her Society, took a fair and friendly Farewell of them all; excusing her
sudden and unexpected alteration; with her former engagement to Acolasto; which
without apparent violation of Faith she could no way dispense with: assuring
them withal, that if He had not taken hold of that opportunity; her resolution
to religion had gone on, without entertaining any succeeding Motives of Fancy.

This ingenuous acknowledgment might seem to allay, but not wholly to cure this
indignity. But their speedy departure was the only way to calm this distemper.
Homewards therefore are we to imagine these two reconciled Lovers returning:
mutually relating those sundry Occurrents, wherewith, during their absence one
from the other, their sinister Fortunes incountred withal. Which ministered no
less content in their wayfaring relation, then Scenes of discontent in the
pensive re-view of their former Condition. But subsequent joys play the office
of speedy Sextons in burying the memory of those that were precedent. The
society of love interlaid with occurring stories of delight made their long
Journey less tedious. Unexpected Contents are ever clothed with the clearest
habits, and put on the purest paint. These, as they are most real, so they
appear ever most visible. The Party cannot conceal them, for his very
Countenance upon their first appearance make a discovery of them. It is a
Recovery which gives the sweetest sent; these our Expertest Hunters observe:
and the very like effect do all crossed Lovers apprehend in the eager Chase or
Pursuit of their affection.

Panthalia rejoices in the recovery of her Acolasto, who in her opinion was
irreparably lost: which was no less argument of joy to Acolasto, in the
re-seazure of her suspected love: both which contents so sweetly and mutually
acting, equally reflected on Pandione as a main Sharer in these enjoyments.
Long it was not, till their affections thus grounded, were ceremonially
confirmed, with the consent and approvement of their Friends. But transitory
joys cannot possibly admit a perpetuity. These Nuptial honey Months are oftimes
mixed with much aloes: as it fared with this unfortunate Couple. For Acolasto,
either forth of a distaste which he conceived of Panthalia's Freedom; being
such as a moderate or unprejudicate judgment would have ascribed rather to her
affability then levity. Or out of his own inconstancy (as if he had taken a
Surfeit of enclosed grounds) they begun to live apart. In which unhappy
division, Acolasto became gracious in the Eye of an eminent Lady, called
Morana; a Person of incomparable State and gallant presence: but infinitely
addicted to the Choice and acceptance of Complete Favorites.

This Lady above the rest of her relations held Trimelio and Acolasto in
principal esteem; the one being a singular Secretary and of an excellent
Dialect: the other of a graceful and winning demean. Both contesting in their
assiduate Service, which should appear nearest in her thoughts. But Competitors
in relation to Subjects of Love beget ever the dangerousest quarrels. An
infinite jealousy chanced to arise betwixt these two amorous Favorites, which
broke forth into such an irreconcilable heat, as nothing but Fire and Fury
breathed from them. Fancy in dependence to a Mistress, especially where Beauty
has surprised the heart, will admit no Corrivals. Acolasto to revenge himself
for some private affronts done him by Trimelio; accused him, and not without
apparent Cause, as was generally supposed, of his profuse and too liberal
report spread abroad to Morana's dishonor. The Substance of which report was
this: That his intimacy with Morana, the great Mistress of his affection, had
raised it self to that pitch, as Acolasto was but used for a shadow to palliate
her designs: but his familiar secrecy only reserved for her private Cabinet:
and that his access with much freedom was made feasible to him, even to her
lodging Chamber, at all hours. With sundry other vanting expressions,
derogating highly from Morana's honor.

No sooner came the report of these injurious and ungrateful aspersions to the
ear of Morana, a woman of a masculine and vindicative nature, then she became
highly enraged, vowing revenge in the extremest measure; if the words which
Acolasto had attested upon due examination proved true. Neither would her
impatience permit delay: for the very next morning sending for Trimelio, in the
presence of Acolasto his accuser, she accosted him in this manner.

Wherein have my Favors, Trimelio, been so profusely scattered, as the too
liberal conferment of them might justly redound to my dishonor?

Have I ever acted any thing so indiscreetly, that might beget in me an opinion
of levity: or so free in my express, as to make you confident of an unbeseeming
interest in my affection? was it a grateful requital in you, to answer my
immerited esteem of your parts with a Calumnious report? Could your easy
access promise to your deluded thoughts such success; as your free admittance
to a Ladies chamber could not choose but make you Owner of her Bed? was our
affability a Signal of immodesty? In what a miserable Condition be poor women
stated, when their very Countenances must be censured; their pleasing demean
traduced, and their smiles, if too freely or frequently bestowed, injuriously
taxed? Well, Sir, clear the poison of this traduce and vindicate mine honor,
in justifying your fidelity to the Conviction of your Accuser: else expect an
heavy and speedy revenge from the hand of incensed Morana.

Trimelio, upon this unexpected regret, became infinitely perplexed; That
excellent Form of dialect wherein he usually flowed; was reduced to a calm,
or rather an amazed Silence. Not one word could he utter either in defense of
his own innocence: or excuse of his rashness. At last recollecting himself with
much timidity and weakness of spirit He muttered forth inarticulately some
dis-joynted words to this effect: that man breathed not who durst accuse him of
any such Crime. Yes, replied Acolasto, here he breaths who dares justify your
dishonor done to this Lady, and will be ready upon your denial to maintain
it with his blood. Are you my accuser, said Trimelio? No Sir, I appeal to your
own Letter: your own hand will impeach you without any other Accuser. And
taking a Paper out of his Pocket: Madam, said He be pleased to show him these
lines: and whether he can or no remember his own Character? After She had
received the Paper, and cursorily perused it; with a contracted countenane
turning her self to Trimelio; Sir, said She, my question shall be short and
effectual either to clear or impeach you; resolve me in a word, is this your
hand? I cannot deny it, answered Trimelio. Then must Marana conclude, replied
She, that thou art an egregious Villain. This Letter here produced, and to one
of thy Associats impudently addressed, but by my Faithful Servant Accolasto's
care no less happily then casually intercepted, displays thy guilt and injoyns
my revenge.

All this while with a dejected Countenance Trimelio after the production of
this Letter, fixing his Eyes upon the ground; remained mute, replying nothing
either in defense of himself; nor opposition to his Accuser. Which unwonted
Silence (for none usually of more volubility in Courtly Rhetoric, nor
affectation of discourse then Trimelio) induced Morana to conclude: that there
was more modesty in his Face then his Heart; For the one deblazon'd an
apparancy of guilt by an expression of shame; which the other fruitlesly sought
to disguise: but the clearness of such odious Crimes, which moral honesty
could not choose but blush at, might not possibly frame for such a distained
visage any vizard. M^rana's Sentence on Trimelie.
Prepare thy self then without delay for death: for a lower revenge cannot
expiate thy guilt. After which words, laying her Commands upon some select
domestics of her own (Assacinates sufficiently flesht for such actions)
forthwith to dispatch him: this Scene was with no less instancy then Cruelty
executed. Which she, armed with a remorseless hand and a relentless heart, to
discover her implacable Fury, redoubled with three mortal stabs with a
poniard: upon receipt whereof this unfortunate Favorite presently expired.

Acolasto, Acolasto resents Morana's cruelty.
though seemingly pleased with this act; yet recollecting himself, He had such
resentment of the truculency of his merciless Mistress, as he apprehended the
danger of his future security. He remembered well how formerly dear Trimelio had
been to his Lady, and in how short a space he had closed the freedom of his
Comic delights with a fearful Tragedy. This brought him to a Representment of
his own uncertain Condition, thinking thus with himself: That seeing Morana's
favors were so quickly resolved to mortal hate in relation to Trimelio; what
less could be expected by Acolasto, if any new Corrivall should arise, and
become an Instrument of his ruin, as he had been by his projectment to
Trimelio: The Original Copy renders it: He importuned her reconciliation.
He resolved therefore to decline his pursuit after strange mistresses, and his
adoration of prohibited beauties, and seasonably to endeavor his peace and
reconciliation to his late-deserted Panthalia. Which within few days was no
sooner desired, then accepted: no sooner tendered, then admitted. An act of
Oblivion was mutually signed of all occasional distasts formerly commenced:
and an happy reunion, after so causeless a division, cheerfully confirmed.
This unexpected Juncto gladded Panthalia far above all the joy she conceived in
her amorous access to Acolasto.

Long did they live together in this Conjugall enjoyment: no Remora's to impede
the continued Current of their reunited affection. And to return an higher
enlargement to the renewal of their Comforts, by the Bequests of some near
Friends; whose indeerment and relation to Him, enjoined them to contribute at
their deaths to the advancement of his Revenues, their means became much
improved; which raised their youthful Spirits to that unaccustomed port, as it
begot in them a profuse and excessive Freedom: the blame whereof, as opinion
spread it self, was laid upon Panthalia's delicacy: For Acolasto, after such
time as he had sown his wild Oats in Foreign Fields, grew so uxorious, as
his Course was wholly managed by her Conduct. So strangely became he reclaimed;
as from a Favorite of other light Mistresses, he fell to be an obsequious
Servant to his own.

But to descend from these Divertisements; which, as they were stored with
variety and interchange of unexpected Passages, cannot choose but afford much
delight to any equal or well-ballanc'd Judgment; especially considering what
near dependence these incidences had to the Subject of our Discourse now in
hand: we are now to return to the Series of our History; the various
Consequences whereof may justly produce occasional Motives both of Compassion
and wonder.

We are now to present to your Eye upon a Sable Scaffold erected by an usurping
power, an Object of incomparable worth, though accompanied by disastrous Fate:
rich in all Ornaments that either Art or Nature could imbellish him withal,
and pursued with as much popular hate as ever any Person so highly and
deservingly interested in the management of State-affaires to these times
incurred: From the infancy of his honor, to his fatal decline we shall here
render him, interveining this sad and serious discourse with various passages,
worthy the recollection and useful application of the clearest and most
refined Judgments. Who, if they have attained to the highest pitch of
greatness, may collect by this Great man's fall, how greatness is most subject
to a disasterous fate: this we have enlarged with some necessary Cautions or
directions how to prevent popular hate (the constantst pursuer of honor) in
their height and freedom of Greatness.

The Life and Death of Sophronio.
This Sophronio before these distractions in Candy, was a Person of great
eminency; though afterward popularly branded with Calumny. He was held both at
home and abroad of such high abilities, as both for martial discipline,
wherein he retained an opinion of singular dexterity; as likewise for
State Policy; no man in his time, was accounted his Parallel. For many years
together He was deputed the Provincial Governor in Iberia; wherein he carried
his Commands with that justness and irreprovable equity, as none could tax
him, even in his nearest relations, of partiality. In the Field he behaved
himself like an experienced Soldier; in the Court like a prudent Senator.
Prompt and acute in preventing danger, and of nothing more conscienciously
tender, then in the whole manage of his actions, by just ways to a prudent
care in preserving the condign title of honor. His Commands were evenly
balanced twixt Love and Fear. Wherein, as the Levity he expressed to his
Soldiers, did not estrange them from an awful Fear: no more did his
well-tempered Severity lessen their love. By an assiduate training and
disciplining of his Men, which during his reside in Iberia, were numerously
raised, and drawn to a Considerable Army, All such as were enrowl'd and had
constantly served under his Command, there was not any private Soldier but he
was grown so expert in the use of his Arms, There was no design of difficulty
which these Soldiers from the affection they bore to their Commander, would
not encounter. Being ready to teach Hannibal to break Rocks with Vinegar
and military Conduct in the Field, as he might in relation to his judgment
and experience, lead a Complete Army.

In a word, such influence had this equal temperature of Love and Fear wrought
upon all those Iberian Forces listed under his Command; as He might confidently
aver with that no less affectionate then resolute African; That he was so
dearly interessed and cordially possessed of his Soldiers hearts; as no assay
were it of never so imminent or apparent danger, which they would not attempt
with all alacrity for his sake. Were it to leap from a perpendicular Hill; or
from any steep or precipitious Cliffe into the maine Sea; there was none of
them from the highest to the lowest, who would decline that inevitable danger,
being grounded on his Commands or conducing to his honor.

And to give one additament more to his prudence and prowess; though his Prince
had deputed him to the government of such a Province; then which none more
servile, savage nor cruel; yet in very short time after his Plantation there,
by his discreet and awful management, none became more faithful, civil nor
loyal.

Yet for all this bracks are found in the purest Clothes. Though none in any
age more loyal to his Prince, nor Faithful to the public State; yet was this
Great Patriots Candor and Innocence so eagerly pursued by Consular hate and
popular heat, as never was any one more sincere, and more traduced: more
useful to the State, and more ungratefully slighted. Sundry Articles of High
Treason were exhibited against him, which were seconded and strongly prosecuted
by such, who sat at the Stern of the State, making it their only design to
bring them into disgrace; who vyed with them in the management of
State-affaires: or who by their abilities out-stript them, and consequently
more eminent in the Eye of the Public.

The Particulars of the Charge laid against him were these.

First, that he had labored to weaken the strength and sinews of the Candian
State by raising Commotions, and fomenting divisions in the Frontires of their
dominion.

Secondly, that he had infused poisonous Principles into the bosom of the
Prince, highly destructive to the Government of a Politic State: Suppressing
by his Power (which they pretended to be seconded and irresistably strengthened
by the influence he had over his Sovereign) all municipall Laws; ancient
Privileges; liberty of Subjects: with whatsoever necessarily conduced to the
uniform Order or Constitution of a State.

Thirdly, He was accused of Extortion and Corruption in his Course of
Judicature (a traduce of all others most injurious:) for never was Aristides
held more just, then he approved himself in all his Proceedings.

Fourthly, of Tyranny and oppression; which his small increase of Revenue
cleared him of: For it appeared, that during all the continuation of his
Provincial Government, he was much poorer than when he first entered it: For his
Heir, a Gentleman of hopeful parts, was enforced after his Fathers Death, to
make sale of a great quantity of his ancient hereditary Estate, to discharge
his Debts.

Lastly, He was taxed of being profusely free in relation to his Honor; not
only for admiring, but sensually pursuing strange beauties: and amongst the
rest, of One especially; who as she was espoused to a Person of Honor, so she
attested upon her death her innocence; not only in his vindication, touching
whom that infamous report was dispersed: but likewise of her clearness and
purity in defiance of all the world. To be brief, there was no Crime, that
might strike either at Fame, State or Life, which was not with much bitterness
and passionate vehemence aggravated.

His Prosecutors by way of Plea were Cambriano, Mardanes, Albanus, and
Palmeriades. Whereof the Last only showed himself temperate, civil and of fair
deportment. For the rest, they breathed nothing but Fire and Faggot. Death was
too easy a Sentence for such heavy (and as they termed them) inexpiable Crimes.

But amongst all these, none of his Adversaries more impudently violent than
Menippus and Nevio; the one for exclaiming; the other for commenting what he
never either spoke or thought. Yea, rather than that malicious Nevio would give
way for Sophronio's innocence to pass with impunity; to make good those
assertions and ementitious testimonies, which were produced and vehemently
pressed against him, He seconded his Informations with apparent Perjury.
Whereof he was convinced by Circumstance to his great dishonor, if his seared
front had been sensible of any such blemish. But his inveterate hate to
Sophronio's person so strangely transported him with passion; as the Title,
which he had deservingly stripped him of, caused him to transgress the bounds of
Reason, and in his pursuit of revenge to neglect the Cure of his wounded
reputation. But to return you the success of these two malicious Prosecutors,
who so furiously run after their own quarrel; you shall know that vengeance
dogged them at the heels: and that the Supreme Powers will not suffer their
Judgments to slip, though for a season they suffer them to sleep. For the One
of these ( Menippus I mean, a sensual Libertine even in his age) dyed a
miserable and infamous death. And for Nevio, then whom none more hateful, He
became through his Contemptible life, by Those esteemed least, for whose
service he had been employed most. A just Censure for such actions of
dishonor. Which Time shall sooner surcease to be, then with the File of
Oblivion ^aze out.

Suppose now Sophronio, that Mirror of his time for prudence and State Policy,
attached, indicted and arraigned at the Bar of High Justice: where we are to
present him, as his Presence well deserved, bearing himself in a grave and
discreet posture; serious and solid in his Answer: and in every particular
Article of his Charge so Satisfactory, as none of that Great Auditory heard
him, but infinity suffered with him: and out of a generous and general
compassion, so far as their equal opinions or powers could extend to,
acquitted him: holding him so clear of whatsoever had been Objected against
him, as none could tax him Criminally, nor justly conclude him less then
innocent; unless his Appellants were highly impudent.

But such was the joint vote of the Patritian Order, seconded with the aerie
blast of the vulgar; as they proceeded to his Sentence and Censure: imagining,
as might be easily gathered by consequent grounds, that their new Constitutions
of State could not hold, if he stood up. And that it was far better for One to
perish then an Unity; though One in Him was of more worth then the whole
Assembly.

Truth is, had not Sophronio been prevented by a premature and unsuspected
Surprise; Those who were the principal Instruments of his ruin, had fallen
into his snare: for the Train was laid, but the cautelous prevention of the
Guilty, became destructive to the Innocent.

It was high time then, as they thought, to take Him out of the way; and by his
timely remove to lay an easier way to their Foundation of a new Government: so
prompt is the brain in designs of blood.

With a calm attention He gave ear to the Sentence of death pronounced upon
him; without any Change of Countenance at all. Which constancy of his, as some
erroneously thought, proceeded not from his own resolution; but from the
Confidence He had in Rosicles, his Princes affection. But those hopes, if any
such were, proved of all others most failing. For though his loyal and
devotionall Service had merited more from his Sovereign, then any Subject
within all his dominions: yea, though the Prince himself had been an
Eare-witness of all the Articles preferred and pressed against him: and in
presence likewise, when this incomparable Statesman not only made his Reply to
whatsoever was objected: but upon his just defense came off with honor: yea,
though Rosicles in relation to Sophronio's innocence; publicly protested, that
he could find nothing in the whole course of their Proceedings against him,
which might render him culpable either of death or defame; being so discreet
and conscientiously politic in the Carriage of his affairs during his
Provincial Government, as he might be far sooner admired then imitated by
those that should follow him. Yet for all this, such influence had some of
those State-Sycophants (even those whose religious profession might have
exercised them in better Offices) over the facile and pliable nature of
Rosicles, as upon their discovery of the necessities of the time, the results
of the House, and clamours of the People, They wrought so strongly upon him
(the best natures are the soonest deluded) as they persuaded Him to Subsigne
his death; whose innocence he had so lately attested. An act of high
ingratitude, you will say, it was: and He acknowledged no less; bemoaning this
Offense, which He held piacular, in the extrems of Fortune with briny tears.

And now you may imagine, that this Fury of Hate, which had so strangely fired
the hearts of the Senate, would admit no delay; it must break forth with a
violent torrent, to the ruin of the Innocent.

The Warrant was no sooner signed, then it was with all speed transmitted and
delivered to the Warder, in whose custody he remained then under restraint:
which came quickly (harsh news are ever impt with swiftest wings) to
Sophronio's hand; who was at that very time ordering his affairs, and composing
his mind against all occurrents. For his better preparation wherein, he was
even then reading Seneca's Tract of the Tranquillity of the Mind, when this sad
Message came. Which, smiling he entertained with this mild reply, after he had
seen Rosicles Seal Manual, and subscription to the Warrant: This it is to
confide in the arm of flesh, and to rely on humane levity.

Having perused the Paper, his Desire was to be left alone; that his privacy
might allow him what the world could not afford him. Being thus left to
himself; after a serious recollection of his present and approaching condition;
calling for present and ink, he resolved to direct his last addresses to his
virtuous Lady, in a Funeral Letter to this effect.

Sophronio's Funeral Farewell to his disconsolate Lady.
My Dear, thy Sophronio is Sentenced to dye; but as thou love me, let not
this perplexe thee. My Crime is Loyalty; how ch^rfull then and expiatory must
be that Sacrifice, which must be offered up to the last Obsequies of such a
Service? Those who dye with honor, though they dye to life, they live to fame.
After a long Seafaring Compass, I am now approaching Harbor: where if my
vessel come off with honor, what would thou crave more? I have a Conscience
within me, that will witness for me, I have been no Servant to time, but to
truth. My Principle which I have held from mine infancy, and which I mean to
Seal with my blood, was Allegiance: and to dye under that Notion; who can hold
it less then a Subjects debt, and in the sufferer a glorious resolution? I have
felt the opposition of many furious Assailants; who both in language and
private practice to make my actions appear more odious to the eyes of God and
man, have struck highly but fruitlesly at the ruin of mine honor; but their
Spleen fell far below my spirit: their spite far beneath my scorn. They may
triumph in my fall, but never in my shame.

And though ingratitude in lieu of my faithful service, has been lately my
guerdon; I shall sign Him to whom I owe my self, a clear and Conscientious
pardon. I will not revive it, lest I should retain too deep an impression of
it: and cast a surviving dishonor on his Name who acted it. I am too well
known to thy tenderness and goodness, to importune thy Care toward those
Living Pledges, sweet innocent Babes which I leave behind me, and must
recommend unto thee. To thee I leave them, who do so entirely love them: and
to whom now thou art to perform the Office of a double Parent in nursing and
informing them. Farewell, Farewell on earth for ever; till we shall be hap^^y
reunited, and without fear of division live together,

Thine to death, SOPHRONIO.


With what a languishing and contristate Spirit this good Lady perused these
Funeral lines of her dying Lord; it is far easier for the conceit to imagine,
then for any pen to describe. Never was Sorrow more passionately retired, nor
more cordially silenced.

But Mercies molded in the bosom of Tyranny revert into Cruelty. For neither
could this Ladies pious tears, nor his approved innocence beget in his
relentless Enemies the least sense or apprehension of remorse. Marble is not
easily pierced; nor the Tigers nature quickly civilized. The Senats instancy
backed with Plebeian insolence and implacable Fury would prolong no time for
Sophronio's execution: Fearing, as might be thought, lest that hand which had
signed and subscribed his Death, might recall his Doom. So as, after the third
day immediately following the warrant had been delivered to the Warder; a
Scaffold, by the Consuls express Command, was erected upon Pharamount; to
which, Sophronio with a strong Guard of Soldiers was conducted. Where mounting
the stayrs of the Scaffold with a cheerful and pleasant countenance, as if he
had addressed himself rather for a Festival Solace, than a Funeral Office: Upon
his ascent, looking about him with a graceful aspect, he turned himself toward
the Seats where sundry Persons of eminent quality had bestowed themselves: and
eying a wonderful confluence of People crowding not only about the Scaffold,
but clustring all about the Trees adjoining to the Place of his Execution; with
a settled and composed Demean, he delivered himself in these words: or as near,
as the brevity of an exact Character could render it.

Sophronio's Speech upon the Scaffold.
My Lords, and you Gentlemen who are come hither to be spectators of my death.
I am here to be presented for a spectacle of wonder. Being made a Sacrifice of
loyalty in relation to my Prince: and an Eyesore to the State. So as, if
Fidelity be a capital Crime, which never before these seditious times was held
one; I must freely acknowledge my self culpable, and consequently a deserving
Sufferer: if otherwise, I appeal to your apprroved judgments, if a loyal
death be not a Signal action of honor.

I am so confident of my reality in the whole carriage of my affairs since my
first employment in the State of Candy; as I dare attest any Person in this
great Assembly, that can justly tax me of any injurious proceedings against
him or any one of his Family. Truth is, I have been personally accused of many,
but to this hour never found guilty of any. Sundry Articles, and of high
quality objected, and with all Fury pursued; but nothing proved: appearing
rather scandalous aspersions, to impeach my Fame, and surprise my person; then
grounded allegations to weaken my repute or evince me of treason. I have
cleared my self in all; yet am I found pardonable in none. An inevitable
necessity is laid upon me; I must dye: and I embrace my doom cheerfully.

It is better for one to perish, then an unity. And I hold my self a light
ransom, to redeem my Countries liberty. But it is much to be feared for that
Nation to be accompanied with success, whose Foundation is laid in blood.

I have been ever a Faithful Servant to my Sovereign: wherein, if I have done
too much; it will appear to the whole world that my recompense in lieu of that
service, has been too small. But this fault I impute not to Him, but to them
who deluded him. It is easy for cunning men by their evil counsel to have
strong influence over Princes Commands when their backs are at wall, and their
hopes under Hatches. My wish is, He may raise himself strength from my ashes. I
have ever observed it, and now found it true by sad Experience, that usurping
Powers have their Center every where, but their Circumference no where. Meer's
that transgress their bounds, must not be confined. It is the honor of
Treason, to slight the Order of subjection: and out of an audacious contempt
to spurn at Command; by making it is own will an irreversible Law. I fear
much, lest such State-pioners in these times of distraction, by their lawless
fury, should act much mischief in the Frontiers of Candy. But I leave it to
the Powers above to divert this Catastrophe. This fear which I conceive and by
all probable Circumstances divine, proceeds from that entire zeal which my
loyal heart bears to the State, for whose pretended safety and liberty I here
dye.

But I must not be long, lest my delay might beget in you a prejudicate opinion
of me touching that, which, I dare attest my frailty, I never had, a fear to
dye. One word home-ward, and then to my last home. For my Civil affairs; they
are already ordered.

As for my dis-consolate Consort, and those tender Pledges of our Conjugall
love, my sweet Infants; I Commit them to the protection and providence of
Heaven; to comfort and support the One, and in mercy to speak for the other,
who know not, poor Babes, to speak for themselves.

And now my Good Lords and Gentlemen, hear the last words of a dying man, which
in pity should retain the deepest impression, because the last Expresses,
that ever He shall deliver upon Earth. Be pleased to acquaint the Senate, that
the senses of Sophronio's innocence had so completely armed him, as he durst
look death ^ith face: and entertain the stroke of the Axe with a smile. Now do
thy Office, Executioner.

After this, making himself ready, and putting off his doublet, He went toward
the Block; where with a stout and undaunted courage laying his hand upon the
Edge of the Hatchet: This, said He, is a Cure for all diseaser; a receipt
against all maladies.

This done, by direction of the Executioner; a man of high name, though of vile
condition; He cheerfully laid down his Head upon the Block, which was divided
from his Body at one stroke

It was afterward by permission, artfully feered to his neck, and conveyed to
the Vault where all his Ancestors lay; not far distant from his Mannor-house of
Sylviana; where He was with no less honor solemnly interred, then generally
bemoaned.

Truth is, his Funeral Farewell seconded with his patient and composed demean
at the time of his death, begot that resentment in those who had formerly been
his Mortal Enemies; as his last adue breathed forth with so graceful a
passion, enforced tears in their Eyes, who never before that time lodged
remorse in their hearts. Yea those, who were the principal Agents and
assiduatest Instruments of procuring his Head to be cut off; could with all
their hearts have wished it on again, when they had duly considered, how the
wisdom of that Head, which the Hand of Faction had taken off, might have
composed and repaired many Fractures, which the Liberty or rather Anarchy of a
distracted State had produced. But it was too late to recall what Fate and
Plebeian Fury had snatched away. Sundry papers were pasted and posted up in the
eminentst parts of Thamipolis especially near the Merchants Trapeza, containing
such inscriptions as these and the like.

"Vaga vulgi, vota vani,
"Clari clades Coriolani.
For in many places he retained the Name of Coriolanus; with whom he was
paralleled for his brave atchievments, clemency, and actions of honor.

"Saeva plebaei flamma furoris,
"Laeva patricii pestis honoris.
Peoples heat and Consuls hate
Crushed a brave Patritians State.
The prudent Senate did not hold it fit that this Act should be exemplified, but
upon Sophronio for Example sake only executed: And that no Proceedings after
that time should be admitted as legal against any other being prosecuted by
Plea in the like manner.

And that their Saintly Clemency might to Posterity be commended, it was
ordained, that no Action whereof Sophronio stood accused or impeached, should
after his death be recorded as Capital, but that the memory thereof should be
to all intents and purposes utterly abolished: and that no Person whatsoever
should be rendered Criminal or accessory to Treason, being attached upon the
same grounds. But though this Law became reversed, it restored not his life;
whose ransom might balance with the Estimate of an Empire*

Thus far have we enlarged our Discourse, as it was consistent to our Story,
touching the Life and Death of Sophronio; the only Mirror of that age for
Prudence, Courage and Polity. Unthankfully sentenced, and subscribed to by
Rosicles, whose faithful Servant and Creature he had been: and with no less
Princely Compassion bemoaned by unfortunate Rosicles after his Execution, for
his necessitated Subscription. Being induced by the Arguments of a timing
Primat to do, what he in honor, neither could, nor would incline unto.

Howbeit this unprincely Act so highly incensed Irina, as she withdrew herself
from the Court for many days together; Silence the properest posture for
Sorrow, and privacy the fitest Cell to act it in.
like a pious and compassionate Princess to vent her discontents in private.

But we are now to climb up from these lower Stiars to higher Stories: and from
dependent Ciens (though none of all the Consular Order more eminently
qualified, than that Person, whose life and death we have here described) to
the Topbranch, even Rosicles himself. Whose unexemplary misfortunes, for
Annals to all succeeding ages, we have here historically compiled and
methodically digested.

How Rosicles after his confinement, became arraigned, impeached and sentenced
to death.
Such was the implacable enmity of the Synod, and madding Fury of the Plebeian
Family toward their unfortunate Rosicles; as they held it not sufficient to
restrain him of his liberty, and strip him of his regal dignity; but to deprive
him of his poor life, being all that was left him, and so complete his misery.

And that they might bring this to a more speedy dispatch, they caused an High
Court of Justice to be forthwith erected, and this surrounded with Funeral
Sables, importing some sad design, which shortly after ensued. Thither was
disconsolate Rosicles brought, or uncivilly haled rather by the Consuls
command, and after a tedious restraint to engage his calamitous life to their
severe judgment.

Active and nimble instruments had the incensed State provided to bring this
last work to effect: Amongst which, those whom they principally relied on, not
only for contriving and drawing the articles of charge intended against him,
which were high and heavy: But such as could Rhetorically play the Orators, by
withdrawing the affections of that small party which sided with him; as
likewise in aggravating the quality of his crimes, which they pretended in the
Survey of all Annals, to appear unexemplary: and by that means to make
compassion in his case a stranger to the assembly. Alius too was reported to be
a close active Instrument of his ruin.
The Agents they employed were these: ROSELDIUS the contriver of the instrument;
who was shortly after unpreparedly surprised, and according to his disloyal
attempts, by an unknown hap, justly dispatched. Sinonaintes, a smooth Engineer,
and of singular trust with Climenes, Chalibetes, an excellent Orator: One, who
had Tongue enough, to fortify an ill cause, and to cloth his pretenses in any
color: but the indis osition of his body crossed the intention of his mind;
being disabled by sickness, to pursue personally the weight of his business,
Leuco-Magiris, a contemptible Baudite; who had drunk of all waters, and by
running too deep on score, had a little before been enforced to run out of the
Country, till Treachery brought him into request and enabled him to pay his
arreers. But of all others Rabsheda, was designed that Rhadamanth who was to
supply the Seat of Justice; in whom, had impudence and insolence lost their
lodgings, they might have easily found entertainment.

Suppose him then summoned by this merciless man: where standing before that
Predominant Bench, This Hall was built by the Roman Rutilius, where the
Candiots had hung up their Ensigns, with other Oval monuments, for signals of
their numerous victories against the Illirians.
and in the condition of such a prisoner, who called to the bar of justice,
might assure himself to be encountered with many professed foes, but few firm
friends. Suppose him (I say) though crushed with indignities, with a Princely
and Majestic demean, presenting himself in this manner.

Looking first about the Pretorian or Senate Hall a place no less spacious then
numerous: and eyeing the great press and multitude there assembled: What means,
said he, this confluence of people? They be come (answered Rabsheda) to hear a
Tyrants trial, a Rebel I can see, replied Rosicles, but Tyrant I can discover
none. Unbosom your self, said Rabsheda, and you will soon discover him, for how
should he be accounted less, who in these civil distempers has been the only
Author of the effusion of so much blood, and that of his own people, within
this crimson Isle of Candy? What do you mean Rabsheda, said Rosicles, by that
Crimson Isle; and by whom was that tincture laid? By your own hand, answered
Rabsheda, deep died and embrued in your subjects blood. Upon which words, being
with a braving insolence uttered, the incensed Prince raising himself a little
upon his chair. Egregious Rebel, said he, has ignorance glazed thy forehead
with that impudence, as neither thy Princes presence, nor thy sworn allegiance,
can imprint in thee an awful fear, nor civil reverence? These words breathed
forth with such a graceful Majesty, so startled him; as for a good space, they
calmed not only his passion, but silenced his Elocution. Till at last, as
might be probably gathered, recalling to mind that great reward which was by
the Senate promised him; and seeing himself so strongly flanker'd, and by the
soldiers acclamation so highly encouraged; he recovered his speech: and with
great boldness calling him to the Bar; A strange summons of a subject to his
Sovereign; the Prince much exasperated with this unexemplary insolence told him
expressly, that his Sovereignty had mounted a story higher then their commands,
and that their new molded Laws were to stoop to his Prerogative. But all this
would not stand him in any stead. Popular fury backed by the Consults Authority,
and resistless sinews of an army made an easy breach through allegiance. A
charge of high consequence, being already drawn up, was publicly read, the
particulars whereof were these.

1. That his Government had been tyrannical, in laying insupportable burdens by
impositions, imposts, exactions, with other heavy pressures upon his
impoverished subjects.

2. That he bestowed best places on worst men.

3. That his corrupt council, had depraved the state, confounded their
municipal laws; and consequently destructive to the ancient Rights and
Privileges of their Nation: the fatal issues whereof were generally noxious to
the liberty of his subjects, with sundry other Criminations of like nature, and
of lower qualification in their measure. All which, with a scornful smile, as
objections inconsistent to his pious condition, HE seemingly slighted, using
only these words: That his Innocence was recorded above their Seat of Justice.

But the decision of his cause hung upon the Senats prepensed resolve and edge
of the soldiers sword, being sentenced to die, and that before his own
Court-gate of Candy-Port; within the ken of his great City Thamipolis: where
within few days after, without a resistance (a rare president to all Ages) he
was executed, according to his sentence formerly delivered.

The Senate only had this kindness for him, in admitting two Flamins to prepare
him before his death. Onixus and Reshu. The latter whereof, though a seeming
Saint, nay, opinion'd for a reverend Patriark of their profession, appeared an
egregious timist: One who knew well how to close with time, and hug the
shadow of an eminent favorite, for his own interest. For the former, He was no
formal, but a serious and sincere professor and on whom this sentenced Prince
so much relied; as he derived from his mild and sweet tempered advice much
comfort. Amongst many we shall instance this for all. The adjudged Rosicles
remaining some few days after his sentence pronounced in a house of the
Jacobins, where He was no less strictly guarded then rigidly used; He began to
feel some contests or wrastlings in himself, suggesting to his magnaminous
thoughts, how ill it would become him to subject his head to the Hatchet of a
slavish Baudit, and without resistance to submit himself to the execution of so
unjust a Sentence. And such deep impression had this debate wrought upon him,
as he became half resolved to divert the hand of Justice by his personal
resistance until the morning before he dyed, having acquainted Onixus with his
purpose; He was by his grave and discreet advice, with tears from his eyes
plenteously flowing, dissuaded from entertaining any such thought: For, said
he, this act would drive you into fury, and consequently discompose your soul
for her prepa^ation to an higher seat. Desist, said he, I beseech you, from any
such thought; but recommend your case to the Providence of Heaven, whether it
be to life or death. To which pious and prudent council he cheerfully submitted.

And in very truth, it had proved a vain assay to have made resistance, seeing
there were sundry engines, and those invisibly contrived, purposely prepared to
hale him to the Block, if he had offered the least force or manner of
opposition.

The time now approaching, a strong Squadron of Stratiots were appointed to
guard him along through the This Theriorophie was an impark'd ground be longing
to the fraternity of Jacobins: through which Rosicles was conducted to the
scaffold.
Theriotrophie, bearing a spacious vale and the Court chase; and so by ascent
to the Amphitheatre; through which he was brought down to the Scaffold; where
with a pale visage, but Princely presence, casting his eyes upon the multitude
of People (then which a greater confluence had been seldom at any time seen)
He declared himself wi hout the least diminution of state or courage, in this
sort.

ROSICLES Speech at his Death.
Good people, You are come hither to see your Prince become a Sacrifice to his
Subjects. A person held unfitting to live, because he scorned to purchase evil
men's love. I am guilty of many crimes, if you believe my accusers; Tyranny
especially. But a dying man may for pity sake find ears to receive his Apology.
Here I stand before God and Man; where I appeal to the whole World, from whence
I am going; And to Heaven, whereto my hope is I am coming: That I never to this
hour unsheathed my Sword to shed the blood of any Subject from the highest to
the lowest. Impunity in neglect of my own safety has proved to my self a
Tyranny: but my charity forgives them freely. I must ever bemoan the Blood of
ONE, whose Death by inforcement, seconded with the persuasions or impostures
rather of Timing Parasites, my Hand unthankfully subscribed. Never did subject
merit more of Princes affection, and receive for his service a more undeserving
guerdon. Oh, that my tears could rinse or raze forth the memory of so
unhandsome an action; or expiate the guilt of such a crimson crime!

In this my last farewell and adieu to the World, I cannot but stand amazed at
the infelicity of our Family, since our first plantation here in Candy: where
we are become strangers to our own, and bemoaned more by strangers then our
own. Long time has this sad onmious Cloud hung over our house: Be it Heavens
pleasure at last to disperse it. Never did Royal Race since the foundation of
Candy, fall into like misery: But there is an instrument (pointing at the Axe)
that will shortly ease me of my sufferings.

If there be any Member of the Senate here present, I salute him in the name of
that whole Representative Body, assuring him in them, and them in him, that
they could not be more ready in giving, then I in forgiving their severe
sentence. But Mercy is seldom shown, where pity took no place.

But I have been dealt withal too short, to continue my discourse long. Then
taking his leave of the Gentlemen of his Chamber, and of his facetious friend
Parthenius; with eyes Elevated to Heaven, he subjected his Head to the
trembling hand of the Executioner; who performed his Office with more fear then
skill.

His Body was some few days after (being first made a Mercenary Spectacle to
the people) without any solemnity at all, privately interred. Such was the
immerited fall of unfortunate Rosicles.

Then whom none ever more justly governed, nor more deservingly to be beloved;
who became more disloyally treated, more scornfully deserted.

Now it might be asked, how it could possibly come to pass, that in so populous
and confluent a City no hand should be lifted up in defense of his innocence:
And there is an apparancy of reason for it. Those who stood well affected to
the Royal Cause, were but few, and those naked: Whereas the disaffected were
many, and those completely armed. So as tears and groans were the best supplies
their feeble forces could contribute to his relief. But indeed there was no
impede greater to Rosicles success, nor wrought more to his disadvantage, then
his subsignation to Sophronio's death. This it was that begot a distrust in
some, who could with all their hearts, through the disgust they received from
their present inverted Government, to have changed faces, and wholly adhered to
the Prince, had not this jealousy possessed them: Saepe justitiae injusta redit
Comes Sententia.
imagining, that it could not be safe for them to confide in him, who had subsc
ibed against his own resolution and public prote^^, to the death of so
faithful a servant. What might a Proselyte foe expect, For sufferi^g ^n unj^st
judgment upon a other, himse^f was brought to suffer by an unjust judgment.
when a loyal subject fared so ill? This it was which begot him the greatest
Odium; being in every man's mouth, and consequently a precipice to his
proceedings.

Sundry menacing presages there were of his approaching ruin, before his
death; discovered by several apparitions seen in the air: As terrible armies
skirmishing directly over the seat of his chief city Thamipolis. Bloody
Streamers with apparent models of Funeral Scutcheons, indented with Gules and
Sanguine Characters, visible and legible. Two Moons of different magnitude.

Mixendes an eminent Peer of Candy, riding abroad to take air in a stately
Chariot, drawn along with six gallant Flander Mares, having only Aniel, a
Groom of his Chamber opposite to him in the end of his Chariot: The Mares
suddenly staid and would go no further, though his Charioter with the help of
his Postillion, used all the art and force he could to drive them forward: upon
which unexpected stand, Aniel, as one wonderfully amazed, suddenly cried out;
My Lord, What Woman is that sits there beside you? Mixendes, though at first he
discovered nothing, became suddenly sensible of the danger of this imposture:
for his Heels were presently struck up and hoisted to the inner top of the
Chariot, with his Head grovelling below. Having with much difficulty recovered
and raised himself, by the assistance of his astonished Groom, they joined both
together to fasten upon that apparition, which seemed to them a real woman,
intending to pinch her; but this phantasme, or whatsoever it might import, with
a terrible flash of fire and hideous voice suddenly vanished: But not without
apparent hurt to the Charioter, having his Leg broken in the very Box where he
sat, from whence he had not removed, nor used any agitation nor motion at all.

The Postillion likewise became strangely distempered. The guider of the
Chariot being pitifully maimed, shortly after dyed: Whose body after his death,
either by enchantment, or some other occult malady, grew as black as pitch.

This Mixendes, being one in the lower list of the late created consuls, was
accounted by some to be privately an active complice of Rosicles ruin, and
that this accident befell him, purposely to caution him of his transgression:
though others have since that time vindicated his honor from that aspersion;
and that it was an act of Witchcraft occasioned upon the dereliction of his
Lady.

These were rare occurrences, but no way comparable to those strange prodigious
birth: terrible to the eye of nature; which were produced at that time, and
could presage nothing less then some fearful unaccustomed alteration; whereof
this amongst many.

In the West part of Candy, as is reported to have happened sometimes upon the
like occasional mutations in the Confines of Gascoigne, a Female child was
born, that from the Belly upward was a Twin, having two heads, two breasts, and
four arms; and the one part did that which the other did not: So that whilst
the one did eat, the other would not; and whilst the one slept, the other
waked. And having lived in this manner (as a Prodigy to Nature) for some
certain time, the one died, the other surviving; which afterward through the
stench of the other died also. That which by this prodigious birth, had been
formerly predicted, was by as fearful an issue not long after seconded, in
production of those state combustions whereto no age was ever exemplary.

After Rosicles death, the Cypress trees, Laurels, and Palmato's which in that
Country we of plenteous growth and surpassing height, whole lie withered.

Thus by the change of one, was the state of Candy quite changed; the face of
the Court disfigured, and a flourishing government into an Anarchical condition
reduced. For the ancient Peerage, whose descent and desert might justly record
them in the catalogue of Honor, either through discontent or ripeness of age
were expired.

Amongst which Lycorus, Merannes, Arnoldo, Tutonus, Trevenco, Polidon; leaving
those to steer the state, who preferred their own interest before the interest
of the public.

As for that new Mintage of Nobility, extracted from the creation of Climenes;
those that were the graver, and in their qualification accounted wiser;
employed their time in incroaching, and inhancing their revenues, and enlarging
the privileges of their Manors: Whereas the younger Fry were for undertaking
Duells in defense of their Mistresses. Which light skirmishings, being neither
much fatal nor fearful, were the only signals of their valor, as Rings,
Gloves, and Ribbands, the richest Trophies of their Honor, which mush
rump-gallantry ran all along in a blood for many ages together; making good
that Philosophic all Maxim: "That the Corruption of one was the Generation of
another.

The nature of things, through the depravation or degeneration rather of times
growing such, that whereas a good man is joined with a bad, the bad is not
bettered by the good, but the good corrupted by the bad. Thus fared it with
this innovated state of Candy.

Charicles pursues his own interest against the Senate.
CHARICLES to revenge his fathers death, and in hope to re-invest himself in
his lineal-regal estate, being strengthened by the assistance of the Eluri and
other frontier Scythians (a people that were ever held fast foes, but failing
friends) but Princes in their distress must be content to lean on weak
Crutches, invaded Candy. In a fair Battalia were the two Armies martially
disposed, and their Tents orderly picht near to a strong and well fortified
City, called Reus Court, anciently Saly Castro. Hopes equally breathing, half
of the day was this Battalia in dispute; wherein Charicles by the singular
prowess and dexterity of his Pedeantry, being all of them excellent Archers,
had long time the better, till overpowered by continual recrutes, and the
treachery of Leontius; who had the principal command and charge of the Scythian
Caualry: and hovering remissely upon an hill, above the Armies, behaving
himself more like a Spectator then a Warrier, never so much as engaging his
person to the necessitous assistance of Charicles: He with his Forces became
wholly routed.

Albeit the Prince, even in his greatest distress, considering how his personal
security and regal sovereignty were both at the stake, with an incomparable
spirit charged twice or thrice quite through his Enemies Army, continuing in
the field without the least decline of courage, so long as there appeared the
least hope of subsistence, or the Cavalries assistance; whose perfidious
Commander had been too highly corrupted, to forget the reward of his service.

Thus was the unfortunate Charicles, as if an ominous Cloud had constantly hung
over his family, enforced to leave the field, being so deserted of his own by
this discomfiture, as very few or none were left to accompany him in his flight.

The Enemy had his scattered Forces long in chase, taking many prisoners; and
such as were of eminent quality, as might be probably conjectured, seeing the
most of his patty, unless they were of the ruder sort of Scythians, had been
persons qualified and of extraction, whereas the adverse party were generally
Plebeian and Mercenary.

But in their pursuit, their eagerest hunt was after Charicles, by whose
surprise, the Senate conceived them to be secured from danger, and freed from
the attempts of any invasive pretender. And that they might be more speedily
seized of their prey, it was their prime care to have all the ports laid; their
stratagems with much secrecy contrived, their Ambuscado's set, and sundry
parties of Horse every where dispersed and disposed for the taking of this
deserted Prince. But for all this they mist their aim, for the providence of
heaven was such (an act which cannot be too much admired) Charicles escaped
their politic designs; and whereas there appeared no visible probability of
refuge or receipt; He found for the time a convenient harbor, to decline his
enclosing danger, by such strange means and instruments as shall be related
hereafter.

How Charicles after his discomfiture at Reus-Court, being pursued by the
Enemy; was in a Pilgrim habit, Hospitably received and seasonably secured,
beyond all expectancy by Candiope.
IT cannot sufficiently be admired how sundry eminent personages destitute of
all hope or visible help, have escaped in their imminency of dangers the
implacable fury of the enemy, being reserved, no doubt, by Divine Providence
for some future ends. This might be instanced to life in the present condition
of distressed Charicles; the issue whereof closed in this sort.

Candiope, a Lady lineally-loyally descended; being both by extraction from her
family, and education from her infancy so affected; Walking one morning early
in a Grove; whereto for her private retirement she usual frequented, and
wishing nothing more out of the loyal fervor of her desires, then to hear the
event of that great Battle at Reus-Court, with the good success of the Prince,
whose restoration she unfeignedly besought. It was her fortune in the tract
where she walked, being not far distant from the public road, to meet with one
in a Palmers weed, fixing his dejected eyes on the ground, as if some sad
mischance had befaln him: or as one weary of earth, resolving to measure out
his Grave, and to play the Sextons part before he dyed.

Long was it ere she could awake him out of this his melancholy dump, or
pensive amaze, so strangely extasied seemed he to be, as nothing appeared in
him saving motion that might argue him to be living, or for the present capable
of respiration. At last drawing nearer unto him. Good sir, said she, what is it
troubles you? What misfortune has befaln you, that it should have such strong
influence over you, in writing your discontents in such deep Characters of
sorrow? Alas, Madam, replied He, it were a fruitless discovery, to impart our
griefs where there is no hope of remedy. My wounds, with many others, rankle
too sore to expect a present cure. Candiope collected by these words, that all
things had not fallen out well at Reus-Court, with much importunity therefore she
desired to know of him, whether he had been personally engaged in the battle
or no, and what the success thereof might be? With a deep scalding sigh, we are
all wholly lost, said he. Our Prince utterly routed, his hopes expired. The
softness of your Sex, and affability of your nature may retain that temper, as
it may afford compassion to our forlorn condition; for as yet we have hardly
found it. Woe is me, answered Candiope, who might he be that was the Agent of
this sad scene of his infilicity? The probable ground of his misfortune,
replied the Palmer, arose from the treachery of Leontius; a principal commander
of the Scythian Cavalry, by whom, he with his associates were wholly routed.
And that this disaster proceeded from Leontius treason might be hence
conjectured; for after the battle was ended, and he amongst others surprised,
his gentle usage and easy confinement by the Enemy, discovered to all the
world his secret treachery.

But what is become, said Candiope, of distressed Charicles? Of a potent
Prince, replied he, he is now made a poor Pilgrim; a fugitive deserted of his
own, and nothing but a mere shadow of hope to support him. A weak supportance,
Heaven knows, said the Lady: Oh that I might have the honor to give him
harbor; with what prompness and fidelity should my best endeavors answer it?
You may perchance replied he, have the occasion, and he the good fortune to
partake your assistance; for his hapless condition must procure harbor in one
place or other, or we must conclude him lost for ever. Mean time, Madam, I must
ingeniously acquaint you, seeing your noble disposition steers your course that
way, how I am become His Highness Almoner or necessitous purveyor, while he in
a disguised habit acts the sad part of a disconsolate wanderer. Thus has our
condition, which formerly has been a stranger to servile ends; or to what must
now oblige us, beholdingness, enjoined us to submit to the necessity of Fate;
and to beg releif with silence, when our language cannot in modesty find a
tongue to express our necessity. Woe is me for you, said the tear-swoln Lady,
that ever your Prince should be brought to that exigence. But your pale visage
with other apparent arguments of your infeebled condition, stand in need, as I
conceive, of more relief from a bountiful hand, then of verbal compassion from
a pitiful mouth. These words that come from us are but airy expressions to
wasted spirits: Painted meat to a pensive Pilgrim: Be pleased, Gentle sir, for
by what title to distinguish you, I wholly know not, to take a repast at my
fathers house, in this next Grange here adjoining, where I can promise you
security; though it may be no such equipage as may any way suit with a person
of your quality.

This curtisie could not otherwise choose but be received with infinite
acception; to him especially and his distressed consorts, who had not only
found necessary relief, but even humane pity a stranger to their misfortunes,

As they were thus conversing, and Candiope resolved to bestow her care upon
his accommodation, by conducting him to her fathers house, (a continent repose
for a wearied Spirit) where she might not only receive further intelligence
touching Charicles condition, whose safety she so much tendered; but afford all
competent supplies to this disconsolate Palmer, as his present necessity
required.

As she was, I say, bestowing her whole care and ingenuous endeavors upon this
Office of Piety this signal freedom of Hospitality, she might hear from the
skirt of the Grove a pitiful voice (a voice well known to the Palmer, though it
rendered a strange accent to the ear of the Lady;) So full of passion appeared
every expression from the language of that sorrowful person, as none could do
less then commiserate his sad condition; upon the hearing of those pressing
grounds of his complaint and personal resentment. The words, as they were by
him passionately delivered, and by her no less pitifully received, were these.

O Heavens! When will these cloudy days close with a clear evening? Must this
black cloud hang for ever over our unfortunate house? Must our disasters fall
thus upon us in a continued torrent to all succeeding Ages? Must Theaters be
erected only for acting our tragedies? Must the fame of our family be quite
razed forth of the Annals of posterity? Is there any such close crime known
only to the eyes of Heaven, but shut from the knowledge of men; whereof our
House has been highly conscious, and as yet remains unexpiate, and
consequently the occasional ground of our misfortunes? Oh, may these tears of
an innocent Prince, rinse the guilt of a nocent Progenitor! for any part I
appeal to the powers above whereon depend the Foundation and Mutation of
States, if ever any act of folly since my infancy merited from the hand of
Fortune such infelicity. Lay thyself open to the whole World, and make them thy
judges, who most hate thee, and least value thee, or those demerits in thee,
and let them freely discover, if any act were ever by Charicles done, that
should make him thus undone.

Candiope at the name of Charicles, being not able to contain her self any
longer, interrupted these passionate complaints, saying: Woe is me for thee,
Noble Charicles; then whom never any distressed Prince diserved better, and in
his pursuit of a just claim succeeded worser. Let us draw nearer, said she to
the Palmer; Why should he be thus deserted, and partake no sociable comfort to
allay his distemper.

CHARICLES had no sooner got a sight of them, then rousing and raising himself
from the shady covert where he reposed; as if he had not been the same man,
whom his sad complaints had so lately discovered of all men most unfortunate;
and with a cheerful countenance looking upon Molinutus (for so was the Palmer
called.) It was your Office, said he, Molinutus, to play the Purveyer and not a
suitor: Our misspent times will admit of no Mistresses. Afterward looking aside
upon the Lady, then whom none of a more becoming nature: Excuse me, Madam, said
he, if I sport with my misfortunes, My low repose, and lean repast require
some expediences to repair the ruins of a late shaken fortune.

CANDIOPE fixing her eyes intentively all this while upon his meagre
countenance, vyed in tears with his words; and at last falling on her knees.
Dread Liege, said she, lately, but all too soon, has your poor Handmaid heard
of your great disaster. But what is it that Time and Opportunity may not
recover? Tempore and Medi^, in omni Malo fruimur remedy.
Fortune ows your Highness as much as she has taken from you. Sir, it has been
your hard and heavy state to suffer by a disloyal enemy; and from an absolute
power to fall upon such a precipice of misery, as no age can present a
parallel, nor to a Prince so well deserving, a catastrophe so tragically fatal.
But as it has been your great unhappiness to decline from so high a pitch of
regality (which decline shall not be, I hope, of long continuance) so shall I
ever hold it to be the happiest occasion that has been at any time presented
me, to become an unworthy instrument to your security. The place, Sir, whereto
you may with much safety retire, is near adjoining; and wherein you may enjoy
your own commands with all freedom. Your place of repose is my fathers house;
wherein you may be accommodated with all conveniences, though not suitable to
your quality, yet with such a subjects welcome as his care of your safety shall
demonstrate his fidelity. Your Highness shall need no other purveyor then our
own family; nor any other securer then the pledge of our own lives, which shall
be devotionally employed to do you service.

Is it possible, said He, that Heaven can reserve any Family so faithful to
One so unfortunate; and on whom such sinister occurrents have acted their worst
of Fury?

Much safer then a higher Protection, whose reliance had been his ruin.
Go to, Molinutus, we will confidently commit our selves to the Charge of this
affable and compassionate Lady, who opens her breast so affectionately to the
resentment of our misery. Such freedom of language, accompanied with such a
fair and debonair Carriage, cannot choose but promise us safety, if we may be
capable of it, after so hot and hostile a pursuit.

Along they resolve to go with the Lady to her Fathers Grange, where they were
with all amicable hospitality received, and with all such accommodations suited
as their private Family could afford them. For enlarge them further, they
wisely would not, lest their entertainment might be suspected.

After their some days reside in that affectionate Harbor, contriving what
way were be^^ to take for his safe and speedy Convoy to Ferrara, whereto he
bent his course: Candiope a faithful Secretary in all his assayes, be thought
her self of an expert and trusty Pilot, one whom the Favors of her Family had
formerly obliged, who had pitched his resolution for that coast within few
days after, with whom she dealt so seriously and secretly, in relation of her
interest and confidence in him; as she contracted with him for their conduct to
Ferrara: in which voyage she intended (so tender she was of the Princes safety)
to become both an Assistant and Associate. The prefixed time was designed, and
all things prepared for their passage. Into the ship with much privacy, and so
disguised, as probably appearing without discovery, were Caricles, Molinutus
and Candiope received; but no sooner embarked and ready to hoise up sail, then
one Phereclus a Captain, designed by the Senate to guard that Port, and to take
account of all such Passengers as were to take shipping there, with a surly and
imperious demean opposed their admittance; acquainting Dioscurus, Master of the
ship, that he was personally authorized to make search, and due examination
take of all such persons as surreptitiously (for so he termed it) made their
way from that coast; especially at that time, when such enemies to the State
were known to be straggling abroad. For whose attach and apprehension he himself
with other prime Commanders were to those Ports nominally assigned. But
Dioscurus a person of a stout and resolute spirit, wholly slighted his braves,
telling him that his ship was his house, and those whom he had received into it
were his Family: whose safety he was bound in honor to defend: he wished him
therefore to desist from making any attempt, lest his resistance might casually
engage his person with all such as should assist him to inevitable hazards.
Upon these words the Captain showed his Commission, imagining that the power
and validity thereof would divert all opposition, and give him ready way to
execute his commands. But he found it much otherwise, for Phereclus could not
be more speedy in pulling out his Commission, then Dioscurus was for hoisting
up Sail, and lanching forth into the Main, attesting his confidence with a
volley of shot, taking so his leave with much alacrity of the coast of Candy.

Within few weeks after, being favored with prosperous gales, they arrived
safely in Ferrara; where we will leave him a Pensioner to the State; and
recounting his misfortunes to the incloistered Queen his disconsolate Mother.

Thus have you heard how Charicles beyond all hope, by the private Conduct of
Candiope, escaped the pursuit of the enemy.

And to return you an Abstract of the miseries of this Family, we may here in
sable colors deblazon these sad accidents of Armory in the ruins of a
royall-declining Family: then which none more highly deserving, nor more
unhappily decreasing; and all this in a very few years completed.

For what miseries more lineally linked to one House, or more successively
continued? you have heard how Basilius, who succeeded Athalia, or as we have
originally styled her, Bellingeria, was strangely, and not without jealousy of
his subjects, dispatched; his eldest Son Cyrenius, a Prince of excellent hopes,
not without suspicion of poison, prematurely removed; his younger Brother
Rosicles, as you have heard, before the eyes of his people, the face of his
eminentest City, and at his Court gate woefully slaughtered, his Son Charicles
treacherously deserted, discomfited, remaining exiled; his Widow-mother
incloistered, and the memory of that Royal Race by the Senates express decree,
to be quite extinguished and razed out of the Catalogue of Honor, as persons
incapable of bearing any office in the Commonweal.

So as there remained no hope of a new being or breathing to the revivall of
their Phaenix ashes, unless some invisible hand far above all humane expectance
should interpose it self, and in mercy raise it from the rubbish of division,
and by degrees restore it,

Distractions in the State of Candy in their Aristocracy; with the miseries of
an innovated Government.
All things now might seem to be quiet at home. But it is a constant
observation in all States, that they remain less secure, when they promise to
themselves most security. This might be manifested to all Governments; but
especially where Usurpation puts in for a Title. Wherein, admit there were no
Heir Apparent to make his Claim, there would be a Latent Power to take revenge.
So it appeared in this State-Theatre; though Candy had exiled her Foes, she
retained Fears. Civil Wars betwixt Climenes, Bellonius, and Lamachus reduce
this distempered State to miserable distractions. For this confused Aristocracy
consisting neither wholly of Peers nor Plebeians, but of a promiscuous Society;
begun at last to have a resentment of their translated Government: with what
felicity accompanied the harmonious union of a well-tempered Monarchy; with the
disasters that usually occurred where numerous Commanders burdened the State
with distempered humors by their plurality. Subjects easily shake off the yoke
of Sovereignty, when their Commanders be many. One or none, says Caesar. None
but One, says the Usurper. None rather then One, says the Leveller. Thus
Government deprived of one legal-Lineal Sovereign, became wholly irregular. The
issue whereof may be clearly instanced in this headless State of Candy.

Bellonius was a person (as has been told you) of an active hand, but
defective headpiece, a stout spirit, but shallow intellect, fitter for action
then design: one who could do much, but speak little, and of that little, small
to purpose. Infinitely serviceable had he been to Climenes in all his
undertakings, and incomparably prosperous in his achievements, being in all
those Civil Wars commenced against Rosicles and his successor Charicles made
General over all the State-forces, and under whom Climenes, during all that
time, acted only as private Commander. But Climenes taking notice of his
weakness, but never till the heat of the day was past, apprehends a disgust
concerning his contracting a marriage or alliance, as he pretended, with an
eminent person, who had held a correspondence formerly with Charicles. This was
easy for him to do, having by this time insinuated himself into the esteem and
favor of the Army, by great rewards, full pay, and fair quarter. Bellonius
recalling to mind what service he had done for the Public, stood for a while
in resistance, as a Champion in defense of his honor, armed with more Fury
then Patience, Prowess then Prudence. Verona his Lady extracted from a noble
and courageous Family, encouraged him highly in these actions, assuring him
that the memory of his exploits could not but retain a deep impression in the
State, and Soldiery too, with whom he had so resolutely engaged his person,
and exposed his safety to the desperatest attempts. And so unmindfull was the
State, Senate and Soldier of his former engagements, and so indifferent for
his welfare, as they left him to himself to sink or swim.

But of small avail is Valor without Assistence; Price and Reward had made him
incapable of Revenge,

Truth is, Bellonius had formerly good opportunity for preserving his Fortunes,
Freedom and Honor, and of averting that ominous fate which hung over his
Family; but by neglecting it, he threw himself with all these into an
inevitable precipice. His only hope, amidst these extremes, which his
declining greatness depended on, was a New Convene of the late adjourned Synod,
summoned to assemble the first month of the year ensuing; the issue whereof,
after our relation of Lamachus condition, shall appear in every circumstance to
life portrayed. This Gentleman by his infinite industry and studious privacy,
raised his improvement to a high proficience in political and wise knowledge;
which he afterward employed to his great advantage.
Lamachus was a Gentleman of good Extraction, great Industry, and singular
Animosity, the very right hand to Climenes in all his achievements, but
sinister to Charicles in all his proceedings.

After the brunt of these Wars, and much blood inhumanely shed, he appeared the
only man of merit and esteem in Climenes account. No honor nor reward held
sufficient to gratify his service: Nay it was very observable, that Climenes,
after such time as his fortunes had raised him to the absolute Sovereignty of
an Arbitrary power: a step higher then ever distressed Charicles could ascend,
and held to bear the face of a Tyrannick Government, during the unfortunate
reign of those lineally descending Princes. After this height of his commands,
I say, whereto his numerous victories had perched him, and wherewith this
strong alliance had irresistibly settled him: Climenes, who partak'd no less of
Fox then Lion, was never known to meet Lamachus without an indeered embrace, or
veneration rather, as both his demean and expresses signified; saluting him not
only by the name of fellow Soldier, but of Prince, Champion, and Chieftain of
his Army: without whose help, the whole fabric of that State had shrunk under
its own Grandeur. For he had got the art of shaping himself to any feature,
having compassionate eyes to vie in tears with the Crocodile, and deceiving
Fauns to gloze with the Hyene.

Now the strength of his alliance derived from the persons with whom he matched
were these: Lucapius espoused the eldest; a gallant jovial Lady, who in her
very posture knew how to personate her qualified honor, and how to ingratiate
an obsequious servant: though in the end she became an incomparable Convert;
being one, to whom the discovery of her Fathers tyrannick actions appeared most
odious. Fotoweldus took the second; a young Foster-mother of strange opinions.
Seblasius the third; a modest Maid, and of a composed carriage. The fourth and
last was matched to Chirus; one whose accidental infirmities had made useless
for a Nuptial Bed. These became additaments to his swelling Power; but nothing
in comparison to the influence he had over his numerous Army. Upon his
confidence whereof he became transported to such unbounded height (an humor
commonly incident to those who rise from lower grounds to mountanous fortunes)
as he grew infinitely apt to pick quarrels at his best friends; being such, from
whom he had received formerly his strongest assistance; and to whom he had
expressed seemingly his nearest indearments. Amongst whom, howsoever he
pretended, none appeared more odious to him then his sometime bosom-friend
faithful Lamachus. Which distaste arose from Lamachus just opposition, and from
this occasion. Climenes arched thus with strong alliance, on whom he had
conferred the eminentest Offices and places of Command within the whole Island;
as likewise with other considerable Forces, understood sufficiently how nothing
now remained undone for completing the absolute work of his Sovereignty,
whereto his ambitious thoughts with much politic secrecy aspired, saving only
the Title of Regality: which though he seemed outwardly to decline, there was
nothing that he did more inwardly desire. He perceived upon vote how Lamachus
was the only man who opposed the conferment of that Title; which he objected,
Climenes could not with honor accept: having before the face of his Army
disavowed the acception of any such style: for otherwise the true lineal Regal
Race had never been extirpated, nor their memory extinguished. 2. That an
Aristocratical and no Monarchical Government was intended in all their
proceedings; and this sworn to, if either Fidelity or Oaths could oblige them.
3. That he could not see but as many of them had been equal sharers in the
hazard; so they might by Law of Arms become equal sharers in the quality of
Honor. These objections were with more boldness pressed, then they could be
possibly by his weak strength or assistance seconded. For though sometimes his
fair usage and stout courage had strongly possessed him of the hearts of the
Soldiery, his late retirement and privacy, by his affecting a rural life, had
quite estranged their endeerments from him, being only devoted most to his
service, whereby they had most hope of pay: which Climenes spirit to his great
advantage ever strove to make good; for though his Exchecquer grew lean, being
exhausted by sundry unfortunate attempts, pursued to his apparent dishonor,
with the loss of his eldest and experientest soldiers: yet such was his
ambition, clothed with an avaritious disposition, which had sprung to that
height, as he would digg Pluto out of Hell for gold, as exactions and onerous
imposts, unknown to the State of Candy, before his time, returned ever fresh
and free supplies to the daring Soldier, on whose shoulders he reer'd the
structure of his usurped honor. Neither did it much trouble him to impair the
Subjects state, so he might improve the Soldiers strength, whose sinews were
his supportance.

Now, those bold expresses of Lamachus could not be so privately delivered, but
they were as soon discovered. Climenes gathered from hence how the game went.
This it was which broke the long continued League betwixt Climenes and his
Chieftain Lamachus (for so was he wont to call him:) and to expedite his
revenge, he advises with his Council, depraved and active enough to put on his
design, though his own vindicative spirit needed no such fiery Instruments, how
and in what manner he might requite his kindness; which his incensed thoughts
prompt him to answer with all violence, as appeared afterward by sundry
particulars of high consequence.

Climenes could not be readier to propose, then these vicious Counselors were
to suggest: It was revenge which he pursued, and they to time it, were as apt
to excite him to it.

Themistocles saying pleased these corrupters of Justice better then the
impartial censure of that just Father, who being requested to bear himself
indifferently in his censure, answered, Be it far from me not to pleasure my
friends in all things.

This fire burst out into that violent and impetuous heat, as his first design
was, to clip Lamachus wings by abridging his power; which he executed to
purpose, by taking from him the Command which he had given him in reward of his
hazardous service over the Epirian Horse, a great addition to his strength and
annual revenues, which dishonor so highly trenching upon Lamachus, this
subtle Sinon, Climenes pretended to be the Act of his Council, and not of his,
which he was pleased to signify upon every occasion; never meeting Lamachus
without a dissembling hug, and a treacherous embrace. Neither could he, for
all his subtilty, so palliate the inward hate he bore him, but even in
Table-discourse he would make Lamachus usually the subject of his Story;
inquiring how he bestowed himself in his Country life, and what employments so
deserving and active a Spirit could address it self to, being so full of
heroic thoughts and matchless gallant^y.

And being then answered, That he had got into the esteem of a rare Limner, and
an excellent Florist: Go to, replied Climenes, let him ply his wo^k, and fall
to his setting of Citrons, and Melons, and Pumpions; but I could wish that
precious Wall-flower to beware, lest his dainty Griffs, like ambitious Ciens,
grow above their due stature and proportion, lest the cunning Gardener cause me
to play the Primer. Thus was this politic Usurper, who of a Plebeian Soldier
was become an absolute Commander, apt to play the Imposter with his best
Friends.

Notwithstanding all this, though Intelligence abroad, and Assistance at home,
might seem to secure him against the policy of all private designs, or power
of public attempts; yet what security, where there lodges a secret enemy?
There was a Foe within him, though he had no visible hand to assail him. For
all the happiness he could promise himself in this assumed freedom of his
infant Sover^ignty, consisted in the enjoyment of a confined Liberty: His very
Palace became his Prison, and himself a Jailer to himself. Rare were his
visits into the City, for he knew well how the Citizens did generally hate him,
and that his own ears could not choose but be witness of their odious censure.
And for his Summer Progresses, they were accompanied with such fears and
jealousies, as every Bush represented to his feavourish thoughts a Bugbear.
Thus were his Recreations made his Afflictions; this bulk of honor a burden to
himself; though sometimes amongst his Infantry he would pretend to mirth,
purposely to delude the conceit of a Court-visitant. As for his princely Port,
(if penury might be held princely) the face of his Court presented so mean a
garb, as it relished no more of State, then his imposthum'd heart of Grace.

But we are to return now to that grand Convene, whereof there was such great
expectance; but what this Mountain brought forth, you shall hear in order, as
things occurred, duly related.

Dies Mercurialis maxim fatalis, quia eo die gravissima Incolis Candiae
obtigisset clades. Annal. Cand.
The first day of their Convene had been ever held fatal and ominous, from that
great Massacre acted under Leopaldus. But observation of days was by them
accounted superstitious. Climenes, as became a professed Zelot, whereto none ever
more publicly pretended, nor more covertly dissembled; with far more privacy
then state entered the Praetorian or great Hall; and after him the body of the
whole Assembly, a gallant prudent Synod, distinguished into two eminent
Societies, of Lords and Commons. Wherein you are to note, that those were only
Titular Lords, and nominally so created by the hand of the Sword, but not by
descent, some few only excepted; who standing upon their privilege of Birth,
held it a derogation to their honor, to be ranked among those who were only
Titular. For those Mushrom surreptitious Peers might be, for their
denomination, properly compared to those Flies bred near to the River Hymerus,
that were but of one days continuance, nay no sooner bred then dead: Quorum
Familia sicut ignota, ita Progenies little an legitima, a plerisque fuit
ambigendum. Alii enim in Coemteriis impliciti Cunis, alii in publicis viis sine
integumentis reperti fuerunt nudi, in Sacrarum aedium liminibus alii, in agris
and areolis Hortorum alii, Parochiali Curae traditi, ut nullius filii. O
generosae Heroum Progeni^^
So as in very deed in their discovery of the Accedents of Armory, they might
justly acknowlegde themselves more beholden to their Titles of Honor by
Accident then Antiquity. Whereof one of that prime House so highly prized
himself in his late acquired purchase of Honor, as he stick'd not to vie with
the chiefest of the Peerage, yet was his extraction well known to all the City,
being found in his Infancy laid swathled in a Churchyard, left wholly to the
care and provision of the Parish. Others likewise of this leaven there were,
who in their childhood had been found without succor or harbor in the public
streets, fields, and garden alleys, and afterward highly advanced in these
times of distraction, for their service, by Climenes grace and favor: And
these would usually beard the eminentest of their Nobility, and not so only,
but contend with them for Offices of high concern, and Places of command,
magnifying their actions, and saying; That their assayes had deservingly raised
them from low extractions to degrees of Honor; Whereas the pusillanimity of
those, whose descents had made them low in the esteem of Fame, had aspersed
upon their names an indeleble tincture, which the length of time would not raze
out, not the splendour of their Family repair, and that their House, though
built up only to the first story, would appear more glorious to the eye of
Posterity, then ancient high Structures grounded on shrinking foundations; and
that theirs would stand, when those vast piles of declining Nobility should
sink. With these and such like affronts would these Sprouts of adventitious
Honor shamelesly encounter their chiefest Peers; which those tame Lords had
more Patience to endure, then Prowess to oppose. And this redounded highly to
Climenes content, whose Honor was his Soldier, by whose assistance, were it
right or wrong, if the distracted Synod should fall in pieces, he promised to
himself security.

These Members being now, according to their distinct qualities, orderly seated
and disposed; Climenes stood up, and in a Preamble, for further he did not go;
(so as all might safely conclude, that the porch was larger then the building)
he expressed the necessity of that Grand Meeting, with some Complements, apt
enough to ingratiate the Members (in which Art he was singularly schooled;)
which done, he enlarged himself no farther; transmitting his sense, and what he
held most consequent to be insisted on for the benefit of the public, to a
Worthy Person of the Assembly (as he termed him) to be more fully communicated
unto them the next day, Siennefius was that Worthy Person, on whose weak
shoulders Climenes had laid the burden of that day; whose long-lung'd Speech
breathing more Church then State, appeared less curt and Laconick then his
Commanders, but far more intricate; for to this hour there was none of all
that great Auditory, that could discover Climenes sense by that Speech without
a Clavis; and it seemed the key was lost, so as they might justly despair of
the opening of it; the only word that gave way to the unlocking of one ward,
was supplies; a term of such hard digestion, as it highly disrelished some
persons, and those eminent Ones, of that Assembly, who, it seemed, either
wholly slighted, or lightly resented Climenes necessity.

The very next day, to discover their disgusts, and satisfy their doubts, two
grave and judicious Counselors, by name Ventilano and Collino, were purposely
sent from the Higher Order of those Conscript Senators, to present to Climenes
two Requests in the name of the whole Synod. The first was, That he would
declare his own sense by publication of his own Speech. The second was, That he
would render an account of the expense of all those vast sums, by which the
State had been so impoverished, and the Royal Exchequer exhausted: Whereto
Climenes with an haughty and imperious deport, without any civility at all
shown to those Counselors of State, replied; That they were in a great error,
if they expected to receive a Transcript from his hand of any Speech that he
had delivered, for it had never been his use, either to employ his own Pen, nor
any other Amanuensis in order to his Expresses, but that it was a divine
Providence inspiring him, whereon he relied, and the only Directory by which he
regulated the subject of his Discourse.

And in answer to their second request, as their expectance of an Account from
him, discovered in them an unexemplary boldness, so would his acquiescence to
their demand in that particular argue his weakness; with which irresolute
answer they returned less satisfied, but more exasperated then before.

But little cared Climenes for their incensement, his hand was upon his Sword,
as Tideus laid his upon his Shield; his highest design was, his Soldiers pay,
which procured, he hoped ere long to pay them home who opposed him.

Climenes had read, no doubt, that Story of Hannibal, and knew well how to make
singular use of it. Of whom it was observed, Strabo, Suidas, Stobaeus, Dion.
Rosardus.
that the nearer he appro^ced in his march to the City of Rome, the Senators
grew less prudent, their Orators less eloquent, and the Citizens less
valiant. The memory of so eminent an example, probably induced him to give
command, that sundry parties of Horse, in good number, should march to and fro
close by the Senate gate with light matches, purposely to beget a Fever in the
House, and consequently in all their Votes to correspond with his desires and
dangerous designs.

And some of these feverish spirits, like wise Politicians, were carried away
with such imaginary fears of death, which they understood to be in the power of
the Sword; and that it argued small discretion to enter into dispute with force
and fury, as they cunningly acted the part of Metius Suffetius, In aspectum
Atrae Virgae, ut prodigium Naturae, contremuerunt.
turning down right Succo^s Merashites, or Neutrals: These trembled at the
sight of the Black Rod; as a fatal Prodigy: They knew death to be the King of
fears, and fear of Kings, much more of inferior Creatures, whose happiness was
their liberty, and from others heavier censure an impunity. Others there were
of more fiery spirits, who spoke home, and were as homely rewarded.

Bellonius to his advantage was not addmitted to be a Member of the Synod; and
if he had, it was general thought, his presence had been to small purpose; for
though a professed enemy to Climenes proceedings, yet he was ever held a Person
of more abilities for a pitched Field, then a Council of State.

And for Lamachus, though much was expected, he had learned so much Council of
Harpocrates, as to lay his finger on his mouth, and teach his tongue to keep
silence.

Of all this great Assembly, there appeared very few to acquiesce to Climenes
supplies, though the occasions and necessities of the Kingdom were vehemently
pressed, and that the constitution of the State could no way subsist without
them. Neither could it avail him to bend his Bow, wanting sinews and strings to
expedite his shot.

Highly incensed was Climenes with this unexpected result from the Assembly,
but principally from the City; wherein, though there were many Indian
Merchants, who, as he supposed, had feathered their Nests sufficiently, yet
would they find no Supplies to accommodate his urgent necessity, which appeared
not only in his public employments, and constant disbursements, in the
continuance of a standing Army, and a straying Navy, but likewise in relation
to his private engagements, by marrying his Daughters to eminent Persons, with
fair promises, but slow performance.

Climenes having taken notice of the disaffection of such, on whom he had
relied, with the prevalent power and increasing strength of those, by whom he
stood opposed; so as it appeared wholly improbable to him, how any expediences
should be for his accommodation procured, or ought condescended to as he
desired, without more ado: As one transported with an implacable passion, not
without some menaces of revenge, he entered the Senate House, and with a rough
furrowed countenance, dissolved that great Council; determining all those
weighty Resolves and Results of the Pretorian in one peremptory period;
concluding, that the late disorders of that Assembly, had begot more
distractions in the State of Candy, then many years before, during all their
civil Wars, had ever produced; and that those domestic divisions fomented in
the breast of a factious House, would breath a fresh vein to the effusion of
more new blood then the late civil Wars, by their fatal influence, to the
irreparable ruin of that State, had formerly occasioned: This storm, said he,
with a countenance no less stormy, appears yet in a cloud, but it would
shortly break forth into a violent tempest, which the misfortunes of a
distempered State might more easily bemoan then prevent; encounter then divert.

It was the opinion of some judicious Members, that the dissolving of this
Grand Council redounded highly to Climenes disadvantage; for if his passion
would have given way to reason, it was verily thought, that the Senate would
have acquiesced to his Demands.

But truth is, it was high time for Climenes to provide for his own safety,
being so dangerously engaged, that if he had not seasonably dissolved this
Great Council, it would in few days have taken course to dissolve him, by
forcing him to act his last Scene on the Scaffold, as he had done to many
others, and to submit his head to Bonnardus Hatchet, by paying his life tribute
to the funeral Obsequies of a fatal Mortality; for his many insolences, heavy
impositions, and insuccessive adventures, had quite razed out the memory of his
former Victories, and resolved his imperious height into mortal hate.

Neither did his words only but his actions give his Adversaries, occasion to
fear the heat of his fury; for the whole Bastile Royal became stored with his
disaffected Instruments.

There was none, to his apprehension, that bare him or his Adherents the least
hate, which he revenged not with semblable spite.

Neither was his fury thus bounded, for remembering those undigested affronts
and indignities which he had received from the City, he devised how to lay
heavy burdens upon the Citizens, not only in relation to their trading or
commerce, which by Pyracies, and other Marine Occurrents, became obstructed,
but even to their buildings, which to the improvement of his own Coffers, or
the advance of his Soldiers, were highly inhanced.

Neither was the City slow in requiting these discurtesies, whereof as they
were very sensible; so in these times of their sufferings there was an
opportunity offered them for acting what their thoughts had privately designed.

About this time there chanced to arise a great difference betwixt two eminent
Families within the City, the Cervisiarii and Dispensatorii. Now Climenes stood
wholly for the former, but the City, in opposition of him, for the latter; so
as there fell no place nor office of command within the walls, wherein the
Disp^nsatorii upon election were not preferred, and the Cervisiarii rejected.
This nettled Climenes heart above all others, being so nearly concerned in his
Relations to the Family of the Cervisiarii, as he ever ingenuously acknowledged
even in the height of his fortunes, that his Extraction originally received
breath from that Family. But this disgust, were it never so justly grounded (as
indeed they could not wound them, but it must pass through his sides) those
that were the prime Commoners, holding the greatest stroke and sway in the
City, slighted his threats, and disesteem'd his frowns: For though he ruled all
by the power of the Sword, yet they knew how to oppose him by the strength of
their Charter, the privileges whereof he had constantly protested to maintain,
even unto death. Now the express words of their ancient Charter, continued by
many Centuries of years, in the Ordination of all Civil Offices, admitted a
free Election, excluding ever those three fearful Precipices, Fear, Favor and
Reward.

Besides all this, so inveterate was the Plebeian hate to Climenes, as his Lady
Adipa, (a mere stranger to a Princely posture) could never make her visits in
the City, but the refuse and off-scum of those streets, where she occasionally
passed, would not stick publicly to revile her, aspersing the fowlest terms of
infamy and disgrace upon her; yet when inquiry was made, the Authors could not
be found. So hard it is to return a remedy, where Authority inclines to a
partial connivence; cordially intending, whatsoever is pretended, to give way,
be it never so much pursued, for the Offenders impunity.

Howsoever this ancient uncivilized Lad appeared as great a Stranger to
Climenes crimes, as she was in her own person to all courtly State, moulding
her self nearer to her own rural Education, then the majesty of that
superlative condition, whereto she was so lately advanced; and indeed, neither
was her Person nor Breeding suitable for courting.

By this time, Climenes growing jealous of the affection of his Soldiery, who
seemed much discontented with the unexpected dissolution of the Senate,
convened before him all the Major-Generals and prime Officers of his Army, to
whom; drawing aside the hangings of his lodging-chamber, he communicated his
troubled thoughts in this manner:

Fellow Soldiers, Climenes Speech to the Prime Officers of his Army.
it cannot be but I should know most of your faces, nor is it possible but most
of you should be known to me; neither can you be ignorant, how the Superior
Power, by which all our humane actions are directed, and to their proper period
reduced, has from time to time gone along with us, owned us, and given us
success above hope in our highest assayes, and most hazardous adventures, The
Sun shone ever cheerfully, and the winds blew prosperously upon us: The
Champaign accommodated our Army with all conveniences suitable for our
undertakings: All the Elements fought for us, to make our Achievements more
glorious, our continued Victories more numerous. Neither shall I blush, from a
grateful recollection of my own condition, to acknowledge the Providence of
Heaven, in raising me from a low ground to this gradual ascent, whereto by step
and step I have mounted; Gradually I may properly say; for without ascribing
any thing to my self, I shall ingenuously confess it, that in my first
initiation and exercise of Arms, I was as one of you, nay lower in account
then the lowest of you; and by what stairs did I ascend to this height, or by
whose hands was I lifted up to this Seat? I call the Heavens to record, in
whose presence I stand, that it was not my ambition, but your unanimity and
free Election, which far above my thoughts, or hopes, raised me to this
condition. It was your joint voice and vote that laid upon me these Commands;
they were put upon me, and not sought. And must my actions now be questioned,
that have been ever cast in that mould, and acquainted with no other end then
preservation of the Subjects ancient Liberties, Royal Privileges, the life of
the Laws, the just maintenance of our Honor, with the safety of our Person,
the security whereof I have many times neglected, as your selves well know, for
advancement of the Public? Now resolve me, will it become you to entertain
jealous thoughts touching your Commander, whose highest endeavors have been
ever so constantly tender of your Honor? Trust me, Fellow Soldiers, Climenes
desires thirst after nothing so much as the knowledge of your affection. Deal
clearly with me; unrivet your bosoms freely, and do not double with me. If you
have a love for me, retain it, it shall be my aim to deserye it; if otherwise,
discover it. Lay down your Commissions, whosoever you be, that have no mind to
serve me. Upon my reputation I vow it, your dis-service, and desertion of me,
shall not distaste me: Nay, if you should imbody your selves in an Army, I
could do no less then smile at your folly, and cheerfully imbattle you, and
make your own blood satisfactory for my injury. Neither do I speak this to
incense them, whose impoysoned thoughts harbor some jealous opinions
concerning me; but to declare to the world how lightly I weigh them, who vapor
forth their undigested, griefs without grounds, desiring nothing more then to
imbroile the State, and involve our late reduced Nation in a new War. I shall
only tell these disaffected Ones, that I should rather have chused to keep
Sheep on an hill, then born Command over such Incendiaries, whose designs
secretly act for shedding more innocent blood, then all their Sympathetick
powders have power to stanch. As for those that will be entirely mine, they
shall have that interest in me, and influence over me, that though I be their
Commander, they shall be Commanders of my affection, and receive ample
remonstrances of their alacrious service and fidelity toward me.

Go on then, fight for me, or against me; as the one may oblige me, so the
other shall not affright me. Resolution can no way suffer, where true Valor
gives Convoy to the Port of Honor.

This Speech wrought attention on some with applause, which was manifested by
their Hum; but the discontented Party went away unsatisfied as they came. Which
Climenes quickly observing, resolved to take another course, and in such a way
as might accommodate him in three main respects, both for securing his Person,
strengthening his Commands, and raising him to the highest pitch of his
Ambition.

And to expedite his designs, seeing himself enclosed with such straits at
home, he seeks how to purchase himself Friends abroad. Ferrara he finds to be
no firm Friend to rely on; his aim therefore was to fall off from their
association, and ingratiate himself by Embassies, with other indearing tenders
of affection, into the Alliance of Hetruria, a long continued Enemy to Ferrara;
imagining, as he might well, that the Hetrurian might prove more useful for his
interest then the uncertain Amity of Ferrara: But for all his solicitancy, the
Hetrurian was too wise to give ear to a reconciled Enemy (and such an one had
Climenes professed himself during all these Civil wars) in adheering and
strongly assisting Ferrara, their mortal Foe against them.

Climenes being thus disappointed of their Alliance, which had been of infinite
consequence to the settlement of his affairs, he determines to set up his rest
upon one especial design, which he had been long in hatching, but now came to
acting; for so the necessity of his condition, wherewith he was straitened,
presently required; and to make a trial of his conclusion, knowing by long
experience, that more advantage would accrue to his addresses by dispatch then
delay, one morning betimes, when they least expected, he calls up his Cabinet
Council, communicating himself freely unto them in this sort.

Climenes Speech to his Cabinet Council.
My prudent and faithful Counsel, it were not possible that I should appear
either so insensible of mine own former condition, or so unmindful of your
vigilant care and approved affection, as not to retain in memory the sundry
straits, whereto the giddy wheel of Fate has in these agitations of State
reduced me; with what promptness and alacrity your great Wisdoms have
seasonably contributed in those extremes to my relief. To whom then should I
make my address, but where I have found such opportunate redresses? And I must
freely acquaint you, that my condition is such, as your advice could never be
more useful to me in the Receipt, nor more grateful in the Application: But
those wounds have been ever held of a malignant quality, that expect cure
without a discovery. I intend therefore with much freedom and confidence to
unbosom my self before your Honors: You cannot but observe how variously
disposed their affections are toward me, who owe themselves unto me: This
dissent in Opinions has begot these divisions, and different distractions. This
great City Thamipolis, the glory of Nations, Candies ancient Metropolis, whose
sinews gave supplies to our Forces in all these Civil Wars against Rosicles,
and his Successor Charicles, are lately fallen from us; standing wholly for a
State-Government, others for a Democracy, others for a Platonic Community:
Whereas your Prudence, who sit at the Stern of the State, has ever stood
constantly to a Monarchical Sovereignty; whereto I have been many times by your
grave advice seriously invited, and solicitously courted; but through a native
modesty being flat against those Principles, which I had fought against and
protested, I seemingly declined.

But, my good Lords, the urgent necessities of these times, with those
threatening combustions and approaching storms, which every where engage our
care for a timely prevention, have so strongly wrought upon our thoughts, as we
are resolved for the acception of that Imperial Title, if your assents, as you
have ever formerly expressed, give way unto it.

Sundry Statizing Libels have been by malignant spirits in sundry corners
dispersed, highly tending to the derogation of our Honor, and Prerogative of
State: All which, our present condition being rest of a Titular Power, we were
necessitated to connive at, as if it had not concerned us. These with many
other State-maladies, may, as we conceive, become capable of a speedy cure by
your joint assent to our admittance of this Style.

Neither has Ambition, but the States preservation, pitched me upon these
Resolves; for HE, in whose presence I stand, has ever dictated to me this good
Counsel; Let Reason go before every Enterprise, and Counsel before every
Action: Eccles. 37.16.
Which Precept I have to my seriou'st thoughts often proposed; and it shall be my
content to surfer in the highest measure, rather then decline from it.

I desire no more of you, nor can I expect less from you, then to pursue what
you did attempt; your foundations, have taken up a great deal of room. Do but
accomplish and make good what you have undertaken; and handle those things
which you have devised and mused of with your selves.

My Lords, you have a great share in me, Sen. ad Lucil.
under which notion I must freely tell you, that I have been more wearied with
Commanding then Conquering: Yea, so dispassionately has my patience been
transported with the guidance of this People, as I should have holden my
condition more happy in being a Shepherd, then leading such wild Cattle: And to
enlarge my self more,
had not the high interest and necessity of this State received such commanding
influence over me, and laid these servile Manacles (for less I cannot hold
them) upon me, I should have taken into my thoughts that opinion of Seleucus;
That if any one should but consider what thorny cares were interwoven in a
Crown, he would not hold it worthy taking up, if it lay in the street. But this
care is exacted of me, and I must become a principal sharer in it: this yoke is
imposed on me, and I must bear it.

Now, that I may be the fitter molded for it, and better enabled to support
it, be it your goodness to lend me your heads, as I shall upon all occasions
render you my hands. Action and Policy must make up the Diapason in this
State-harmony; for where the Gown and Gantlet are managed with discretion, and
in a Symmetrial order, they cannot choose but come off with honor, and by their
fair deportment present actions corresponding with the constitution of a
Senate, and the Title of an Emperor.

His Cabinet Counsel was so fitly molded to his bent, as they knew well how to
sooth his humor. So as, though some of them had highly disgusted Climenes rash
Act of dissolving the Synod without the privity or approvement of his Council;
they not only with joint vote assented, but strongly importuned him to expedite
his Resolve in this acceptance of the Imperial Crown. This was the Lure which
they applied, and whereon his attractive appetite quickly baited. Neither did
Climenes retard their desires: For though daily swounings arising from an
ill-limited swinge of passion, and fury of opposition had much enfeebled him:
nay, though nightly fears and jealousies, ushered in with terrible visions had
greiviously startled him; yet so strongly had Ambition seized upon his
thoughts, as nothing could be with more winged speed accelerated, then the
pursuit of his Imperial Investiture; which within few days after, was with
more privacy then public solemnity accomplished in this manner.

The Prince Ferrara by his Proxy was highly courted to be there present, but
affairs of more obliging concern had engaged him. The Dukes too of Florence and
Millain were expected; Climenes was a Person incomparably passionate, and of a
vindicative nature, which brought him to pay his debt to Nature the sooner.
but upon a Provincial Diet being otherwise employed, they excused their
absence. And well might Foreign States be dispensed with, when the ancient
Peerage of Candie were taken with such an Epidemical distemper, as none of all
these could be seen at this great Solemnity, conceiving, as might be collected
probably, that such an immerited honor was unfittingly conferred on a
pretended Power, shadowed with the Robe of an usurped Majesty; which Climenes
quickly observing, he in great choler passionately vowed, that he verily
thought all the Nobility of that Island was taken with the Calenture, but he
would find a way to cure their distemper.

All this fore-slowed not his design: For his jealousy had caused many of his
Lifeguard to be secured.
All hands were employed; all things with much state and magnificence prepared,
though the Confluence appeared thin to accompany it. The Imperial Ebor or Chair
of State was erected: An Arch-Flamin, by whom these Regal Ceremonies were to be
performed, readily attended: An Imperial Diadem adorned with the pretioust
Stones that the East afforded. Where Climenes, as if he had put on a new face,
answerable to the person which he was to represent, ascended to his Throne with
an unwonted state, upon the Cornish whereof he found these words written in a
little Scedule: In terram, Diadema si tollas, a terra in terram tolleris,
antequam geres. On earth, if thou take a Crown, thou may receive it, but
from earth thou shall return to earth before thou wear it. This upon his first
reading of it did not a little amaze him; but afterward holding it to be the
device of some disaffected person, or rather some Magical Spell or
Enchantment, he wholly slighted it; though shortly after this incantation
proved a true divination. For scarcely had that Imperial Crown impaled his
head, till (as if it held it self too worthy a Receipt for such a Guest) he sunk
down suddenly, and so expired.

The report of this unexpected change was presently bruted abroad through all
the Garrisons, designed for the guard of his Person, and safeguard of the
Palace, which were numerous, and in several places disposed; so many were the
fears, jealousies, and affrights, which usually encountered him; being, indeed
to the judgment of all those who knew him, a constant terror, or rather a
prison to himself; wherein he exercised his imperious Sovereignty, and
Syracusan Tyranny, till this adventitious Fate (which occasioned more grounds
of joy then tears) cut him off from acting more cruelty, by imposing a period
to his usurped Power, and closing it with a tragic and disconsolate
Catastrophe.

Neither had this report of his death only possessed the Guards, for by this time
it had sounded loudly in the ear of the Roman Regiment, who were ever held the
strength and sinews of his Army. These, as they were Soldiers of Fortune, no
sooner heard of Climenes fall, then they stood up for another rise. And the
late unfortunate and proscribed Charicles must be the man; Charicles priusquam
Regale Solium ascenderat mortem obiit, a cujus discessu, illius frater
Jagonius, Princeps egregiae indolis, ex miae mentis, invicti Spiritus,
infatigabilis industriae, militibus perquam charus, communi omnium arbitrio,
Imperiali Titulo censebatur dignissimus. Ficin. Sect. 2. parag. 7. Some vary in
this Relation, saying, that Charicles dyed before he ascended the Regal Throne;
and that his B other Jagonius, a Prince of an undanted spirit, and by all the
Soldiery infinitely loved, lineally succeeded him; which is by the approvedst
Centurists opposed.
which they publicly attested, and with joint clamor ecchoed forth in these
words: REVOCETUR CHARICLES AB EXILIO, IN REGALI CONSTITUATUR SOLIO: Let
Charicles be recalled from Exile, and restored to his Empire.

This startled the Counsel of State; but holding it no discretion to dispute
with Power, after a short Consult (for the heady Regiment would permit no long
debate) it was by joint vote concluded, and with the Signal Manual of the
Senate consigned, that a Commission General so sealed should be recommended to
the care and transaction of an Eminent Person for that purpose elected and
authorized, with qualified Hostages deposited: the purport of which Instrument
bore this face; That it was the universal consent and desire of the State of
Candie, that Charicles should be recalled from Banishment, and re-invested in
his hereditary Rights, and Imperial Throne; That Security was already given, by
considerable Hostages, for his safe arrival and access to his Metropolitan City
Thamipolis, and his Royal Palace Leucoma, a too accurate Seat for an usurping
State.

These pleasant tidings came no less unexpectedly then seasonably to the ear of
Charicles, being at that time divided betwixt hope and fear; but over-ballanced
were his hopes with fears, having such weak Forces visibly appearing to
advance his hopes.

Time would admit no delay in pursuit of so fair an opportunity; so soon
therefore as he could prepare himself with conveniences suitable for so
important an Expedition, he resolved to take his leave of the Court of Ferrara,
and address his course for Candy.

Many days were not past, till all things were provided according to his
desires, and every way corresponding with his occasions.

Along then, with his disconsolate Mother, a Lady of singular piety, with
others of his Relation, he commits himself to the mercy of the Sea, where, by
the assistance of prosperous winds, within short time after he landed in
Meloces an Haven in Crete, anciently famous for confluence of Merchants and
plenty of Traffic; from whence he was with all Princely state, and a gallant
retinue of Peers, (such as had been seldom seen in the presence of Climenes)
with all cheerfulness and alacrity conducted toward Thamipolis. Some half a
league before he came to his Palace of Leucoma; where he first intended to
show himself to his Court and People, he alighted from his Chariot, and taking
the Queen Mother by the hand; Madam, said he, will your Highness be pleased to
take Horse? It will give satisfaction to the longing expectance of our
affectionate Subjects. She inclined to his motion; and drawing near to the
sight of the Aceschein or Refectory, mounted prospectively above the Court
gate: Charicles casting his eye aside, sent forth a deep sigh. What may
occasion that, said Iri^a, arriving so near your own? Madam, re^lyed he, this
wa^ fetched from the sad memory of mine own; the crimson circle of that
unhallowed place made your Grace a Widow, and us Orphans; this was that
Perfidious plat, where in the sight of his own, he was deserted of his own, and
weakly bemoaned by his own, the sable Stage where he performed that last Act,
which reft you of an Husband, us of a pious Father.

This relation Irina plenteously imbathed in tears; but high and consequent
affairs enjoined their divertisement from a pursuit of passion, to such a
composure or moderation, as might suit better with the necessity of their
addresses.

The very next day after Charicles repair to Leucoma, his inauguration was
with all Princely magnificence and solemnity performed; wherein it was a
wonderful thing to observe, with what promptness (to omit the incomparable care
and sedulity of his Courtiers) that Neutral City, which so lately before had
dis-obliged their absolute Sovereign, by impoverishing themselves to strengthen
the sinews of an Usurper; with what alacrity, I say, these Protean Proselytes
or State-Chamelions, having changed their hearts as well as habits, manifested
their Zeal to this late inaugur'd Prince, not only in acclamations, public
shows, presentiments, and Bone-fires, with Conduits running freely with all
sorts of Wines, but in precious and rich presents; implying demonstratively,
that though their Treasuries had been long time shut from the seizure of an
Usurper, they could readily find keys to open them to their Hereditary Prince
and lineal Emperor.

This incomparably ingratiated him, and advantaged them in the confirming their
Charter, which by their miscarriage had run it self upon a shelf of irreparable
danger, had not the Princes indulency past over the highness of their
delinquency: which in the judgment of that time appeared to be a singular
argument of clemency in Charicles, who had far greater cause to revenge then
remit, not only the private designs, but public attempts of many
self-interested Citizens of Thamipolis, who professed themselves constant
Favorites to Climenes, during the pursuit of all those Civil Wars; which
affectionate adherency they were ever ready to manifest in their ample and
voluntary contributions upon all occasions, as likewise in their promptness of
Recruits, affording fresh supplies to the Rebels assistance with more quickness
then it was required.

Yet the memory of all these insupportable injuries by the Princes piety became
buried; so highly was he taken with those visible testimonies of their
submission and humble desires of reconciliation, as his benign disposition made
revenge a a stranger to his thoughts, receiving them into his Favor, whose
actions had merited the heaviest weight of his displeasure.

Truth is, it was not possible that any occasional disgust could be so
implacable, as not to be in some measure attempered or mollified by their
seasonable application, and free agnition of their disallegiance toward him,
and by what person principally those disrepects had been fomented: And this was
one Salino, who had been the only disciplinary Martialist for the City. A man
seemingly appearing of a clear and serene temper, but cordially factious, and
of a turbulent nature; which being aggravated by sundry instances, brought him
to a shorter period then his Accomplices desired, though nothing sooner then his
actions deserved; being executed on the Artillery Round, where his perfidious
Headpiece had molded the platforms of many dangerous divisions: So easy it
was for one contagious Member to infect a whole Society, and by poisonous
ingredients distemper the constitution of a Loyally-affected City. For had not
the sinister influence of such as these operated strongly upon the principles
of Thamipolis, it had never fallen into such dangerous conclusions, nor professed
it self either hostile or neutral to a lineal Sovereignty.

After this unexpected juncture by the Prince his gracious acceptance of the
Citizens into his favor and protection, there past not one day without some
Presentment or other set forth to the best beauty and advantage that either Art
or Invention could devise. Amongst which there was one only Satirical Conceit,
which took infinitely above the rest; and this was presented in a dance of
Sylvans, wherein the chiefest Sylvan, attired in Princely habit, after the end
of the Antic, bearing the vivid Effigies, both in countenance and personage,
of Climenes, sat mounted in a Chair of State, to whom was presented a Coronet
of pure gold; and having his head ready to be impaled with it, there appeared
an hand out of a Cloud snatching at the Coronet so presented, and in a Crystal
Ovally formed, containing this Impresse, DETUR DIGNIORI. This was no sooner
shown, then the Sylvan was with much disgrace forced out of that Chair, wherein
he was formerly placed, and another more Princely or Majestic Sylvan, holding
a near resemblance both in favor and feature to Charicles, was set in that
Chair of State, and dignified with the Coronet. This Invention infinitely
contented the well-affected, which was generally so, or pretending to be so.
Though Charicles forth of a native modesty, either seemed not to observe it, or
would take no cognizance of it, being much below his scorn to impe his wings
with scattered feathers, or to triumph in the dishonor of a deceased Foe,
whose ignominy, though it deserved no pity, yet he held it ignoble to rub over
the wounds of a blasted memory.

Neither did this his gallant compassion, extend it self only so his deceased
Enemy, but even to his Posterity, to as there were none of his Relations, who
did not amply taste of it; only it was his pleasure with much mildness to tax
his Daughter Salacia, a Lady infinitely spritely, and a complete Curtezan, of
her too much liberty, wishing her to be more tender of her honor; wherein he
expressed rather the office of a Father then a stranger. So as Alexander, that
universal Monarch, could never show more Princely clemency nor affability to
Darius Wife and his Children, after his Conquest, then Charicles did to the
Relations of Climenes after his death.

True it is, that though Climenes laid great taxes; assesses, and impositions
upon the Candiots, pretending, that the constitution of the State could not
otherwise subsist, which pressures begot him a general Odium amongst the
Natives, whose necks had been formerly free of such servile yoaks; Neither,
indeed, could Charicles, in respect of his absolute Command, and Climenes
numerous oppressions, incur the censure of in justice, if he had converted
his Enemies rich Coffers to the furnishing of his poor Exchequer.
yet these allegations of his appeared to be, after his death, mere pretenses;
for his Coffers were full of treasure, besides the Banks he had stored up in
other Nations; which by report of some Merchants employed in those parts, and
nearly interested in his Commands, were of high consequence.

Now collect hence the rare temperance and moderation of Charicles amidst these
attractive Baits. Power enough he had to seize on them, and to convert them to
his own Treasury; yet neither could the memory of an Enemy, nor his own
resistless Authority, induce him to act ought that might detract from the
splendour of Justice, or appear light in the scale of Equity. Whatsoever those,
who had relation to Climenes, impropriate to themselves, he not only left
untoucht, but published it as his express Command, that none, under what color
or pretense soever, should seize upon any such treasure, substance, or
utensils, but leave them to the enjoyment of his Successors without
disturbance: Which Princely compassion not only gave wings to his Fame, but won
those to his affection, whose hearts had been before Aliens to his devotion,
and private obstructers (for further they durst not go) to his late investiture
and inauguration.

But to the end he might declare himself in a more satisfactory manner to his
Peerage and Commons, he proposed a sixth day, wherein he intended to communicate
his thoughts and designs relating to the State in general; as likewise touching
some eminent Persons, of whose different opinions and affections toward him,
he had received both by intelligence, and personal interests, ample
demonstrations, which in a Princely demean and well-beseeming posture (as none
could deliver his mind with a more majestic presence, nor propriety of
express) he returned in this sort.

Charicles Speech to the Peers and Commons of Candie.
My Lords and Commons; and to you first, who hold the first place in my
thoughts, nay, to whom I owe my self, in recollection of my late condition, and
your approved zeal; which your loyal desires no less opportunely then
compassionately expressed, when my necessities required them most, being in the
depth of my extremes, and the lowest ebb of my fortunes; yet as in the purest
Minerals there is to be found some ground-soyle, and impurer metal; so there
were some among you, whom I shall leave to the scrutiny of their own breasts)
who, though their Extractions were anciently good, yet the corruption of these
times had depraved them, and by degenerating principles made them evil. These
were such, as neither the apprehension of my calamitous condition could reclaim
them, nor their own sufferings, being slaved to a tyrannick Government, reduce
them. These were no refined metal, no gold of Peru, for they would not abide
the touch, but adulterate; Neutrals at the best, if not professed Enemies to the
equity of my Cause.

I should be loath to dart a glowing blush on any of their faces by my
discovery; I leave them to a sensible remorse of their obliquities, and a
bosom-agnition of their own disloyalty. By the word of a Prince, so they redeem
the time they have lost, and teach their thoughts to be regulated by his
Commands, whose just Sovereignty they stand obliged to obey, their former
failings shall be past over with all impunity: To have it in ones power to
punish, and not to inflict it, I have ever held it Princely.

But let not this Clemency be abused, lest it return with the heavier stroke;
enjoy your own, so long as with fidelity you own him whom you ought to serve,
and from whose allegiance in the least iota to decline, is to lose your selves.

But it will not hold with reason, that all should be admitted to this
Indulgence: Some have had their hands deeply imbrewed in the innocent blood of
a pious Prince, our indeered Father, and to remit these, were to forget the
memory of a Father.

Yet in relation to that Fact, the unexemplary cruelty whereof no Age may
parallel, we are not wholly ignorant, how those Assacinates (for otherwise we
cannot possibly brand them) were of a several and distinct qualification in
that tragic and tyrannick Scene; some being only Assenting, and those traduced
by error; others Active, and those possessed with rankor, whose irregular fury
deserves an higher censure.

For the former, we have a bosom opening to mercy; but for the latter, as they
had active hands in depriving their Native Prince of life, and us of a Father;
it cannot be otherwise holden then a mild severity, and a temperate act of
Justice, if we abridge their liberty, by confining them to a perpetual
restraint: Our well-affected Party has been confined for their conscientious
obedience, well may these suffer in the same manner for their dis-allegiance.

As for that prime Moulder and Fomenter of these mischiefs, more exquisite
tortures had been inflicted on him, if his sudden death had not prevented our
revenge.

Others there be, who, though our too much intimacy and bounty obliged them to
us, yet were they made Intelligencers against us. No passage in our
Cabinet-Counsel, were it never so important, could promise secrecy, nor to our
Person security, through their interests and intercourse of Letters with our
mortal Enemy: Some of these State-timists we have formerly discovered, and laid
it open unto them, shadowing their excuse with silence; for no other defense
could they pretend for their dis-service; only some formal arguments of remorse
were afterward shown by them which allayed our heat, injoyning them no other
penance then their absence for our satisfaction. Our Resolves stand fixed; they
must hold themselves strangers to our Court. Fruits being once corrupted at
heart, appear they never so specious, cannot prove sound.

For you, my Commons, we impute your neglect of obedience to that common error
of Plebeian ignorance; we are confident that your disloyalty closed in that low
degree, as it scarcely deserved to fall under the notion of Treason; you were
carried along with the strong current of the time; applying your weak interests
to the peremptory commands of your Superiors. It was your sole desire to sit
quietly under your own Vine, and to partake of the fruit of your own Olives;
whereof, by this enjoyment of peace, you may amply receive the benefit.

Rely on the reputation of his word, under whose Sovereignty you live, that you
cannot be more dear to your selves then you shall be unto us, so popular
Faction divide you not from us. Not do we doubt it, for we see that
cheerfulness in your faces, as it assures us, that nothing but Characters of
loyalty can be writ in your hearts: From which assurance, we have signed your
pardon with the Signet Manual of our pity.

Now for you the Citizens of our great Thamipolis, we cannot be ignorant of
your free contributions to our disadvantage, your purses were never straitened,
nor your hands contracted, so you might by the emptying of your Coffers
strengthen the sinews of the public Enemy, in the defiance of your Princes
sovereignty. Notwithstanding all this, you shall know that our resolves are
steered rather by Reason then Passion; and that the relish of Remorse has
stronger influence over us then the spirit of revenge: nay, that it shall be
ever the lowest of our scorn, to lift up our hand to strike, where Princely
Clemency invites us to spare; nor to use Corrasives, where we hope that
Cordials may cure; we appear here in this Pretorian, where we have been lately
re-invested in our lineal right, ready to receive you with an indulgent bosom,
and lodge you in the arms of mercy. In a word, our compassion shall acquaint
you, that as our feet be slow in attempting, so we are none of those Syracusan
Furies, whose hands were heavy in inflicting. And to cement your hearts more
individually to us, our request shall be this unto you all, that you would use
your Swords for us, so long as we govern justly, and to unsheath them against
us, when we act ought deviously, or contrary to the rule of Equity.

Mean time we give way, that your Charter, Liberties, Privileges, and
Immunities be confirmed in as large and ample manner, to all intents and
purposes, as they were first granted; for it is not our meaning, that you
should lose any thing by your late opposition, so you redeem the time, and
repair your fame by subsequent Evidences of your loyalty and affection.

The Citizens, with the rest of the people there assembled, being able to
contain themselves no longer, expressed their universal joy with this joint
Applause and Acclamation: Long may CHARICLES rule over us; long and
prosperously may He and his Royal Posterity flourish, and peaceably reign over
CANDIE.

An additional Observation extracted from the historical sequel of this ROYAL
ROMANCE
FRom a narrower and nearer scrutiny into this Author (a singular Surveyor and
Observer of the Revolutions of those fatal times) we find how one Darchirus
succeeded Climenes; a Person of pleasure, naturally addicted to Hunting,
Hawking, and other generous Recreations: So as being either wearied with the
unsuteable burden of State Affairs, or the apparent disgust of some neerallying
Competitors, or out of a conscientious resentment of the unjust usurpation of
his Father, and injurious deprivation of Rosicles, he begun to cast his eye
upon the true Line, surrendering his Crown, and betaking himself to the innocent
freedom of a Country life.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
FOl. 6. lin. penult. for required read acquired: f. 7. l. 15. for Pavedone r.
Panedone: f. 32. l. 4. for winning r. winging: f. 81. l. 4. for stated r.
seated: f. 88. l. 21. for bemone r. become: f. 94. l. 14. for Enthimio r.
Euthimio: f. 109. l. 27. for retraction r. retractation: f. 119. l. 18. for
cleanest r. clearest: fol. 129. l. penult. for foreign r. forage: f. 132. l.
2. for cure r. care: f. 161. l. 20. for his r. her: l. 21. r. roseack: f. 192.
l. 26. for Gallery r. gullery: f: 195. l. 9. for when r. what: f. 196. l. ult.
r. of fancy: f. 202. l. 4. for proviviseth r. promises: f. 215. l. 6. for
Prince r. prime: f. 226. l. 7. for levity r. lenity: f. 240. l. 18. for stiars
r. stairs: f. 241 l. 27. for employed r. employed: Marg. ib. fot Alius r. ALBUS:
f. 243. l. 29. for Consults r. Consuls: f. 244. l. 23. for a r. all: f. 246. l.
l. for bearing r. being: f. 257. l. 24. for continent r. convenient; f. 259. l.
13. for nature r. feature: fol. 266. for wise r. moral: Marg. f. 271. l. 12.
for Primer r. Pruner.


