True Excellency of GOD and his Testimonies, and our National Laws, against
TITULAR EXCELLENCY. Or, A LETTER To the GENERAL his Excellency THOMAS Lord
FAIRFAX, With a Complaint and Chart against Tyrannical Whitchcock the
Governor of Winsor for arbitra ily, d^fig^^rly and maliciously walking
contrary to the Scripture^ of God, and the laws and Liberties of the People.
From Captain William bray at his un-Christian Indurance there.
Prove. 21.3. To do Justice and Judgment, is more a^ceptable to the Lord then
sacrifice. Prove. 27. Open Rebuke is better then secret love. To Level all to
LAW we must.
To Level all to LUST'S not just.
And I do exclaim and Cry out unto Thomas Lord Fairfax to perfo^me engagement
to the people, while it is cal^'d to day; and unto all the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, and other the Free People of the Nation (that truly own
God, Scripture and Law) Murder, Murder, Murder, I say Murder.
Sir,
I Had thoughts never to have written to you more; but love to my Country, and
Tyranny justly provokes me; I wll once more see whether the Lord, or common
reason, (the latter of which has prevailed with Pagans) will prevail with you;
as for the former if the Lord has manifested himself to you, surely you will
then be won to righteousness and justice; and if principles of neither will
prevail, you may quickly judge whether you are a Christian, or a reasonable
man's I know the wise God is able to give and restore principles of nature and
ri^hteousnesse, though by your conversation you act, as if there was no such
things dwell^ng in you.

To do impartial judgment and justice, is suitable to scripture, and the
infallible evident commands thereof, and judgment denounced against the
violators of justice. It is the reason why authority was constituted, Isa.
30.18. Isa 61.8. Exodus 18.21, and 23. 26, and Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. and 16.19. and
25.1. 2 Chronicles. 9.6, 7. Isa 2.23, 24. Ier. 5.28, 29. ^ 22.16, 17, 18. Amos 5 12.
and 6.12, 14. Micha. 39.11. Zach. 18.16, 17, Will you praunce upon the
Scriptures of God ^ow? I am by force a Slave, a Prisoner in an an illegal
Goal, in walking in an undoubted Christian, natural Parliamentary way of
appeal, and this is destructive to, a stifeling and strangling the foundations
of nature, of humane societies, of justice, of Scripture, of the c^pit^ll
obligations, of God to man, man to God, and one man to another, as you may see
in my Book, Entitled, Innocence and Blood of the Slain Soldiers and People,
mightily complaining and crying out to the Lord, and the people of the land,
against those Forty Knights and Burg^sses that sit, or that you have left in
the House of Commons; and in that you may see the cruelty exercised against a
freeman of England at large. If any the people of the land or a nation have
lost the right of appeal, against you, or any man for their eight years blood,
and treasure, then that man or men must needs be a Tyrant. I am deal with just
as if a child should ask bread of a father, and he should give him a Serpent;
this is the ^^ing and poison of our miseries, and casting out of ^ut
fundamental liberties and safeties; this is unaccou^tablenesse indeed, this is
idol^zing of persons indeed; and yet you have out off the King, and told the
people that he was an Idol. But to me there is but one God and Father of whom
are all things, etc. This is lawfulness, this is (as much as in you lies) to
be supreme to God, to nature, to Scripture. Did we fight for our Laws and
Lib^rties, and is there no Law? Did your House (as you may call it) Vote since
they cut off the King, that you would maintain the fundamental laws, and is
there no law? shed blood for law, and is there no law? Are not you one of the
murderers then, if no law? Could the King, or the Kings party transgress if
there was no law? Will you make the Apostle a liar? for he says, Where there
is no Law there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. Truly Sir, M^ster Peter's your
Chaplain did never read Peter thoroughly; if he has he may weep bitterly.

Was not Christ the head of Saints, the only Son of the most High Crucified and
butchered by mere subtilty, conjoined with force? Contrary to Law, Reason, God
and Nature? And the design of God from eternity did not take away their
blood-guiltinesse, so as to make them without blemish, and the murder no
murder.

Sir, the souldier^ (though they were may be commanded) had a hand in the
innocent blood as well as Pilate and the chief Priests; Soldiers are some of
the best of men, or some of the basest of men.

Did the Parliament invite the King to blood, for their Laws and Liberties? and
did they desire the King to rely for his security upon the Laws and affections
of the people? and will not you do what you would have had him do? with many
other eminent and transcendent expressions to maintain the Laws and Liberties
of the people, which were violated as they declared, 1 par. of the Parli. Dec.
p 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16. 38. 140. 150, 151. 200, 209 259 266, 267. 272. 278.
323. 464. 466. 473 687. 689. 692, 693, 694. 697. 698, 699, 700. 702, 703. 710,
711. 721, 722, 723. 727. 729. All these are worthy perusal.

It is the greatest evidence of an unchristian spirit that can be to maintain
the principle and practice of force against reason, Justice, Law and Scripture;
Law, Reason and Scripture should be above force, and force should be always a
servant to just Law, to obey the commands of it, against such whomsoever, as
would make force supreme to Law and Justice; and no authority is to command
any thing unjust, 1 part of the Book of Dec. of Parl. p. 207. 690. Master Cook
in King Charles his Case, page 23. For by it authority does break all the reins
of order and government, and become Tyrants, (as Master Solicitor St. John said
against the Earl of Strafford) Wolves, Bears, Polcats, Foxes beasts of prey,
not men, not Christians; but capital murderers, chief Robbers of Nations, of
Families, of Persons, pray Sir have a care stand, and make a hault, and
acknowledge, Lord, the Scripture, and the Law, above your self, and your
fawning proselytes.

The Parliament charged the King in the first part of the Book of Declarations.
page 689, 693. That he intended to govern the Kingdom and People by the violent
Laws Martial; And say they, accurs^d be that advice to ways of force, and let
all the people say Amen. The King told the Parliament they intended such things
themselves, as they charged him with; O Lord, arise and judge. By the Law of
England, such was the justice of the Law, in the former, and late King his
Reign, whom you have cut off; That if Catile be destroyed and impounded in a
Castle or Fortress, and withheld against gage or pledges, and if they be
solemnly demanded by the Sheriff, and not delivered, etc. The Castle or
Fortress shall be beaten down without recovery, and all the damages that the
people has sustained in his beasts, etc. shall be restored him by the Lord, or
by him that took the beasts, if he have whereof; and if he have not whereof, he
shall have it of the Lord; See Lieut. Col. Lilburn that Patriot, in his Bo^k
called the Peoples Prerogative. Bro. Rio^ 2. 3. 52 H. 3. 3. 13. Ed. 1. 32.
V.N.B. fol. 43. 44 Regist. fol. 85 52. H. 3. 21 Regi. fol. 81 fitz. N.B fo. 68.
F. But now there is not so much c^re of mankind, though Christ declares Gods
providentiall care of humane nature; of the h^lt of a man's head, (nor
mentioning my engagement unto blood, and faithfulness for Laws and Liberies,
as there is provision for beasts; no, not that provision that the laws of
Nature* the Land, and especially Christianity provides. O brave Representative
Justice (as you and they call your selves)! Oh brave General of an English Army
for Laws and Liberties, who has declared against arbitrariness under his hand
in several Declarations to King and Parliament; and more then that, violently
opposed his Lords and Masters, and Benefactors under a pretense of Justice.

If the mere being of Policy ( alias Knavery) and Force is in this our
generation good and just* then the cruelty and murder of the Lord Jesus was
good and just, (which any honest man or Christian abhors to imagine,) then the
murder committed upon other saints and servants of God was just, then resolved
designing robbers and murderers upon the highway, are holy and just men; then
the Kings cause was good, and would have been as good as yours every whit, if
he had been but Conqueror; and yet you arraigned him at your Bar for a Tyrant,
a Traitor and a Murderer.

But this way of unrighteousness (I had much jealousy in my spirit, before
the Kings blood was taken away) would and will come to pass, dest^uctive to
the Laws of God, Nature and the Land. And indeed, when I came unto you from the
Tro^ps, (being with others sent with an assurance from them to your Excellency)
they did by me assure you, that if there was cord alnesse, justice and
impartiality, and the laws of settlement, justice and freedom to the Nation in
futur, as you had declared you aimed at* they would (if God and Nature c^lled
for it) spill their blo^d as water, to accomplish those ends for the Nation,
under your conduct. And truly, Sir, I must profess, as in the presence of the
Lord, I was as cordial to you and your person (i^ order and subordination to
that supreme end, and the honor and love I b^ar to m^ God and my Country) as
to my own body and spirit. But I must confess, my judgment was, the Trial of
the King would not be so justifiable bu^ by a new, speedy and free Parliament,
as I told one of your Secretaries, and diverse others, in the Gallery at
White Hall; and I looked upon the Laws, Rights, Freedoms and safeties of the
people, to be that alone that would justly satisfy them, make ^ good issue of
the Wa^, and make a general peace in the Nation, according to mutual
agreement and concord, in common and plain principles of Scrip^ures and common
reason, as Mr Solicitor Cook said against King Charles in his Case, page 22.
But I went again suddenly into the country, and having not been there long, I
had information of the break^ng and rending of the House of Commons (part of
which was done before I went out of Town) and the declared pretense was bruited
abroad, that they joined in the Scottish Invasion: and a little after that, I
heard of the erect^on of a Court of Justice, and of the resolution* of the
Grand^es intention to try the King, before a new Parliament, and before they
went through the Rights of the People; which when I he^rd, made me fetch a deep
and hearty sigh in my own spirit (for my Country) to consider it; and what
insecurity there was to the peoples Rights, Justice, Freedom and Peace, which
the Army spoke so much of in the Remonstrance from St. Albans the 16 of November.
last, against the King and Parliament; declaring against the inordinate temper
of spirit to bre^k the bonds of Law and Magistracy, and to fly above the due
bounds of Order and Government; against interest, and that the King would, not
stop or bogle at principles of ^evenge, falsehood, cruelty, faith or oath,
pretenses, will, power, oppression, corrupt forms without law, or rooted in the
Law; against awful reverence, and idolizing of persons, offices and
dispensations, to fit for Ecclesiastical and Civil Tyranny; against
vainglory, hypocrisy, Tyranny, and in sum of all, against arbitrary power in
any over the peoples Laws, Liberties and Properties; against the hardship of
imprisonment used to Patriots, that had appeared to assert the common
Liberties, the several designations of some to the slaughter, some to exile,
others to prisons, all to the misery of one sort or other; and that the Kings
injustice and arbitrariness was the cause of the War, and innocent blood, and
of all the evil consequents and concomitants thereunto, and not the oppressed:
with other enamouring and unparalleled language and expressions: pages 4. 10.
14. 16. 17. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 26. 29. 30. 31. 32. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 65. 66.
67. 68. 70. See also the former Declarations, page 10. 14. 39. 40. 41. 42. etc.
Mr Cooks Book against King Charles, page 37. 38. 42. etc. Let the Lord, and the
people that are unbiased, Judge whether they do not ^^e^d in the some steps.
But the main ^^^n and strain of my affections was to the Rights of the people,
is the Lord Almighty knows, and the security of the Laws and Liberties; and the
Lord bears me wi^nesse, I have yet stood to that, against all temptations of
proffered honor or revenge, and ^o (I trust) shall, as I have showed in my
Book her^ re^ited. I do not sp^ak this neither so as to r^pine against the
mighty h^nd of the Lord, in that the Kings life was taken away; or to stir up
any heart-burnings in any against you or any other, for I do abhor it; though
man many times may do things out of wicked and unholy ends, which the Lord does
in time discover: for I am satisfied in my conscience and judgment (a before
the Lord) and I will decl^re it though I were to perish, that I beleev^ the
King was guilty of the blood of the people, and the violation of the peoples
Laws and Liberties. But your guil^iness will be far more, if you apost^tize and
defer^ that supreme end, even the just Laws and Liberties of the Nation, for
which we fought, and were formerly made, and also the enlargement of ou^
freedoms and safety. And for the enjoyment of justice and freedom, I can live
(I thank the Lord my strength, the m^st High) with satisfaction under any
Government, whether M^n^^chy, Arist^cracie o^ Democracie: but I must confess,
I had rather l^ve under a well bounded Monarchy by Laws and Liberties, then a
corrupt Aristocracy.

The Scriptures and the Laws of England are favorable and tender of the life
and Liberty of humane Nature, of Mankind, Genesis 49 6, 7 Number. 35.31, 33 Ezekiel.
35.5, ^. 1 King. ^.5 6. Exodus 21.14. D^ut 19.10, 11 12, 13 and 21 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7 8, 9. Mic 2.1. most eminent and glorious Scriptures, worthy of the
Nations faithful reading and use. And, says Mr. Steel in Duke Hamiltons
Case, If di^ers persons do come to do an unlawful act, and one commit murder
or Treason, its so in all. 1 M. Dyer 38. 11 H. 4. 13. 19. Edw. 2. Fitz Cor.
4.33. And The Law of England (says the Lord Cook) is a Law of righteousness
and mercy, 1 part of Instit. sect. 483 fol 2 0. 2 part of Instit. fol. 42. 43.
46. 55 56. 115. 186. 189. 190. 526. and 4 part of Instit. fol. 168. See Lieut.
Col. John Lilburn^ Case of the Sentence in the Star Chamber, and the Votes upon
it for his reparations, that the Sentence was wicked, cruel, bloody, illegal,
barbarous and tyrannical.

The Nations right of appealing is not only strangled and stifled, but I am
sent unto your Jurisdiction, and am in the custody of a Tyrant, that has dealt
contrary to the Law with me, as if he were Lord Paramount, not only ^o those
that committed me, but to the Law, and Liberties of the People: For a Prison
(in case I had been legally and righteously committed) ought to be only for
safe custody; as the Lord Cook says* Prisons ought to be for keeping men safe,
to be tried acco^ding t^ the just Laws and Customs of the Land: but not to
punish or destroy them, or to remain till the parties committing please (as the
illeg^ll Warrant by which I am committed shows:) his Exposition of the 26 Chap.
of Ma^na Charta. But here I am unjustly committed, and incapable of a trial in
a fair, righteous, and National w^y.

I am only a prisoner of lust, since the 19. of March 1648, without cause in
Law, or Reason, or Christianity, for what is not a just cause in Law, is no
cause. Romans 4.15. Deuteronomy. 11.3.8. Number. 15.30. The judgment of M. Tho. Goodwin,
(when he was banished to Amsterdam, as I take it by the Bishop) in his Book,
entitled, The aggravations of sin and sin^ing against mercy and knowledge. See
your own pretended Agreement of the People, in 4, 5, or 6 particulars thereof,
page 23. wherein your faith and honor is lately engaged, which you have broken
by your actions. And indeed, it is that which God did charge against Satan
concerning Job, cap. 2.3. And the Lord said unto Satan, etc. Thou movedst me
against him, to destroy him without cause. So that you may see, See Ki^^
Charle^ his case, (...) 11. conc^ning Si^ Jo. Elio^ that die^ by crue^ induranc^
even you and the rest that committed me, do imitate the Devil, as M. Caryl
sweetly treats upon the three first Chapters of Joh, page 131. against the
arbitrary Courts; Touch men in their Liberties by Imprisonment (says he,) in
their Estates by vast Fines, in their Names by disgrace, in their Bodies by
whipping and cutting, in their Relation^ by keeping all friends from sight of
them: and when those Courts and persons cam^ to have their power and actions
sc^^ned, it was not moderating or rest^aining, or regulating, or limiting, but
they must down and be taken away: Merciless m^n (says he) think there is
nothing done, u^l^sse m n be undone; they never give over touching, till they
come to ruining.

I hear that Cromwell, or Ireton or both, have sent a Letter to his Council of
State, of very high language and design concerning me; but as M. Solici^or
Cook said against the King, The people should not live at the nod and beck of
Tyrannical men. And the 10 page charges the King, that the Kings wicked
design was to tear up the foundations of Government and Law, that Law should
be no protection to any man's person or estate. But I value it not, though I
lament that his tyrannical influence and power should have such extention upon
the present Councels of both Nations. I desire to wait upon the Lord of hosts*
the high and mighty God, and my everlasting Father.

And I hear also that Ha^rison did tear his hair almost, and gnash his teeth
with indignation and en^ie at me for my last Book, which is indeed a Book of
the light of their excessive illegal Tyranny and cruelty unto me, which kind
of action was just like the Queens, who when (as it was reported) the late King
went to the House, with an intention as it was bruited abroad to have murdered
those members that stood in his way, viz. The Lord Kymbolton, M^. Pym, etc. But
Sir, for such men to have influence upon you, and the command of the Councels
and power of the Kingdom, will make you dishonor the Lord to your ruin, and
infamy to all g^nerations. And as for Harrison^ bitte^ hatred of me, I care
not for it, so long as the Lord loves me.

The actions of Tyranny and lust are sufficiently displayed by Mr Pym and Mr.
St. J^hn against Strafford, and indeed in the whole Scriptures of the high and
mighty God and all rational men; such wicked m^n are judged to be the cause
of bloody wars, though they would turn it upon the innocent person that are
their opposers, and are under their horrible cruelty: Therefore in my cruel
bonds I cry out to you, and to all my fellow S^uldiers and the good people of
the Nation that are for righteousness, justice, and freedom from sl^very, (as
I would against so many Murderers that would set upon me in the high way)
Murder, Murder, Murder, and I say Murder, and if you and they do intend to
murder me, I say as Christ said to that Apostate Judas, What you do, do
quickly; for I am more willing to go to God my Father, then to live with cruel
men, and see my native Country under lust and spoil: Blame me not, seeing I am
so cruelly dealt with by those that have bin the highest Pretenders to
righteousness in the World, and I am suit I was used with far more civility and
humanity from the late Kings party when I was their prisoner, (in pursuit of
them at York fight) then I am from you and your House, for when they had gotten
all I had from me, they gave me good accommodation with them gratis, though I
did reason freely against their cause for the Parliament face to face, (viz.)
with Col. Tildesly, and Lieutenant Colonel Ger^ard sometimes an hour togethe^;
but for your parts I have not had any of my Arreers from you though I moved
your House to it, no consideration of my damages, charges, and losses by you,
and beyond my ability to bear; losses in my horses since I came to prison, one
by death, the others by selling at under rates for half as much less as I
might have had, if my condition had not bin under Tyranny; and I have not ^a^
one jot allowance from you since my imprisonment, and if I had not had a little
of my own left, and some affection from my friends, you had had your and their
murtherous ends long ere this.

SIR, It is the pretense of cruel men, to use the words of God, of truth, of
righteousness but believe them not without actions; I see we must all come to
the actions of men, if we would have peace and settlement, by pretenses and
suggestions, a lustful man in power is a transcendent Impe of Satan, to
hinder just things and prejudice the just, as they reported of Christ, That he
was a seducer, a winebibber a friend to Publicans and s^nners to take him away
out of envy lust, and fear that his light would take with all p^rties; Wicked
men, mere Politicians and Statesmen, hate light, and G^d, and Scripture amongst
the People, though they pretend never so much to it; and therefore they keep
Patriots close Prisoners, and d^ny them Pen, Ink, and Paper, and the society of
friends, and they had rather release Barrabas then Christ; light amongst the
people is their to^ment and horror, and they would make or take any occasions
to destroy them; It is an evident sign of their wicked cause what ever their
pretenses a^e to ^he contrary, 1. part of the Parliaments Declaration page 8 9,
1^, 11, 12, 13, 16 As Hen. 3 did suppress the Schools that were in his days to
teach the People the knowledge of Magna Charta, as Sir Edward Cook declares in
the Proem to the second part of his Instit. Wicked men hate and curs^ the day
of light, and knowledge in the hearts of the People; let the world judge of the
actions of these d^yes. The tyrannical governor under whose hands I am,
denies my friends access to me, contrary to the Laws of the land, beyond the
commitment, imprisoned two arbitrarily, wickedly, and illegally, that came to
see me according to the Liberties of England and that are faithful to the
Interest of justice to the People for ought I know; nay, I believe more
faithful then himself; ^h^i^ Names are, Janes Harding and Robert Weaver; also
obstructed the fundamental right of the People in petitioning, gives out that
his will is his Law, and commanded a Petition from one Master John Church in
this Town which was on foot, The substance whereof was, That Lieuten^nt C^lonel
John Lilburn and the rest in the Tower might be less to the due course of the
Law^, etc. And one of the Gove^nours creatures here in the Castle in the
presence of Witnesses, did declare that he could murder me and justify it, or
words to that Effect. If you and the House will not justify the Governor in
his actions, I desire before the God of the Heavens, and the Earth, and the
People that I may have Justice against him; for such Tyrannical practices are
contrary to God, nature Law, and Scripture in whomsoever, and by such Practices
he may destroy the People of the Town here and Country at pleasure, in their
Liberties and Lives; as for me if I must be murdered by you etc. and by
Whitchcock who for ought I know intends out of envy to murder me, and to
think to gain your favor thereby, under whose illegal, unrighteous and
envious jurisdiction I am, as if I were willing to be privy to my own death, I
should desire you then that it may be done quickly, but I cast my self upon the
Lord his excellency, his justice, his truth, and faithfulness, and when you
have done it, you can do it no more.

But I am committed by the words of the thing which some men call a Warrant
(and it is in general terms) to stifle the just rights of Appeal for justice;
and the words are* viz. for printing the Book tending to mutiny in the Army,
and sedition in the People. The Grandees had their politic tale at their
fingers end, only to show you that generals are no crimes or Charges in Law,
Acts 25.27. John ^.51. The second Part of the Lord Cook^ Instit. fol 52* 53,
315 318, 591, 615, 616. 1 part Book Declar. p. 3^, 77, 20^. ^45. and the Votes
upon the Impeachment of the 11. Members, and Petition of Right the 3. C. R.;
The Act that abolished the Star-^hamber, 17 C. ^. The deliberate opinion of all
the Judges of England, the third year of King James, in Answer to the 22.
Objection of Archbp. Bancroft and the whole Clergi^, and no Commoner of Engl.
is to be restrained of his Liberty, by Petition or Suggestion to the King or to
his Council, or any unless it be by Indictment, or presentment or good and
lawful men, and he is not to loose life, limb, liberty, or estate, but by a
legal Trial, by a Grand jurie, or Petty-jury of his Peers or equals, which
the Lord Cook calls the ancient and undoubted right of an Englishman, 5 Edw. 3.
cap. 9. 25 Edw. 3. c. 4. 37 Edw. 3. c. 18. 38 Edw. 3 c. 9. 42 Edw. 3. c. 3. 11
R. 2. c. 6. 2 part of the Lord Cooks Instit. fol. 46.

Though there were a just Authority that committed me, yet Legislators ought
not to be Law Executors; it hinders and obstructs justice in cases of final
appeal, etc. (but in case of male administration of justice by any person or
persons. 14. and 29. c of Magna Charta, the Exposition upon them. Second part
of the L. Cooks Inst. 29. 46. and Roll. Parl. 5 R. 2. number. 45. and Roll. Parl. 5
Hen. 4. numb. 14 numb 79. 5 H. 4 cap. 6. and 11 H. 6. cap. 11. and 23 H. 6.
cap. 11, and 15. 4 H. 8. cap. 8. and 1.2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 10. 4 Part of
Inst. fol 25. and 1 part of the Book of Decl. p. 48, 278. I cannot find out
one jota or Punctilio of law, reason, God, nature, Scripture, faith, or honor,
in the dealings with me; I appeal to the People that are rational and
unbyassed.

By arbitrary power, Fear, Jealousy, Lust, wicked Policy, and Ambition is Lord
and Master; and by it (viz.) the power of sword and lust, they have murdered
their dearest and nearest relations, as Mahomet his wife, the fair Irene, as
the History calls her, in the presence of all his Officers cut off her head
with his Cemiter, in policy, as he said, to appease his Soldiers; Mahomet
strangled his young brother 18 months old, and said, It stood with the policy,
peace, and safety of his State. Solomon the cruel Tyrant, his innocent son
Mustapha, because he was beloved of the Soldiers and the people, and
Mustaphaes son also. The course of wicked Pharaoh, Saul, Herod, Ahab, Jezebel,
Kain; and the world may speak as to our days: and indeed, the fear^ull and
lamentable judgments of God and man have come upon Tyrants. Policy, Ambition
and Envy are Devils incarnate, yet are corrupt men's gods. Tyrants cannot abide
Law and Settlement, and their cruelty is their ruin. Just Authority is to lift
up the afflicted and oppressed, and by their authority to bridle domestical
wrong, to strengthen the diseased, to heal that which is sick, to bind up that
which is broken, to bring again that which is driven away, to seek that which
is lost, and not with force and cruelty to rule, Ezekiel. 34.4.

Therefore I do in the name of the Lord of Hosts, and the most excellent God,
the God of Justice and Mercy, demand Freedom from my illegal Bonds, and
reparations therefore, to the honor of the Lords Justice, the acknowledging of
his name, and to the keeping of your Faith, and the honor of our Laws and
Liberties, and lay you self at the foot of God, Scriptures and Laws, And to
this end and purpose, that the Lord may be acknowledged in Judgment, I do
propose that M. Cook your Orator against the King, may be made Judge betwixt
us, and may have an Oath given him of impartial Judgment without fear, favor
or affection, and that you may choose any whom you will, so many to so many of
my friends, of the Army, or out, to be my Antagonist in a public audience, and
writers on both sides, and I will engage to prove the dealings with me are
illegal, barbarous and Tyrannical, contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, the
nation, the scripture, your own declarations, the declarations of Parliament
and all the Capital obligations of justice and mercy, that ever I heard of in
the world; And though you have given him lately much worldly estate and honor,
yet I will trust the Lord with the innnocency and splendour of my cause, and I
hope the Lord will make righteousness in his Spirit Supreme, to all honor,
glory and safety, according to his own word^, so I rest,

From my illegal cruel arbitrary imprisonment, under an unnatural and unholy
Ty^ant in Windsor Castle. The Lord his weak and unworthy servant, and in the
peoples cause, William Bray.

My Dedication and Supplication to God my Maker and Father.
OH Lord, Thou who art indeed excellent, the great Commander of all the world,
who turnest all thing upside down, who have the hearts of all men in thy hand
and can make the greatest persecutors and affl^cting powers of darkness,
stoop to thee, Oh Lord, my God and Father, great are my enemies, one who is
called Excellency; But oh Lord it is thou alone art Excellency, faith^uln^ss^
and truth; and the others are Crowel, Ireton, H^s^^rig, Harrison and
Whitchcock, under those Tyrannical hand I am: my cause is the cause of thy
people, the general cause of Justice and Freedom; Thou know the sincerity
of my spirit; oh Lord my enemie^ are in great honor and power, by the peoples
blood, labors and treasure; If it be thy holy will let them acknowledge thee
God of the whole earth, whose name and power has made great changes in the
world; Let them in there conversations acknowledge the Scriptures, and
testimonies of thy self, the laws and liberties of thy people, without respect
of persons; If not, oh Lord put a hook in their nostrils, and a bridle in their
jaws, that they may not use wicked and crafty policy, and the treasure of thy
people make them destroy one another, against their laws and liberties: Uniteth
people that are sincere to thee, and one to another, in righteousness and
judgment, make up thy J^wels, and show some w^^ or other, some evident
testimony of love to thy people, against the bloody designs of thine and their
enemies, under what cloak or form soever they appear in the world; keep me
steadfast unto thy self against a^l the bloody intentions of my close politic
and mighty enemies, and let thy name and honor be ex^lted as indeed it is,
whether in persecution or freedom: And if oh Lord they have such murtherous
thoughts toward me, as O Lord thou know their actions are hitherunto wicked
enough, and if they bring forth the wickedest and extremest into action, O
Lord let me continue constant in thy strength unto the death, and make me
willingly to embrace my condition, and give testimony to thy self, and to the
testimonies of thy self in Scripture, in spirit, in my own heart the testimony
of my enemies themselves, and the enemies of our Laws and Liberties: Purge me
also O Lord, oh purge me; whilst I am in this mortality, and let me dye before
I die: So prays thy weak servant, and one of thy sons, in my cruel bondage as
to men and freedom as to thee.

Whilst the Author striveth for his Countries good,
An under-Tyrant thirsts for his blood.
His Jailer Whi^chcock arbitrarily
Heapeth upon him greater Tyranny.
Our deer-bought Freedom now is not worth a straw:
Let all men judge, when Whitchcock's will's a Law.

FINIS.

