THE ANATOMY Of Et caetera.

Or the unfolding of that dangerous Oath in the close of the Sixth Canon.

As it was contrived by the Bishops and some of the Clergy, in their late Oath
Ex Officio, cunningly obliging the Consciences of his Majesty's Subjects to
observe and obey whatsoever errors they would impose.

Condemned and dissected in a passionate Conference betwixt the two zealous
Brothers Roger and Ralph, penned at the first injunction of the new Canons, and
now published since their abolishment.

By an Oxfordshire Gentleman.

London printed. 1641.

TWo of the zealous Tribe being inspired, as they termed it, and having a
greater parcel of the spirit than at other times, after a great deal of chat,
now concerning this thing, and now again concerning that thing, at last drew
themselves as far as the New Canons, where they read, but yet you must not
think that it was without rubbes, and jarres, but coming to the Sixth Canon
that ended with Et caetera, at the very sight of which he swelled as much as
Goliath with his weavers beam, and thus began to break forth in these or the
like terms.

Roger. I that have behaved my self so well, that now I am in sincerity
elected a Zealous Brother, I that having my worth seen am for it rewarded with
twenty Nobles per annum, besides what I collect every year from our Female
Charity, considering with my self what a vile and indiscreet thing these new
Oaths and Canons are, I am even wrapped besides my self, and with this very
word, or letter, or syllable, or whatsoever it is, I must and will dissect it.


Ralph. Why brother Roger? Are thou of so shallow capacity as thou make thy
self to be? Have patience pray, and rather find fault with the Printer than
with the thing printed, or rather with him which set the Printer on work than
with the Printer himself, these times are corrupted, for why? corrupt men have
ruled us here in this Land.

Here could Roger hold no longer, but like to a Bear-dog, he yawnes, and
barks, and bawles, saying.


Roger. In sincerity brother Ralph, thou do not know what an urging this is
to me, see what a vile misshapen monster it is, this Et caetera God bless us!
is a Limb of the Devil, or as they please to construe it, according to their
wooden headed wit, That brand which is upon the buttocke of the Beast, the
Dragons tail tied up together in an Antichristian knot, it is nothing else but
a nest of young Apocryphaes, nay, I think that the divinest inspiration can
never unfold and set out to open view this Impe of Hell, this Caterpiller, this
Toad, or what not.

Now whilst Roger is in his mad way dividing the Text, Ralph begins to wink,
to spit, to streak his beard, and expound, speaking to Roger.


Ralph. My pious and most zealous Brother, hearken with fear and reverence to
what I shall now say, not of my self, but by divine revelation. This is a very
nice point, being clouded much with the sophistical fallacies of the
quondam-learned, I never read on it but it caused me to fast twice at the
least, insomuch that now I have had so much by revelation that I have found
this Et caetera to be one of the idolatrous litter.

But Roger now is all fire, all envy, all malice, Goliath when he vanted
himself against the Israelites had not half those proud postures which now
Roger had.


Roger. I say to thee (said Roger) Et caetera thou lie, I say again, I will
confute thee, what art thou better than a curled lock of Antichrist, thou art
that very rubbish which was sent from the confusion of Babel, for before I have
done with you I will make it plain to the whole world, that the best of
Languages are confounded in this Beast Et caetera. Besides, all you which are
my Brethren, hearken, and take diligent notice of this which I shall say here,
They say that men must swear by this Antichristian rubbish; take heed, take
heed I pray, for I profess ingeniously in good sooth, and in very good deed,
that it is dangerous to swear by Et caetera; for take this from me, whosoever
swears by Et caetera, swears more Oaths at once, than ever came barks from
triple-headed Cerberus: Do you not see how the old cunning Serpent has hid
himself in folds here, and here in an Et caetera you may perceive him: O thou
accursed Et caetera! thou prodigious Antichristian Bastard, now do I know what
meant those portentous bloody Oisters which were seen the other day: O Alestre!
thou ancient writer of Almanacks, how did thou miss to name this Et caetera,
that ill borne Bastard in thy propheticke Almanac: but here see and wonder,
this Et caetera is that ill portentous vault where that infernal Powder Plot
lay a great while at anchor, and surely Brother, I think it not amiss, and if
you will be ruled by me, to keep another fifth day of November: nay, here is
not all yet, Et caetera look to your self, I protest I will have another bout
at wastiers with thee, and so have at thee; thy name is as ominous as a blazing
Star at three of the clock in the afternoon, or as a Schreech-owle hovering
about the house in daytime, nay my expressions fail me to paint thee out in
thy colors. The Trojan Nag was never so gorged with mischief, as this
ominous, ill-conditioned Et caetera, Og and Schon those two great Commissaries
and enemies to the Lords anointed never deserved half that ill which this
il-shapen slave Et caetera has done. And now I find my self almost tired in
following this light-footed mischief, and now my Babes of Grace, my greatest
desire is that you would be cautious how you swear by Et caetera, for you have
already heard how dangerous and damnable Et caetera is, for indeed now to
unfold the truth of all, if it were pulled out at length, it is just like unto
a York shire way-bit, longer by far than a mile.

But now he is inspired, he swears, now truly, in truth, in sincerity, and in
very good deed; in words at length, and not in figures, that this Et caetera
did more trouble his conscience than ever the fall of one of his dearest
Sisters ever did. But now you must note, that he drank, which he takes off
all, because he was afraid to leave Et caetera in the bottom of the cup: his
Brother Ralph pledged him, and mark how it sell out, he swears by the Sack
he drinks, he will prove a catylier, or worse to the Synod, if worse might be.

Thus they drank on, not offering to part,
Till they had sworn out the eleventh quart,
Whilst all that heard and saw them, jointly say,
They and their Tribe are all, Et caetera.
Well, these two Zealous Brothers had drank so long together that they played
the beasts, like a couple of drunken rogues, etc. and then they must needs
quarrel, and make themselves, and Religion in them to be scoffed egregiously,
and indeed it is an ancient proverb, When thieves fall out, true men come by
their goods.

It chanced that Roger gave Ralph some words in his drink, which did not very
well please him, which made Ralph break out beyond the bounds of modesty, and
told him that he was a dissembling knave, and that he could prove him so, for
said Ralph, Is it not the part of a knave to carry another man's wife so far as
Banbury in Oxford shire, and there to live with her, and keep her as your own
wife? fie, fie, for shame.

Nay, said Roger, hic-up, if you go to that, hic-up, you are as arrant a knave,
hic-up, as my self, for do you remember, you Slave you, how you wished your
wife in the Low Countries, to say, that you were her brother, because she was
fair, and that it might be said that you imitated Abraham, when he was a good
man, whereas thou art a stinking Rogue.

Thus they brawled, and scolded, and scolded, and brawled, till they fell
asleep, in which pickle I left them.


FINIS.

