A SERMON OF THE BLESSED SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SUPPER; Proving that there is
therein no proper sacrifice now offered;

Together with the disapproving of sundry passages in 2. Books set forth by
Dr. Pocklington; the one called Altar Christianum, the other Sunday no Sabbath:

Formerly printed with License.

BY WILLIAM BRAY, Dr. of Divinity.

Now published by Command.

LONDON, Printed by T. and R. C. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreete, over against St. Dunstans-Church. 1641.

A SERMON OF THE BLESSED SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
1 COR. 11.26. For as often as ye cate this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lords Death till he come.


THe Prophets are Comments upon the Law in the Old Testament, and the Epistles
upon the Gospels in the New. My Text is part of the Epistles, and it Comments
upon that command of our Savior to his Disciples, Do this in Remembrance of
me. Which is a part of the Gospel of the Institution of the Holy Communion.
For that command is repeated in the 25. Verse of this Chapter, and then
follows my Text immediately, as a Comment upon that Command, a Gloss upon
that Evangelicall Law; For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lords Death till he come.

And if you observe it well, my Text as a clear and full Comment, explaines
all the doubts and difficulties of that Text in the Gospel, Do this in
remembrance of me.

For first, there is no time expressed when this is to be done, or celebrated; so
the doubt is, First concerning the frequency of Celebrating, whether once, or
more then once? This doubt the Comment cleeres in the first words of my Text,
As often; so it is to be done again, and again, and that often.

A second doubt is concerning the duration of this blessed Sacrament: How long?
whether temporary or perpetual? this the Comment likewise cleeres in the last
words of my Text, Till he come; so it is to continue in the Church till our
Saviors second coming.

Again, it is not clear in the Gospel, whither these words are to be
referred, Do this, for they are mentioned only in Saint Luke 22 S. Luke. 19.
, and they are mentioned after the Institution, and Consecration of the Bread
only, and not of the Cup: so the doubt here is, Whether they refer to the
Bread alone, or to both Bread and Cup? but the Comment here directs you to
refer them to both, For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup
too, says the Text, ye do, indicatively, or do ye, imperatively, that is,
do both, and do this in both.

Besides, we do not understand out of the Gospel, the latitude of this
Command, Do this, what it comprehends within it, whether the action of the
Receiver only, or of the Minister only, or both: that is, Totam Sacramentalem
actionem, the whole Sacramental action; here is another doubt.

And here again we must have recourse to the Comment in my Text for direction,
and that expounds it of both. First, Do this, that is, eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, here is the action of the receiver in express terms.

But that is not all, for what our blessed Savior did by way of Preparation,
before his Disciples Communicated (I mean not for all Circumstances, but for
Essentials) as taking and blessing the Bread, and the Cup, and the like; that
must the Ministers of Christ in all ages also do, by virtue of this Command,
Do this. And this is clear also in the Comment of my Text, though not
expressly as the action of the Receiver, yet by evident consequence, and that
from the Emphasis of the Greek Articles before the Bread and Cup, (...), This
Bread, and this Cup, for without the action of the Minister, in taking, and
blessing the elements; the Receivers may indeed eat, and drink common bread
and wine, but they cannot be so well assured, that they eat and drink this
Sacramental Bread and Wine, so called here by way of Eminence, and special
reference.

Yet farther, my Text does clearly expound the end of that command of our
Savior, Do this in remembrance of me. First, in remembrance, that is, nor a
bare and naked remembrance locked up only within the closet of our own
memories, but such a remembrance, as is withal a Remembrancer of it, to, and
with others, a Commemoration, whereby in a joint Communion together, we
proclaim, and show forth our Saviors Love. As often as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, ye do, or shall show forth, says my Text.

Lastly, in remembrance of me, says the Command in the Gospel; of me, that is
not so much of my Incarnation, life, miracles, doctrine, resurrection,
ascension, as especially and expressly of my death, and Passion, ye do show
the Lords Death, says the Comment in my Text.

I have done with the For, in the beginning of my Text, which connects it with
the verse precedent, whereof it is a comment, and a confirmation, as you see.

To draw nearer to the Text it self, wherein you may observe these two
general parts, Our service to God in the use of this blessed Sacrament, in the
former part, As often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup: And the meaning
of this service, or the Res Sacramenti, the thing signified by it, in the
latter part, Ye do show the Lords Death till he come. 12. Exodus 26.27.


In the 12. of Exodus God enjoynes the people of Israel, that when their
children should ask them concerning the Passover, What mean you by this
Service? that they should say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who
passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the
Egyptians and delivered our houses.

In the like manner Saint Paul, having received it of the Lord, delivers unto
us the meaning of this Service of the Evangelicall Passover, It is the
Memorial of our Saviors Sacrifice offered upon the Cross once for all, which
we celebrate in remembrance of him, to show forth his bitter death and Passion.

But to proceed, in the first general part, which is the Service we are to
perform to God, in the use of this blessed Sacrament, you have these three
particulars contained. 1. The parts of this Sacrament. 2. The Sacramental
actions. 3. The circumstances of those actions.

The parts of this Sacrament, and they are two: Res terrena, et Res Coelestis,
as Iren. lib. 4. aduersus haeres. cap. 34.
Irenaeus calls them, the Earthy, and the Heavenly part. The earthy part is here
expressed, bread and wine; the heavenly part is the body and blood of Christ,
here imported in the Articles (...), This Bread, and This Cup, which has an
Emphaticall reference to the verses immediately precedent, where it is said of
the bread and cup after our Saviors blessing them, that This is my Body which
is broken for you, and this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. This Bread,
and This Cup that do Sacramentally exhibit the Body, and Blood of our Savior,
are here specially designed.

2. Ye have The Sacramental actions, and they are in like manner two; Eating,
and Drinking; answerable to the parts of the Sacrament, eating this Bread, and
drinking this Cup.

First, we must Eat: It is not enough to purpose or desire to be Guests at
this heavenly Table; neither may we be present only as spectators and
beholders, to see, and to gaze, but we must taste and eat. Secondly, we must
Drink the Cup too as well as Eat the Bread, these two are joined together by
Christ in the Institution, and they may not be severed by Man without manifest
impiety.
3. The Circumstances of the actions (which make the third particular in this
first general) they are likewise two.

The first is of Time: Baptism is to be received once only; but this blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper often, both out of a grateful obedience to our
Savior, and out of a careful regard of our own spiritual advantage by it.
As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup. It is not barely (...),
when, but (...), how often soever, which implies a frequency.

The second circumstance is of the Persons Communicating, Ye. First, Ye in the
plural number: for this Holy Sacrament is a Communion, and may not be received
by one alone.

Ye again, that are Members of the Church, Ye are to eat of this Bread, and
drink of this Cup. For he that is not entered into the mystical body of the
Church by Baptism, is no fit subject as yet to partake of these high, and holy
mysteries.

And these are the severals in the first general part of the Text, to wit, the
Service of the Communion.

In the second general part, which is the Meaning of this service, ye have
three particulars likewise, each of them suitable to the three particulars in
the former part of the Text; wherein you have the special meaning of each part
of the service declared.

First, ye have the meaning of the Sacramental bread and cup, to wit, the
death of Christ. Secondly, ye have the meaning of our eating this Bread, and
drinking this Cup, namely, the showing forth of Christ's death. Thirdly, ye have
the meaning of our often eating this Bread, and drinking this Cup: to wit, the
perpetuation of our Saviors memory, so long as he is corporally absent from us
here on Earth, even till he come again in his glorious presence to judge the
quick and the dead. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do
show the Lords Death till be come.
Here Is a large field of matter, I can but gather here and there an ear of
corn as I pass along, without making any long stay upon any particular.

I begin first with the Parts of this Holy Sacrament (which is the first
particular under the first general;) and first with the Earthy part, or
outward Elements, which are Bread, and Wine.

The outward senses of Man are the windows or gates of the soul, nothing
enters into the soul but by them; we understand nothing, we know nothing,
whilst we are here in the body, but the ear, or the eye, or some one, or more
of the senses present it first to the soul, and the more senses there are that
present a matter to the soul, the soul understands it the more clearly, and
believes it the more strongly, even as the opening of many windows lets in the
more light into the house.

God knows our mould in this, and considers it graciously, and accordingly he
vouchsafes not only to instruct and persuade us by the Ear, in the hearing of
his word, but by the Eye, Taste, Touch, in the outward elements of this
Sacrament, which we may see, handle and taste, for our further instruction, and
confirmation.

If any man therefore, presuming upon I know not what spiritual Revelations,
and Seraphicall raptures, shall neglect the hearing of Gods Word for his
instruction; or if any other, resting in the bare hearing of the Ear, shall
neglect this blessed Sacrament, wherein God farther manifests himself to the
faithful Soul, by the door of the rest of the senses; if there be any such
presuming spirits, they very much forget themselves that they are yet in the
body; Yea, they forget God too, and his gracious condescent herein to our
corporeal weakness, who best knows whereof we are made, and how best to
consider it.

That there is an earthy and sensible part in the Sacrament therefore ye see
great reason for it; But what is the reason of the choice of Bread and Wine to
be the sensible part in this Sacrament? Was not the killing of the Paschall
Lamb, and the striking of the blood thereof upon the lintell and sideposts of
the door, a more sensible and clear Resemblance of the shedding of the blood
of the immaculate Lamb of God? Why then was the Passover abrogated, and Bread
and Wine in the place thereof substituted, as the sensible part of this
Sacrament?

To omit many other most proper Analogies, and aptitudes in the Elements of
Bread and Wine, serving for this purpose; I will only give you an account of
this change thus in brief.

The Old Testament (you know) is abrogated (I mean in regard of the manner of
Administration of it, by the Leviticall and Ceremonial Law) and the New is now
in force, the Testator himself having confirmed it by his own precious Death,
and Bloodshedding; Hence, the shedding of the blood of the Paschall Lamb is
justly ceased. For after so sovereign an expiation by the Blood of Christ
himself, no shedding of blood is now necessary, Heb. 9. and 10. chapter
as the Apostle argues in the Epistle to the Hebrews: and hence this Sacrament
of the New Testament in the breaking of the Bread, and pouring forth of the
Wine most fitly succeeds in the place thereof, as being the most apt and vive
expression of blood already shed, without new bloodshedding.

Besides, though our heavenly Father knows, that even under the New Testament,
we have need of these outward and sensible things, and that for the
strengthening of our Faith, whilst we are here in the body, and therefore (as
ye read but now) God in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness to us, has
instituted Sacraments for us in the New Testament, as well as in the Old, which
consist of an outward and sensible, as well as an heavenly and spiritual part.

Yet there is a very observable difference of degrees, at least, betwixt the
Sacraments and Services of the Old and New Testament, even in this regard:
Those of the Law and Old Testament, were more sensible and earthy, but these of
the Gospel and New Testament, more pure and spiritual; the Law being as it
were the body to the Gospel, and the Gospel being the spirit and life of the
Law.

Thus the Passover which was a more crasse and corporeal Sacrament is ceased
also together with the Law, and in stead thereof, a Sacrament more suitable to
the Gospel is instituted in Bread and Wine, which of all sensible substances
here below, are the most pure, and so the fittest to set out the spiritual
service of the Gospel.

The consideration whereof should teach us that live under the Gospel, not to
rest our selves in any bodily, or outward observations, as if they were the
only or principal duty of the Gospel, but to use them as helps only, the
better to enable us for the due performing of our spiritual services, which is
the perfection the Gospel calls us to, and without which all other performances
like a hungry, and barren soil will yield but little solid fruit, or comfort
to our souls.

And so I pass from the more sensible and earthy part of this Sacrament; to
the spiritual, and heavenly part, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ, which
is imported in the Emphasis of the Articles here, This Bread, and This Cup.

Where, before we come to the Emphasis, and what it imports, give me leave to
observe, First, that the Apostle here calls the Sacramental Elements, Bread and
Wine, and that after the words of Institution, and Consecration. So, they
retain their nature, and substance still and remain Bread and Wine, even
after this great advancement.

And here you may see upon what a sandy foundation the Church of Rome has
built that most dangerous and destructive doctrine of Transubstantiation; Saint
Paul calls the Elements Bread and Wine, after consecration; the Church of Rome
says, they cease then to be Bread and Wine, their very substance is converted
into the substance of the natural Body, and Blood of Christ, by a new way of
their own fancying, which Biell a prime Doctor of theirs confesses, is not to
be found in the Canon of the Bible, Biel Lect. 40. in Can. Missae.
for which they have sutably invented a new Name of Transubstantiation.

And I call it a destructive Doctrine, and that most justly, and in many
Regards.

For first, it destroys the nature of the Elements of Bread, and Wine, by a
total Conversion of them into the substance of Christ's Body, and Blood.

Secondly, it destroys the nature, and properties of Christ's Body, by
ascribing Infiniteness, and Omnipresence not only to the Person of Christ,
but to his natural Body, which was borne of the Blessed Virgin.

Thirdly, it destroys the Peace of Christendom, or at least it has a great
share in it, as being boldly, and rashly defined by the Church of Rome, and
presumptuously imposed as an Article of Faith, to be believed upon Necessity of
Salvation.

Fourthly, it is notoriously known, the denial of it has destroyed the Lives
of many of Gods faithful Servants, both here, and in other parts of the
Christian world.

Fifthly, and Lastly, to add no more, it is destructive of Piety and Devotion
in diverting the Soul from devout and useful Meditations, and drawing it
aside to subtleties of wit, and empty speculations. To this purpose Master
Hooker Eccles. Poli^. lib. 5. sect. 67.
excellently observes, that the Discourses of the Romanists concerning
Transubstantiation are hungry and unpleasant, full of tedious and irksome
labor, heartlesse, and without Fruit; whereas the Discourses of Ancient, and
Later Writers, concerning the Mystical presence of Christ, the use, efficacy,
and benefit of the Sacrament, are heavenly and devout; their words sweet as
the Honeycombe, their tongues melodiously-tun'd Instruments, and their
sentences mere Consolation, and joy.

second thing which I will observe from this part, is, that Saint Paul does not
call the Consecrated Elements, bare Bread and Wine, and no more, but Bread, and
Wine, with an Emphasis. This Bread, and this Cup, of which it was said before
in the words of Christ, This is my Body which is broken for you, and this Cup
is the New Testament in my Blood.

How the Bread and Wine in this Sacrament are the Body and Blood of Christ, is
a great Mystery to unfold.

Master Calvin in his fourth Book of Institutions, Calv. lib. 4. Instit. cap.
17. sect 7.
Cap. ^vij. calls it sublime mysterium, cui nec men's plane cogitando, nec
lingua explicando par esse potest. A Mystery so sublime, that the mind of Man
is not able to comprehend it, much less the tongue to unfold it. Quod ergo
men's nostra non comprehendit, concipiat fides. (so he goes on excellently in
the same Chapter, Sect. 10.) What therefore our Reason cannot comprehend, let
Faith conceive. Christ has said it, this is my Body, let us therefore believe
the Truth of the thing.

But he has not said the manner how, let us not therefore search into that
which is not written. For mine own part (says the same Author Lib. 4.
Instit. c. 17. sect 19. Caeterum his absurditatibus sublatis, quicquid, ad
exprimendam veram substantialemque Corporis ac sauguinis Domini
communicationem, quae sub sacris Coenae symbolis fidelibus exhibe^tur, facere
potest libenter recipio: atque ita ut non imaginatione duntaxat, aut meant is
intelligentia percipere sed ut re ipsa frui in alimentum vitae aeternae
intelligantur
) his absurditatibus sublatis, set aside the absurdities which boldly and
falsely define the manner of the presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Lords Supper, (He means Consubstantiation and Transubstantiation) whatsoever
may be said to express the Communication of the true, and substantial Body,
and Blood of the Lord, which are exhibited to the Faithful, under the holy
Symboles of the Supper, J willingly admit; and that in such sort that this
participation may be understood, not in Imagination only, and Apprehension of
the mind, but a Real Fruition to nourish the body and soul to eternal Life.
Thus, that Reverend Author, and much more to the same purpose in that place.

With the same wisdom and sobriety the Church of England speaks of this
great Mystery, she does not (as the Church of Rome unjustly charges us)
exclude Christ out of the Sacrament, and make it a bare sign, and Figure of
his body and blood; she indeed denies their Carnal and Corporeal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, and acknowledges only an heavenly, and spiritual
presence, without any farther defining of the manner in particular.

But for the Truth of the thing it self she believes, and acknowledges
expressly, That to such as rightly, worthily, and with Faith receive the same,
the Bread which we break, is a partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise
the Cup of blessing, is a partaking of the Blood of Christ, in the Art. 28.
relig.
28. Article of Religion, and more fully in the Doctr. of the Sacraments.
Catechism, The body and blood of Christ, are verily and indeed taken of the
Faithful in the Lords Supper.

I go on to the Sacramental actions, which are likewise two, answerable to
the parts of this Sacrament, to wit, Eating of this Bread, and Drinking of this
Cup.

First, we must Eat this Bread.

There is a fourefold benefit which we receive by our bodily Eating;
Nourishment, Society, Delight, and Physic; You know there is a Meal for
Nourishment, a Feast for Society, a Banquet for Delight, and a Medicine for
Physic. This fourefold benefit we receive to our souls in a far more
eminent manner, by this Sacramental Eating; and for this fourefold benefits
sake, we must taste and eat this Sacrament, and we shall find it (if we
prepare our selves aright before we eat it) to be through the Grace of Christ;

First, Coelestis Refectio, an Heavenly Repast, to nourish us up to eternal
Life.

Secondly, Sacrum Convivium, a holy Feast, to mainetaine the mystical society
betwixt Christ, and his members, and to be a bond of Love and Unity amongst
Christians.

Thirdly, Spirituale Epulum Call. lib. 4. Instit. c. 17. sect. 1.
a spiritual Banquet, for inward and unspeakeable Delight.

Fourthly and lastly, to be Medicina animae (as Medicina enim spiritualis est,
quae cum reverentia degustata purificat sibi devotum. Ambr. tom. 5. Oper. in
Epist. ad Cor. cap. 11.
Saint Ambrose calls it, i. e. to them that are rightly prepared, and through
the grace of Christ,) Sovereign Physic for the Soul.

Secondly, we must Drink the Sacramental Cup, as well as Eat the Bread: For
as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup too, says the Text. They are
joined together in the Text, and they may not be severed in our Practice. And
that for these three reasons.

First, propter Perfectionem Repraesentationis, that in this Sacrament, there
may be a perfect resemblance and representation of Christ's Passion on the
Cross, for there the Blood was severed from the Body, and therefore here to
keep the resemblance perfect, the Wine which resembles the Blood, must be
taken severally from the Bread, which resembles the Body.

Secondly, propter Perfectionem Refectionis, That the Lords Supper may be
perfect Nourishment to us. For as in bodily sustenance, Meat does not nourish
well without Drink, a Meal cannot be perfect without Meat and Drink: So is
it likewise in this spiritual Refection, we must Eat, and Drink too, else
no perfect nourishment to the Soul. Vtrumque enim est de perfectione hujus
Sacramenti, For both Eating, and Drinking too are required to the perfection of
this Sacrament. So much Aquinas Aquin. Com. in 1 Cor. 11.26
himself, a prime Schooleman amongst the Papists, acknowledges in his Comment
on my Text, and he gives these two forenamed reasons, for his acknowledgement:
So that by his own confession, the Church of Rome, however she may be more
indulgent to her Clergy, yet she is very scanty to the People, and halfes out
to them but an imperfect Sacrament.

Thirdly, I will add a third and maine reason for this Sacramental Action,
and that is propter perfectionem Obedientiae, that our Obedience may be
perfect; for you see we have Christ's Command for both drinking the Cup, as well
as eating the Bread not only his Practice, as in administering it after Supper,
but we have his practice and command too, for sub utraque specie, for the
Communion in both Kinds, which makes this obligatory to us, though not the
other (according to that excellent rule of Saint Cyprian S. Cypr. lib. 2 ep. 3.
) quae Christus fecit, and docuit sunt perpetuae observationis, what Christ
both did, and also taught, or commanded must be perpetually observed in the
Church.

The boldness therefore of the Council of Constance was very great in
declaring the administering of the Communion in both Kinds, to the People, to
be no more obligatory to us, then the administering of it after Supper, but
their presumption is much more intolerable in establishing the Romish half
communion, with a non obstante in terminis, to the Institution of Christ, as
you may read in the 13. Session of that Council Tom. 7. council. edit. per Bin.
.

I have done with the Sacramental actions. The third and last particular in
the first general concerns the circumstances of these actions.

And the first circumstance is of Time, As often. Semel nascimur, saepius vero
alimur, we are borne but once into the world, and so we receive Baptism but
once, which is the Sacrament of our New Birth, But we stand in need of often
Nourishment, and therefore we are often to receive the Lords Supper, which is
the Sacrament of our spiritual Nourishment, and growth in Christ.

Accordingly, if we look into Church story, we shall find that the first,
and best ages of the Church, and as many of the after ages as desired to
conform to those first and best, were all of them for frequent Communions.

In the times of the Apostles, Acts 20.7.
we read of a Communion once every week, upon the first Day of the week,
which is the Lords Day.

In the times next to the Apostles, Saint Cyprian Eucheristiam quotidie ad
cibumsalutis accipimu^. S. Cyp. de Orat. Dominica.
tells us of an every-dayes Communion. Every day the Christians looked for
Death, in those times of violent persecution, and therefore every day they would
be provided of this Viaticum.

In Saint Augustines time, which was 400 years after Christ, some Churches
communicated every day, some only upon the Saturday, and the Lords day; others
only upon the Lords day, as we read in his 118. Epistle.

After that, Devotion decaying, the Communion was administered generally only
thrice in the year, at the three great Feasts, of Easter, Whitsontide, and
Christ, mas; and of later years under Pope Innocent the Third, in the Lateran
Council, propter iniquitatis abundantiam, refrigescente charitate multorum, so
Aquin. Sum. par. 3. q. 80. Art. 10. ad quintum.
Aquinas himself renders the reason of it, By reason of the abounding of
Iniquity, the Charity and Devotion of many waxing cold in the Roman Church, the
people were upon this, bound only to receive once in the year, to wit, at
Easter.

But the Liturgy of the Church of England, to reform us nearer to the Piety of
the Ancient Church of Christ, though it sets not down a general Rule, to bind
every particular Person, to Communicate more then Thrice in the year, which
was done no doubt upon most prudent Considerations, Because the variety of
Cases, in regard of the different understandings, and employments of particular
persons, in regard of the different Capaciousnesse, and Receipt of Places and
Parishes, and diverse other Circumstances considerable, make the prescribing of
a certain Rule for Particulars in this kind, fittest for private advice and
resolution upon due preparation of every Communicant: Yet in the Rubricke after
the Communion, a Communion is enjoined every Sunday at the least, in
Cathedral, and Collegiate Churches, except they have a reasonable cause to the
contrary. And in the first Exhortation before the Communion, all the People are
most pathetically moved and exhorted to frequent receiving.

And I would to God there were no need of such an Exhortation, but alas, it is
too usual for many to make excuses for absenting themselves from the Lords
Table, ^ Luke 14.
as the unworthy guests in the Gospel did; I will briefly show the vanity of
these Excuses, and so pass over this circumstance.

And I will go no farther for Evidence against them, than to the Grounds
already laid. You have read that this Blessed Sacrament is Heavenly Food, for
our Nourishment. A Holy Feast, to mainetaine Love, and Unity, amongst
Christians. A Spiritual Banquet, for Delight and Sovereign Physic for the
Soul.

First, then an unworthy guest pleades multiplicity of worldly business, and
therefore he cannot come so frequently to the Sacrament; But he should
consider that this Sacrament is Heavenly Meat for his Nourishment, and as
Meat hinders not our Business, so neither must our Business hinder our Meat
in the seasons of it, whether for Soul or Body.

A Second is not in charity with his Neighbor, and therefore he holds
himself excused, which is Excusatio accusatione digna, as Salvian speaks in a
like Case, an aggravation, no excuse, thus to cover one sin with another.
This man considers not, that the Communion is a Holy Feast instituted by our
Blessed Savior to mainetaine Love and Amity amongst Christians.

A Third alleges he finds no relish in this Manna, and this discourages him.
But Oh! taste and see how gracious the Lord is, prepare thy Taste aright before
thou come, and thou shall find this blessed Sacrament to be an Heavenly
Banquet for Delight, such Delight as is most glorious, and unspeakeable; in
comparison whereof all that is called Delight here below, is but mere anity
and vexation of spirit Hanc Dei gratiam recolens, qui de Sacro caline bibit,
amplius sitit, and ad Deum vivum erigens desiderium, ita singulari fame ille
uno appetitu teneturut deinceps fellea peccatorum horreat pocula, and omnis
sapor delectamentorum carnalium fit ei quasirancidum radensque palatum acutae
mordacita it is acetum. S. Cypr. de Coena Domini. sect. 17.
.

A Fourth and last pretends his manifold sins, the sense whereof deterres him
from often approaches to this Holy Table.

But if he account sin a disease indeed, and desire unfeignedly to be cured,
why does he neglect the Remedy? which is, by Faith and Repentance to prepare
himself for this blessed Sacrament. The whole have no need of the Physician,
but the sick, says our blessed Savior Mat. 9.12.
. This man considers not the virtue of this Sacrament, in such as are so
prepared; That through the Grace of Christ, it is with these preparations a
sovereign Physic against all Diseases of the Soul.

The second circumstance is of the Persons, Ye. First, Ye, in the plural
number, for this Holy Sacrament is a Communion, and therefore may not be
received by one alone, as the name it self imports. A Communion, that is, a
Common union of Ministers and People together. Thus much Cassander, one that
lived, and died in the Communion of the Roman Church, acknowledges, That it
cannot be properly called a Communion unless there be a Plurality of
Communicants. Communio proprie ditinon p^test, tisiplures participent etc.
Cassa^ Consultat. de solitarii^ missis.


The private Masses therefore in the Roman Church where the Priest Communicates
without the People, are rather excommunications of the People, then Communions,
as Goulartius wittily calls them in his Notes upon Saint Cyprians Tract, on the
Lords Prayer. Vid. Calvin. lib. 4 Instit. c. 18 7. Aditus missis privatis est
patefactus, quae Excomunicationem quandam magis reservent quam
co^munitatemillam a Domino institutam etc. Council. Trident. Ses. 22. cap. 6.


I am not ignorant that the Council of Trent Vid. Calvin. lib. 4 Instit. c. 18
7. Aditus missis privatis est patefactus, quae Excomunicationem quandam magis
reservent quam co^munitatemillam a Domino institutam etc. Council. Trident. Ses.
22. cap. 6.
wishes that the people would co^munic ate always with the Priest, and
acknowledges it to be the more profitable for the peoples souls, but this
blanches the matter only, but mends it not, the private Mass is a bitter
Almond still for all the blanching, so long as the people are not enjoined to
Communicate with the Priest. Nay, so long as the Priest is by that Church
allowd, nay enjoined to celebrate, though without distribution to the people.

Ye again, that are Members of the Church by Baptism. Ye, and Ye only must
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup. For the Grace which we have by the Holy
Eucharist does not begin, but continue life. No man therefore receaveth this
Sacrament before Baptism, because no dead thing is capable of nourishment.
That which grows must first live, says Reverend Hooker in his fifth Book of
Ecclesiastical 5 Lib Ecc le. polit. 67. init.
Policy. Besides we must first be received as members into Christ's Family,
before we may be admitted to his Table. The Childrens bread must not be given
to strangers.

But I hasten to the second General, and main part of my Text, which is the
Meaning of this service of the Holy Communion, in the last words. Ye do show
forth the Lords death till he come. The principal verb which bears the
weight of this part of the Text is (...). Our Translation renders it most
fitly, Ye show forth, which expresses the latitude of the word, and the
meaning of the Sacrament more fully, then Annuntiate in the Latin, which
properly is but a verbal declaration.

Now in this Sacrament Christ's death is shown forth three ways especially.

First, by way of Representation, and Resemblance; so signs, and figures of
things do show forth the things that are represented, and resembled by them.

Secondly, by way of Evidence, and Confirmation; so the Testators seal set to
a Testament, and his delivery of it as his deed, does show it to be his Will
and Testament.

Thirdly, and lastly, by way of Commemoration, or memorial; so a feast
appointed in remembrance of a Benefactor does show forth his benefits to us.
Therefore Beza translates the verb here, Commemoratis, ye Commemorate Christ's
death. Now as often as we cate this Bread, and drink this Cup, we do all
these ways show forth the Lord's death both in the end, and meaning of the
service, and we ought to do it in obedience, and duty, for so the verb here
used may be taken either Jndicatively, Ye do, or Imperatively, Do ye; or Ye
ought to do, and so I shall follow it.

First, Then we do show forth Christ's death in the Sacrament by way of
representation, and resemblance, and that not naked without attendance, but
solemnly accompanied with the causes and effects of it: Christ, and Christ
Crucified is here evidently set forth before our eyes. Neque tamen diffitemur
quin ita nobis monstraturillic Christi immolatio ut crucis spectaculum pene ob
oculos statuatur, qualiter in oculis Galatorum Christum suisse crucisixum dicit
Aposte. dum illis propositacrucis predicatio suerat Calvin l. 4. Jnllit. c. 18
11


For first, The Ministers setting apart the Bread and Wine upon the Holy Table,
and Consecrating them, represents God the Fathers unspeakeable Love to mankind
in setting apart, and sending his only begotten Son into the World to dye for
us, here is the prime cause of his death.

Again, the breaking of the Bread, that resembles the brusing of our Saviors
body, and the Agonies of his soul for our iniquities, and the pouring forth of
the Wine, and the distribution of the Bread; and Wine severally and apart, does
most aptly resemble the shedding of his most precious blood, and the severing
of it from his Body on the Cross, wherein consisted the very Passion.

And lastly the Effects, and Operations of Bread and Wine, upon the Bodies of
men they do most Lively resemble the Effects and Operations of the death of
Christ, upon the Soul.

To the sound and healthful body, Bread satisfies Hunger, and strengthens
life, And Wine makes glad the heart of man, says the Psalmist. Psa. 104.15
But on the contrary to a foul, or feverish body, wine is turned into poyfon,
and there is nothing surfets the body more suddenly, nor more dangerously then
bread, according to the Aphorism, Hippo. Aphor. l. 7. Aphor. 62
Si quis febricitanti cibum dederit; quem sano exhibet, valenti Robur,
aegrotanti morbus fit. In like manner the death of Christ applied to the
faithful, and devout soul, satisfies his spiritual hunger, strengthens the
life of grace in him, fills him with joy unspeakable, and most glorious. It is
to him the savor of life unto life; but to the unbeleever, and impenitent,
that wilfully perishes, It becomes the savor of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2.16
vid. S. Cypr de. coena Domini. 7.


Let our souls go along here and meditate of these, and the like Analogies in
the time of receaving, Hoc age, do this. And this is the first sense of
showing forth Christ's death in the Sacrament.

In this Sacrament we do not only make a bare show of Christ's death by way
of representation and resemblance, but we show it forth also by way of
evidence, and confirmation. For this Sacramental Cup is the New Testament in
Christ's Blood, And all the promises in the Gospel which are the Legacies of
the New Testament, and Benefits of Christ's death, are in the right use of this
Sacrament conveyed, and assured to us.

In this Sacrament Christ sets his Scale to his Testament, and delivers it
particularly into every worthy Communicants hand, and every such Communicant
receaves it to his souls comfort from God, as his deed and gift, and hereof
he may assure himself as verily as he receaves the outward Elements of
Bread, and Wine, to his bodily nourishment.

And though a frail, and mortal man be the Minister, and Jnstrument to convey
this assurance to you, yet what he does herein, he does it in the Name of
Christ, by Commission from Christ, and in Christ's stead; So that it is
Christ's Act and deed, and the Assurance is Authentically, and Originally from
Him, who is Jnvisibilis Sacerdos the Invisible High Priest. John 4 v. ^, 2
In the 4 of Saint John, we read that Christ Baptized more then John, though
Jesus himself Baptized not (says the Text) but only His Disciples. If
therefore Baptism be our Saviors Act, In, and by the Ministry of His
Disciples, which He never administered by Himself, how much more is this
Blessed Sacrament His Act and Deed, by the hands of his Ministers, which He
Jnstituted, Consecrated, and Administered Himself in His own person; And as
much Comfort, and Assurance may Ye reap from it now by the hands of Christ's
Ministers; as if Ye should receive it from Christ's own Blessed hands, as the
Disciples did.

Only (as ye desire to enjoy the Comfort of it) be careful to observe
Theophylact's Counsel, which he gives upon this very Ground, in his Comment on
my Text, Eo affectu debetis esse imbuti, Ye ought to be so well disposed when
ye come to receive the Eucharist, as ye your-selves think ye should, and
could have been, if with the Disciples ye had enjoyed the happy presence of
our Savior at his last Supper, and had taken this Blessed Sacrament at the
first Institution of it from our Saviors own hands; Ye ought to aspire after
it now that ye may be affected with the same heavenly Devotion, and humble
Reverence, with the same fervent Charity, and hearty thankefulnes toward our
blessed Savior, considering it is the same Holy Supper, and no other, and the
very same Death which we now show forth, and unto the worlds end as then, at
the first Institution, and Ordination of it.

Thirdly and lastly, we do in this Sacrament show forth Christ's Death by way
of Memorial, and Commemoration: Do this in remembrance of Me, says our
Savior, 22. S. Luke 19.
And for this end mainly was this Sacrament instituted by our blessed Savior,
And from this main end of it, this Sacrament is, and has been in all Ages of
the Church, called by the name of the Eucharist; as being a sacrifice of Praise
and Thanksgiving to God in Remembrance of our Saviors Death and Passion. And
accordingly our Church exhorts, and practices in the service of the Communion.
The last Exhortation before the Communion, and the first Prayer after the
Communion.
Above all things we must here give humble and hearty Thanks to God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World, by the
Death and Passion of our Savior Christ, both God and Man, who did humble
himself to the Death upon the Cross for us miserable sinners. And to the end
we should always remember the exceeding great Love of our Master, and only
Savior thus dying for us; he has instituted, and ordained these holy
Mysteries. To Him therefore, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Let us give
as we are most bounden continual Thanks.

And that this our Thansgiving may be acceptable to God, let us first conform
ourselves to our blessed Savior in his Death and Passions, let us die to sin,
and live to Christ; Consider we therefore the work we have in hand, and the
end of our coming as often as we come to Celebrate the Holy Eucharist. We
come here to Commemorate the Death and Passion of our Savior for our sins, and
it would ill beseem us then to solemnize the Funerals of our Lord and Master,
not having on our mourning Garments, without suitable sorrow, and suffering in
our own souls. Should we suffer sin to live in us, which cost our Savior his
Life, and make that our Delight which caused his Death, and that at the very
time when we come to the Holy Table of the Lord, to show forth his Death with
a thankful Commemoration: what else is this but to stand laughing under our
Savior's Cross, as it were, to make ourselves merry with his Agonies, and to
triumph profanely in his bitter sufferings? with the wicked Soldiers, it is
to crucify him afresh, and to put him again to an open shame; In stead of an
honorable and grateful showing forth of his death, This were to make
ourselves guilty of his death, Guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, as
the Apostle speaks.

Wherefore, that we may show forth the Lord's Death as we ought; Let us first
set up the Cross of Christ in our own hearts, Let us fasten ourselves to it,
and conform ourselves there to the sufferings of our Head; Let us willingly
suffer shame and ignominy, in the due acknowledgment of our sins, Let us
suffer pain in a true sorrrw, and Compunction of soul for them; Let the
Remembrance of them be as Thorns in our Temples, and as a Spear at our very
hearts. Let us so subdue, and chasten our Flesh, and Revenge our selves upon
Our selves (as the Scripture 2 Cor. 7.11.
speaks) by severe and strict Mortification, that the Old Man may languish, and
die daily in us. And let us so Compose and settle our Desires, and Affections,
even as men that are hanging upon the Cross with our Blessed Savior, and
ready to depart this World, Let us make our peace with God and all the World.
Let us wean our selves from the Earth which we are leaving, and set our
Affections on Heaven, and the things above, whither we are going; Let us no
longer make provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof 13. Romans
14,
. But let us put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thus show forth the Lords Death
till he come, And at his Coming we shall by his Infinite Mercy Live and
Reign with Him for ever in the Kingdom of his Glory.

Thus you have the Orthodox interpretation of these words, the true and only
way of showing forth Christ's Death in this Sacrament according to the Doctrine
of the Church of England, and of approved Antiquity.

But the Church of Rome not content with this way does in the Council of
Trent, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 3.
denounce an Anathema against all those that will acknowledge no other
sacrifice in the Eucharist, then by way of Remembrance and Commemoration of
that one only true and proper Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood offered
upon the the Altar of his Cross once for all. And therefore if you will believe
her, she will tell you of a more excellent way of showing forth Christ's Death in
the Sacrament, to wit, by way of Iteration, or a new and daily Oblation, of the
very Same natural Body and Blood which was offered unto Death upon the
Cross, only with this Difference in the Manner of the Offering, That Christ's
Body upon the Cross was offered after a bloody, but here upon their Altars
after an unbloody Manner. And from this Fountain of Corrupt Doctrine, there
flow diverse streams of very dangerous Errors; I Will instance but in two for
our present purpose.

First, upon this Ground they define this Sacrisice in the Eucharist, to be a
true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice, to be every way equal with the
Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and their Altars to be as true and proper
Altars; which doubtless is a very high derogation from Christ and his
Sacrifice, let them mince and excuse it the best they can.

Secondly, From hence they teach most perilously, that the same Adoration which
is due to Christ, is due to this Sacrament. And certainly, to give that
Adoration which is due to Christ to any of the Creatures, can amount to no
less then Idolatry; Neither will Bellarmine's evasion, which he uses, Lib. 4
de Euchar. cap 29.. Sed haec mera calumnia est, etc.
acquit the Papists of Idolatry herein, though he pleads not Guilty, because
they hold not the Consecrated Bread and Wine to be any longer Bread and Wine,
but to be transubstantiated into the very natural body and blood of Christ;
so he pleads, they worship not the bread but Christ alone. But a false
persuasion (as we have proved this to be in the former part of the Sermon) has
not the power either to nullify a sin, or to alter the species of it, either
to make a sin no sin, or to be any other then it is in the kind of it. The most
charitable Construction that can be made in this Case is, That perhaps to Men
so persuaded, as some of the Romanists are, their Adoration of the Sacrament,
is not in them wilful Idolatry, yet in it self Idolatry still for all their
persuasion. However for our selves, that by the infinite blessing of God to us
are better taught and persuaded, for us I say not to renounce and detest this
Abomination of the Popish Adoration of the Sacrament would be most wilful
Idolatry, without the least cloak for our sin.

For mine own part, therefore, as becomes a true Protestant of the Reformed
Church of England, I do here solemnly protest against all Popish Errors, and
in special against the manifold and dangerous errors in the Doctrine and
Practice of the Popish Mass, against their pretended Oblation of the very
natural body and blood of Christ, against their Propitiatory sacrifice in
that intended Oblation, and theirs (or any other sort of men their) true and
proper Altars, and against their Idolatrous Adoration of the Sacrament, and
acknowledge only one true and proper Sacrifice and Altar, that is, the
Sacrifice of Christ himself offered upon the Altar of the Cross once for all.

And give me leave here also solemnly to profess my Opinion concerning the
Lord's day, and the sanctification of it.

I hold that according to God's holy will and pleasure the Lord's day ought to
be celebrated both in Public and in Private, in the Church and out of the
Church, in the Forenoon and in the Afternoon, by hearing the Word of God read
and taught by Public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, by holy
Meditations, Private Prayer, Reading and calling to Mind what we have read or
heard, by work's of Charity to our Neighbor and the like.

And I hold it to be our Duty in special that are God's Ministers to teach,
exhort, and encourage the People by all means, to such a sanctification of the
Lord's day. And for mine own part, I heartily honor a conscientious man, who
has a Careful Regard to yield Obedience to all Gods Commandments (as far as
humane frailty will permit) I honor such a man the more, the more strict he
is in a Religious Observation of the Lord's day.

And further I hold that this great Holyday which we Christians now celebrate
upon the first day of the Week though the Scripture, and so the Proper name of
it be the Lord's Day, yet in regard of the due sanctification of it, in that it
ought no less to be kept holy for the Exercise of the works of Piety and
Charity in it, then the Jewish Sabbath; in this regard by way of Allusion, it
is, and may be fitly called a Sabbath, and the Christian Sabbath.

And now to come to the End of my Coming hither at this time. The Right
Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the high and Honorable Court
of Parliament now assembled, by an Order bearing date the twelfth of March
last, have enjoined me to make a Sermon in this Place, upon this day, and in
my Sermon to make a confession of my error in Licensing and approving of two
Books made by Doctor Pocklington, the one called Altar Christianum, the other
Sunday no Sabbath, which Books, by their Lordships Censure, are justly
commanded to be burned.

And here that I may give the fuller satisfaction, I have received from my Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, a Copy of some mayn erroneous and offensive passages in the
said two Books, and the places pointed out in the Margin; upon most whereof,
their Lordships proceeded in their just Censure and Condemnation of those
Books, and all which I am by order from their Lordships here to disapprove, as
I willingly do all these passages following.

The Assertions of ALTAR CHRISTIANVM, disapproved by Doctor Bray, the Licencer
of that Book.
At Saint Margarets in Westminster, the eleventh of April, 1641.
1.
THe very Title is offensive, Preface.
because there is no Christian Altar but the Cross of Christ.

2.
He says in scorn, Page 4.
and detestation of Lectures, that Master Cotton was never Parson, Vicar, nor
Curate, but Lecturer of Boston, which is false, for he was always Vicar of that
place, and no Lecturer.

3.
When he proves out of Saint Ambrose, de Sacramentis, lib. 4. cap. 3. That the
Christians were more ancient then the Jews; To fetch in the Antiquity of his
Christian Altar, he leaves out Saint Ambrose his qualification: Sed nos in
praedestinatione, illi in nomine; That Christians were first in Gods
Predestination, but not in Compellation. Which is not fairly done; And forgets
that Page 32. he meant to say. That Christianity began but in the Reign of
Tiberius.

4.
He falsely interprets that place of the 1 Cor. 9.13. Page 6.
of the Priests in the new Testament, which are to live by the Altar: which is
spoken clearly of the Leviticall Priest, that cuts up, and divides the Legal
Sacrifices.

5.
He says, Page 9.
That Christians are in a miserable case, that think they can offer as good,
and effectual spiritual Sacrifices to God, as the Priest. Which is false and
Popish, for all true Christians are Priests in regard of most spiritual
Sacrifices. And he confesses it himself. Page 127.

6.
He teaches falsely, Page 14.15.
that in the Christian Church there are material, and proper; and not
Metaphorical Altars only.

7.
He says, Page 28.
that close and exalted Pews are profane, and were detested by the Church of
God. Which is but his foolish and fond conceit. And expounds that place of Heb.
13.10. We have an Altar, of the Lords Table: which place is not to be so
interpreted literally, but of Christ himself, as he confesses in the next
Page.

8.
He says, we have true, real, earthly, Page 9. and 72.
and material Altars. Which is false.

9.
He quotes a passage out of the Letter, Page 30.
which is not there, but in Bishop Jewels works: to prove there were no
material Churches in the Primitive times. Which is but a base and unworthy
dealing, and great Arrogancy for a private man to confute a book, recommended
by authority to all the Churches of England, and to say, it maintains a
falsehood. Page 34.

10.
He says, that we were miserable, Page 50.
if the now Archbishop of Canterbury could not derive his Succession from S.
Austin ( meaning Austin the Monk) Austin from Gregory, and Gregory from S.
Peter. And a little before he says, that if in Cathedral Churches there were
no material Chaires for Bishops to be Inthronized, there were no Succession in
Faith and Doctrine from the Apostles. Which is both false, and foolish.

11.
He broacheth two points of Popery, Page 65.
not maintained by the Church of England, First, That nothing in Baptism is
rightly done, unless we add thereunto the sign of the Cross. Secondly, that
men are not full Christians unless they be Confirmed by the Bishop, Which is
Popish and erroneous.

12.
He scandalizeth our Church as having Lecturers, Page 71.
which never take Orders: and falsely quotes the Letter, for that which speaks
not a word Pro or Con. in that Matter.

13.
He wrests Saint Cyprian and all Antiquity to say, Page 75.76, and 174
that where there is no Altar, there is no Eucharist, or Communion. Which in
it self is altogether untrue.

14.
He calls his Altar the Holy of Holyes, Page 83.
which smells of Iudaisme.

15.
He boldly corrects the Rubric, Page 86.
that appoints the Communion Table to stand in the Chancell, or body of the
Church. And denies a power to the Ordinary to place it in the body of the
Church. Which is a high offense against the Rubric, and the Act of Parliament
that confirms the same.

16.
He says, Page 89.
that Bishop Jewels works against Harding differ from the Articles, and Canons
of our Church. Which is scandalous, especially when it is not showed wherein.

17.
Those VVriters, Page 114.
who attest the truth of the Reformed Religion, this man averres to be called
by Illyricus the VVitnesses of the truth, with reproach of truth, and of
Christian Religion. Which is near unto blasphemy. And in the same place,
John Fox his Calendar, or an Extract thereof is said to be full of Traitors,
Murderers, Rebels, and Heretics; And no better Saints, then Penty, Hacket,
and Legate. Which is a base and unworthy expression. And whose Martyrs he
points at, you may see, Page 135.

18.
He says, Page 120 121. and 169.
the Bishop of Lincoln did order the setting of the Lords Table Altarwise.
Which that Bishop utterly denies.

19.
He says untruly, Page 136.
that if there be no Christian Altar in our Church ( as there is none in our
Liturgy or Canons) we have neither Priest, nor Deacon in our Church: no
Liturgy, nor Act of Parliament that confirms it. Which is a wild and
inconsequent Assertion.

20.
Our Saviors institution (says he) of the Page 162.163.
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at a Table, does not bind us to the name of a
Table. Which is a bold Assertion: thought not so bold as that which follows.
That Saint Paul crossed the order in that Sacrament used by Christ. Which tends
to blasphemy, if we remember by what Spirit Saint Paul was guided.

21.
He says boldly, Page 165.166.
that howsoever our Savior calls it a Table, Luke 22.21. Yet was it rather a
floor wherein he instituted the Supper.

22.
He says, Page 171.
Tithes cannot be alienated from Spiritual persons. Which is against our Laws,
and such Acts of Parliament as have made them Lay Fees.

23.
Lecturers (says he) set up in good Towns, Page 172.
be but a dull device of a foggie brain and willing blunderer, which light upon
it in a Mist. Which is an expression of a dull and irreligious brain.

24.
He says blasphemously, Page 178.
that the holy Scripture, the holy Sacraments, the Articles of our Creed, and
Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, have no Rations cogentes or forcible
inducement, to cause men to assent unto them, although they are immediately
grounded upon divine Authority, which at the first glance captivates the
understanding of all true believers. And in his 190 Page he says, that all
Canons made in Convocations are to be obeyed, though they yield no reason at
all to enforce their obedience. Which kind of Doctrine has of late done our
Church no good.

Assertions out of SUNDAY NO SABBATH; disapproved by Doctor Bray, at S.
Margarets in Westminster, the eleventh of April, 1641.
1.
HE says, Page 3.
that Saint Paul preaching till Midnight, in a room where men did eat and
drink, was out of order. Which is much boldness.

2.
He says, Page 6.
Knox and Whittingham were the first that called the Lords Day, the Sabbath
Day. Which is false. For it is called the Sabbath Day, and our Sabbath, under
King Necessary Doctrine, 1537.
Henry the Eighth, King K. Edwards Catechism, joined to the Articles, 1553.
Edward, Profitable and necessary Doctrine by Bishop Boner.
Queen Mary: and Homily of place and time of Prayer.
Queen Elisabet, in writings printed and set forth by public Authority under
all these Princes.

3.
He says, Page 19.
the name of Sabbath Day is held up by some in our Church, as the great Diana
of the Ephesians, that stalking behind it, they may shoot against the Service
appointed for the Lords Day. Not being able to resolve, whether the sin be
greater to bowl, shoot, or dance on their Sabbath, then to commit Murder: or
the father to cut the throat of his own Child. Which is a harsh expression, and
scandalous to our Church.

4.
He calls an afternoon Sermon on the Lord's Day, Page 28.29.
a fruitless and disobedient exercise of their afternoon talent, springing from
the wilful conceitedness of those that affect it. And that we are not bound
to imitate either Saint Peter's or Saint Basils example in preaching in an
afternoon, nor Saint Paul's in preaching in an upper Chamber. Which as we are
not bound to imitate, so are we not bound to the Contrary. So that these
expressions had bin better spared.

5.
He makes strange interpretations of the Greek text, to serve his own turn,
Page 29.30.
and the newfanglednes of the times. As pressing Saint Paul's (...) ( which is
to dispute Dialectically) to a Catechizing by question and answer only. And
(...) (which signifies nothing else, but to make a speech or hold discourse) to
Saint Paul's reading of a Homily, penned for him, either by all the Apostles, or
by Saint Peter. As though Saint Paul ( filled as he was with the Holy Ghost,
and bred up at the feet of Gamaliel) could not have held a discourse in a
private Family at Troas, but he must have read it out of a Book. And in
imitation hereof, he would have all Bishops likewise to read Homilies to the
people, page 31. And concludes reading to be the most powerful kind of
preaching, to perfect the men of God, and to make them Martyrs, page 32.

6.
He makes all such as omit the Letany on the Lord's Day, Page 35.36.
( by which he says the English Nation was converted) all such as expound the
Scripture otherwise then out of the ancient Fathers: all such as use long
Prayers before Sermons, or often repeat Lord, Lord: and such as speak against
pastimes on the Lord's Day, breakers of the Sabbath.

7.
He says, Page 46.
that if we do not only Bend, or Bow our body to his blessed Board or holy
Altar, but fall flat on our faces before his footstool so soon as ever we
approach in sight thereof: the Patriarchs, Apostles, and blessed Martyrs would
be glad to see their Lord so honored. Which he says without any Law, Rubric,
or Canon of the Church.

And now in all humble Obedience to so high Authority, and in Conformity to
their Lordships just Censure of these Books, and of me to this public
acknowledgment, I do here ingenuously confess my hearty sorrow for that all
these erroneous and offensive passages have slipped me and passed my hand, I
acknowledge that I have too much relied upon the seniority of the Author, who
was an ancient Divine in the University, and had been President of two
Colleges successively when I was first admitted there; upon which
Considerations I took not that due Care and Caution in the perusal and
licensing of these Books which I ought to have taken in a matter of so great
importance. And therefore I do here sincerely and sorrowfully before many
Honorable Witnesses acknowledge my great Error and Offense in the licensing
of these two Books, and do also in all humility, taking the former passages to
consideration, acknowledge the justness of their Lordships Censure of those
Books, and of me to this disapproving of the same.

And what other Books of like Nature or upon like Considerations, or rather for
want of Consideration, may have passed my hand. Give me leave here also to
profess my hearty sorrow for my Error in passing any of them.

And so I humbly desire you, to conceive of me as I am by Gods Grace, and
desire ever to be, an Enemy both to Superstition and Prophanes, a hater of
Idolatry, and an honourer of Piety and Devotion, especially practiced on the
Lord's Day. In sum, a dutiful Son of the Reformed Church of Christ, here in
England, by Law established, to the which I shall by Gods Grace with all due
Care and Circumspection conform my self; and which God of his infinite mercy
long preserve.

I conclude, most humbly beseeching God to forgive us all our oversights and
Errors, and to give us all of his Grace that we may sincerely follow those
things that make for the advancement of Truth and Peace, and the edifying of
our selves in Faith and Love, that we may walk in the good old way without
Innovations, carefully avoiding all Extremes, without turning aside either to
the right hand or the left, that so in the end we may find rest to our souls,
which GOD grant, etc.

FINIS.

