A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their Public
FAST, November. 29. 1643.

BY WILLIAM BRIDGE, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge, now
Preacher of Gods Word at Yarmouth.

REVEL. 16. 15. Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments lest he walk naked, and they see his shame. LONDON,
Printed for R. DAWLMAN. M. DC. XLIII.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament.
Right worthy Senators,
ACcording unto your command I have presented these notes unto your hands and
the worlds view; give me leave withal to present my humble thankfulness, for
your unwearied labor of love to these three Kingdoms, and in them unto all the
Churches of Christ: for as once the Poles Ambassador said in regard of the
Turk, Per latus Poloniae petunt Europam, I may say in regard of your and our
enemies, through the sides of England, Scotland and Ireland, they strike at all
that i^ truly called Christendom, your wisdom therefore does well to make
good these passages.

It is true indeed your work is, 1. great, but it is for the Sicut calere
contra frigidum hoc est repugnare frig^do, virtutis est* atque vigoris, sic
amare^t appet^re* insuav^ siv^ molestum, etc. Paris. de fide.
great God, and Solomon says, The house that I build is great, for great is
our God, 2 Chronicles. 2. 5. Shall not we do great things for him who has done and
suffered great things for us, and by us?

2. Your work is clogged with many difficulties; but if it were not so, how
should the strength of your love appear either to your God, or to your
Country? a man may be said to love the truth before the wind of opposition
rises, but he cannot be said to hold it fast or cleave unto it till he meets
with some that would take it from him, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. Difficulty does
commend duty; there was a stone rolled upon Christ's grave, And there is a
difficulty rolled upon every truth or way of God, which through the evil of the
times has been buried; But when you come to the graves mouth, the place where
you think to meet with most difficulty, Operum difficultates coelotum
saa^^tates consequuntu^.
there, and then, the stone shall be rolled away. The more difficulty in doing,
the more sweetness in the work done.

3. Your work is berounded with many dangers, but the Nec menda^ii utilitas est
diuturna, nec veritatis damnum diu nocet.
neglect of it is more dangerous, and the frown of a Prince may sometimes stand
with the favor of God; neither shall flattery always hold in credit, nor
truth ever continue in disgrace.

4. Your work is reproached sometimes, and calumniated by diverse adversaries;
But as Seneca said to his friend (male de te loquuntur homines, sed mali) so
Cur respondet Sacerdoti, sed Peninnae non respondeat Anna? quia Peninna ^rat
persona privata, sacerdos autem publica: item Peninna loquebatur ex odio,
sacerdos ex zelo: unde allud negligendum e^at, ille instruendus. Mend. in Sam.
may I say to you, Men speak evil of you, but they are evil men, and it may be,
yea it is likely, God will hear the language of your Peninnahs, and make you the
more fruitful, especially you doing as Hanna did, who though she was willing
to answer to the charge of Eli, because he did speak from Zeal, yet she would
not answer the reproach of Peninnah, because she spoke from hatred. Surely
Malignants clamours are best answered when neglected. Tutius aliquando agit qui
calumnias non exaudit; Jesus Christ was eclipsed, that Gods servants might
shine.

5. Your work also is or may be disadvantagious unto your own particular
interests, your public employments cannot but hinder your private affairs,
yet be pleased to remember Moses and Joshua, who were men of great service in
their generation, having as full an opportunity to have made themselves rich as
ever men had, yet we do not read of any great lot they shared out to themselves
or their posterity: You are now employed upon Gods service, As for your own
private affairs, if you afford them some Relics of your love, and so much
only as the public Toleramus potius praesentia quam diligam^^. Aug.
leaves, it is enough; for what is too cold for God, is hot enough for the
world; yet as the baggage unto an Army, so are things temporal to spiritual,
and personal estates to public employments.

And in the throng of all your discouragements, be pleased also to remember how
good, how honorable, how successful your service is and will be.

It Is good, first, in regard of the State; for you are now in travail for your
Countries liberty, which though it may stick some time in the birth, and a
dragon stand before you to devour it before it is borne, yet in due time it
shall be brought forth, and we shall not only be liberati, but (...) Qui diruit
maceriam, eum mordebit serpens: qui legum constitutiones impingit, non feret
impune; qui Religionis sacra violat, non erit a poena immunis. Drusius proverb.
liberi. The Hebrews have a Proverb which they have borrowed of Solomon, That
Whosoever breaks down the ^edge, shall be bitten with serpents. The hedges of the
State or Church are the Laws, (as Drusius interprets it) or the Ordinances
thereof: Those enemies of yours or ours, that have or would tread down our
hedges even to the ground, shall not ever go unpunished. When the hedge is
lowest, the serpent is nearest.

2. Good in regard of the Churches; for through your pains and labor of love,
those swelling parts (I had almost said wens) which engrossed all the outward
nutriment unto themselves, (the direful presage of a peoples (...) in corpore
humano (cui (...) in (...) epistolarum suarum pas^bu^ compa^a^) quod si
nut^imentum luit ad unum membrum, ita ut ^no^miter ingrossetur and al^a (...)
attenuatione demacerentur nonpotest (...); sicin c^rpore Eccles. si supe^iore^
fiant ita graves attractione substantiae quod in(...)res vix possunt pra inopia
se sustinere, hoc est signum ^am prop^nquae ruinae. Gersom.
death and ruin, says Gersom) are either taken off, or made more
proportionable.

2. Your service is very honorable; for what greater honor, then under Jesus
Christ, to be your Countries saviors, and your Lords servants? Upon Moses
death it was said, Moses the servant of the Lord is dead; not Moses the Prince
of the people, but the servant of the Lord: So Psalm 18. in the Title of the
Psalm it is said, A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord; not a Psalm of
David the Anointed King of Israel; but as if it were more honor to be Gods
servant, then Isreal's King, it is said the servant of the Lord: such honor have
all our Worthies.

3. Your service is and will be most successful; it is truth you stand for; And
though the truth may labor, (as Hierom Veritas laborare potest, vinci non
potest. Hier. Quid enim (...) lo inexpugnabilius? v^ritas arcem in coel^
collocavit. Ps. 119. Mend.
speaks) it cannot be overcome; For what (says Mendoza) is more impregnable
then the Heavens? and Truth has built it self a tower there. Thy word, O
Lord, is settled in the Heavens, Psalm. 119. Wherefore worthy Sirs, as
heretofore, so now much more be always abounding in the work of the Lord, in
due time you shall reap if you faint not. If you want money to carry on your
(yet not your, but Gods) public Design, remember what was promised unto
Cyrus, who in regard of re-building the Temple, was to do your work in the
type: I will Esaias 45. 2, 3.
go before thee, says God, and make the crooked places straight; I will
break in pieces the Gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, and
will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places.
And does not your own experience tell you, thus, even thus has our God dealt
by us? for the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places have
been brought forth unto us; Gold and silver that has not seen the light for
many years before: God is the same God still, and his promise, which is your
Mint, the same.

If you want outward strength and power, then remember how often when the Jews
were to build the Temple, and therein to meet with enemies; the Lord inculcates
that his Attribute upon them, The Lord of Hosts, (Thus says the Lord of Hosts)
thrice in one verse, Zach. 15. 3. and five times in four short verses, Hag. 2.
Silver is mine, and gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts; I will fill this
house with my glory, says the Lord of Hosts, etc.

And if you find not the hearts of the people coming up always to your
forwardness, then your wisdom knows how to improve the heates of their
hearts while they last; all things you know are easy and beautiful in their
season; And because men know not time and judgement^ therefore their misery is
great upon them.

But above all things let your eye be upon that most which Gods eye is most
upon, Truth, Reformation, and pure Religion; State-hypocrites desire truth for
peace sake, godly Statesmen desire peace for truths sake; war is for peace,
but peace for truth: Wherefore that I may serve you herein, I take the
boldness to lay these few lines before you.

The Sermon calls for exactness of Reformation; if I have not been exact
whilst I have called for exactness, your goodness knows as well how to
connive at what is mine, as to embrace what is God. Go on right worthy
Patriots, still to defend your Country, to contend for truth, to be willing to
lose and be lost for Christ; whilst I live I shall live praying for you, and
when I dye I hope I shall dye praising God for you.

Your humble servant in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, WILLIAM BRIDGE.

Die Mercurii 29. November. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Sir Robert
Harley do give thanks unto M. Bridge, for the great pains he took in the
Sermon he preached this da^ (at the entreaty of the Commons) at S. Margarets
Westminster. it being the day of public Humiliation, and to desire him to print his
Sermon.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D Com.

A SERMON Preached at the Late Fast, before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ZECHARIAH, CHAP. 2. VER. 18, 19, 20, 21. And CHAP. 2. VER. 1. 18. Then lift I
up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four borns. 19. And I said unto the Angel
that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns
which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. 20. And the Lord showed me
four carpenters. 21. Then said I, What come these to do? and he spoke,
saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift
up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the
Gentiles, which lift up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it. 1. I
lift up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a man with a measuring line
in his hand.
ALthough according to our English Translation these words are parts of
several Chapters, yet in many Hebrew Copies the second Chapter begins where my
Text does, and they have such connection that I may not part them.

Three things there are which this Age of ours has brought forth: Malignant
enemies: Special instruments of their ruin: And great endeavors for
Reformation. Accordingly here are three Visions; A Vision of four horns, ver.
18, 19. A Vision of four carpenters, ver. 20, 21. A Vision of a man with a
measuring line in his hand, Chap. 2. ver. 1. Every Vision has its

Narration, and Explication.
The Narration of the first Vision at the 18. verse, I saw, and behold four
horns. The Explication in the 19. These are the horns which have scattered
Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. So that

1. You have the description of the Churches enemies, under the vision of four
horns; who are here described, 1. From their number or multitude, they are
four horns, according to the four parts of the world; Quatuor cornua sunt
quatuor mundi parts. 2. From their power and strength; the horn is a word that
in Scripture phrase does note strength; He has raised up a horn of salvation
for us, Luke 1. 69. that is, strong and powerful salvation. 3. From their
mischievous and malignant practice, They scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.

2. In the second Vision you have the description of those special instruments
that are raised up for their destruction, under the similitude of four
carpenters, or four smiths; who are here described, 1. From their number,
four: And 2. From their work, which is to scatter the horns, and to cast out
the Gentiles.

3. Then comes in the third Vision, the endeavors for Reformation, under the
similitude of a man with a meas^ring line in his hand; which is described two
ways: 1. From the instrument thereof, a man, or as in the Hebrew, an excellent
(...)
man, explained to be Zerubbabel their Governor, Chap. 4. 10. 2. From the
exactness thereof, he does work by line, I saw a man with a measuring line in
his hand.

Give me l^ave to open the words, and draw out some short Observations upon
them before I come to the maine truths.

VERSE 18. Then lift I up mine eyes, and saw.] That is, I stirred and rowsed up
my self with all intensenes to receive this vision. Heavenly relations are not
to be obtained in a drowsy and sleepy way.

And behold four horns, that is, enemies from all parts of the world, and
especially those four Monarchies who have all in their course and turn been
vexatious to the people of God. It is no new thing for the Saints and Churches
to be pushed, gored, scattered by cruel and beastly enemies. Yea the Churches
may be so afflicted with enemies, that a man shall not know whither to fly for
safety; for in every part of the world there shall be some opposers; I saw
four horns, misery, and calamity, and persecution arising out of every part.

VERSE 19. And I said to the Angel that talked with me, etc. This Angel by
Interpreters is said to be Christ himself, the Angel of the Covenant, who is
the best Interpreter of Heavenly visions and of hard Scriptures; When we
understand them not, we should search, make enquiry and go to Christ, saying as
Zechariah here, What are these, Lord?

And he answered me, these are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel
and Jerusalem.] The enemies of the Churches are not said here to have wounded,
or killed Judah, Israel, or Jerusalem, but ventilarunt, they have tossed them
up (...)
as it were into the air, they have scattered, says the English. It is the
proper work of the enemies of the Churches to scatter Gods people. The
Disciples of Christ are commanded to be without horns, Be wise as Serpents,
and innocent as Doves, the word in the Greek is without horns as Doves; (...).
but here the enemies are said to sccatter Judah, Israel and Jerusalem, that is
their work and property.

VER. 20. And the Lord showed me four Carpenters.] The word is (...), that is,
such Agents and Instruments as do (...) fabricavit.
work with art, counsel and deliberation. Though the enemies of the Churches
be unreasonable and cruel as horned beasts, yet the instruments that God
rayseth up to suppress them are full of humanity, wisdom and counsel; and
they are four too, a proportionable strength.

VER. 21. Then said I, What come these to do? And he spoke saying, These are
come to fray them away, and to cast out the horns of the Gentiles. Look how
they dealt by Gods people, so God will deal by them; they scattered Israel,
and the God of Israel will raise up instruments that shall scatter them; they
cast out Gods people, and they shall be cast out. Scattering enemies shall be
scattered themselves at last.

CHAP. 2. VER. 1. I lift up mine eyes again.] Here is another vision brought to
the same purpose, in general, to uphold and comfort the distressed s^rvants of
God. When the the condition of the Saints is low and their fear^s great, there
is need of repeating comforts; Then visions, promises and consolations must be
often repeated, I lift up mine eyes again.

And I looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand; That is, for
to build exactly. The second verse tells us it was for to measure Jerusalem,
which cannot barely be understood litt^rally, for ver. 16. of Chap. 1. It is
said, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies, says the Lord, my house shall
be built in it, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem, etc. which
promise in its latitude was never yet fulfilled literally, but it is to be
understood of the New Jerusalem especially, mentioned in Revel. 21. Where we
find a man also at this measuring work. So that we may yet say, though the
afflictions of the Churches be very great, and their desolations many, yet if a
man will lift up his eyes and stir up himself, he may and shall behold a man
with a measuring line in his hand. And thus you see that there is ^ardly a word
of these three visions, but affords some special instruction. But because I
have not time for all, I shall especially close with those three Doctrines,
that are especially held forth in these three visions. Thus.

1. In that here are four horns that appear, first, you may

2. In that these four Carpenters do appear immediately four horns, as it
were in the same vision, you may observe, That though God do suffer the enemies
of his Churches and people to be exceeding strong, many and most mischievous,
yet he will raise up an answerable strength against them; Four Carpenters
against four horns, which shall fray them away, and deal by them as they
have done by others.

3. In that the man with a measuring line does immediately Line.

I begin with the former vision of the four horns, and the Benjamin for the
great sin of Gibeah? If you look into the 20. of Judges, you shall find that
before Benjamin was punished they got two great victories upon Israel; Israel
(if you count the numbers of their soldiers) were twelve to one; Israel had
the best cause, and their work was good, they went forth to do just^ce on that
delinquent Tribe; yet if you consult the story, the Tribe of Benjamin first
slew of them down to the ground forty thousand m^n. This is Gods way still; He
seldom or never destroys his enemies but out of Zeal; The Zeal of the Lord
of Hosts has done this, says the Prophet: Now Zeal is nothing else but
angered love; and three things there are in the world that God does love
especially, His people, His truth, and His worship; When the enemies prevail
they spoil his people, they defile his worship, they scorn his truth, so his
love is angered, his Zeal is stirred, and then his enemies are confounded.

But what reason is there why God should suffer his precious

Good reason for it. Totidem inimici, totidem paedagogi: Make plain my way
before me (says the Psalmist) because of mine enemies; but in the Hebrew it
is, because of mine observers; our enemies (...) Inimicus q^asi obser^ator
dictus, quod semper obser^et et contempletur quibus malefacial. Buxtor^.
are our observers, and their observation is our preservation. As a man's best
friend sometimes does him more hurt then his worst enemy, so his worst enemy
does him more good then his best friend. Now suppose (says Salmeron) that a
man were in great want and need of money, and his friend should throw him a bag
of gold, though in his catching of it he might hurt his hands or head, yet when
he has Magna Dei mise^^cordia in flag ello temporal: ut si quis c^umenam
g^avem and au^o onustam ex ^dito loco in caput cu^usdam p^o d^^ito aliq ^o in
carce^om detenti proj^^eret and dolorem aliquem ei infe^^et, and ^um^rem
capi^^s exc^taret, and un^m vel alteram g^ttulam sang^ (...) cl(...)ct, ille
quidem ^ei ignarus moleste serret in principio, and vicem suam magn^p(...)
dole^et quod afflicto afflictio adde^etur; verum si paulo post animo ^am
tranquill^ a l(...)xu^^ ^culos suos convertet, and c^umenam multo auro refectam
deprehendat, quo possit debita sua persolvere, and q^od supe est ad vitam ^t
anquilie placideque traducendam suffi(...)e, p^osecto de ill ato tantillo
vul^ere n^lla esset amplius querimonia vel memo ^a, imo se^ta congratulat^o: Ad
eundem mod^m de Christi flagellis considerandam. Salmer. de miracul. in J^an.
3. * Honor est testimonium de alicujus excellentia. Aqu.
taken out the gold, he loves his friend never the less. There is no
persecution but brings a bag of gold to Gods people; though it may somewhat
hurt them in falling upon them, yet when they have picked out the gold thereof,
they will love God the more.

Let me instance.

1. Hereby they are occasioned to honor God, which is the end of their life
and the comfort of their soul: for what is honor, but as H^nor est
testimonium de alicujus excellentia. Aqu.
Aquinas speaks, a testimony of another excellency? the more I testify of any
excellency in any truth or way of Gods, the more I honor him; and in times of
persecution the Saints of God do thus testify of him.

2. Hereby the children of God are weaned from the world, and made to hie them
home to their fathers house.

3. Hereby they are made more useful in their places, and beneficial unto
their enemies; for therefore our enemies do us so much hurt, because we do
them no more good.

4. Hereby they carry the truths of God and Christ into other parts; the enemy
intends to scatter their persons, but God intends to scatter his truths.

5. Hereby the children of God receive a fuller and clearer testimony of their
own graces. When the world frowns most, God smiles most upon them. When the
enemy gives the loudest testimony of their hypocrisy, God from heaven does
give the highest testimony of their sincerity to their bosoms.

6. Hereby the enemies themselves are more convinced. Some men snore so loud in
their sleep, that they awake themselves with their own snortings; and some
men's sins are so loud and unreasonable, that they convince themselves and
others by their own unreasonable dealing with the people of God. Master Fox
tells of one in Queen Mary's time, that had so basely and maliciously used that
s^rvant of God James Abbes, that when that good man James Abbes was dead, the
remembrance of this Martyrs patience and his own unreasonablenesse, made the
Persecutor cry out and say, James Abbes is saved, and I am damned, and so he
went wringing his hands to his grave, crying, James Abbes is saved and I am
damned, James Abbes is saved and I am damned. It is recorded also of one
Calocerius, that when he saw the malignancy of the enemies, and patience of the
Martyrs, he cried out and said, Of a truth great is the God of the Christians.
And what Vere magnus Deus Christian^rum.
can a Christian desire more? Is not Gods truth better then my house?

7. Hereby also the Saints are kept from and cured of divisions among
themselves. Cyprian meditating of the several causes that brought those sad
and heavy persecutions in the primitive times, reckons up this for one, their
own divisions, wherefore God was fame to let out the dog upon the sheep, that
the sheep might run together. Our punishments oftentimes wear the names of
our sins in their foreheads: And if ever, then now; God does punish our
divisions with divisions; But it is to cure our divisions. He points to our sin
by our punishment, that in our punishment we may becured of sin.

8. Hereby also the servants of God may see and know by experience, that it is
better to serve God then men. When ^
we worship God after and for the precepts of men, we do rather worship men
then God, and serve them then him; And when his servants do so, th^n God
suffers men to rise up against them, that they may learn in a smarting way, as
well as they have done in a sinning way, what it is to serve men. This cause you
have expressed, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7, 8. And when the Lord saw that they humbled
themselves, the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out by the hand of Shishak;
Nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may know my service and the
service of the Kingdoms of the Countries.

9. Hereby again the servants of God learn the right use of the rod, both in
Church and State: Sometime it so falls out that Justice is not executed in a
Kingdom, and Discipline not exercised in a Church; Well then says God, seeing
that you will not take the rod into your hand, I will take it into mine own,
but it shall be in such a manner as shall make all your hearts to ache. In the
second and third Chapters of the Revelation, you know there are seven Epistles
written to the seven Churches, and there is none of all the Churches but are
threatened with one affliction, calamity or another, save only that of
Philadelphia; and if you mark it, you shall find that only that Church had
the keys rightly used and handled. And you shall find this also in all Gods
dealings both with States and Churches: Let a State or Kingdom be never so
wicked, yet if Justice be executed there is hope thereof; Let a Church be never
so defiled, yet if Discipline be exercised, there is hope of that: But if a
Kingdom where there is no Justice, or a Church where there is no Discipline,
nor in tendentia to it, then the Lord himself arises and says; W^ll, because
you will not take this rod into your hand, I will, and I will raise up enemies
against you that shall do the same to you, that you should have done to them.
Good reason therefore, yea infinitely good reason, that God should sometimes
suffer his own people to be pushed, gored, scattered, by cruel and bloody
enemies that are most unreasonable.

Wherefore then let no man be stumbled or offended Application.
at Gods present proceedings in the world, or in this Kingdom, though very
mysterious. Our Savior says, These things I tell ye before, that when they
come to pass, ye may not be offended; and whatsoever is now come to pass
among us, Christ has told us of it before; yea this Scripture. Yet, good Lord,
how many are there that are offended! Oh, says one, we looked for reformation,
and we meet with confusion; for light, and we meet with darkness; we looked
that Jesus Christ should at this time have restored his Kingdom to the
Churches; for friends, and we meet with enemies; Can God love us, and suffer
such enemies to rise against us? Were there ever any enemies that were like to
ours? so potent, so cruel, so many, so blasphemous, so hellish, etc.

But who art thou, oh man, that speak thus long without book under the
command of unbelief, and darknest knowledge? Should thou not rather write so
and such over thy sins, then over thine afflictions? You say, had ever any of
Gods people such enemies as we? so cruel, so many, so vile, etc? You should
rather say, Come, O my soul, did ever any commit such sins as I do? so
frequently, so knowingly, so deliberately, so incorrigibly, so scandalously?
Why do you not rather write the So upon your sins, then upon your sorrows?
Thus did Eusebius Neiremburgius, aggravating his own sins, oh says he, never
any sinned so as I have done, the Devil sinned indeed, but Christ never died
for him as he has done for me; Judas sinned indeed, but he was never pardoned
as I have been; Achan sinned indeed and troubled the kingdom, but enemies you
know there are by whom you are most molested,

The Flesh Devil World

First, the Flesh brings forth three great evils. 1. Ignorance in the
understanding; In opposition to that Jesus Christ is called our Prophet. 2.
Rebellion in the will; In opposition to that Jesus Christ is called our King.
3. Guiltines that arises from ignorance and rebellion; In opposition to that
Jesus Christ is called our Priest.

The Devil our second enemy is armed with all weapons of hostility against us;
therefore there are several names given to him. He is said 1. to be the strong
man, (...), when the strong man keeps the house, etc. In opposition to that
Jesus Christ is called (...) stronger then he. 2. The Luke 11. 21.
Devil is called the Accuser of the brethren; In opposition to that Jesus
Christ is called our Advocate. 3. The Devil is called Apollyon, destroyer; In
opposion to that Jesus Christ is called our Savior. 4. The Devil is called the
old Serpent; In opposition to that Jesus Christ is called the brazen Serpent.
5. The Devil is called a roaring Lion; in opposition Iste leo ob seritatem,
Christus ob fortitudinem Christus l^o ad vincendum, diabolus ad nocondum. Aug.
to that Jesus Christ is called a Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 6. The Devil is
called the god of this world, the prince of the air; In opposition to that
Jesus Christ is called the Prince of Peace, the mighty God. Thus what ever
terms or titles of strength and power there is in Satan, there is somewhat in
Jesus Christ that answers, yea that over-answereth all.

And for our third enemy, the world, you cannot have a more full description of
its power then as it is presented to you Revel. 13. 1. I saw a Beast arising
out of the Sea having seven heads and ten horns. Our Text speaks but of four
horns, and here are ten; yet if you look into the 5. Revel. you shall find an
answerable strength in Christ, who is described to be a Lamb having seven
horns, seven rather then ten being the number of perfection in Scripture. But
if you think that seven is not enough to equalize the ten, you find also in
Habak. 3. ver. 4. that the Lord our God is said to have horns in his hand,
because all the works of his hand are done in strength and power. So that what
ever your enemies are, there is strength enough in Jesus Christ to subdue their
strength.

And why is Christ thus furnished, but for his Church and people? He is the
Lord Keeper of all our comforts, the Lord Christus com(...) thesa^(...). Luth.
Treasurer of all our graces, and the great Magazine of all our Ammunition. He
was anointed that he might anoint; he was sanctified that he might sanctify;
he received of the Father that he might give unto you, unto you I say and unto
all the Churches. He is the Head of His Church, and therefore as Luther
observes well, though every member is sensible Sen^^s sub(...)o^ and (...) est
in capite quam in reliqui^ membris corpor^^: hoc experientia ^idemus, nam laeso
digitu^o aut ali^ minima corporis part laesa, statim caput in vultu prodit
s^se hoc sentire; nasus enim contrabitu^, oculi torvum vident: si^ Christus
caput nostrum afflictiones nost^as suas facit and ut in capite omnes sensus,
etc. Luth.
of wrong and hurt done to another member, yet the head is much more sensible
then all the members, for the head is the se^te and habitation of all the
senses; the hand may touch, but it cannot see; the foot may feel, but it cannot
hear or taste; the head sees, and f^^ls, and hears, and tastes, and smells; so
says he, it is with Christ our Head, in whom all the senses dwell, and
therefore infinitely more sensible of the Churches misery then any other member
in all the world; and sensible he cannot be unless in due time he be helpful
unto them. Upon this very ground you shall find that God promises to raise up
seven shepherds and eight principal men for the help of his people, Micah 5.
5. When the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our
palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds and eight principal
men; As if he should say, though you have been heretofore without Guides, and
Captains, and Commanders, and Princes, yet when the enemy is come into your
land, I will raise up instruments enough to suppress them; and look what these
Assyrians have done unto you, that shall my instruments and workmen do unto
them; do they come into your Country and tread down your palaces? so shall
mine instruments go into their Country and tread down their palaces, ver. 6.
And would you know the ground of all this? It is my love in Christ; for, Thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out
of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from of old* from everlasting. And ver. 4. He shall
stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the
Lord his God, and they shall abide; And this man shall be the peace when the
Assyrian shall come into our land. ver. 5. So that whosoever does but seriously
consider the strength and anointment of Jesus Christ, must needs conclude this
Doctrine with me. Though God suffer the enemies of his Church and people to be
many and great, yet in due time he will raise up a proportionable strength
against them to suppress them, and to deal by them as they have done by
others.

The application of this Doctrine looks two ways,

To the Saints in general Carpenters in special

To the Saints by way of consolation and encouragement.

To the Carpenters, to Gods workmen, by way of direction and exhortation.

First, here is consolation and encouragement unto all the Application 1
Saints and people of God. Wonder not that in a day of humiliation, I speak of
consolation. Beloved, you are never Sanctus dolet, and de dolo^e gaudet. Aug.
more fit to mourn for sin, then when you can rejoice in God. One grace makes
way for another. It is the warm beams of Gods love and care must thaw our
hearts. Two things that we are this day to do. To wrestle with God; To fight
with our enemies. You cannot in your wrestling take better hold of God then by
the skirt of a promise: you cannot fight better against your enemies then by
faith. The Devil, with whom especially we fight in these wars, will not be
killed with swords and knives; This is our victory whereby we overcome the
world, even our faith. It is written in the life of Mr. Tindall, that when he
was in the Netherlands, there was a Conjurer that could command dishes of meat
from several men's tables, so that he would invite his friend to a dish of meat
from such or such a Princes table; diverse going to see his exploite, Mr.
Tindall went with the rest, if it might be, to hinder it; and when he came
there, he set himself in a way of believing to hinder this Conjurers
proceedings, which he did accordingly, for when that wretched man should have
done his exploit, his hands were held by Mr. Tindalls faith, and he cried out
and said, I cannot do it, there sits the man that hinders me, or to that
purpose. What will not faith do, if good? What will it not hinder, if evil? I
will not say that in these sad days of ours we have to deal with Conjurers,
but surely with such persons as through their violence and thefts are able not
only to command men's dishes off their tables, but all their goods out of their
houses: Oh that we had but faith enough, we might Fides se demittit ad domestica
soon believe them out of all their plundrings.

Wherefore that I may raise up your faith a little, and keep you from
discouragements, I lay before you this promise; Zechariah his vision is your
promise; yea it is somewhat more, for as we say of Sacraments, so I say of
these two last visions, they are promises unto the eye, unto sense. When Joshua
was to bring the children of Israel into Canaan, and so to meet with many
enemies, before he went out, God, and Moses, and the people bestowed their
several exhortations on him; and if you consult the place, you shall find that
all of them, God, Moses, and people wish him to be of good courage, and not to
fear; Why so? Abulensis answers, Rationabiliter enim timere potuit Joshua;
Joshua might rationally fear, for he saw how that his master Moses was
occasioned by the Rationabiliter ergo timere poterat Josua, quod cum ipse
^^agilio^ ess^t sacillime peccare pote^at, ita ut deus ipsum et populum in
hostilem tradert potestatem. Tostat. in Josu. 1. cap.
Israelites to sin against God, and to be angry, in so much as he was kept out
of Canaan: Whereupon Joshua might well think thus with himself, Oh Lord, if
Moses who was the meekest man on earth was moved to anger, the holiest man, a
man that saw God face to face, yet could not do this work, but through his
failing was denied entrance into Canaan; how shall I be able to lead this
people up against all these enemies? Well therefore might he fear (says
Abulensis) lest God should give both him and his people into the hands of his
enemies. Well, but how then does God remove these fears, and relieve his
heart? Only thus, he strengthens him with a promise, Fear not, (says God)
neither be dismayed for I am with thee, and I will never leave thee nor forsa^e
thee. So now, are there any of you oppr^ss^d with diverse seares because of
these horns that are risen up in several parts of the world, of this Kingdom?
The Lord has said that according to the number of the horns, the carpenters
shall be. Are there enemies in every part? There shall be carpenters in every
part. Will you say, Oh but our en^mies are exceeding many, and very cru^ll? So
were these mentioned in the Text, who (as Sanctius observes the words
signify) were to do mischief in quantum potuerunt and in quantum voluerunt,
and as your English has it, so that no man did lift up his head. Will you say,
Oh but I do not yet see these carpenters at work? But is it not because you
do not stir up your s^lves? I lift up mine eyes and saw, says Z^chariah. Will
you say, Oh but when I do stir up my self to behold things as they are, I
cannot see four for four, a proportionable strength on the Churches side
raised up against the enemies? Well, but yet you may see some strength in every
place, where ever there is any opposition made by enemies, some there are in
the same place that God has raised up to resist them. And the Text is not,
that God will raise up strong gigantean carpenters, but carpenters, four
carpenters, some or other that shall do the work of God, though they be never
so weak. In that Mic. 5. where the promise is to raise up seven shepherds, and
eight principal men, he says, ver. 7. The remnant of Jacob shall be as the
dew that waits not for the sons of men. Mark that word, that waits not for
the sons of men. When Sisera and all his host were discomfited, what were the
carpenters? were not Deborah and Iael with her hammer amongst them? and says
the Text, So let all thine enemies perish; it is not only a prayer, but a
prophecy.

It is recorded in the life and death of Melancthon, that when Charles the 5.
and the Pope of Rome threatened the Protestants with fire and sword, Luther,
Melancthon, and others got together to seek a way for themselves, their little
ones, and their substance; and on a certain day after long deliberation,
Philip tired out with labor, rose up (exceeding sad and very sorrowful) to go
speak with some that knocked and enquired after him at the gate; in his return
to his company he heard in a room as he passed by, the noise of children, as
it were pronouncing their Catechize; whereupon he put aside the door where they
were, and he saw the Ministers wives of the place, praying and praising God
with their children; upon this Melancthon returned to his company exceeding
cheerful and very joyful; Luther espying his gladsome countenance, said thus
to him, Philip how comes it to pass that you return so joyful that went
out even now so sorrowful? He answered, Let us be of good comfort, for I have
seen them that will fight for us and defend us. Luther asked, what those stout
and brave Captains were? Oh (says Melancthon) they are the chaste wives and
virtuous children of holy men. It seems that holy man Melancthon thought such
Carpenters were a great matter in his time. Beloved, you have many such
Carpenters as these at work for you: But besides these look into any part of
the kingdom, and you shall find that where ever any horn is raised up, there is
a Carpenter at work also, some or other that God has unexpectedly raised up to
make resistance. Wherefore then lift up your heads oh all ye people of the
Lord, and be not discouraged; what Zechariah saw you shall find, Gods promise
is your security, He will raise up four Carpenters to the four Horns.

Secondly, This Doctrine speaks direction to the Carpenters, Application 2.
it tells them what they ought to do, and what is their work. The work of the
four Carpenters you see is not only to fray these horns away, but to cast
out the Gentiles. Who ever therefore you are whom God has raised up for this
employment, behold your service, up and be doing, and do it fully; Cursed is he
that does the work of the Lord negligently: and with holds his hand from
shedding of blood, they are knit together in one verse, Ierem. 48. 10.

But we are now upon the work of Reformation, building

Mistake me not, it is not in mine intention to call for blood. Moses was the
meekest man upon earth you know, yet when Israel had defiled themselv^s with
Idols in the matter of the golden calfe, he stood in the gate of the camp ^.
Sam. cap. 2. ^, ut (...) eis ne^ sibi (...), and tamen d(...)nquentes si^
pe^secutas est, q^os (...), ut eos etiam Domino parcente prostern^^ et. Gr^gor.
and said, Exodus 32. 27. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, put every man his
sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate through the camp, and
slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor. He does not say, Slay every man his enemy, or every man his
countreyman, but every man his brother, and his companion, and his neighbor.
And ver. 28. it is said. The children of Levi did according to the word of
Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men; yet the
Levites had their hand in Temple-work more then any other Tribe, and Moses had
the honor to build the Tabernacle. You read also in Zech. 13. of a great and
glorious Reformation, so high, so great, and so convincing, that the very
Priests who were wont to go in rough garments to deceive the people, should
throw away their Priest-coats, and say, ver. 5. I am no Prophet, I am an
husbandman, for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth. As if they should
say severally, Though I am able to read a Chapter, yet I am not fit to be a
Minister, I have no learning, but in truth am more fit to go to the plough:
Well, but now mark I pray how this great change and Reformation is ushered in
and brought about, not without some kind of holy violence, for it is said, ver.
2. It shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of hosts, that I will cut
off the names of the Idols out of the land, and they shall be no more
remembered; and also I will cause the Prophets and the unclean spirits to pass
out of the land: And ver. 3. It s^all come to pass that when any shall yet
prophecy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him
through when he prophesyeth. And ver. 6. when any should ask him, What are
those wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, Those wherewith I was wounded
in the house of my friends. Another notable Scripture you have for this purpose
in Psalm. 24. when the question is made at the third verse, Who shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place? That is, who
is fit to be a member of a true Church? Answer is made to this at the 4. 5. and
6. verses, He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, etc. Wherefore then
says the Psalmist, Lift up your heads O ye gates, that is, Magistrates that
sit in the gates; and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that is, of the
Churches, for the doors of the Churches are everlasting doors, against which
the gates of hell shall not prevail: and then the King of glory shall come in:
that is, God will come in and dwell amongst you in his great glory, and your
very congregations shall be filled with glory. But, Who is the King of glory?
The Lord strong and mighty, says the Psalmist, the Lord mighty in battle, the
Lord of Hosts, he is the King of glory; that is, thus will he bring his glory
into the Churches by showing himself to be the Lord strong and mighty, the
Lord mighty in battle. Wherefore then lift up your heads O ye gates, and
execute you justice and judgment, and be you lift up ye everlasting doors of
the Churches, and be you reformed, and the King of glory shall come in with his
glory into your congregations. But if you ask me who this King of glory is? I
must tell you he is the Lord of hosts, and so he will be known unto you when he
brings his glory amongst you, even the Lord strong and mighty in battle.
Wherefore I say lift up your heads O you carpenters and servants of the Lord,
drawn forth to that employment: you see your work, the Text has cut it out, I
beseech you in the Lord CHRIST, do it, and do it thoroughly. Only let me lay
in one Caution, which is this:

When you have frayed away the horns, and cast out the Gentiles, take heed
that the spirit of the horns do not live in the carpenters. When the Children
of Israel drove the Canaanites out of their land, they did as well inherit
their sins as their lands, th^si^s they came to punish they did commit, the
spirit of the Canaa^ites did dwell in the Israelites. So it was with Iehu when
he had beat down the house of Ahab: So with Am^ziah, who when he had destroyed
the Edomites, he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set the ^ up to
be his gods, 2 Chronicles. 25. 14, 15. This is too common in times of Reformation.
You all know what a blessed instrument of Reformation Master Calvin was in his
time, yet when he came to that At ego, inquit Calvinus, Chrys^ll^mum sequntus,
occid^ me potiu^ patia, qua^^ hae^ ma^us De^ contempto^^bus ^udicat^^ sancta
Domini pe^^^gat.
matter of denying the Lords Supper to Bartlerius and other Servetians who were
A prandio vero Call(...) lo^um illum (...) Actorum Apost: so^te tractans in quo
Paulus Ecclesiae Ephesi^ae, testatu^ se e^m non esse qui adversus magist^atum
pugra^e sc^ret a^^ docer^t, (...)tumque mult^^ (...) co^ortatus ut in ea quam
audi^^sset doct^ina pe^severa^^t, tandem (...) postremam concionem Gen(...)e
hab^turus, and qu^ mad^^od^^, ^^qui^, se res habent, ^^^cat mihi quoque ^^atres
apud (...) haec Apostols ^e^ba ^sur^a^e, Commendo vo^ D^o and so mo^^ g^atiae
ejus. M^l. Adam. de vita Calvini.
most unworthy, those that otherwise were called Protestants, rose up in
opposition to him, insomuch that he was ready, if not altogether forced to
leave Geneva for a time. And was it not thus in that unhappy difference at
Francford? In Queen Mary's time you know that Hist. d^ Franc.
many left this their own country, and did fly to Germany; when they came
there, did not many of them that fled for Religion prove pushing, goring horns
unto their brethren? yea some of them were so bitter to others, that they
complained of and impeached that reverend man Master Knox of High Treason
against Imperial Dignity, in so much that he was banished from the City, and
driven from his congregation. Oh what a sad thing is this that the spirit of
Papists should live in Protestants! that the spirit of the horns should live in
the carpenters! that the spirit of Prelates should live in those that are risen
up to fray them away and cast them out! I say no more, but when we have done
all, cast out the Gentiles, and frayed away the horns, if then we shall turn
to push, and gore, and cast out our brethren, and one another, God will find
it out, and will not put it up at Englands hands. Wherefore (my beloved) in the
fear of God let us all remember this Caution, Oh take heed that the spirit of
the horn do not dwell in the carpenters; And so I come to the third Vision, A
man with a measuring line in his hand, and the third Doctrine, which is this,

When God shall raise up his Carpenters against his Churches enemies, then, and
then especially Reformation is to be laid unto the line. You see how these
three visions are knit together, one following immediately upon another,
showing not the coherence of the words only, but of the matter: The Doctrine
therefore falls asunder into two Propositions.

1. Stones of reformation are to be laid with most exactnes. 1. Prop. 2.


2. When God raises up his Carpenters against his Churches enemies, then, and
then especially this exact reformation is to be much endeavored.

1. Stones of reformation are to be laid with most exactnes. Propos. 1. Reas. 1.
1. Temple work is a great work and of great consequence. When the matter that
a man is to work upon is precious, the eye curious and exact that he is to work
unto, and the work it self of infinite consequence, there exactnes is much
required, especially when a miscarriage can hardly be mended but with much
difficulty. Now so it is in the work of reformation, the matter to be wrought
upon are the souls of men and women, the most precious matter in the world;
the eye that we are to work unto is Gods, is Christ's, who walks between the
golden Candlestickes; And the business it self is of infinite consequence, yours
and mine and thousands eternities lying at the stake; And if there be a
miscarriage, it will be a hard thing to bring the whole Nation unto the work
again. You see that when a man walks upon the rope, he carries a pole in his
hand to sway him, and he looks diligently to his feet, Quia non licet his
peccare, because if he do fail he cannot mend his miscarriage; And I say that
in this work of reformation if there be the least slip; it will be a hard thing
to r^cover it, when once a nation is settled in that miscarriage. Surely
therefore the work is to be done with the most exactnes.

2. It is only exactnes that does cause conviction in those A ^ ex^m^^ari. D.
V^ et.
does depend the reformation of all the Churches in Christendom as upon a Rule
and Exemplar. So that I say there is no reformation on foot in any Nation but
the eyes of other Nations are upon it; If it be done exactly, the beholding
Nations will also come in, and say, We will take hold of your skirt, and your
God shall be our God. When Judah shines, and Gods glory rests upon them,
then Nations come in and join themselves unto them; Esa. 60. 1, 2, 3. It is
only beauty that does take the eye; when there is no beauty, there is no
allurement; (...), beautiful, comes from (...), which signifies to call,
because beauty calls forth the eye and holds it in its beams; Now 4. things must
concur to beauty. 1. There must be all the parts. 2. All in their proportion.
3. All in their due place. 4. All laid over with a sweet and lively color. So
it is in the beauty of Gods house; There must be all the ordinances, all in
their place, all in due proportion* and laid over with the power of godliness.
When these meet in any Church, there is beauty; but meet they cannot, unless
there be exactnes in reforming. Surely therefore stones of reformation are to
be laid with most exactnes.

But what reason is there of the second Proposition, which

True, they are indeed. But God chooses troublous times to build in both his
house and walls of the City. The Ecclesia tunc semper fu^t optima quando agebat
inte pessi^os. Luth.
Churches have always lost most in times of peace, and gained most in times of
trouble. Whilst the 10. Persecutions conti^ued, the integrity of the Church^s
was best preserved. The Psalmist says, Send out thy light and thy truth, O
Lord, Psalm. 43. 4.
and let them lead me unto thine Altar. There is no going unto Gods Altar with
worship, without the leading hand of truth, and there is no building Gods house
for an Altar without light. When God made the world, he first made light on the
first day, as an example unto us in all our works to work by light. Now light
and truth do break forth much in troublous times.

1. Troublous times are praying times, and praying times Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. If
thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, if
thou seek her as silver and searchest for her as for hid treasures, then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God.

2. In troublous times men's hearts are most low and Esa. 11. that God promises
that in the latter times the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord; and in the verses a little before, it is said of the Lion and the
young Lion that a child shall lead them; these two go well together, but the
stout Lion-like spirit will never be led by the hand of a sucking child till it
be brought down and low by troublous time.

3. In troublous times God is pleased to communicate ordinarily communicate
himself unto them. Thus troublous times do bring forth light and truth. God
loves to have a sacrifice from the hands of the children of Abraham out of the
thickets and briars. Opposition commends reformation, in troublous times
there is much opposition, and therefore in those times reformation is very
beautiful. The Doctrine is clear then, the application easy. Thus.

Hence we may all see and know what is the work of the App(...)
times, even to measure the Temple. Now for a long while we have had experience
of the first Vision, and we have felt the horns; the rising of the carpenters
we have seen also: And who may not say, I have lift up mine eyes, and behold, a
man with a measuring line in his hand? Blessed be God that we have lived to see
this day, to see a man stand with a measuring line in his hand in England. And
who ever you are that hear me this day, you are either such as have this
measuring line in your hands, or else such as are to be measured.

If you have the measuring line in your hands, then remember Stones of
Reformation are to be laid with most exactness. Herein if you be exact, you
shall be like unto Jesus Christ, who (as Salmeron observes) when he came to
purge the Temple, did not only admonish, chide, reprove the money changers, or
whip them away, but did overthrow their very Tables, Ne impium opus facile
repeterent, Lest they should recover their trade Sac^^dot^^ in Templ^
(...)dentes su^^ ^^gellorum d^g(...). S^l^ner* in Joan. 3.
again. In other things you are very exact, men are exact in their trades,
exact in their accounts, exact in their reckonings, exact in their diet, exact
in their sleep, exact in their hair both of head and face; In small things you
are exact, and will you not be exact in this greatest? You know what other
Reformed Churches have done, the Reformation of all other Churches are round
about you, you have their writings before you, their books, their practices,
their examples, and this for many years; can you think that God has set us
now for an hundred years upon their shoulders, to see no farther into
Reformation then they have done? If two men be to do the same work, the one
first and the other after; he that does it first though he does it never so
well, yet will excuse himself and say, I never saw he work done before me, I
was feign to invent my very tools and instruments; and you will excuse him
though there be some failing in him: But when the second man comes to the
same work that has a former example, and all his tools to help him, you
expect more exactnes from him. You know my meaning, I need not apply this; Oh
that our God would make England the praise of the whole earth! Nothing will do
it but our exactnes in reformation. Certainly this reformation that is now on
foot, has (as I may speak with reverence) cost our God very dear, the
liberties, the estates, the lives and bloods of many of his dear children, of
whom the world was not worthy. Do you think God will lay out all this for an
imperfect, unexact, poor and low reformation? Let me present you with the
prophesy of Bishop Hooper, who when he was in prison called his Printer to him,
and said, You shall outlive these Marian times, and see the alteration of the
present religion, when the Gospel shall be freely preached, wherefore remember
me to my brethren as well in exile as others, and bid them be circumspect in
displacing of Popish Priests, and put good Ministers in Churches, or else their
end will be worse then ours. He said, be circumspect; I say, be exact; And
though I do not wish that every morning there might be a boy crying at your
doors as once at Philips, Mortalises, thou art mortal, thou art mortal; for
that the Drum does sufficiently every morning; yet I could wish that this
sentence might be sounding in your hearts every morning and night, that it
might lie down with you and rise with you, stones of reformation are to be laid
with most exactnes.

But how shall that be?

Thus. 1. Be sure of this that you take the right line into line, able to reach
unto all particular affairs of the Churches.

Mistake me not, I pray. A Church is considered two ways; As a meeting of
people, men and women; O^ as a Church meeting, a meeting of Saints, apparent
Believers, coe^us sidelium. I do not say that the Word is to be the only line
and rule to the Church in the first respect, so reason may be a rule to men as
men; but in the second respect it is, the Word is able to reach unto all things
belonging unto a Church as a Church. Our Commission is not larger now then the
Apostles Commission was, and their Commission ran thus, Go teach and baptize,
etc. teaching men to observe what ever I command you, Mat. 28. If not commanded
by Christ, then not to be preached by them nor by us. Jesus Christ was and is
as fully Christ in his Prophetical as Priestly office, and his Priestly
satisfaction reached unto all our sins, though they were never so small,
therefore his Prophetical direction reaches to all our duties, ^
though they be never so little. That which comes not from heaven, can never
bring you into heaven. If you say, There are some things indifferent; It is
true, but Christ's command is to keep them so then, and not to alter them. If
you say that Circumstances are left unto the Church; Either you mean all
Circumstances, or some; If you mean only some, then you conclude nothing, for
a particular Proposition cannot make a general Conclusion; If you mean that
all Circumstances are left unto the Church, then you do at once and at one
stroke cut off three Commandments from the Decalogue; the first Commandment,
Thou shall have no other Gods but me, commands the substance of worship, the
second the means, the third the manner, the fourth the time; and means,
manner, ^
and time are circumstances. Herein Luther speaks well, Whatsoever a man
believes, or learneth, or teaches besides the Word, it is sin; and again
says he, The Church Non enim nostro ^udicio ins(...)nda est Rel^g^^, sed e
(...) Dei. Om^ a pervertunt^^, cum Religio non verbo Dei, sed hominum a bit^^^
^i^itur. Jew^l, Conci^ ad Clerum de verbo Dei.
is the daughter of Scripture, brought up at the fe^t of the Word. O the
perfection of that line! it is a complete line, a glorious line, a blessed
line. Take this line therefore first into your hands.

2. When you have gotten this line into your hand, view your ground well, and
stones well that you are to draw this line over. Three sorts there are that are
especially to be lined by it: The Magistrates, the Ministers, the
Congregations. These three the Pope and Prelates, notwithstanding their
slattering with Princes, have especially labored to degrade and to deprive of
that power which was given unto them by Jesus Christ. 1. The Magistrates, and
therefore the man of sin is so described by the Apostle, that he shall exalt 1
Thessal. 2. 4.
himself above all that is called God. 2. The Ministers and Revelation to the
14. there is no more mention made of Elders (unless it be in relation unto
that same time:) In the 4. Chapter the condition of the Church is stated, and
then the Elders are mentioned; so again in the 5. and 7. but in the after
Chapters to the 14. you have the story of Antichrist, his rise, his reign and
ruin; and till the fall of Antichrist (which is begun in the 14. and Babylon
is fallen, then come forth the Elders again, praising God, and with great joy.
So in our Service Book, the Collect runs thus, Send down upon our Bishops and
Curats, etc. as if Ministers and Elders were only Bishops Curats, and had no
power but under them. 3. The Congregations also have been much oppressed by
them, therefore Non i^aque insiciamu^ ^eterem ritum ac mor^m Epis^^pos
^ligend^, quo pl^be praesent^, im^ and ^^sius suffragiis aliquand^
^ligebantur^nam in Africa illum moremobservatum esse cons^at ex electione
Eradii successoris S. August. in Graecia ^^tate S. Ch^ysoll. ex libro esus 3.
de sacerdote: qua quidem eligendi Episcopi ratio usque ad Gregorium I. ut
constat ex ejus epistolis, im^ and ad Caroli Magni, and Ludovici R. ^^.
Imperatorum usque tempor a perduravit. Azor. instit. Morab. p. 2. l. 3. c. 28.
Azorius the Jesuit professes ingenuously that until Gregory the first, and
Charles the Great, the Congregations had the power of choosing their own
Ministers; since Antichrists power the Congregations have lost their power.

Now bel^ved in the Lord, there is none of all these three but have some power
about Church-affaires; the Magistrate he has his power, and therefore he is
called a nursing Father; the Minister and Elder, he has his power, therefore
he is commanded (...), which signifi^th both to feed and rul^; The Con^r^gation
has its power, and therefore well says that blessed and learned man D.
Whitaker, who is now in H^aven: If you consider ^
the government of the Church in regard of its Head Christ, so it is
Monarchical; if in regard of the Elders, so it is Aristocraticall; if in
regard of the people who have a power to choose their own Officers; it is
Democraticall: Whether this power of theirs be a matter of privilege or of
jurisdiction, I dispute not now; but a power they have: a power the People, a
power the Minister and Elder, a power the Magistrate; and if your line can be
so drawn, as that every one of these three may have that native power which
Jesus Christ has left them by legacy, then have you drawn your line aright:
view therefore your ground well.

3. Which that you may do, in the third place take heed of selfe-ingagements
and self^-respects in this work of Reformation. Veritas st^t in aperto Campo,
the truth stands in the open ^ield, it s^es no house, it sees no friend, no
home; And if your eye be upon your engagements, your hand will draw the Line
awry. Chrysostom observes, that when our Savior propounds the Parable of
the husbandmen unto Mat. 21. 41.
the Scribes and Pharisees, saying, What shall be done to these Hu^bandmen?
The Jews answered, He shall miserably destroy Luke 20. 16.
those Husbandmen; yet in another Gospel when our Savior says, he shall
miserably destroy them, the Jews answered, God forbid: In one Gospel their
answer is related to be, He shall miserably destroy them; in the other Gospel
their answer is related on the contrary, God forbid. How can these agree? Yes,
says Chrysostom, for first they say, he will miserably destroy these
husbandmen; but when they perceived that Christ aimed at them, then they said,
God forbid. So misleading are all self^-respects and engagements in receiving
the truth; Reforming persons therefore must be selfe-denying persons.

1. They must deny their own wits, understandings, reasonings, though they be
never so plausible; Da mihi baptizatam rationem, Give me baptized reason, says
one, mortified reason. Natural reason may be a drawer of water unto the
Temple, but no Officer in the Temple.

2. They must deny their own wills and affections, though they be never so
strong. The Saints in Heaven are the least proprietaries to their own wills,
and yet most happy. Our Q^i voluntati propria non divinae obedit, sibi parit
ruinam. Mendoza.
Savior says, I am not come to do my own will, but the will of him that
sent me; and this must be the resolution and practice of all those that are
sent by God upon any service.

3. They must deny their own labors though they be never so great: So did
Paul, who though he labored more abundantly then all, yet says, I am the
least of all the Apostles. I have read or heard a story of one being in the
boat where the Kings ^rowne was, and the Crown falling occasionally into the
water, he leaped after it, and having recovered it, to save himself and it, he
put the Crown upon his own head, that so he might swim the better unto the
boat or land; but though ^e was thanked for his venture, yet he was sharply
reproved for his boldness, for putting the Crown upon his own head. The case
is ours, is yours, the Crown of the Lord Jesus has as it were fallen into the
water, and been ready to sink; it is your duty and practice to venture for to
save it, but you must not th^n set the Crown upon the head of your own
labors, but upon Christ himself. The four and twenty Elders threw down their
Crowns at the feet of Christ, Revel. 4.

4. They must deny their own enjoyments, comforts and contentments, though they
be never so sweet. So Nehemiah Nullu^ ^a^^ntem exci^abit nisi ^n ^^^^one s^^.
August.
denied his Court favors, his Governors table, and sometimes to shift his own
clothes: he that will lift up one that is fallen must stoop himself.

5. They must deny their own relations though they be never so near. Salmeron
observes that our Savior Christ did still call his Mother Woman, Woman what
have I to do with thee? not Mother, but woman; Why so, says he, but to In
ca^sa (...)(...) ^^^san(...) non esse (...). Salmeron.
show that in matter of Religion we are to know no relations. Thus must all
reforming persons be self-denying persons. And thus right worthy Zerubbabels,
if you do first take the right line into your hands, then view your ground
well, giving unto every one those immunities that Christ has left him, and
deny your selves in working, your own reasons, wisdoms and understandings,
your own affections, your own labors, your own outward contentments and all
relations, I make no question but our stones of reformation shall be laid with
much exactnes and the Lords blessing; And the Lord grant it may be so.

As for these that are to be measured, let them be willing to Beza, who coming
unto a disputation before the Court of France, and being very mighty in his
arguments against the adversary, a Cardinal stood up and said unto some Peers,
I would to God that either Beza were dumb, or that we were all deaf; so
unwilling were they to receive the truth, and to be reformed by it. And if
people did not in their hearts wish as much now, why should they say in every
place, Would to God we had never meddled with this work of reformation, here is
ado about reformation and exact reformation, see what it is come to, would to
God that we had stayed in our old condition! Oh my beloved, do you not remember
Christ's complaint? I came unto my own and my own received me not. Shall Jesus
Christ take up the like complaint and say, I came unto my own in England and
they received me not; I offered, I tendered my own government unto them, and
they would none of it? Oh England, England, how long have I stood knocking at
thy door, and as it were put my finger in at the hole of the door by my
providentiall works! Wilt not thou yet open unto me? How often would I have
gathered thee under my wings as a hen gathers her chickens, and thou would
not? Wherefore now thy house is left unto thee desolate. Oh that people
therefore would be willing! Yea, go to God and say, Behold Lord we are all here
before thee, do with us what is good in thine eyes, only measure us, measure
my family, measure my children, measure my servants, measure my self, only let
the line of reformation pass over me and mine; I am willing Lord, help my
unwillingnes.

Then secondly, if ever God shall please to bring you unto the haven of your
desires, reformation in exactnes, Christ in his own government into your
congregations, be sure that you lay fast hold of him, that he may never leave
you or go from you any more. When the Spouse in the Canticles had lost Christ,
she goes bemoaning, lamenting, crying and enquiring after him; when she had
found him, she brings him into the chamber of her Mother, and says, I charge
you O ye daughters of Jerusalem, I charge ye by the Roes and by the Hinds that
ye awake not my beloved until he please. So do you, if ever you light on Jesus
Christ again, a settled Gospel, carry him, oh carry him into the Chamber of your
Mother as it were, and say unto all your friends, neighbors and congregations,
I charge ye oh ye daughters of England, yea by the Roes and Hinds of the
fields, I charge ye oh ye daughters of England, that ye awake not my beloved
until he please. This do hereafter, and for the present engage your selves
thereunto.

3. In the mean while that you may do and have all this, now pray, pray alone
and pray in company, pray in public, pray in private. The man with a
measuring line in his hand, says pray, your Carpenters that are abroad in the
field say pray; the examples of all reformed Churches say pray; your Parliament
say pray; your Assembly say pray; your lives, your liberties, your Gospel, your
all, says pray: Oh you that have any credit in Heaven pray now, you that never
prayed before, pray now; It is but one hour and the work is done; Can ye not
watch with Jesus Christ one hour? watch and pray: And that I say unto one I
say unto all, and unto my own soul, Let us all watch and pray lest we enter
into temptation.

FINIS.

