ENGLANDS SELECTED CHARACTERS, Describing the good and bad Worthies of this
Age. Where the best may see their graces, and the worst discern their
baseness.

The Particulars be these, 1 A worthy King. 2 An unworthy King. 3 A worthy
Queen. 4 An unworthy woman. 5 A worthy Prince. 6 An unworthy Prince. 7 A worthy
Privy Counselor. 8. An unworthy Privy Counselor. 9 A worthy Nobleman. 10
An unworthy Nobleman. 11 A worthy Bishop or Minister. 12 An unworthy Bishop or
Min^ster. 13 A worthy Judge. 14 An unworthy Judge. 15 A worthy Knight and
Soldier. 16 An unworthy Knight and Soldier. 17 A worthy Gentleman. 18 An
unworthy Gentleman. 19 A worthy Lawyer. 20 An unworthy Lawyer. 21 A worthy
Soldier. 22 An untrained Soldier. 23 A worthy Physician. 24 An unworthy
Physician 25 A Jesuit reprobated. 26 A cowardly Cavalier. 27 A Bawd of the
black Guard. 28 A malignant knave a hatcher of plots.


LONDON, Printed for T. S. 1643.

To the Reader.
I Am sure that if you read through this Book, you will find your description
in one place or other: If among the Worthies, hold you where you are, and
change not your card for a worse: If among the other, mend that is amiss, and
all will be well: I name you not, for I know you not: but I will wish the best,
because the worst is too bad. I hope there is no body will be angry, except it
be with himself, for somewhat he finds out of order: if it be so, the hope is
the greater, the bad will be no worse: yet the world being at such a pass,
that living Creatures are scarcely known from Pictures till they move, nor Wise
men from Fools till they speak, nor Artists from Bunglers till they work: I
will only wish the Worthies their worth, and the contrary what may mend their
condition: and for my self but pardon for my presumption in writing upon the
natures of more worth then I am worthy to write of. So leaving my Book to your
best liking, with my better Labors to the like effect, in hope to find you
among the Worthies, I rest

At your command, if worthy B.N.

1. A worthy King
IS a figure of God in the nature of government, he is the chief of man, and
the Churches Champion, Natures Honor, and Earths Majesty, is the directour of
Law, and the strength of the same, the Sword of Justice, and the Scepter of
Mercy, the glass of Grace, and the eye of Honor, the terror of Treason, and
the life of loyalty; his Command, if right, is general, and his power
absolute, his frown a death, and his favor a life, his charge is his
Subjects, his care their safety, his pleasure their peace, and his joy their
love, he is not to be paralleld, because he is without equality, and the
prerogative of his Crown, may not in just ways be contradicted; he is the
Lords anointed, and therefore must not be touched, and the head of the public
Body, and therefore must be preserved; he is the scourge of sin, and a
blessing of grace, Gods Vicegerent over his People, and under him supreme
Governor; his safety must be his Counsels care, his health his Subjects
prayer; his pleasure his Peers comfort, and his content his Kingdoms
gladness; his presence must be reverenced, his passion attended, his Court
adorned, and his State maintained, his bosom must not be searched, his will
(in write) not disobeyed, his wants not unsupplied, nor his place unregarded:
in sum, he is more then a man, though not a God, and next unto God to be
honored above man.

2. An unworthy King
IS the usurper of Power, where tyranny in Authority loses the glory of
Majesty, while the fear of terror frighteth love from obedience, for when the
Lion plays with the Wolf, the Lamb dies with the Ewe; he is the messenger of
wrath to be the scourge of sin or the trial of patience in the hearts of the
Religious; he is a warrant of woe in the execution of his fu^v^, and in his
best temper a doubt of grace; he is a dispeopler of his Kingdom, and a prey to
his enemies, an undelightfull friend, and a tormenter of himself; he knows
no God, but makes an I doll of Nature, and uses reason but to ruin of sense;
his care is but his will, his pleasure but his ease, his exercise but sin,
shame and blood, and his delight but unhumane; his heaven is his pleasure, and
his gold his god; his presence is terrible; his countenance horrible; his words
unconstant, uncomfortable and uncertain, and his actions intolerable: in
sum, he is the foil of a Crown, the disgrace of a Court, the trouble of
Council, and the plague of a Kingdom.

3. A worthy Queen
IS the figure of a King, who under God in his grace has a great power over
his people: she is the chief of women, the beauty of her Court, and the grace
of her sex in the royalty of her Spirit: she is like the Moon that gives
light among the Stars, and but unto the Sun, gives none place in her
brightness: She is the pure Diamond on the Kings fi^^ger, and the Orient
Pearl unprizable in his eye, the joy of the Court in the comfort of the King,
and the wealth of the Kingdom in the fruit of her love: She is Reasons honor
in Natures grace, and the Wisdoms love in virtues beauty: in sum, She is the
handmaid of God, and the Kings second self, and in his Grace the beauty of a
Kingdom.

4. An unworthy Queen or woman
IS the misery of man, whose demeanure is not to be described; but in
extremities her voice is like the sc^^ching of an Owl, her eye the poison of a
Cockatrice, her hand the claw of a Crocodile, and her heart a Cabinet of
horror: she is the grief of Nature, the wound of Wit, the trouble of Reason,
and the abuse of Time: her pride is unsupportable, her an^er unquenchable: she
fears no colors, she cares for no counsel, nor advice, but such as is
Jesuiticall, derived from that cursed black mouth Whore of Rome, from whence
proceeds nothing but blood, ^apine, mischief, and all manner of miseries,
sparing no person, age of sex which walks not in her way: and in this she is
vigilant at all times, not caring at what ra^te she purchases it, (be it
Kingdoms, jewels, yet what note) her command is must, her reason will, her
resolution shall, and her satisfaction so, she looks at no Laws, and thinks
of no Lord; admits no command, and keeps no good order: she is a cross, but
not of Christ, and a word, but not of Grace; a creature, but not of Wisdom;
and a servant but not of God: in sum, she is the seed of trouble, the fruit
of travel, the taste of bitterness, and the digestion of death.

5. A worthy Prince
IS the hope of a Kingdom, the richest Jewel in a Kings Crown, and the
fairest flower in the Queens Garden: he is the joy of Nature in the hope of
honor, and the love of wisdom, in the life of worthiness in the secret
carriage of his hearts intentions, till his designs come to action, he is a
dumb show to the worlds imagination; in his wisdom he startles the spirits of
expectation in his valor, he subjects the hearts of ambition in his virtue, he
wins the love of the noblest, and in his bounty binds the most sufficient: he
is the crystal glass where Nature may see her comfort, and the book of
Reason where Virtue may read her honor: he is the morning Star that has
light from the Sun, and the blessed fruit of the tree of earths Paradise: he
is the study of the wise in the state of honor, and in the subject of
learning, the history of admiration: in sum, he is in the note of wisdom,
the aim of honor, and in the honor of virtue, the hope of a Kingdom.

6. An unworthy Prince
IS the fear of a Kingdom, when will and power carry pride in the impatience
in the close carriage of ambitious intentions; he is like a featfull dream to
a troubled spirit: in his passionate humors he frighteth the hearts of the
prudent; in the delight of vanity, he loses the love of the wise, and in the
misery of avarice, is served only with the needy: he is like a little mist
before the rising of the Sun, which the more it grows, the less good it
does: he is the Kings grief, and the Queens sorrow, the Courts trouble, and
the Kingdoms curse: in sum, he is the seed of unhappiness, the fruit of
ungodliness, the taste of bitterness, and the digestion of heaviness.

7. A worthy Privy Councellor
IS the pillar of a Realm, in whose wisdom and care, next under God and the
King, stands the safety of the Kingdom: he is the watchtower to give warning
of the enemy, and a hand of provision for the preservation of the State: he is
an oracle in the Kings ear, and a sword in the Kings hand; an even weight in
the balance of justice, and a light of grace in the love of truth: he is an
eye of care in the course of Law; a heart of love in his service of his
Sovereigne; a mind of honor in the order of his service, and a brain of
invention for the good of the commonwealth: his place is powerful, while his
service is faithful, and his honor due in the deepest of his employments. In
sum, he is a fixed planet among the stars of the firmament, which through
the clouds in the air, shows the nature of his light.

8. An unworthy Privy Councellor
IS the hurt of a King, and the danger of the State, when the weakness of
judgment may commit an error, or the lack of care may give way to
unhappiness; he is a wicked charm in the Kings ear, a sword of terror in the
advice of tyranny: his power is perilous in the partiality of will, and his
heart full of hol^ownesse in the protestation of love: hypocrisy is the cover
of his counterfeit religion, and traitorous invention is the agent of his
ambition: he is the cloud of darkness that threateneth foul weather, and if
it grow to a storm, (as now it is) it is fearful where it falls: he is an
enemy to God in the hate of Grace, and thrice worthy of death in disloyalty to
his Sovevereigne or Commonwealth: in sum he is an unfit person for the place
of a Commonwealth, and an unworthy subject to look a King in the face, fit
only for an outcast to be gazed at, or to be preferred aloft, as Haman was.

9. A worthy Noble-mans
IS a mark of honor, where the eye of wisdom in the observation of desert
sees the fruit of Grace, he is the Orient Pe^^^e that reason pollisheth for the
beauty of Nature, and the Diamond spark where divine graces give virtue
honor; he is the note book of moral discipline, where the conceit of care
may find the true Courtier; he is the nurse of hospitality, the relief of
necessity, the love of charity, and the life of bounty; he is Learnings grace,
and Valors fame, Wisdoms fruit, and kindness love; he is the true Faulcon
that feeds on no carrion, the true Horse that will be no hackney, the true
Dolphin that fears not the Whale; and the true man of God that fears not the
Devil. In sum, He is the Darling of Nature in Reasons Philosophy: the
Loadstone of Light in Loves Astronomy: the ravishing sweet in the music of
Honor, and the golden number in Graces Arithmeticke.

10 An unworthy Nobleman
IS the grief of Reason, when the title of Honor is put upon the subject of
disgrace; when either the imperfection of wit, or the folly of will, shows the
unfitness in nature, for the virtue of advancement: he is the eye of
baseness, and spirit of grossenes, and in the demean of rudeness, the scorn
of noblenes: he is the suspicion of a right generation in the nature of his
disposition, and a miserable plague to a feminine patience: Wisdom knows him
not, Learning bred him not: virtue loves him not, and honor fits him not:
prodigality or avarice are the notes of his inclination, and folly or mischief
are the fruits of his invention. In sum, he is the shame of his name, the
disgrace of place, the blot of his title, and ruin of his house.

11 A worthy Bishop or Minister
IS an Ambassador from God unto men: in the midst of war to make a treaty of
peace, who with a pronuntiation of a general Pardon, upon a general
confession of sin upon the fruit of repentance, gives a full assurance of
comfort: he brings tidings from heaven, of happiness on earth to the world: he
is the silver trumpet in the music of love, where faith has a life that
never fails the beloved: he is the directour of Life in the Laws of God, and
the true Chyrurgion of the soul, in lancing the sores of finne, the terror of
the reprobate in pronouncing their damnation, and the joy of the faithful in
the assurance of their salvation. In sum, he is in the nature of Grace,
worthy of honor, and in the message of life worthy of love; a continual agent
betwixt God and man, in the preaching of his word, and prayer for his people.

12 An unworthy Bishop or Minister
IS the disgrace of Learning, when the want of reading, or the abuse of
understanding in the speech of error may beget idolatry: he is Gods enemy in
the hurt of his people, and his own woe in the abuse of the word of God. He
is the shadow of a candle that gives no light; or, if he be any, it is but to
lead into darkness: the sheep are u^happy that live in his fold, when they
shall either starve or feed on the g^ound: he breeds this war in the wits of
his audience, when his life is contrary to the nature of his instructions: he
lives in a (Rome,) where he troubles a world, and in the shadow of a Saint, is
little better th^n a Devil; he makes Religion a cloak of sin, and wi^h a
counterfeit humility, covers incomparable pride: he robs the rich to releeve
the poor, and makes fools of the wise with the imagination of his wrath: he
is all for the world, but nothing for God; and for the ease of nature loses
the sap of reason. In sum, he is the picture of hypocrisy, the spirit of
heresy; a wound in the Church, and a woe to the World.

13 A worthy Judge
IS a doom, whose breath is mortal upon the breach of Law, where criminal
offenses must be cutoff from a common wealth: he is the sword of Justice in the
hand of a King, and the eye of wisdom in the walk of a kingdom: his study
is a square for the keeping of proportion betwixt command and obedience, that
the King may keep his crown on h^s head, and the Subjects his head on his
shoulders: he is seared but of the foolish, and cursed but of the wicked; but
of the wise honored, and of the gracious beloved: he is a survey or of
rights, and revenger of wrongs, and in the judgment of truth, the honor of
Justice. In sum, his word is Law, his power Grace, his labor Peace, and his
desert Honor.

14 An unworthy Judge
IS the grief of justice in the error of judgment, when through ignorance or
will, the death of innocence lies upon the breath of opinion: he is the
disgrace of Law in the desert of knowledge, and the plague of power in the
misery o^ oppression; as by woeful experience these times of ours now tell us:
he is more moral then divine, in the nature of policy, and more judicious then
just in the carriage of his conceit: his charity is cold; when partiality is
resolved, when the doom of life lies on the verdict of a Jury: with a stern
look he frighteth an offender: he gives little comfort to a poor man's cause;
the golden weight over-weighes his grace; when the Angels play the Devils in
the hearts of his people, and the credit of his damnable bribes must not be
questioned. In sum, where Christ is preached, he has no place in the Church:
and in this Kingdom, out of doubt, God will now visit them, not suffering any
such Devil to bear sway any longer.

15 A worthy Knight and Soldier
IS a spirit of proof, in the advancement of virtue, by the desert of honor,
in the eye of Majesty: In the field he gives courage to his Soldiers, in the
Court grace to his Followers, in the City reputation to his person, and in the
country honor to his house. His sword and his horse make his way to his house,
and his armor of proof is an undanted spirit: the music of his delight is
the trumpet and drum, and the paradise of his eye is an army defeated, the
relief of the oppressed makes his conquest honorable, and the pardon of the
submissive makes him famous in mercy: he is in nature mild, and in spirit
stout, in reason judicious, and in all, honorable. In sum, he is a Yeomans
commander, a Gentleman's superior, a Noblemans companion, and a Prince and
Kingdoms worthy favorite.

16 An unworthy Knight and Soldier
IS the defect of nature in the title of honor, when to maintain valor, his
spurs have no towels, nor his sword a point: his apparel is of proof, that
may wear like his armor, or like an old Ensign that has his honor in
rags. It may be he is the Tailors trouble in fitting an ill shape, or a
mercers wonder in wearing of silk: in the Court he stands for a cipher, and
among Ladies like an Owl among birds: he is worshipped only for his wealth, and
if he^e valued by his wit, when if his pride go beyond his purse, his ti^le
will be a trouble to him. In sum, he is the child of Folly, and the man of
Gotham, the blind man of Pride, and the fool of magination: but in the Court
and Kingdom of Honor, are no such Apes, and I hope this Kingdom will breed
no such Asses.

17 A worthy Gentleman
IS a branch of the tree of honor, whose fruits are the actions of virtue, as
pleasing to the eye of judgment, as tastefull to the spirit of Understanding:
whatsoever he does, it is not forced, except it be evil, which either through
ignorance unwittingly, or through compulsion unwillingly he falls upon; he in
nature kind, in demeanor courteous, in allegiance loyal, and in Religion
zealous, in service faithful, and in reward bountiful: he is made of no
baggage stuff, nor for the wearing of base people; but is woven by the spirit
of wisdom, to adorn the court of Honor. His apparel is more comely then
costly, and his diet more wholesome then excessive, his exercise more
healthful then painful, and his study more for knowledge then pride: his
love not wanton nor common, his gifts not niggardly nor prodigal, and his
carriage neither apish nor sullen. In sum, he is an approver of his pedigree,
by the nobleness of his passage, and in the course of his life an example to
his posterity.

18 An unworthy Gentleman
IS the ^^offe of wit and the scorn of honor, where more wealth then wit is
worships of simplicity, who spends more in idleness, then would maintain
thrift, or hides more in misery then might purchase honor: whose delights are
vanities, and whose pleasures fopperies: whose studies fables, and whose
exercise worse then follies: his converfation is base, and his conference
ridiculous; his affections ungracious, and his actions ignominious. His
apparel out of fashion, and his diet out of order; his carriage out of square,
and his company out of request. In sum, he is like a mungrell dog with a
velvet collar, a cart-horse with a golden saddle, a buzzard kite with a
Fawlcons bells, or a Baboone with a pide jerkin.

19 A worthy Lawyer
IS the Student of knowledge, how to bring controversies into a conclusion of
peace, and out of ignorance to understanding: he divides time into uses, and
Cases into instructions: he lays open obscurities, and is praised for the
speech of truth: and in the Court of conscience pleads much in Forma pauperis,
for small fees: he is a mean for the preservation of titles, and the holding
of possessions, and a great instrument of peace in the judgment of
impartiality: he is the clients hope in his cases pleading, and his hearts
comfort in a happy issue: he is the finder out of tricks in the craft of ill
conscience, and the joy of the distressed in the relief of Justice. In sum,
he is a maker of peace among the spirits of contention, and a continuer of
quiet in the execution of the Law.

20 An unworthy Lawyer
ANd unworthily called a Lawyer, is the figure of a Foot-post, who carries
Letters, but knows not what is in them, only can read the superscriptions, to
direct them to their right owners. So trudgeth this simple Clarke, that can
scarce read a Case when it is written, with his hand-full of papers, from one
Court to another, and from one Counselors chamber to another, when by his
good payment for his pains, he will be so saucy, as to call himself a
Sollicitour: But what a taking are poor Clients in, when this too much trusted
cunning companion, better read in Pierce Plowman, then in Ploydon, and in the
Play of Richard the Third, then in the Pleas of Edward the Fourth, persuades
them all is sure, when he is sure of all? And in what a misery are the poor
men, when upon a Nihil dicit, because indeed this poor fellow, Nihil potest
dicere, they are in danger of an execution, before they know wherefore they are
coudemned? But I wish all such more wicked then witty, unlearned in the Law and
abusers of the same, to look a little better into their consciences, and to
leave their crafty courses, lest when the Law indeed lays them open, instead
of carrying papers in their hands, they wear not papers on their heads, and
instead of giving ear to their Clients causes, or rather eyes into their
purses, they have never an ear left to hear withal, nor good eye to see
withal; or at least honest face to look out withal: but as the Grasshoppers
of Egypt, be counted the Caterpillars of England, and not the Fox that stole
the Goose, but the great Fox that stole the Farm from the Gander.

28. A worthy Soldier
IS the child of Valor, who was borne for the service of necessity, and to
bear the Ensign of Honor, in the actions of Worth: he is the Dyer of the
Earth with blood, and the ruin of the erections of Pride: he is the watch of
Wit, in the advantage of Time, and the executioner of wrath upon the wilful
offender: he disputes questions with the point of a Sword, and prefers Death to
indignities; he is a Lion to Ambition, and a Lamb to Submission: he has Hope
fast by the hand, and treads upon the head of Fear. He is the Kings Champion,
and the Kingdoms Guard, Peaces preserver, and Rebellions terror: he makes the
Horse trample at the sound of a Trumpet, and leads on to a battle, as if he
were going to a breakfast; he knows not the nature of Cowardice, for his rest
is set upon Resolution: his strongest fortification is his Mind, which beats
off the assault of idle humors, and his life is the passage of danger, where an
undaunted Spirit stoops to no Fortune; with his arms he wins his Arms, and by
his desert in the field, his Honor in the Court. In sum, in the truest
Manhood he is the true man: and in the creation of Honor, a most worthy
Creature.

22 An untrained Soldier
IS like a young hound, that when the first falls to hunt, he knows not how to
lay his nose to the earth: Who having his name but in a book, and marched
twice about a Market place, when he comes to a piece of service, knows not how
to bestow himself: he marches as if he were at plough, carries his Pike like a
Pikestaffe, and his sword before him, for fear of losing from his side: if he
be a Shot, he will be rather ready to say a Grace over his Piece, and so to
discharge his hands of it, then to learn how to discharge it with a grace: he
puts on his Armor over his ears, like a wastecoat, and wears his Murrian like
a nightcap; when he is quartered in the field he looks for his bed, and when
he sees his Provant, he is ready to cry for his victuals; and ere he know well
where he is, wish heartily he were at home again, with hanging down his head,
as if his heart were in his hose: sleep till a Drum or a deadly bullet awake
him, and so carry himself in all Companies, that till Martial Discipline have
seasoned his understanding, he is like a Cipher among figures, an Owl among
birds, a Wise man among fools, and a shadow among men.

23 A worthy Physician
IS the enemy of sickness, in purging nature from corruption: his action is
most in feeling of pulses, and his discourses chiefly of the natures of
diseases: he is a great searcher out of simples, and accordingly makes his
composition: he persuades abstinence, and patience for the benefit of health,
while purging and bleeding are the chief courses of his counsel: the
Apothecary and the Chyrurgeon are his two chief attendants, with whom
conferring upon Time, grows temperate in his cures: surfets and wantonness
are great agents for his employment, when by the secret of his skill, out of
others weakness he gathers his own strength. In sum, he is a necessary
member, for an unnecessary malady, to find a disease, and to cure the diseased.

24 An unworthy Physician.
IS a kind of a Horse-leech, whose cure is most in drawing of blood, and a
desperate purge either to cure or kill, as it hits: his discourse is most of
cures that he has done, and them afar off, and not a receipt under an hundred
pounds, though it be not worth threehalfpence; upon the Market day he is much
haunted with urinals, where if he find any thing (though he know nothing) yet
he will say somewhat, which if it hit to some purpose, with a few fustian
words, he will seem a piece of strange stuff: he is never without old merry
taies, and stale jests to make old folks laugh, and comfits or plums in his
pocket to please little children; yea, and he will be talking of complexions,
though he know nothing of their dispositions, and if his medicine do a feat, he
is a made man among fools: but being wholly unlearned, and ofttimes unhonest,
let me thus briefly describe him: He is a plain kind of Mountebanke, and a
true Quacksalver, a danger for the sick to deal withal, and a dizard in the
world to walk withal.

25 A Jesuit reprobated
IS the child of sin, who being borne for the service of the Devil, cares not
what villainy he does in the world; he is always in a maze, for his courses are
ever out of order, and while his will stands for his wisdom, the best that
falls out of him, is a fool; he betraies the trust of the simple, and sucks
out the blood of the innocent; his breath is the fume of blasphemy, and his
tongue the firebrand of hell; his desires are the destruction of the virtuous,
and his delights are the traps to damnation: he bathes in the blood of murder,
and sups up the broth of iniquity: plots, conspiracies, and all manner of
mischief, are the chiefest aim of his studies: he frighteth the eyes of the
godly, and disturbeth the hearts of the religious; he marreth the wits of the
wise, and is hateful to the souls of the gracious. In sum, he is an
inhumane creature, a fearful companion, a manmonster, and a Devil incarnate;
therefore to be quite packed out of this our England, to his own proper center
the whore of Rome.

26 A cowardly Cavalier
IS the child of fear, he was begotten in cold blood, when Nature had much
ado to make up a creature like a man: his life is a kind of sickness, which
breeds a kind of palsy in the joints, and his death the terror of his
conscience, with the extreme weakness of his faith; he would have peace, in
regard he fears a sword in his soul, hating to meet a man, or to encounter an
enemy or opposite in the field, witness our present troubles, when like the
Egyptians plagues they fester, and are the disquiet of this our land, robbing,
pillaging and spoiling poor Countrymen and carriers, who cannot give any
resistance (one eyd Hasting-like:) if he cut his finger, he looks presently
for the sign, and if his head ache, he is ready to make his will, a report of a
Gauon strikes him slat on his face, and a clap of thunder makes him a strange
metamorphosis: rather then he will fight, he will be beaten, and if his legs
will help him he will put his arms to no trouble, but try the strength with
the levity of his flight, while he is as he conceives beyond the reach of his
arrival, where like a moule he is ready to run his head into any hole to hide
him, searing the very sent of a man; he makes love commonly with his purse, and
brags most of his maidenhead; he will not marry but into a quiet family, and
not too fair a wife to avoid quarrels; if his wife frown upon him, he sighs,
and if she give him an unkind word, he weeps: he loves not the borne of a
Bull, nor the paws of a Bear; if he chance to be rich, he is afraid of
thieves; if he be poor, he will be slave to a beggar. In sum, he is the
shame of manhood, the disgrace of Nature, the scorn of Reason, and the hate
of Honor.

27 A Bawd of the black Guard
IS a kind of woman-beast, who having lost the honor of her virginity in her
youth, means to go to hell in her age: she is dangerous among young people,
for fear of the infection of the falling sickness: and not to teach children to
spell, lest she learn them too soon to put together: she is partly a
Chyrurgion, but most for the allaying of swelling in the lower parts, and has
commonly a charm to conjure the Devil into hell. She greeves at nothing so
much, then at disability to sin, and is never so merry, as when she is
persuaded to be young: she fears nothing more then the Cart, and cares for
nothing but ease, and loves a cup of sack, and a pot of ale, almost as well as
the hope of her salvation. She is much troubled with sore eyes and ill teeth,
with sitting up late, and feeding upon sweet things. She is well verst in the
black Art, to accommodate them of the black Guard: a weesel-look't goslip she
is in all places, where her mirth is a bawdy tale; and a matrone in an
Hospital to see young Wenches well set to work. In sum, she is the
loathsomeness of nature, the hate of virtue, the spoil of wealth, and the
ruin of maiden-heads.

28 A malignant knave a hatcher of plots
IS the scumme of wit, and the scorn of reason, the hate of wisdom, and the
dishonor of humanity: he is the danger of society, and the hurt of amity, the
infection of youth, and the corruption of age: he is a traitor to affiance,
and an abuse to employment, and a rule of villainy in a plot of mischief: he
has a Cats eye, and a Bears paw, a Sirens tongue, and a Serpents sting: his
words are lies, his oaths, perjuries, studies, subtilties, and his practices
villainies: his wealth is his wit, his honor is his wealth: his glory is his
gain, and his God is his gold: he is no man's friend, and his own enemy;
cursed on earth, and banished from heaven: he was begotten ungraciously, borne
untimely, lives dishonestly, and dies in a halter, or worse, shamefully. His
heart is a puddle of poison, his tongue a sting of iniquity, his brain a
distiller of deceit, and his conscience a compass of hell. In sum, he is a
dog in disposition, therefore not worthy to live among men; a fox in wit, a
wolf in his prey, and a Devil in his pride.

FINIS.

