Shrewsbury taken.

A COPY OF Sir William Breretons LETTER TO THE PARLIAMENT: And the Copy of a
Letter FROM The Committee of Shropshire: WITH A full Relation of the manner of
the taking of Shrewsbury, by Colonel Mitton and Colonel Bowyer, with Sir
William Breretons and Colonel Mittons Forces, on Saturday last, February 22.

AND The Particulars of that great Victory against P. Maurice's Forces there:
Also a List of the chief Prisoners names; and what was taken in the said
Garrison.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin, in the Old Bailey. 1645.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM THE Committee of the County of SALOP, FOR THE
PARLIAMENT.
To the Honorable, Sir William Brereton Baronet, Commander in Chief of the
Cheshire Forces.
SIR,
LEt us admire the mercy and goodness of God, that has so far looked upon our
low condition* ^^ to advance us now in his own time, and to possess us of
Shrewsbury. What shall we render for this unspeakable mercy? We beseech you
join with us in the praise of our God. This morning, about break of day, we
entered Horse and Foot, and all in it, and are now staving off the soldiers
from plundering. We have not yet time to give you a (...) the prisoners, but
many of quality, the Governor, and (...) John Wild, and his son, with many
more. We beseechy you consid^r how to improve this advantage, and the d^^ection
that the Prince must needs receive by it: We doubt not if your assistance as
occasion shall present: And for the pr^t in great have (with our humble thanks
to you for this great favor you have affoorded us, and our unspeakable and
humble acknowledgement of Gods great mercy) we rest,

Salop, 22. Febr. 1644. Your most affectionate faithful Servants, The Castle
holds out yet, for ought we know. Thomas Mitton. Samuel More. Robert Charleton.
Andr. Lloyd. Rob. Clyve. Tho. Hunt. Leege Bruen.


SIR,
THough these lines may come unexpectedly to you, yet they will present you
with so great a manifestation of Gods wisdom, power, and goodness, as that
they will be welcomly entertained; Shrewsbury was this morning about five a
clock taken by some 700. of our men of Staffordshire, and Cheshire, (and a
company of Sir William Breretons own Regiment, commanded by Colonel Bowyer)
and the Shropshire Forces, in all about 1200. we lost not a man (as I hear
of:) the prisoners are many* and considerable, and the prize great, Sir Michael
Ernely, Governor, Sir John VVylde, and diverse others; the Town is rich, and it
is said all the Princes treasure and carriages, were left there. I hope this
victory will be pursued: I am constrained to be so brief* as that you will
scarce believe it, because it will be so unexpected* therefore look upon the
enclosed, and join in praises: excuse my have.

In regard we came with our Forces out of Wales, and must stay with our Army
till the Lancashire and Yorkshire men come up, my General Sir William
Brereton was desirous to improve time, and not to lie idle, and therefore sent
the Staffordshire Forces, which are put under his command for this service, and
some Cheshire Horse and Foot, under the condduct of Colonel B^^y^^, a brave
fellow.

Christlet^n Feb. 22. 1644.
Sir William Breretons Letter to the PARLJAMENT.
THese Lines may conveigh unto you the welcome news of surprising Shrewsbury
this Saturday morning about five a clock: which mercy cannot but be
acknowledged to be the return of those many supplications put up to that God
which hears prayers, and gives success to those that seek him, and make
their dependence upon him; so has he now dispensed (blessed be his great name)
to his humble and unworthy servants, who have been plotting and contriving that
which the Lord has now effected. The Committee at Wem have been a long time
very industrious about the effecting hereof, and it has been several times
attempted, though we have failed therein: the Lords time was not then come, and
his time is the best time. I hope it may produce a very good effect in all
these parts of the Kingdom, wherein there is not a more faithful industrous
Committee, who less seek themselves, and more the advancement of this cause,
then the Committee of Wem, and Oswestree, whom the Lord has much crowned and
prospered of late, though they were in so weak a condition, as that they had
not sufficient men to maintain their Garrisons, of Wem, and Oswestree* so as I
was constrained to assist them with four Companies of my own Regiment, until
they were possessed of the Garrison of Moreton-Corbet, since which time my Lord
CALVILL, and another Cheshire Company have remained with them, unto whom I
sent, upon Wednesday last, four hundred Horse of Cheshire and Staffordshire,
and three hundred Staffordshire Foot, and one Company of my own Regiment,
under the command of Colonel BOVVVER, which together with the Forces of Wem,
and Oswestree, under the Command of Colonel MITTON, did not exceed 1200. men,
to whom the Lord has delivered one of the strongest Pieces in all this
Kindome, and therein many considerable Prisoners, Sir MICHAEL ERNELY, the
Governor, Sir JOHN WILD, and diverse others, where of I have not as yet
received a list, nor any more advertisement then is comprehended in the
enclosed, being a copy of the Letter from the Committee, whereunto I shall not
know what more to add, but to assure that no assistance which can be affoorded
nor any endeavor upon my part shall be wanting, to improve this advantage
which God has given. They cannot keep Salop, and their other Garrisons,
therefore I purpose with all speed (God willing) to march nearer unto them,
that so we may be able to give them relief, if occasion require. As there may
be further opportunity administered, I will not fail to give you advertisement,
and to employ my utmost endeavors to shorten this War. Which that it may, is
not more desired by any man, then by

Christleton, Feb. 22. 1644. Your most faithful Servant, William Brereton.

The Relation of the manner of the taking of Shrewsbury on Saturday the 27th of
February, 1644.
By Colonel MIRRON, and Colonel BOWYER.
SIr William Brereton being ever vigilant to take the best opportunity of
times, that might stand for the advantage of the Common wealth, and at this
time t^king this occasion, whilst Prince Maurice was advanced with his Forces
on the Welsh side of the Rivet D^e, whither he was marched to releeve Chester
that way, Sir William Breretons forces being all on the North side of the
River; for the Welsh side is so barr^^ that there is not provisions for a
considerable Party that are able to defend themsel^ to lie there. But Sir
William Brererton perceiving that Prince M^e would not fight with him, but
rather (...) through that barren place to (...) Chester that way if he can, Sir
William Brereton was very willing to make the best use of the occasion that he
could.

On Tuesday February the 18. th 1644. Sir William Brewerton (having received
Instructions from the Committee of a Design which they had against Shrewsbury;
and therefore desired a party of his Horse and Foot to join with Colonel
Mittons) he made no delay therein; and Colonel Bowyer, awery able gallant
Soldier was designed for the business.

On Wednesday February 19. Sir William Brereton having drawn out Four hundred
of Cheshire, and Staffordshire horse of those that were with him out of his
Army, and Three hundred of the Staffordshire Foot, and a Company of his own
Regiment, put them under the command of Colonel Bowyer, and sent them to the
Committee at Wem, well armed, and fitter for present service, who went very
cheerfully and with admirable resolutions, not doubting but that the Lord
(whose blessing they prayed for) would stand for them and protect them, and
give a blessing to their endeavors.

Sir William Brewerton also sent diverse Petars and other necessaries for the
storming of Shrewsbury, to break open the Gates or for such other services as
they should find occasion, in which Sir William took great pains that there
might be no delay in a business of so great concernment; and it was carried on
with very great speed as may appear by the ensuing d scourse each thing lying
in order as the business was performed, which was performed in a very short
time, to God be the pra^^.

On Thursday February the 20. 1644. Colonel Mitton with 500 of the Shropshire
forces, and Colonel Bowyer with the aforesaid Cheshir^ and Staffordshire
forces met at W^m, there number in all were about 1200* and there they received
Instructions from the Committee for the carrying on of the business in going
against Shrewsbury, Colonel Mitton himself is one of the said Committee, a
very gallant Soldier, and one that is full of valor, and Cordeall for the
public good, as appears by all his actions, he having in all that he has
done received very little pay; yet is not any the less active in preferring
the public before his own private interest; And the next day they were
designed to march against Shrewsbury, the strongest Garrison in Prince Maurices
assotiation, and not much inferior to the strongest garrison that the King
has in all England.

On Friday February the 21. th, Colonel Mitton, and Colonel Bowyer with the
said 1200 of Cheshire, Staffordshire, and Shropshire forces, Horse and Foot
marched from Wem, they marched all Friday night, such was their courage and
earnestness, with their vigilance and care, that they would loose no
opportunity, notwithstanding the Coldness of the seasor, and darkness of the
night, but went on unanimously about the work they were designed for; Colonel
Mitton led on the Van, and Colonel Bowyer brought up the Rear, the Army being
drawn into a formedable marching posture, in which they matched all that night.

On Saturday February the 22.th 1644. They drew near to the Enemies garrison
about Three or 4 of the clock, Colonel Mitton led on the Horse, and Colonel
Reynings the Foot, and so they marched up to their very Works about four of
the clock that morning.

About five of the clock in the Morning Colonel Mitton having passed some of
his Foot in some Boats on the Severne, which runs all along by Shrewsbury,
toward which River the Castle stands, which foot were commanded by Colonel
Rayning a very gallant able Soldier with Carpenters and other workmen and
Artists fit for that employment who went along with them in boats, and when
they came to the Walls, the Carpenters sawed down the Pallasadoes, and the
Soldiers helping one another got over, and slew the Sentinels, and surprised
the Soldiers in the Court of guard, and from thence went to the Magazine, and
their chief Works, and possessed themselves of them before they opened the
Gates to the rest of the foot, and the Governor and many of the great ones
were surprised in their bedds, and when they had made all sure they opened the
Castle Gate, and let in all the Horse and the rest of the Foot, and marching up
with Courageous resolution to enter, the Enemy within being exceedingly amazed
fled, some threw down their Arms; and all crying out Arm, Arm, which
opportunity our men took, marched in and opened the Gates, and Horse and foot
all entered, and with the spilling of very little blood gained the Town.

When they had made entrance thorough the gate, and guarded the Town, our men
some went into one street, and some into another, to search for the chief
Officers, and Soldiers, and great care was taken to get between them and the
Castle, which stands near the west gate, and they took the Governor, and
diverse other very considerable men, besides other purchase as you may see in
the List which follows.

And the Committee of Wem coming along with them, they took great care that
those who are wellaffected in the Town might not suffer, and therefore the
Officers kept off the Soldiers from plundering of the Town, that so the
Committee might see right done and none but Malignants only to suffer.

And cruelly have the good people been long handled by the Cavaliers in that
place, that they were no little glad that Colonel Mitton has taken it, and
accordingly expressed themselves to the Committee.

The Committee gave notice hereof to Sir william Brewerton, certifying him what
they had done, and he has taken care for Forces to lie near them to releeve
Colonel Mitton if occasion be.

The whole County are glad of th^^ he well-affected part thereof, and desire
that Colonel Mitton may be made the Governor thereof; who is an honest
Cordeall well affected man, and of true integrity.

About twelve of the clock on the same day the Castle was surrendered upon
Condition, that the Officers and Soldiers that were in the said Castle should
March away with their Arms and leave the Ammunition, and Arms, in the said
Castle, and all the Officers and Soldiers in the Town behind them.

But there were many Papists and some notable Agents that fled out of the Town,
and ran away as soon as they heard that our forces had made entrance.

A List of the particulars what was taken at Shrewsbury by Colonel Mitton, on
Saturday, February the 22. th 1644.
Eight Knights and Barronets taken Prisoners. Forty Colonels, Majors,
Captains, and others of quality. Two hundred other Prisoners, besides those
that are not taken. One Captain, and 5. Soldiers slain. Fifteen piece of
Ordnance taken. Many hundred of Arms taken. Diverse barrels of Gunpowder.
Prince Maurice his Magazen. The Town, the Castle, and all the Works. Diverse
Carriages, bag and baggage of the Princes. Besides other Prisoners and purchase
not yet discovered. We lost only two Men.
FINIS.

