A Brief ANATOMY OF WOMEN: Being An INVECTIVE against, and APOLOGY for THE
BAD and GOOD Of that SEX.

Eccles. 7.26, 27.28. And I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart
is snares, and nets, and her hands as bands; who so pleases God, shall escape
from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

Behold, this have I found (says the Preacher) counting one by one to find out
the account.

Which yet my soul seeks, but I find not; one man among a thousand have I
found, but a woman among all those have I not found.

November 30 LONDON: Printed by E. Alsop. 1653.

To the Feminine Sex of either sort.
YOu (whose abundant goodness and magnificent virtues sufficiently inform the
world that you are not of the number of the bad) take notice that what is
spoken of the generality of women (in my invective) is not to detract from your
noble worth, but rather to add luster unto your Godly Zeal and honored
virtues; for if there were not deformity how could there be beauty; and if
there were not sin, how could righteousness appear. The Antipathy therefore
between good and evil, is as great as the visible difference betwixt the most
resplendant light and obscurest darkness. Persist then (Heroic souls) in all
Godliness, moral virtues, and heavenly graces, leaving good examples unto
posterity, that so ( Phoenix like) the glory of your sex may revive, and
continue to all Eternity.

But you (whose corrupt natures and evil dispositions render you odious in the
sight of God and Man.) Learn by your own deformities to hate vice and love
virtue, to be more Godly and less profane, more humble, meek, and less proud
and vain glorious, and in your lives and conversations, more constant, staid,
and less variable and dissolute. So will you gain comfort unto your selves,
adding to the number of the good (which are but few) and diminish from the bad,
which are exceeding many. This is the desire of him that is,

Your friend, so far as you are virtues, J. S.

An INVECTIVE against BAD WOMEN.
IF we look upon Man in his first Original (when the breath of life was
breathed into his nostrils, and the work of his creation perfected) we find
that there was a Rib taken out of his side, whereof Woman was framed; but
whether this rib were of the more gross and terrestrial part of that substance,
I shall not here controvert, seeing the almighty works, and inevitable decrees
of the great Creator, are beyond the apprehension of man, and too deep for us
earthly mortals to pry into: however (in all the revolutions and accidents
that are incident unto us) it is most apparent, that there is an instrumental
means for the effecting and bringing those things to pass: Which well may
appear in this first woman, who (being deluded by the subtle serpent, that
enemy of mankind) drew also Adam unto disobedience, and so reduced him unto his
first principle, as part of that earthly mass from whence he came, and we all
return. And if we but seriously consider the nature and qualities of the
generallity of that sex, even in all ages from the fall of man unto this
present, we may well perceive that they have not been only extremely evil in
themselves; but have also been the main instruments and immediate causes of
Murder, Idolatry, and a multitude of other heinous sins, in many high and
eminent men; witness the wife of Vriah whose beauty so ensnared religious King
David, as that it caused him to commit fornication, and not so content, but for
his surer settlement and continuance in his wished content, he directed the
chief Captain of his Host to place Vriah in the forefront of the battle, that
so (probably) he might not escape death, which fell out according to his
desire: Also the wives and concubines of learned and wise K. Solomon, brought
him unto idolatry; and Dalilah the beloved of Sampson (notwithstanding his
great strength) was by her overcome and betrayed unto death; likewise Potiphers
wife would have allured her servant Joseph to have committed wickedness, but
that he had the power given him to resist her temptation. Lots daughters, not
only made their father drunk, but caused him to commit Incest; Job's wife
(when his afflictions lay sore and heavy upon him for his trial) advised him
to curse God and die. Iesabel (for her great pride and wickedness) received a
just reward. I might have cited innumerable more of like nature, both out of
divine and moral histories, but I conceive these (together with our own
experience in this age) sufficient to inform us of the general inclination of
these feminine creatures, I shall therefore now proceed to their more
particular characters, which take as follows.

The golden tresses of their amorous hair (which being curiously kept suitable
to their outward apparel, and according to the newest fashion) does manifestly
express the true performance of their duty to their great Lord and master
Lucifer, in observing so well his livery: and that they may more reallie appear
to be his, and their beauty seem more gloriously light to other, they parch up
their visages with pieces of darkness, which are as so many seals of Satan to
bind them to his pleasure and will; all which, out of their great pride and
little modesty, they cover over from the eye of the world, with a sable vail,
called black bags.

Their roling eyes, like shining pearl, seem to be the baits that ensnare men
in their love, whose fruit is destruction,

Their ears delight to entertain frivolous discourses, especially if it relate
to their praise and commendation, which is to them a thing most plausable.
Their tongue (that stirring and active member, both defensive and offensive)
defensive in vindicating and upholding their own supposed credit and good name,
though ever so bad; offensive in scolding, abusing, and detracting from their
neighbors, though ever so good.

Their Lips are the Posterns from whence issues lying, deceit, and all manner
of dissimulation.

Their neck and breasts are left bare unto the open view of the world to
signify that nature has fairly acted her part without, although there remain
no grace within.

Their Arms and Hands are ever ready to perform their respective duties unto
the other parts of the body, whether good or evil: Their body it self is a
magazine of corrupt and ill humors, which has continual recourse to all the
rest of the members: Their Thighs are the ascent unto this frail fabric of
corruption, their legs the supporters, and their feet swift guides to the ways
of vanity; so that from the crown of their head to the sole of the foot, there
is not a good member, no not one.

Notwithstanding it is undeniable but that they are generally useful; for
there is nothing so bad, that has not some virtue in it, neither was there any
thing created but that is good; and they being a creature it must consequently
follow that they are so too; but for what, there is the main point of the
discovery, and a thing much to be controverted: that they are a help unto man
is indisputable, but in what sense, to exhaust his estate, divulge his secrets,
and be a continual trouble and vexation to his spirit all the days of his life.

It we look upon their outward beauty, we shall find it like those Indian
Apples which are seemingly fair without but poison within; if upon their
carriage and behavior, we shall find that as far distant from their inward
nature and conditions as the East is from the West.

And if we but observe their actions and undertakings, it will manifestly
appear that they are fickle, changeable, and various as the weathercock,
constant in nothing but inconstancy, and humane creatures merely metamorphosed,
seeming to be that which truly and really they are not, and in a word, it is
most apparent that they only are the greatest and most powerful temptations
to evil of all other, the very gulf where man's reason, governance, and
discretion is often swallowed up, and the Adamantine Rocks whereon many have
been shipwracked.

Neither is there any thing (except Satan it self) that captivates man's
senses, or predominates more over his understanding and will, then they by
their subtle falacies, and bewitching illusions, which has been sufficiently
manifested, not only in former ages, but also in this present, and that of
late years by men of no mean degree and quality, that have deeply suffered by
those causes.

But I shall not insist on these particulars, (neither proceed to a further
relation and discovery of those many evils and inconveniences that men are
drawn into by the attractive power of women) but rather with care and diligence
seek to eschew and prevent them, advising others, as they find cause, to
endeavor to do the like; for as man is incident unto many and diverse
temptations in this life, even so also is there several means given him, and
ways of resistance, which we ought vigilently to observe and put in practice.

But alas, when I consider how the flesh overcomes the spirit, I cannot but
admire at man's frailty and weakness: and again when I consider that the tree
is known by his fruit, and that man is the fruit of that corruptible tree, my
admiration is soon taken off.

I therefore conclude, that man, in this his depraved condition, is not able of
himself to speak a good word, think a good thought, and much less perform any
good action, without the immediate and effectual working of the divine Creator
in his heart, which gives us an assurance that although our natures are weak
and indisposed, yet there is a spirit of power and strength to assist and
direct us. It now remains that we humbly and earnestly desire of the Almighty,
that he would be pleased to confer upon us some portion of this his spirit,
that thereby we may be enabled to withstand the temptations of this world,
amongst which, that of women appears to be none of the least.

An Apology for good Women.
HAving briefly laid open the evils and discommodities that proceed from, and
attend bad women; it now remains that I say something in commendation of the
good: and although the number of the one so far exceed the other, yet in all
ages there has been some, whose Godly zeal and virtuous piety (together with
their names) ought to be had in memorial to all posterity.

For if we consider (how man's fall from that estate of grace and innocence
wherein he was first placed, was acted and brought to pass by woman) we also
find that the heavenly Creator (out of his infinite and unsearchable wisdom) so
ordained that man's salvation proceeded from woman also; so that by them came
death, and by them likewise we were restored to life: what creature can be more
excellent than that whom God has made an instrument to act so great a work. If
we search the Scriptures we may plainly see how great, how good and excellent
performances have been put in practice by some women, tending to the worship of
God, the good of his Church, and benefit of his people. As namely Qu. Esther,
who (after the decree was past for the destruction of the Jews) besought the
Lord (three days by fasting and prayer) for their preservation, which afterward
was accomplished, she finding favor in the sight of K. Ahasuerus, who not
only repealed that decree, but also caused the proud and wicked contriver
thereof to be executed, and Mordecay (from a mean and low condition) to be
promoted to great honot and dignity; by means whereof the whole nation of the
Jews (the then reputed people of God) obtained more liberty and freedom than
ever.

And also Judith (when the City of Bethulia was besieged by Holosernes and his
Host, and the inhabitants thereof (by reason of their fins driven into great
miseries and extremities) she I say, by a worthy and notable stratagem, raised
the siege, and freed that City from utter ruin and destruction,

And of late years, Queen Elizabeth (of famous memory) who so long ruled this
realm of England in quiet peace and tranquillity: with diverse others before and
since, whose worthy deeds, and renowned virtues, are never to be forgotten, but
remain as due trophies of honor to that sex to the worlds end.

But my pen is not of virtue, or words of force to express their just praise
and commendation, neither is there any earthly blessing so great (either in
prosperity, or adversity, sickness or health) as for a man to enjoy a good
and virtuous woman. In regard therefore they are so helpful, comfortable, and
generally useful unto man, as that without them the world would be at a
period; how then can we sufficiently love, respect, and reverence the virtuous.
But some (perhaps) may object and say, that in this age there are very few of
those, and they hard to be found out, to which, I answer that as indeed they
are not many, that may be an argument, their virtue and goodness may be the
more; for we find (by sure and infallible arguments) that the number of the
righteous are but few, and the wicked very numerous. And we must also
acknowledge that women (in their natural inclinations) are all in extremes, for
they that are good are really good indeed, and they that are bad are usually
extremely evil. Neither is man's weakness more apparent then in his choice
betwixt good and evil, for oftentimes he takes the one for the other, which is
the cause that we all fall into so many evils and inconveniences; for
prevention whereof, we ought carefully and advisedly to look upon the real
substance, and not upon the seeming show or shadow, upon the inward grace and
perfection, and not upon the outward beauty and deceitful appearance. But
above all, upon true faith and Godliness, without which we cannot attain to
any good or perfect gift, tending to our comfort and consolation, whilst we
remain in this life, or that which is to come,

And thus (gentle Reader) I have in some brief measure anatomized the feminine
sex in general, and also in some particulars, which I refer to thy favorable
censure, and good construction, that so, whatsoever is therein am sle may be by
thee corrected, and that which is worth observation more enlarged and amended,
it being a matter of general concernment, and a subject in it self commendable,
profitable unto all, and hurtful unto none: but the completing thereof would
require some labor as well as time, and also employ many sheets of paper; in
regard therefore I may not exceed one (being confined within those narrow
limits by some considerations at this time) I am forced to desist from that
enterprise and must now conclude by way of exhortation (unto all sorts of men)
which is.

That those who enjoy a Godly, virtuous and loving wife, esteem of her
accordingly, prising her as a most rate, precious, and inestimable jewel,
rendering most humble and hearty thanks unto the God of Heaven, for so great a
blessing upon earth.

And those who are made partakers of so great an evil and discommoditie as to
possess a lewd and wicked woman; let them endeavor to arm themselves with all
possible patience, earnestly craving aid and assistance from above, that so
they may be the better enabled to undergo that heavy punishment here below;
which their own inconsiderate rashness has drawn them too.

But those who lead single lives (and have not yet made choice of either) let
not such, I say, in their actions and performances, be also guided by single
judgments, but rather take advice from others; which (being seasoned by their
own experience) may give them a further knowledge what it is to make a choice of
that nature; it being the greatest and most material action of our whole lives,
and that wherein we yield our bodies in bondage to good or evil, until death
makes a final separation.

FINIS.

