THE WORKS OF WILLIAM BRIDGE, Sometime Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge;
now Preacher of the Word of GOD at Yarmouth.

The first Volume.

VIZ. I. The great Gospel-mysterie of the Saints comfort and holiness, opened
and applied from Christ's Priestly office. II. Satan's power to tempt; and
Christ's love to, and care of his people under temptation. III. Thankfulness
required in every condition.


LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole, and are sold at his shop at the sign of the
Printing-Presse in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

TO THE READER.
SO good is the God of Jacob to his Israel on this side the promised Land, that
no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly.

Friend, If it may be verified of thee, what our blessed Savior spoke of
Nathaniel, behold an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile; thou have at
present, not only a title to Esau's ENOVGH, but the tenure of Jacobs-ALL:
according to that ancient Charter of all Saints recorded by that great Apostle
of the Gentiles, -- For All things are yours; whether Paul, 1 Cor. 3 21, 22, 23
or Apollo, or Cephas etc. All are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods.

The very Persons and Ministry, Calling and Gifts, Studies and Writings,
Prayers and Sermons of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, (...).
All are for the use, service, and comfort of Christ's LITTLE-LITTLE FLOCK. This
Evangelical truth is notably proved by the same Apostle to the Ephesians. When
our only High Priest ascended up on high (into the Holy of Holies, there to
transact his Priestly office of Intercession at the right hand of God the
Father) He gave some (to be) Apostles, and some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

Thus this Servant of the Lord is thine; as much thine, as Paul was the
Corinthians. Yea, these his Spiritfull pieces of Evangelical mysteries are
thine: Thine, to build thee up in the saving knowledge of that doctrinal truth,
the Priestly office of Christ, as it is the Magazine and storehouse of all that
grace and comfort which we are crowned with under heaven: Thine, to give thee a
piercing insight into the intricate methods of the Old Serpent, and plainly to
discover upon what rocks and sands the faith of many suffer shipwreck: Thine, 1
These. 5.8. (...) Ephesians. 6.16. (...) of (...).
to arm thee with spiritual Armor of proof, called a BREAST PLATE, because
it guards the heart; or (as the word elsewhere holds it out) A
LONG-IARGE-SHIELD, which is very dexterous to defend the whole of a Christian
Soldier from all the fiery darts of THE WICKED-ONE. (...)


Reader, Let us be thine, to beseech thee by the mercies of God, (as thou
tenderest the peace and welfare of all within thy own tabernacle) immediately
to put in practice the holy Contents of this Experimental Book. For if thou
art one of the LORDS-Simons, Behold Satan has desired to have thee, that he
may sift thee as wheat. Oh therefore make provision for thy soul with all
speed, before the hour of temptation draws on. It is not true valor, but
desperate fool-madnesse, to adjourne this Every-dayes business of everlasting
concernment: Because in this, as in oversights of War, there is no room for a
second retractation, the first error being unrecoverable.

This is all we have to advertise thee touching these choice useful Lectures.
For the Author of them (whom we very much love and honor) we must bear
witness, that when he first preached them from the bosom of Jesus Christ (his
Master) to many tempted bleeding hearts in and about this populous City, he had
not then the least thought to suffer them in Print to serve the Public. But
afterward, eyeing the voice of God in the multiplied desires and greedy
expectations both of friends and strangers, his constant Auditors (though of
different judgments) in their private speeches and Letters; and to prevent a
further inconvenience, [ sc. the publishing them by some who had impefect Notes
in their hands] was necessitated to depute us [in his absence at Yarmouth) to
hand out into the world this his Copy, M. W. M.
which was exactly penned from his tongue, (...). 2 Timothy 1.14.
by that his beloved Amanuensis, and since kept charily by him, as a precious
thing committed to his trust.

The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ grant thee according, to the riches of his
glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, so that
thou may be more then conqueror through Him that loved thee, and prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not. So be it.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, William Greenhill. John Tates. William Adderley.


The Titles of the second Volume.
Viz.

I. Grace for grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's fullness received by all
Saints. II. The spiritual actings of Faith, through Natural impossibilities.
III. Evangelical Repentance.
THE CONTENTS Of the First VOLVMNE
HEBREWS, 2.17, 18. SERMON I.
THE words opened Doct. Page 2 The Priestly office of Christ is the great
Magazine and Storehouse of all that grace and comfort we have, on this side
heaven Page 3 Proved ibid 1 It is a relief and succor to a Christian against
all temptations Page 6 Cleared by particulars 1 When the Lord Jesus Christ
died, he offered up himself a sacrifice to God the Father Page 7 Proved Page 8
2 When he was upon the Altar, the sins of all believers past, present, and to
come, were laid upon Christ Page 9 Cleared ibid 3 When the sins of believers
were laid upon him, he did make full satisfaction to God the Father and Divine
Justice for them all ibid Object. Why Believers have their sins still charged
upon their Consciences Answered Page 13 4 This he has done in a more eminent
way than ever any high priest did before Page 14 5 How all this conduces to
our comfort or holiness Page 15 It conduces to our comfort 1 There is a store
house of mercy and mere compassion erected for poor sinners Page 15 2 All our
Afflictions come not upon us as punishments Page 16 3 We shall never be damned
ibid 4 We may come with boldness to the throne of grace ibid Object. How shall
I know that Jesus Christ has satisfied for me? Ans. 1. Why not for thee? Page
17 2 Applying the promise makes it thine ibid 3 Christ is willing you should
think he satisfied for you ibid 4 Else we are in a worse condition than the
Jews It conduces to our holiness 1 The new covenant is founded upon it Page 19
2 Strengthen faith and strengthen all graces ibid 3 The more a man sees a holy
necessity upon Christ to show mercy, the more his faith rises Page 20 4 The
more a man is engaged to Christ, the more holy he is, the more a man sees his
sins pardoned the more is he engaged to Christ ibid 5 The more a man denies his
own reghteousness, the more holy is he with Gospel-holiness Page 21
SERMON II. Heb. 2.17, 18.
The second work of a high priest, is, to pray and intercede for the people
Page 25 Proved Page 26 Cleared by opening 1 Wherein it consists 1 In owning
our cause and souls to God his father Page 27 2 Carries the merit of his blood
into the presence of God the Father Page 28 3 Answers the accusations that are
brought in against us ibid 4 Calls for pardon of our sins at the hands of God
Page 30
2 How powerful it is with God the father, 1 The great interest he has with
his father Page 31 2 The inclination God the Father has to the things Christ
intercedeth for Page 32 3 upon what terms Christ was taken and admitted into
heaven Page 34
3 He now intercedeth for us in heaven as our High Priest 1 He has gone
through more temptations than any High Priest ever did Page 35 2 He is filled
with more compassions Page 36 3 He is more faithful in his office Page 37 4 He
lives for ever to intercede Page 38 5 He intercedeth at all times ibid 6 For
all sins, the sin against the Holy Ghost excepted
4 This conducech to our comfort and holiness To our comfort, proved Page 39
Object. I am afraid the Lord Christ does not intercede for me Answ. 1. It is no
presumption to bear our selves upon the intercession of Jesus Christ Page 41 2
Who those are that Christ does intercede for Page 42 3 How infinitely willing
he is to intercede for us 1 He has received his anointing for it Page 44 2 It
is the work of his relation Page 45 3 It is the work of his office Page 46
To our holiness 1 The more we are engaged to come to Christ Page 48 2 The more
we are engaged to appear on earth for him Page 49 3 The more we are engaged to
lay out our selves for him Page 50

SERMON III Heb. 2.17, 18.
The third work of the High Priest, to offer up the gifts of the people to God,
to present their duties, to him Page 52 Proved Page 53 Cleared by particulars 1
What Christ does when he offers up our gifts to God the Father Page 54 1 He
takes our persons and carries them to God the Father in an unperceivable way to
us ibid 2 He takes out the iniquity of our duties, before he presents our
duties to his father Page 55 3 He mingles his own intercession with what is
good in our duties, and so presents them as one work to his father Page 56
2 What acceptance this has with God the Father Page 57 1 It was an agreement
made between them before the world was ibid 2 He was made the great Lord
treasurer of all grace Page 58 3 The father promises him his desire ibid 4 He
has put the keys of heaven and hell into his hands ibid
3 He does Improve his acceptance for our acceptance Page 59 4 What abundance
of acceptance we have in all our duties by him Page 60 Objections answered Page
62 5 How this makes for our comfort and holiness Page 64 For our comfort 1 Our
duties are not lost, Christ takes notice of them Page 65 2 We have liberty to
go to the mercy seat and there meet with God ibid 3 We know how it shall go
with us at the great day of judgment ibid 4 Being poor beggars we are releeved
of God Page 66
Object, How shall I know the Lord accepts my duty? Answ. 1 If thou find thy
heart warm in duty or after duty, thy duty is accepted Page 67 2 Can you pray
and intercede for other godly men Page 68 3 If grace be larger under the Gospel
than under the Law ibid For our holiness 1 To the ungodly 1 It keeps men from
opposition to the ways of God Page 69 2 It is a mighty encouragement to
ungodly men to come to Christ Page 70
2 To the godly 1 Here Is an infinite reason why we should be much in duty ibid
2 Infinite reason why we should receive every truth that comes from Christ Page
71 3 It will make you more obedient in an evangelical way. Page 72 4 The more a
man rejoices in spiritual obedience the more humble he is Page 74


SERMON IIII Heb. 2.17, 18.
The fourth work of the High priest is, to bless the people Page 76 Proved
ibid Opened 1 Wherein the blessing of Christ and of the Gospel consists Page 77
1 In the spiritual enjoyment of God in Christ Page 79 2 In the holy Ghost
dwelling in our hearts ibid
2 What Christ does when he does bless 1 He wishes choice blessings to them
Page 80 2 He does authoritively pronounce him blessed Page 81 3 He absolves
them from all their sins ibid 4 He confers and bestows the blessing upon them
ibid 5 He gives increase Page 82
3 That this belongs especially to Christ, proved Page 83 4 That Jesus Christ
is willing to bless poor sinners Page 85 5 He does this fully ibid Object. We
do not see it Answ. 1. It Is a hard thing to discern the blessing of Christ
sometimes ibid 2 He does not bless as the world blesses Page 84 3 Not as
professors bless Page 85 4 Not always as godly men bless ibid But 1. He
blesses such as are weak in gifts and grace Page 86 2 Such as he has made use
of in the work of God ibid 3 Such as are willing to leave all relations to
follow him Page 87 4 He blesses when the world curses ibid 5 Such as
graciously enjoy evangelical ordinances Page 88 6 All this conduces to our
comfort and holiness To our comfort Page 88 Object. If I were assured God had
blessed me I could have comfort Answ. 1 It is a sign a man is blessed, when
others are blessed by him Page 90 2 When he is drawn the nearer to God by
outward things Page 91 3 When he increases and multiplieth ibid To our
holiness 1 it encourages to come to the truth Page 92 2 To go on in it
against all opposition Page 94 3 To go on though we have but weak parts ibid 4
To be contented with our condition Page 95 5 Continually to bless the Lord ibid

Hebrews, 2.18. SERMON I
Text opened Page 98 Doct. God suffers his dearest children to suffer by the
hand of temptation Page 101 Opened 1 There is an afflictive disposition in
every temptation Page 101 2 God suffers his own children thus to suffer 1 The
best many times suffer most Page 103 2 At that very time when they have most of
God ibid 3 Satan many times seems to have the better of them Page 104 4 This
continues a long time ibid
Why God does so 1 That they may be the more enlightened Page 104 2 That they
may be cleansed ibid 3 That they may be kept ibid 4 That their graces may
increase Page 105 5 That it may be discovered to themselves and others, what
their sins and graces are ibid 6 That they may be the more fit to receive
Christ as a Savior ibid 7 That they may be made like to Christ ibid 8 Upon the
same reasons that God suffered the children of Israel to suffer under the
Egyptians 1 That his power might appear Page 106 2 That they might not learn
their manners ibid 3 That they might be provoked against them to cut them off
Page 106 4 That they might long for the Land of Rest Page 107 5 That they might
not return back to Egypt. ibid

Objection. Answered Page 108 Application Do not question the love of God
because of temptations Page 109 Object. How shall I order my heart in
temptations? Answ. 1 Take heed you do not yield to any part of a temptation
that you may be delivered from. Page 113 2 Do not carry the guilt of your old
condition into a new condition ibid 3 Note what sutableness there is in your
condition to the temptation, and take away that Page 114 4 Turn your thoughts
to another object Page 115 5 Take the Shield of Faith. ibid 6 Do not fear too
much, Do not fear too little Page 116 7 If you overcome, be thankful; if you be
overcome, hold up still Page 117 8 Make good improvement of it ibid
Sermon 2. Heb. 2.18.
Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ is a succouring Christ to tempted souls Page 220
Proved Page 221 Opened 1 Christ is able to do it Page 222 2 He is willing to do
it 1 It is Gods will, and he delights to do the will of God Page 224 2 He was
willing to suffer it, therefore to do ibid 3 He is much troubled if it be not
done Page 225
3 He is faithful in doing it. Page 226 4 How Christ succors in temptation. 1
Before temptation 1 By manifestation of him self Page 227 2 By laying in
Gospel-principles ibid 3 By filling the heart with the Holy Ghost Page 228
2 Under Temptation. 1 By opening their eyes to see it is but a temptation Page
228 2 By letting fall some glimps of his love ibid 3 He does succor from
temptation, by temptation Page 229 4 By casting in some promise ibid 5 By
keeping the heart and the temptation assunder ibid
3 After temptation, by filling the heart with unspeakable joy ibid
Application 1 A gracious invitation to poor tempted souls to come to Christ
Page 229 Object. Why then are men damned? Answered Page 230 Other objections
answered ibid Object. My temptation is mixed with corruption Answered 1 He
succors sinners most when they are most tempted Page 231 2 When they cannot
succor themselves Page 232 3 Notwithstanding all their failings ibid
Application 2 Here is strong consolation to all Saints Page 233 Application 3
Let us be succouring Christians Page 235 Application 4 Why should we yield to
temptations though never so violent Page 236 Application 5 Let us labor to
answer Christ in this work 1 Observe his succors and lay them up against a
rainy day ibid 2 Labor to keep the sense of his love upon your hearts Page 237
3 Look up to Christ ibid 4 Give thy soul up into his hands Page 238 5 Rest on
him ibid 6 Do not rest upon means because great, nor despise them because small
ibid 7 Do not live upon the letter of a promise Page 239 8 If you have the
worst, be humbled, If the better, improve your victory ibid

SERMON III Luke 22.31, 32.
Text opened Page 241 Doct. Christ gives leave to Satan sometimes to tempt his
own and best Disciples Page 242 Opened 1 What great power Satan has to tempt
and molest the children of men 1 He is an Angel Page 242 2 He is a Spirit Page
243 3 He is able to suggest what he pleases ibid 4 He knows what bait will
soonest take ibid 5 He is able to follow his suggestions ibid 6 He is able to
bemire the fancy ibid 7 To hold down a man's mind to that particular thing Page
244 8 The same words which are given to God for good, are given to the Devil
for evil ibid
Wherein the Devil falls short of God ibid 2 He puts forth this power especially
upon the best of Saints Page 245 Object Why does Satan lie so heavy upon the
Saints seeing he knows they shall be saved Answ. 1 His envy Page 246 2 That
they may be stumbling blocks to others ibid 3 He loves to molest them Page 247
3 How he comes by this power Page 248 4 Why God gives Satan leave to tempt his
own children 1 To wean them from that sin they fall into Page 249 2 The
manifestation of his own power, wisdom, faithfulness, and free grace Page 250
Application Why should any man doubt of his sonship Page 251 Object. Mine is
no temptation of Satan but the corruption of my own heart Answered 1 It is
usual for Saints to charge all Satan's temptations upon their own hearts Page
254 2 The Saints never fall into any great sin, but Satan has a special hand
in it. Page 255 3 It is the disposition of the Saints to be grieved for their
sins, as if all were from themselves and nothing from Satan ibid 4 The
difference between Satan's temptations and our corruptions Page 256
Object. What comfort can we have in this condition? 1 Nothing befalls you but
what may befall a child of God Page 257 2 Whilst thou art tempted Christ is
praying for thee ibid 3 The enemy is overcome before he strikes ibid 4 He has
no more power than God gives him Page 258 5 Thou have something cannot be taken
from thee ibid
Object. 2 What shall I do that I may not not yield to temptation? Answered
Page 258 Object. What shall I do that I may avoid temptation? 1 Do not stand
playing upon the borders of any sin Page 260 2 Get your hearts mortified to the
objects of love and fear ibid 3 Take your temptation and dip it in the blood of
Christ Page 261

SERMON IIII Luke 22.31, 32.
Doct. The great design of Satan is upon the faith of the Saints Page 263
Opened 1 What it is to fail in faith Page 264 2 What evil is in failing in
faith Page 266 He loses 1 An opportunity of glorifying God ibid 2 His joy and
peace ibid 3 His present prize Page 267 4 The sweetness of his mercy ibid
3 That Satan's great design in Temptation is upon our faith Page 268 Why it is
so Page 269 4 How Satan weakens our faith Page 270 1 Our faith of Reliance ibid
1 By hiding our former experiences ibid How to bear off that blow 1 Take heed
you never rest upon a promise barely because of experience Page 271 2 Take heed
ye never mourn so for sin as to be unthankful for mercies Page 272
2 By severing our souls from the promise How shall we bear of that blow? 1 God
commands me to believe therefore the promise belongs unto me Page 273 2 If the
Lord gives out a threatening that it may not be fulfilled, then he gives out a
promise that it may be fulfilled ibid 3 If I am more godly then I was when
Satan told me that the promise did belong to me, then is the temptation
causeless ibid 4 God has commanded me to believe Page 274
2 How Satan weakens our faith of Assurance 1 By telling us we have no faith
ibid 2 By telling us we have no obedience Page 275
How to ward off this blow? Page 279 That we have no faith How to ward off this
blow? 1 The Lord does give out particular promises for men to measure their
condition by Page 276 2 God does not always give out a particular promise.
ibid 3 Particular promises have a particular faith Page 278
3 How Satan weakens our faith of Acknowledgement By keeping us from owning
Christ Page 278 How to bear off this blow? 1 Possess your souls with the
privilege of suffering for Christ Page 279 2 Be sure you look on both sides of
your sufferings. Page 279
Quest. What general Rules may be given to stay our faith that it fail not in
temptation? Answ. 1 Study the Scripture much Page 280 2 Do not measure your
selves by the Enlargement or, Deadness of your own hearts ibid 3 Look much
unto the infirmities of Jesus Christ. Page 281 4 Do not conclude it is no
temptation ibid 5 Remember thy own soul of the ways of God with thee ibid 6
Apply the Attributes of Christ suitable to the temptation Page 282 7 Take the
Shield of faith. ibid

SERMON V. Luke, 22.21, 22.
Doct. Gods love and mercy is never more at work for his people, than when they
are most tempted by Satan Page 286 Cleared First. Wherein the care of Christ is
expressed to his people in temptation. 1 In ordering their temptations ibid 2
He weakens them. Page 287 3 He causes them to be laid down so as that they
may be discerned. ibid 4 He orders the time. Page 288 5 He sanctifies them. ibid
How is Christ's love drawn out to his people under temptation 1 In teaching
them in and by their temptations Page 289 2 He upholds them with new supplies
Page 290 3 He gives them a breathing time under temptations Page 291 4 He
prays for them, then especially ibid
2 His care is most expressed when they are most tempted 3 What there is in
Christ that inclines him to this Page 293 1 The quintescence of all love he
has to them Page 294 2 The great interest he has in them ibid
Application Abundance of comfort to all Christ's Disciples Page 295 Object. I
fear I am none of Christ's Disciple? Answ. 1 All Christ's Disciples deny
themselves Page 296 2 They take up their Cross ibid 3 They follow Christ ibid
2 Christ does not only pray for his present Disciples, but for all such as
believe through their word Page 297 Object. My heart fails me in time of
temptation Answ. 1 There is difference between failing of ones faith and
failing of ones heart Page 298 2 Between failing in faith in our own opinion
and in Christ's opinion ibid 3 Between failings of faith, and failings that
acompany faith ibid 4 Consider whether your faith failed like Peter's Page 299
Other objections answered Page 300
1 Thessalonians, 5.18.
Doct. It is the will of God that we should be thankful to him for every thing
Page 306 Reas. 1. There is excellencies enough in God ibid 2 No condition is so
sad but there is some good mingled with it ibid 3 Christians must be like Jesus
Christ Page 307 Object. Suppose a man's spiritual condition be overclouded?
Answ. 1 Though God do not shine upon a Christian yet it may be light to him
Page 311 2 Though Christ withdraw his comforting presence yet he does not his
supporting presence ibid 3 Though Christ withdraw yt he draws by his Spirit
Page 312 4 What a man would not loose for all the world, is worthy of praise
ibid
Object. Suppose God do not only withdraw but Satan draws near Answ. Be
thankful, Because 1 Christ has overcome him Page 312 2 He can do no more than
God gives him leave to do Page 313 3 Nothing befalls you but what befalls the
best of the Saints ibid 4 Christ succors you in your temptations ibid
What particular things we should be thankful for 1 We are redeemed of the
Lord. Page 317 2 That we have so many days of Thanksgiving ibid Encouragments
to thankefulness 1 If you can be thankful when you are low, you engage God to
raise you up Page 320 2 Hereby your afflictions will be made blessings. ibid 3
The more thankful you are, the more your souls will be filled with peace.
Page 321 4 Thereby ye shall shame the Devil
How this must be done 1 Observe your own tempers and put your selves upon
that duty your own disposition lies next to. Page 314 2 Maintain your assurance
fresh and green ibid 3 Let your eye be as well upon what you have as upon what
you want Page 315 4 Be sure maintain a sense of your own unworthiness ibid

FINIS.
SCRIPTURES Opened, And occasionally Cleared in the First VOLVMNE.
Chap. Verse. Page Numbers 6 24, 25 79 16 41 43 20 12 267 1 Samuel 25 32 33 2
Samuel 24 10 254 Joh 1 11 321 Psalms 40 7.8 11 94 18 290 116. 11.12 271. 117
1.2 316 Canticles 1 6 68 2 3 12 2 14 62 Isaiah 24 15 307 53 9 11 Zachary 1 8
39.307 3 1 28 Malachy 3 2.3.4 56 Matthew 3 17 72 5 10 87 7 24 266 16 24 296 17
5 72 Luke 1 8, 9, 10 53 22 31 101 John 10 17 33 13 30 310 16 3 110 16 26 61 17
20 42 Acts 1 4 80 Romans 3 25 121 8 33 28 8 35 234 1 Corinthians 10 13 291 2
Corinthinans 12 7 314 13 14 79 Ephesians 1 3 77 3 12 55 5 2 8.12 6 12 245
Hebrews 2 14, 15 230 3 1, 2 37 8 4 26 9 24 47 10 6 11 10 11, 12 34 1 John 2 1
42 5 18 107.265 Revelation 8 3 56 20 1, 2, 3 288

FINIS.
SCRIPTURES Opened, And occasionally Cleared in the Second VOLVMNE.
Chap. Verse. Page Genesis 3 15 70 8 21 29 12 3 72 Exodus us 15 ult 160
Deuteronomy 11 10, 11 63 18 15 72 Joshua. 7 6 162 2 Chronicles 13 17 181 Job 2
4 70 11 13 57 33 14 55 Psalms 16 2.8 25 33 22 164 68 18 41 72 6 47 37 19 187 51
15 102 31 2, 3 104 77 2 223 21 3 233 116 11 164 Proverbs 9 begin 13.253 16 1
100 8 29.31. 118 Canticles 11 12 99 6 8 7 Isaiah 61 1, 2. 24.97 43 13 28 54 8,
9. 29 55 1 53 62 12 254 53 11 210 30 21 219 Jeremiah 7 4 6 3 8 177 31 22 187 31
33 79 Ezekiel 36 26, 27. 30 20 41, 42. 243 Zephaniah 2 3 168 Haggai 2 7 11
Zachariah 1 3 225 12 10, 11, 12. 246 Matthew 5 3, 4. 4 12 47.50. 5 28 19 76 3
11 105 5 16 109 27 6 126 4 4 178 11 20 197 9 9 199 9 10, 11, 12, 13. 226 13 32,
31. 238 Luke 23 24 4 24 36 5 22 32 28 1 20 175 17 13 179 7 38 182 17 6 196 17 3
197 19 5 199 14 16, 17, 18. 219 19 9 222 19 10 224 7 41 225 15 18, 19. 228 7 37
230 John 1 17 9 16 7.10. 10 1 12 20 17 19 24 4 34 26 17 3 80 14 6 94 10 3 96 10
3 96 14 20 115 5 26 117 12 23 158 20 29 180 21 5 185 2 4, 5. 206 Acts 9 6 184
Romans 8 15 47 1 7 96 7 4 96 4 5 228 11 30 242 1 Corinthians 15 45 21 2 3.5. 59
15 10 59 1 9 129 3 22 203 Galatians 4 begin 77 5 22 102 Ephesians 1 23 8 2 1.5.
53 4 10 116 Philippians 2 12 58 2 7.9.98 158 Colossians 1 19 9 1 22 81 3 11 96
2 9 128 Timothy 5 5 157 1 13 222 Titus 2 14 28 Hebrews 7 25 9 2 18 22 3 2 25 1
1 78 10 19 121 11 1 203 James 1 17 93 4 8 225 1 Peter 3 4 36 5 10 51 4 19 177 1
John 1 3 115 Revelations 1 18 94 3 21 120 11 11 155 3 20 253

FINIS
The great GOSPEL-Mystery Of the SAINTS comfort and holiness.
HEBREWS. 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him, Preached at
Stepney. April. 25 1647.
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and a faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation (or atonement)
for the sins of the people. For in that he himself has suffered, being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.
THE Apostle Paul, (whom I take to be the Penman of this Epistle) having in
the former part of this Chapter, showed the Reasons, why it behoved Christ for
to suffer death: He comes now, in the latter end thereof, to give you an
account, by laying down some Reasons, Why it behoved Christ, to be in all
things made like unto us, whom the Apostle here calls the Brethren of Jesus
Christ.

In other Scriptures we find, that our Lord and Savior Christ, is called our
Father, The everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Here he is called our
Brother, we his Brethren. Now the same Person, to be both a Father, and a
Brother unto the same man, in nature it cannot be.

But because all these Relations, are to scant, and narrow Vessels to hold
forth the love of Jesus Christ toward us: Therefore Inconsistent Relations are
given unto him. A Father Provides for his child, which the brother does not. A
Brother can stoop, and condesend unto his brother, which the superiority of the
Father will not bear. So that here is held forth unto us, the stooping,
Condesending love of Jesus Christ: and therefore he is called our Brother, and
we his Brethren.

But why, and what Reason is there, That the Lord Jesus Christ should in all
things be made like unto us his Brethren?

The Apostle in these words gives the Reason, That he might be a merciful, and
a faithful high Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people, etc. The Lord God our Father, swear unto Jesus Christ,
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek. He was to be the
great high Priest. Among the Jews, in the times of the old Testament, they had
an high Priest, that was in all things to stand between God and them, and in
case any sinned, to make an atonement for them. As the Jews had their High
Priest: So the Lord Jesus Christ, he was to be, and he is, The Apostle, and the
High Priest of our Christian profession, as Aaron was of the Jews profession.
And therefore says the Apostle, It behoved him, in all things to be made like
unto us.

But could not Jesus Christ be merciful unto poor tempted souls, Natures, like
in their Affections, like in matter of Temptations.

Christ as God, could have been merciful unto us, but not as our High Priest.

There is an ability of Sufficiency, and of Power: and so Christ as God, was
able to succor those that are tempted, although himself had never been
tempted. But there is an ability of Idoneity, or Fitness, or Aptness and
Disposition: and so the Apostle says here, For in that Himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

It Is plain then, what that is, that is the great support of a Christian
against all Temptations: wherein lies our succor against all Temptation,
namely, in the Priestly-Office of Jesus Christ.

The Priestly-Office of Christ, Is it the great Magazine, and Stonehouse, of
all that Grace, and Comfort which we have on this side Heaven: It is that,
whereby we are reconciled to God the Father, and relieved against all
temptation. This is the great thing that these words hold forth.

And therefore, upon this account, the Apostle Paul, finding the Hebrews
laboring under great Temptations, Doubtings, Fears, and much Unbeleef; he does
not only here, but all along in this book of the Hebrews, open the Priestly
Office of Christ unto them.

And indeed, what comfort can we have in God Himself, but through Christ? and
what comfort can we have in Christ Himself, but as he is clothed with his
Prestly-Garment, with his Office of the High Priest? Whatsoever comfort we have
in the other Offices of Christ, namely his Kingly, and his Prophetical Office,
it is all Originated, and Principiated in this: The Priestly Office of Jesus
Christ, it does give a Life, and Being, and Efficacy to both the other Offices.
And therefore, the High Priest, in the times of the old Testament, (who was a
Type of Christ) he wore a Crown, upon his head, and the breast plate of Vrim,
and Thummim upon his breast: showing, that both the other Offices, the Kingly,
and the Prophetical Office, were planted upon the Priestly Office of Jesus
Christ.

Yea, If you look into the, First, Second, and Third Chapters of the
Revelation, you will find, that whatsoever streams of comfort did run down
upon the Churches through the other Titles, and Attributes of God, they are all
fountain'd here. In the Second Chapter, and the first verse. The Lord Christ
has this Title, That he holds the seven stars in his right hand! These
things says he that holds the seven stars in his right hand. In the Eight
verse writing unto the Church of Smyrna, he takes up another Title, or
Attribute: These things says the first and the last, which was dead and is
alive. At the Twelf verse, writing unto the Church of Pergamus, he takes up
another Title: These things says he, who has the sharp sword with two edges.
Now look into the first Chapter, and you shall see, that those several Titles,
wherewith he clothes Himself when he speaks unto the Churches severally, are
all summed up together at the 16. verse. And he had in his right hand seven
stars; There Is his Title unto the Church of Ephesus: And out of his mouth went
a sharp two-edged sword: There Is his Title unto the Church of Pergamus. And at
the 18. verse. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for ever
more; There Is another Title, that he uses when he speaks unto the Church of
Smyrna. But in the 13. verse. is opened the fountain of all these streams: In
the midst of the seven candlesticks, I saw me like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a garment down to the foot; and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle. This was then the robe and attire of the High Priest: Whose garment
came down unto his feet, and he was girt about with a golden girdle. So that
all these other Attributes, and Titles of Christ, they have their rise here,
here is the springhead of all those consolations, even the Priestly Office of
Jesus Christ.

Usually, Those Excellencies, and Attributes of Christ are most beneficial unto
the Saints, that are most opposed by the world. What Title, Attribute; or
Excellency of Christ is there, that is more invaded by the world, than the
Priestly office of Jesus Christ? What is the whole body of Anti-christianisme,
but an invasion upon this Priestly Office of Christ? What is the Popish Mass,
(that unbloody sacrifice,) but a derogation from the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
once upon the Cross, and so a derogation from his Priestly Office? What are
all those Popish Penances, and satisfactions enjoined, but a derogation unto
the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, and so unto the Priestly Office of Christ?
What is all their praying to Saints, and Angels, but a derogation unto the
Intercession of Jesus Christ, and so unto the Priestly Office of Christ? What
does the Pope call himself? He calls himself, the High Priest, (...)
the very Title that our Lord, and Savior takes unto himself. So that the
whole body of Anti-christianisme, is a great invasion upon the Priestly Office
of Jesus Christ. Now that which is usually opposed most by the men of the
world, that Excellency, and that Attribute of Christ, is of all other the most
comfortable, and beneficial unto Gods people. The truth is, This Priestly
Office of Jesus Christ, is an Office of mere love, and tender compassion;
erected, and set up on purpose, for the relief of poor distressed sinners; and
there is no mixture of terror with it: there is a mixture of terror with the
other Offices of Christ. The Lord Christ, he is King, and he has a Kingly
Office, and by his Kingly. Office he rules over the Churches, and rules over
all the world: But all do not obtain mercy that he rules over. As for those
mine Enemies, that will not submit, will not have me to Reign over them, bring
them, and slay them before me. The Prophetical office of Jesus Christ, it
extends unto many that shall never be saved: Light shines in darkness, and
darkness comprehends it not. He came unto his own, and his own received him
not. But now, where over the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ is let forth upon
an soul, that soul shall certainly be saved for ever.

What was the great relief amongst the Jews against their sins? The Jews, you
shall observe they had many reliefs: when they were in the wilderness, and were
stung with the fiery serpents, then they had a brasen-serpent for to look upon,
as a relief against that distress. When they wanted water, they had the water
out of the Rock, as a relief against that distress. When they wanted Bread,
they had Manna from Heaven, as a relief against that distress. But when they
sinned, whither did they go? Then they took a sacrifice, and went unto the
Priest, and he was to offer for them. So that the Priestly Office then, was the
only relief they had against sin.

And so now, the Priestly Office of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is that great
succor, and relief which Christians have against all Temptations under Heaven.

You will say unto me, wherein this Priestly Office of Christ, is the great
Magazin, and Storehouse of all our grace and comfort.

For Answer, it is unto a Christian against all Temptations, and what a bottom
of comfort, and special means of Grace and Holiness.

The text says, That the work of the High Priest is, To make reconciliation
for the sins of the people. In the times of the old Testament, the High Priest
made an Atonement for the people: in case any man had finned, he brought a
sacrifice, and his sins were laid upon the head of the sacrifice. Once every
year, the High Priest did enter into the holy of holiest, and with the blood of
the Sacrifice, did sprinkle the Mercy-Seat, and laid the sins of the people
upon the head of the scapegoat and so made an atonement for the people. All
which will clearly appear, in that, 16. of Liviticus, at the 14. verse. He
shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon
the Mercy-Seat eastward: and before the Mercy-Seat shall be sprinkle of the
blood with his finger seven times. And at the 21. verse. And Aaron shall lay
both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the
iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions, in all
their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by
the hand of a fit man into the wilderness, and so he shall make an atonement,
as in that Chapter. This was the work of the High Priest, in case any had
finned, to make an atonement, and satisfaction (by way of Type) for the sins of
the people.

Now for the better proof of this great Gospel Truth that I have propounded, I
shall insist on these Five things.

First, That when the Lord Jesus Christ died upon the Cross, he did offer up
Himself a sacrifice unto God the Father.

Secondly, That when this sacrifice was upon the Altar, then the sins of all
believers, past, present, and to come, were all laid upon Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, That when these sins were thus laid upon Christ, he did thereby give
full satisfaction unto God the Father, unto Divine Justice.

Fourthly, That all this he did as our great High Priest, and in a more
Transcendent, and Eminent manner, then ever any High Priest did before him.

Fifthly, How all this does conduce to our Comfort, and to our Holiness.

First, When our Lord Jesus Christ died upon the Cross, He did offer up himself
a sacrifice unto God the Father. He did not (as the Socinians say) die only as
an example for to teach us how to die; but he offered up himself a sacrifice
unto God the Father then. Yea, as if all sacrifices were met in him; all those
titles that are given unto other Sacrifices, they are given unto him. There
were Three sorts of Sacrifices: some were living; others were not living, and
those were either solid, as bread and the like; or else, they were liquid, as
wine and oil. There was a always, Destruction rei oblatiae, A destroying of
the thing offered. If it were a living thing that was sacrificed, then it was
said to be slain: In answer to that, Jesus Christ is said to be a Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world. If it were a dead thing that was offered up,
as bread, or corn, a solid thing, then the sacrifice, or offering was said to
be bruised. In answer to that, our Lord and Savior Christ is said to be
bruised for our iniquities. If it were a liquid thing that was offered up to
God, as wine, or oil, then it was said to be powered out. In answer to this, it
is said of our Lord and Savior, That his soul was powered out unto death. Thus
all Sacrifices meeting in him. Behold the Lamb of God (says John the Baptist
when he saw Christ.) He does not say, Behold the Bull of God, or the Goat of
God; and yet Bulls, and Goats were sacrificed. Why does he rather say, behold
the Lamb of God, than the Bullock, or the Goat? For when the High Priest went
into the Holy of Holiest, and sprinkled the Mercy-Seat, he did not sprinkle the
Mercy-Seat with the blood of the Lamb, but with the blood of a Goat; and yet
notwithstanding, it is not said, Behold the Goat of God, but, Behold the Lamb
of God: Why so? Not only because that Christ was of a lamb-like, and meek
disposition (as some would have it:) Nor only because, that the great Type of
Christ, was the Pascal-Lamb, (though these be reasons.) But there was a daily
sacrifice in the Temple; whether men brought any offering or no, there was a
standing sacrifice in the Temple, morning, and evening, and that sacrifice was
a Lamb. Now therefore, to show, that Jesus Christ is the daily sacrifice,
therefore he cries out, and says, Behold the Lamb of God, and not the Goat of
God; for the Goat was not sacrificed every day as the Lamb was.

For proof of this, take the Apostles Exhortation, Ephe. 5.2. Walk in love, as
Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering, and a
sacrifice to God. Here are Three things considerable. First, He does not say,
Who has redeemed us: but, to show his great love unto us, Who has given
himself for us: He does not say, Who has given himself for our sins: Yet he
says so, in Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for our sins; But, Who gave himself for
us. Why? To show, who they were that he gave himself for: He gave himself for
us, as sinners. Again, He says here, He gave himself for us, an offering, and
a sacrifice, not only an offering, but a sacrifice too. So that this first
Proposition is clearly proved, That our Lord Jesus, when he died upon the
Cross, he did offer up himself as a sacrifice unto God the Father.

Secondly, So when he was upon this Altar, this sacrifice; the sins of all
believers were then laid upon Jesus Christ: those that do now believe, or shall
hereafter believe, they were all then laid upon Jesus Christ. Look into the 53.
of Isaiah ver. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one
to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all. That
which God lays on shall never be taken off, no man shall take it off: The Lord
has laid on him the iniquities of us all.

Yea, Our iniquities are not only said to be laid on him, but (to use the same
word that is used for the sacrifice) it is said, he bare our sins upon the
Cross; as the Goat bare the sins of the people: So says the Apostle, He
himself bare our sins upon the Cross.

Moreover, He did not only bare our sins upon the Cross: but (says the
Apostle) he was made sin for us. It Is not said, He was made a sinner, or
accounted a sinner only for us, but he was made sin for us. All our iniquities
were laid on him; he bare our sins; and he was made sin for us upon the Cross.
Thus briefly the Second Proposition is cleared, That when he did thus offer up
himself upon the Cross as a sacrifice, the sins of all believers were then
laid on him.

Thirdly, When the sins of believers were laid on him, then he did make full
satisfaction unto God the Father, and Divine Justice for all our sins. This is
a bottom of much comfort. For if the Lord Jesus Christ our surety had not
satisfied to the utmost farthing, our great Creditor, God the Father, for all
our debts, God the Father might come upon us the Debtors. But our Surety, the
Lord Christ, has given full satisfaction unto God the Father, that no more
demands can be made upon us: And indeed else, how could our Surety ever have
come out of prison: He was under arrest, he was in the Jayle, in the grave: The
Father, the great Creditor lets him out; and did not only let him out, but the
Lord Jesus Christ, he goes inbto Heaven, and sits down there at the right hand
of the Father; Surely, if the Creditor had not been satisfied, the Surety
should never have bin released out of prison.

He was so fully satisfied, That he looked for iniquity, and he found none,
(says the text.) He looked over all his books, to see if he could find any
thing upon the score, but he found none: all our debts were paid. Behold the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world. He does not say, That takes
away the sin of the Jews only; but takes away the sin of the whole world. He
does not say, That takes away the sins, (in the plural Number) but takes away
the sin) (in the singular Number:) Sins go so together, as if they were but
one: but let the sin be never so twisted together, as if it were but one sin,
this lamb of God, he takes away the sin of the world. And he does not say, That
has pardoned the sin of the World: for then a poor soul might say, I but,
though he has pardoned my sin, yet my sin is not mortified. Neither does he
say, Behold the lamb of God that Mortifies, or Destroys the sin of the world:
But he gives you a word, that takes in, both pardon, and Mortification too.
Behold the lamb of God that takes them away: both in regard of Pardon, and in
regard of Mortification: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the
world.

There is nothing that does so satisfy God the Father, as Obedience, and the
more full the Obedience is, the more God the Father is satisfied thereby: Now
it is said of our Lord and savior Christ, That in this great sacrifice upon
the Cross, he was Obedient. He was Obedient even to the death of the Cross.
That he that did make the Law, should come down from Heaven, and be subject to
the Law, what Obedience was here! Obedient to the Death. Yea, unto the Deaths
(in the plural Number) And he made his grave with the sinners: and his Deaths
was with the rich. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich had his
Deaths, Isaiah, 5^ ver. 9. It is in the Plural Number in the Hebrew, though in
your English translation it is in the Singular. As if the holy Ghost had called
death, the Second death that our Lord Christ had in some measure suffered. For,
if you consider things truly, and rightly, I believe you will find, that our
Lord and Savior Christ when he died, and was in his agony, he did not only
endure the first, but the torments of the second death. He overcame no more
than he submitted to: he overcame death by submitting to death. Now he overcame
the second death also, and therefore in some measure submitted to the torments
of it, so far as he was capable. Look what the first Adam should have endured
for his sin in the fall, that the second Adam now did endure in some measure
for to take it off: The day that thou eatest thou shall die the death. It was
not barely the corporal, and outward death, but it was the second death. If our
Lord and Savior Christ did not endure the torments of the second death, the
wrath of God upon his soul; why did he sweat drops of blood, and tremble, and
shake so, when he came to die? There is many Saints, and Martyrs, when they
come to die, they go skipping, and leaping, and rejoicing: and our Lord and
Savior, when he came to die, he sweats drops of blood; surely there was more
than an outward death: Oh! the wrath of God, and the torments of the second
death was upon his soul. Thus obedient he was, and this obedience of his, it
was volontary, for he needed not to have died; but he saw that God the father
was dishonored by man's sin, and that poor man would be lost, and rather than
that should be, he does volontarily offer himself unto this Obedience. Lo, I
come (says he) in the volum of the book it is written of me, I delight to do
thy will, and thy Law is within my heart, Psalm. 40.7, 8. Mark what an
expression there is in that Psalm, it is spoken concering Christ, as is plainly
interpreted by the Apostle in the 10. of the Hebrews, at the 6. verse.
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened (or
bored.) The Apostle when he translates these words, he translates them thus: My
body have thou prepared. But read them as they are here in the Psalm:
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ear has thou bored. That as
when a servant was willing to stay with his Master, and to do him yet more
service, the servants ear was to be bored: So says the Lord Christ, I am as
willing to do this work, to be thus obedient, as a servant whose ear is bored,
is willing to stay with his master: And mine ear have thou bored, (says he)
ah, here is obedience, here is obedience: this now did infinitely satisfy God the
Father; In so much, that ye may see what is said, in that same 5. of the
Ephesians, and the 2. verse. Who has loved us, and given himself for us, an
offering, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. The whole world it
was full of a stench before, and the Lord was displeased with man before: but
now when Christ comes, and offers up this sacrifice, he did thereby give full
satisfction unto God the father, for it was a sweet swelling-savour unto God
the Father. So that thus the Father he was fully satisfied.

To this I shall ad one word; When the Lord Jesus Christ offered up himself a
sacrifice unto God the Father, and had our sins laid upon him, he did given
more perfect satisfaction unto Divine justice for our sins; than if you, and I,
and all of us had been damned in Hell unto all eternity. For a Creditor is more
satisfied, if his debt be paid him all down at once, than if it be paid by the
week: A poor man that cannot pay all down, will pay a groat a week, or sixpence
a week; but it is more satisfaction to the Creditor to have all paid at once.
Should we have been all damned, we should have been but paying the debt a
little, and a little, and a little: but when Christ paid it, he paid it all
down to God the Father. Had we gone to Hell, and been damned for ever, we had
always been satisfying of God, I but God had never been satisfied: but now
when Christ makes satisfaction, God was satisfied. The Creditor, if he be a
merciful and a good man, is more truly satisfied where the Debtor is spared; he
does not desire that the Debtor should be cast into prison, and there lie and
rot; but he is better satisfied with the sparing of the Debtor; let me have but
my Money, and so the Debtor be spared I am willing, nay I desire it says the
good Creditor. Now if all we had bin cast into everlasting burnings, indeed the
debt should have been a paying, but there the Debtor had been lost: But not
when Christ comes, and makes satisfaction unto Divine justice, Ah! poor man is
redeemed; here is the Debtor spared. And therefore, the Lord he is infinitely
more satisfied, by the satisfaction that Christ made upon the Cross for our
sins, than if all we had gone to Hell, and been damned to all eternity. Oh!
what a glorious, and blessed satisfaction did this our High Priest make unto
God the Father!

But you will say then, If the Lord Christ made this full satisfaction unto God
the Father; how is it that Believers, many of them have their sins, and debts
standing upon the score still, in their Consciences, so perplexed in regard of
sin, as if there were no satisfaction at all made?

Luther calls this aspect of sin, A sacralegious aspect, Luther.

But the reason of it is this, Because that men do not study this Truth, but
was ignorant of it. As, suppose that a man do owe, three or four hundred pound
to a shopkeeper, for wares, and commodities that he has taken up there: a
friend comes, and he pays the debt, crosses the book: but the Debtor, when he
comes and looks upon the book, he is able to read all the particulars; Item;
for such a thing, and Item for such a thing, and Item, for such a thing; but
the man being not aquainted with the nature of crossing the book, he is able to
read all th particulars, and he charges it still upon himself, because he
does not understand the nature of this crossing the book, and he is as much
troubled how he shall pay the debt, as if it were not paid at all. So now it is
here, The Lord Jesus Christ, he has come and cross't our book with his own
blood: the sins are to be read in your own consciences, but we being not
acquainted with the nature of Christ's satisfaction, and the crossing of the
book, we charge our selves, as if no sin at all were satisfied for us: Yet when
the Lord Jesus Christ was made an offering for sin upon the Cross, then he did
give full satisfaction unto God the Father. And that is the Third.

Fourthly, This now he has done as our great High Priest, and in a more
transcendant, and eminent way, than ever any High Priest did before. For,
though the High Priest did come, and make an atonement for a poor sinner, yet
he himself was never made a sacrifice; the Priest offered up a sacrifice, but
himself never was made a sacrifice. But our great High Priest, does not only
offer up a sacrifice, but Himself is made a sacrifice. Yea, that sacrifice,
that was then in the times of the Old Testament, it could not purge the
conscience; not only, because (as the Apostle speaks) it was the blood of
bulls, and goats: but because the sacrifice was performed successively; as
thus, A man sinned, then he brought a sacrifice; sins again, and then he brings
another sicrifice: and once every year, the High Priest goes into the holy of
holiest to make an atonement: But in the mean while, a poor soul might think
thus, What if I die before the year come about, what will become of me? the
High Priest, he goes once a year into the Holy of Holiest, and sprinkles the
mercy-seat, but what will become of me if I die before that time? But now, our
great High Priest, he does not only offer up a sacrifice, and Himself the
sacrifice; but he offers up a sacrifice once for all. (So says the Apostle) So
that now, when a Christian has sinned, he is not to think of a sacrifice that
is yet to come, a year hence, but he is to look unto that which is done
already, a sacrifice once offered, and once for all; So that he needs not be in
suspense now, as the Jews were, his Conscience, it may be fully purged from
sin.

Again, Take the High Priest in the times of the Old Testament, and though he
did make an atonement for the sins of the people;yet sometimes also he did make
the people to sin. It is said of Aaron, the great High Priest, concerning the
golden-Calf, that he did make the people naked: But the Lord Jesus Christ, our
great High Priest, he makes an atonement for sin, and never does make them
sin: He is so far from making the people naked, that he covers them with his
righteousness that their nakedness may not appear. Here Is a glorious
High Priest!

Yea, This High Priest of ours, He does not only make an atonement for sin
committed, and paies the debt; but he does also become our Surety unto God the
Father: He does not only pay the debt that is past, but he becomes a Surety for
time to come. None of all those Highpriests, that ever did so; not Aaron, not
any High Priest that ever gave his bond unto God the Father, that any sinner
should never sin no more. But our Lord Jesus Christ, our High Priest, he
becomes our Surety: and what Surety? not an ordinary surety; for amongst us,
the Surety joins, and does become bound with the Debtor, but still it runs in
the name of the Debtor, and the Debtor he gives the bond for to pay the debt.
But now here, our Surety, he gives the bond, and we that are the Debtors, we do
not give the bond for to pay the debt: there is no godly man, or believer, that
ever gave a bond unto God the Father, that he will pay the debt: but our Surety
comes, and the bond goes in the name of the Surety, and the Debtors name is
out. Oh! what a glorious, and blessed High Priest is here! here is a
High Priest, beyond all the Highpriests that ever did go before! And that is
the Fourth thing

Fifthly, How does all this conduce to our Comfort or Holiness.

First, How does all this make to our Comfort?

first, and of mere compassion for poor sinners? Is it not a comfortable thing,
that God the father is satisfied, and so your sins pardoned? Mark 2.5.
Son (says Christ unto the palsy man) be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee. He does not say, Be of good comfort, thy disease is healed: No,
whether thy disease be healed, or whether it be not healed, this is comfort,
Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

If the Lord Jesus Christ, has satisfied for my sins (may a believer say) then
whatsoever affliction I do meet withal, it does not come upon me as a
punishment (properly) it does not come upon me as an arrest for to pay my debt.
When a Reprobate is smitten, and afflicted, all his miseries, they are arrests
for to pay his debt. Has the Lord Jesus Christ satisfied Divine Justice, and
God the father for me? then surely these afflictions they do not come for me to
make satisfaction.

Again, If the Lord Jesus Christ has satisfied for my sins (may a believer
say) then I shall never be Damned, I shall never fall from grace. I have had
many fears, that I should fall from grace, and so go to Hell, and perish at
last: But if the Lord Jesus Christ has satisfied Divine Justice for my sin,
then God the father will never punish my sin again, for it was punished in
Jesus Christ, therefore I cannot fall from grace, therefore I can never be
Damned.

And if the Lord Jesus Christ has satisfied Divine Justice as our great High
Priest: Then I may come with boldness unto the Throne of grace. A debtor, so
long as his debt is unpaid, he dares not come by the prison door, by the
Compter door; he is afraid of every Sergeant, he is afraid of his friends, that
they should be Sergeants: but when his debt is paid, then he dares go up and
down with boldness. And so the poor soul, when he knows that his debt is paid,
and Christ has satisfied, then he may go with boldness unto the Throne of
grace.

But you will say, my High Priest, so as to have satisfied for me? Ah, if I did
but know, that the Lord jesus Christ were my High Priest in this particular, so
as to have satisfied for me, then should I have comfort indeed: how shall I
discover that? I am afraid he has not satisfied for me?

And why not for thee? (man or woman) why not for thee? That the Lord Christ
died for sinners: Oh! blessed be the Lord (says he) Jesus Christ has died for
me. Satan came in with this temptation to him; I but, young man, why for thee?
Christ died for sinners, but why for thee? how can thou make that appear,
that Christ died for thee? Nay Satan (says he) and why not for me? Ah, the
Lord Jesus, he died for sinners, and therefore, Satan, why not for me? So he
held his comfort, and went up to Heaven triumphing.

So say I to thee, poor drooping soul, that labors under Temptation; Why not
for thee? why not for thee? and say so unto Satan, Why not for me?

Again, Christ's satisfaction it lies open for all sorts of sinners to come unto
it. As the promise,

Furthermore, If Jesus Christ be willing that you should think that he has
satisfied for you, Take my blood that is shed for thee, I apply it to thee.
Behold thy King comes unto thee. When he rode upon an Asses colt, it was not
said, Behold thy Lord comes, but behold thy King comes to thee: he would have
every one so to think.

More especially,

Yes, You shall observe, that the new Covenant of grace, it is laid, and
founded, upon the satisfaction of jesus Christ upopn the Cross, upon that
oblation. Three times, the Apostle Paul makes mention of the new Covenant of
grace in the book of the Hebrews, the 8, 9, and 10. Chapters: and in all these
places he lays the Covenant of grace, and founds it upon the satisfaction of
Jesus Christ. But especially, in the 9. Chapter, the 13, 14, and 15. verses.
The 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God. Then at the 15. And for this cause, he is the Mediator of
the new Testament. For this cause: plainly laying the new Covenant of grace,
upon the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, upon this part of his Priestly Office.
So then, thou may now go unto God the Father and say, Lord, thou have made a
Covenant of grace with poor man, and this Covenant of grace is founded upon the
Priestly Office, and satisfaction of Jesus Christ; and the Lord Jesus Christ he
has satisfied for me; and the new Covenant promises; that we shall be all
taught of God: Lord, I amignorant, Oh! therefore now, by the satisfaction of
Christ let me be taught of thee, that I may be made wise unto salvation. And so
again, Lord, thou have made a Covenant of grace with poor man; this is laid
upon the satisfaction of Jesus Christ: The Covenant of grace says, I will
write my Law in your inward parts: Now, O Lord, seeing Jesus Christ has
founded this Covenant in his blood, and I am one of those that he has made
satisfaction for; Oh! write thy Law in my inward parts that I may do all thy
wills.

But again, and ye strengthen all the branches. Faith is the Root-grace: now
the knowledge, and the through degesting of this truth, That the Lord Jesus
Christ is our great High Priest, in this point of satisfaction, it does
wonderful strengthen our faith. For, the more I know that God is willing, and
and Christ willing to show mercy unto me, the more my faith is strengthened: I
know this, That every man is willing to do the work of his office, if he be
faithful: A Porter is willing to carry a burden; why? because it is his office
to do it. It is the office of Jesus Christ, for to bear our sins: It is his
Office to be the great High Priest, that does satisfy God the Father for our
sins: Surely therefore, he is willing to do it, for he is faithful in his
office. But besides, The more I see an holy Necessity upon Christ Jesus, for to
show mercy to me, the more my faith rises. (It Is very remarkable) The Lord
Jesus Christ, as God, he may refuse, and might refuse, whether he would show
mercy to us or no: But now, as a High Priest, he cannot refuse a poor sinner
that does come unto him. If I know that Christ is able to satisfy, is able to
show mercy to me, my faith stirs a little, at the sight of Christ's ability; If
I know that Christ be willing to show mercy to me, my faith rises higher: but
if I know, that Christ cannot refuse me, if I do come unto him, then my faith
rises up to a great height indeed. When a poor sinner amongst the Jews, had
sinned, and brought his sacrifice to the High Priest, the Priest might not
refuse it: Our Lord Jesus Christ is our great High Priest; I say, as God he may
refuse, but now, he being our great High Priest, therefore when a poor sinner
comes to Jesus Christ, as a High Priest he cannot refuse: Oh! what a great
strengthening is this to faith! Strengthen faith, and you strengthen all: the
right understanding of this truth, does wonderfully strengthen faith.

Further, The more a man is engaged to Jesus Christ, and takes himself to be
engaged to him, the more Holy he is: the more a man sees himself freed from sin
by Christ, the more he takes himself to be engaged to Christ, for freeing of
him from his sin. Now this truth tells us how Christ has satisfied for our
sins, freed us from sin; and so we shall be the more engaged to Christ. If a
man were going to prison, even at the Compter door, for a great sum of money;
and the door were unlocking: if a man should come and speak to the Sergeant,
Hold your hands, here is money for you, I will pay this man's debt, and lays
the money down; would not this poor debtor take himself for ever engaged to
that man, that should thus come, and lay down the money, and free him so
seasonably from the Compter, and prison? Thus it was with the Lord Christ; Ah,
we were all going to prison, everlasting prison, chains of darkness, and he
comes; and lays down the money, makes full satisfaction to God the Father as
our great High Priest: Oh! what an engagement is this to every soul unto the
Lord Christ, to become the Lord Christ's for ever.

Lastly, The more a man does deny his own righteousness, the more Holy he is
with Gospel-Holiness. It is said of the Jews, That they going about to
establish their own righteousness, submitted not unto the righteousness of
Christ. So on the contrary; when a man does go about to establish the
righteousness of Christ, then he submits unto it, and then he denies his own
righteousness. The more we see a fullness of satisfaction made by Jesus Christ,
for all our sins, unto God the Father, the more we acknowledge Christ's
righteousness, and the more we establish it, and the more we shall be brought
off from all our own righteousness.

Oh! Therefore now, as ever you do desire, to have more Grace, more Holiness,
more Comfort; study, and study much this Priestly office of Jesus Christ. There
are many that complain, that they cannot profit under the means of grace: That
they have hard hearts: That the ways, and Ordinances of God are not sweet to
them; Prayer they do perform, but with no sweetness, they do not relish the
blood and Spirit of Christ upon their spirits in their duties, etc. Many
complain that their sins, and temptations (like the sons of Zarviah) are too
mighty for them, and that one day they shall be slain by the hand of Saul, such
a lust, such a corruption. No wonder that we have these complaints, when we do
not go unto the storehouse of comfort, and grace that the Lord has set open
for us. The Priestly office of Christ, it is the great Magazine, and
Storehouse, of all that grace, and comfort which we have on this side heaven:
if ye do not go unto it, is it any wonder that ye want comfort, or that ye want
grace? I appeal to you now; are there not some nay, many that never went to
Jesus Christ as their High Priest to this day? Ah, are there not some even
Professors, that do not know what the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ means?
Oh! No wonder (poor soul) so uncomfortable, no more stength against thy
temptations. If the State should appoint a man for to relieve poor, maimed
soldiers, that go a begging: if they meet with the sawme man that is appointed
by the State, and they beg of him in the streets as an ordinary man, he
relieves them not: but now, if they come unto him, as a man appointed by the
State for relief of such, then he relieves them according to the duty of his
place. So it is with men, they go to Christ in an ordinary way, they do not go
to Christ as the great Lord Treasurer of all our grace, as our great
High Priest, they do not go unto him as in office, set up in office by God the
Father for such relief: they do not address themselves to him as their
High Priest to make satisfaction for them, and therefore they go away and have
no relief. But would we have more strength against corruption? would we walk
more comfortably in our course? would we find the ways of God, Ordinances, and
duties more sweet and comfortable to our souls? then read, and consider that
place in the Canticles, 2.3. As the apple tree among the treesof the wood, so
is my beloved among the sons: I sat down under his shadow with great delight,
and his fruit was sweet unto my taste. The spouse speaks it concerning Christ.
What is this fruit of Christ? Your Justification, Adoption, Vocation,
Sanctification, Consolation, it is all the fruit of Christ: All your own Duties,
your Prayers, Reading, Meditation, they are all the fruit of Christ: The
enjoyment of al his Ordinances, and al your spiritual privileges under the
Gospel, they are the fruit of Christ. Now says she, I sat down under his
shadow, and his fruit, it was sweet unto my taste. As it is unto a man that does
love fruit; be it Pears, Apples, Cherries, or the like: I love this fruit
(says he) but yet notwithstanding, I must needs go where this fruit grows, and
gather it off the tree; and when he has gone to the tree, and taken the fruit
off the tree, (says he) I sat down under the tree. I had not the fruit, the
Apple, or Cherry, brought unto my house, but I went unto the tree, and gathered
it off the tree; and I sat down under the shadow of the tree, and Oh! how
sweet was the fruit unto me! So says the soul, so says the Spouse of Jesus
Christ: I sat down under the shadow of Jesus Christ, and then his fruit was
sweet unto my taste. It may be we have had other shadows: we have sat down
under the shadow of our Estate, our outward Estate has been sweet unto our
taste. We have sat down (it may be) under the shadow of friendship, and the
fruit of friendship has been sweet unto our taste; But behold here a tree, the
tree of life, whose shadow reaches to the end of the earth; Ah, Come, Come and
sit down under the shadow of Jesus Christ. If there be ever a poor soul, that
never yet knew what Comfort meant; Ah, Come, Come under the shadow of the Lord
Jesus; The Priestly Office of Jesus Christ, it has a very sweet shadow; Come
therefore, you that say you cannot profit under the means, and you that
complain of such, and such temptations, and such and such sins; and that you
were never yet comforted, your consciences never pacified: Come now, and sit
down under the shadow of the Lord Jesus Christ. I tell thee, from the Lord,
thus fruit of His, it shall be sweet unto thy taste: thou shall go to Prayer,
and Prayer shall be sweet unto thy soul, though heretofore thou could find no
sweetness in it; so the Word and other Ordinances shall be sweeter unto thee
than the honey or the honey comb.

Thus it is evident how comfortable the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ's, and
how much conducing unto our Comfort, and Holiness: Oh! therefore let us study,
now study the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ, and come and sit down under his
shadow, and the Lord make his fruit sweet unto all our souls. And thus I have
opened, and applied the first particular of Christ's Priestly Office. The Second
follows, etc.

SERMON II.
HEBREWS 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him, Preached at
Stepney. Maii. 2. 1647.
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful
High Priest, in things pertaining to godliness, to make reconciliation for the
sins of the people. For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted.
I Have begun to discover from these words, That the Friestly Office of Jesus
Christ, is the great Magazine, and Storehouse, of all that grace, and comfort
which we have in this world: that whereby we are succored, and relieved
against all Temptations. This has been made good in the General; and in one
Particular work of the High Priest.

If we now inquire further, what the work of the High Priest was, and is, that
accordingly we may address our selves unto Jesus Christ for succor. We shall
find, that it is also, to Pray, and Intercede for the people. To make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, (says the text) To make Atonement
for the sins of the people, (says the old Testament.) Which Reconciliation, or
Atonement, was made in the times of the old Testament, not only by offering of
a sacrifice, but by taking the blood thereof, and presenting that with Praers,
and intercessions, unto God, to accept of it for the sins of the people. As we
shall find, in that same 16. of Livitieus: After the sacrifice was killed, the
Priest was to take the blood of it, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the
Mercy-Seat; as we read in the 14. verse. And at the 12. and 13. He shall take
a Censer full of burning coals of fire from off the Alter before the Lord, and
his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the veil;
And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of
the incense may cover the Mercy-Seat. He was to cause a cloud of incense to
arise upon the Mercy-Seat. All which was a great Type of the Prayers, and
Intercessions of Jesus Christ: who having once offered up himself a sacrifice
for our sins, has carried the blood, and the virtue of it into Heaven, there
sprinkled the Mercy-Seat, and there still by his Intercessions does appear for
us; As it is proved at large, in the 9. Chapter of this Epistle to the Hebrews,
11. and 12 verses: But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come,
by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say,
not of this building: Neither by the blood of goats and calves: but by his own
blood be entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. And at the 24. verse: For Christ is not entered into the
Holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And if you duly consider
this book of the Hebrews, you will find, that this work of Christ's
Intercession, is The Essential work of his Priestly-Office: it seems rather to
go beyond the former, than to fall short of it. Hebrews, the 8. Chapter and the
4. verse. For if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest. That is, look as
it was in the times of the old Testament: if the Priest had only offered a
sacrifice, and had not gone into the holy of holiest with the blood thereof,
sprinkling the Mercy-Seat, praying, and interceding that it might be accepted
for the sins of the people, the Priest had not done the work of the Priest, and
so he had not been a complete Priest: So now, (says the Apostle) if Jesus
Christ had only offered up himself here a sacrifice, and had not gone into
Heaven, the holy of holiest, and carried the power and the virtue of his death
thither, to pray and intercede for us, he had not done the work of the great
High Priest. Every Priest might sacrifice, but every Priest might not go into
the Holy of Holiest, that belonged only to the High Priest to do. Now
therefore, Jesus Christ going into Heaven, the Holy of Holiest, there to make
Intercession for us, is the great, and the special work of this High Priest.

That I may clear up this mysterious Truth, I shall deliver my self these Four
ways; by opening.

First, Wherein the Intercession of Christ consists: and what he does when we
say he intercedes in Heaven for us. Secondly, How powerful, and prevailing his
Intercessions are with God the Father. Thirdly, That he does now intercede as
our great High Priest and in a more transcendent and eminent way and manner,
than ever any High Priest did before. Fourthly, This does conduce to our
Comfort, and to our Holiness.
First, If it be demanded, Wherein consists this Intercession of Jesus Christ?

I Answer.

First it consists in this: His appearing for us in Heaven, his owning of our
Cause, and of our souls to God the Father: It is the word that is used in that
9. Chapter of the Hebrews, the 24. verse. Christ is not entered into the holy
place made with hands, but into Heaven, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. He does not in an ordinary way, and manner appear for us in Heaven; but
with an Emphasis, he does openly, and publicly, before all the Saints and
Angels, appear for us in the presence of God the Father. It is a comfort unto a
man, sometimes, to have a good friend at Court, at the Kings elbow, that may
own him, and appear for him: but though a man have a friend at Court, sometimes
if there be any danger, he will not appear, and own a man; it may be he will
own him, and countenance his Cause as long as there is no danger, but no
longer. But now, here, we have a friend in Heaven, that will appear for us, and
own our Causes, and our souls, and in all conditions appear for us. That is the
First.

Secondly, Hebrews, 11, 12. verses.

Thirdly, Romans 33. ver. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it
is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea,
rather that he is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Upon this ground the Apostle speaks thus; Who shall
condemn them? Jesus Christ is at the right hand of God the Father, to take off
all accusations, that shall be brought against them. Let the World condemn, let
Moses condemn, let Satan condemn; Jesus Christ is at the right hand of God the
Father, to take off all accusations that shall be raised against them.
Concerning this there is a clear and full instance in that notable Scripture
the 3. Chapter of Zachariah, and the 1. verse, We find Satan standing at the
right hand of Joshua to resist him. He showed me Joshua the High Priest,
standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right band to
resist him. It was the custom of the Accuser, to stand at the right hand of
the accused: Psalm, 109. ver. 6. Set thou a wicked man over him, and let Satan
stand at his right hand: take the wall of him in his accusation, condemning of
him. Now here Satan-standing at Joshua's right hand, notes his accusing of him.
Well, what was the matter that he accused him of? Ye shall find that there was
matter, verse the 3. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood
before the Angel. Satan came and accused him that he had filthy garments; and
so he had: for the Priests, had defiled themselves in Babylon, in marrying of
strange wives, as Joshua and his children are charged, in the 10. Chapter of
Ezra, and the 18. verse. (Give me leave a little to open this charge of Satan,
that we may see Satan had matter of Charge, and accusation against Joshua) And
among the sons of the Priests, there were found that had taken strange wives:
namely of the sons of Joshua. He was High Priest. So that now, Joshua had
defiled his garments: three was then matter of accusation for Satan to work
upon. But now, our Lord Jesus Christ, our great High Priest steps in, and takes
off this accusation: The Lord said (at the 3. of Zachariah, 2. verse) unto
Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem
rebuke thee. The word used by the Septuagint, is the same that is used for
Excommunication. And it is here twice repeated, (The Lord rebuke thee, even the
Lord rebuke thee) not only to show the fullness of Satan's rebuke; but to show
the fullness of the intercession of Jesus Christ. Now would we see the fullness
of Christ's apology for Joshua? Says the Lord unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee,
even the Lord rebuke thee: And (says he at the latter end of the 2. verse) Is
not this a brand plucked out of the fire? Thus; it is true Lord, that Joshua
has filthy garments: but yet notwithstanding, Joshua is but as a brand plucked
newly out of the burning. Take a brand, and pull it newly out of the fire, and
there will be dust, ashes, and dirt about it. Lord (says he) Joshua is but
newly pulled out of the burning, and therefore, Lord, he must needs have some
ashes, and some dirt, and some filth about him: O Lord, (says Christ) although
that Joshua be clothed with filthy garments, I will take away those filthy
garments: verse the 4. He answered and spoke unto those that stood before him
saying, Take away the filthy garments from him: and unto him he said, Behold, I
have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with
change of raiment. This can be none but Christ. Thus Christ takes off the
accusation that was brought against Joshua by Satan, for his filthy garments.
And so does the Lord Christ now: If a poor soul fall into any sin, defile his
garments: Satan, he comes in, and takes the right hand of him, stands at the
right hand and accuses, by reason of this filthy garment: but our Lord Jesus
Christ, our great High Priest, he being at the right hand of the Father, takes
up the cause, and answers to the accusation: True Lord, this poor soul, indeed
has filthy garments; but he is but as a firebrand plucked newly out of the
burning: He was in his natural, and sinful condition the other day, in his
burning, and he is but newly changed, and therefore he must needs have some
dirt, and some filth upon him, as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; and
therefore consider him in that respect, and though he have filthy garments now
upon him; yet I will give him change of raiments, and take away his filthy
garments. Thus the Lord Christ steps in to God the Father, and answers to all
those accusations that are brought against him to God the Father. This is the
Third thing that he does by way of his Intercession.

Again, 1 John, 2.1.
our Advocate: If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous. The work of an Advocate, differs from the work of a
Petitioner: an Advocate does not Petition the Judge, but an Advocate, he tells
the Judge what is Law, what is right, and what ought to be done. So the Lord
Jesus Christ being in Heaven, and making Intercession, is there as our
Advocate: Lord (says he) this man he has sinned indeed, but I have satisfied
for his sins, I have paid for them to the full, I have satisfied thy wrath to
the full: now therefore, in a way of Equity, and in a way of Justice, I do here
call for this man's pardon: Thus Christ intercedes. And thus we see (briefly)
wherein the Intercession of Christ consists, and what he does when we say,
That he Intercedes for us in Heaven.

Well, But suppose he does Intercede,

Yes very much: Zach. That Joshua goes away with a fair Myter upon his head:
ver. 5. And I said, let them set a fair Myter (or a Crown) upon his head: so
they set a fair Myter (or a Crown) upon his head, and clothed him with
garments, and the Angel of the Lord stood by. Satan (at the beginning) stood at
his right hand to accuse him: but this Accuser of the brethren goes away with a
double rebuke, and Joshua goes away with a Crown, through the Intercession of
Jesus Christ he goes away with a Crown upon his head.

All which will appear to you, if we consider Three things.

First, Paul prevailed with Philemon for Onesimus, through the great interest
that Paul had in the bosom of Philemon. Our Lord and Savior Christ, he has
lien in the bosom of God the Father from all eternity: he is his Son, his
natural Son, his beloved Son, his Son that did never offend him: and therefore
surely when he comes, and intercedes for a man, he is most like to speed, to
prevail. We know, that David going out against Nabal and his house; Abigail
comes forth, meets with David, and intercedes for Nabal: and Abigail did so
powerfully intercede, even for Nabal, that she turned David's heart quite round
about. David swore he would not leave one of the house, and after Abigail had
interceded a little for Nabal, in the 1 of Sam. 25.32. verse, David said unto
Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet
me: and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept we this day
from coming to shod blood. Pray, what did Abigail say, that she turned David
thus about, that her intercession was thus powerful? Says Abigail, as for
Nabal, he is according to his name. And it shall come to pass (at the 30.
verse) when the Lord shall have done to my Lord, according to all the good that
he has spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over
Israel, that this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offense of heart to my
Lord, either that thou have shed blood causeless, or that my Lord has avenged
himself. This shall be no grief at all unto thine heart (says she) and other
words that she used; by which she prevailed here with David. But Abigail was a
stranger to David: and Abigail she prays, and intercedes for Nabal, a wicked,
vile, foolish man. Shall Abigail, a woman, a stranger prevail thus with David
for a Nabal? and shall not the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, not a
stranger, nor a stranger to his bosom, but beloved from everlasting, shall not
be prevail much more, when he comes, and pleads the cause of the Elect, and of
the Children of God, in the presence of God the Father, whom the Father loves
also? Great is the Rhetoric of a Child: if a Child do but cry, Father,
especially if the child be a wise child, he may prevail much with a tender
hearted father. The Lord Jesus Christ, he is the Son of the Father, and he is
the Wisdom of the Father too; and God the Father is a tender hearted father:
Oh! surely therefore, Powerful are the Intercessions of Jesus Christ with God
the Father.

Secondly, the father has no mind to, or that the father is set against;
possibly he might not prevail: But if a beloved child shall come and pray the
father, in a business that the father likes as well as the child; surely then,
the child is very like to speed. Thus it is: The Lord Jesus Christ comes, and
he intercedes for us: and the Father has as great an inclination, and
disposition unto the work that Christ intercedes for, as Christ himself has:
And therefore says Christ, Lo, I come to do thy will: I come not to do mine
own will, but the will of him that sent me. That which Christ did, that he had
a mind to, it was rather, the will of the Father, than Christ's will: the Father
is as strongly inclined, and disposed to what Christ did, and wills, as Christ
himself. Those that thou have given me (says he) I have lost none: they are
thine own, Lord, and therefore I pray for them. We have a notable expression to
this end, in the 10. Chapter of John, and the 17. verse. Therefore does my
father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again. I lay
down my life: Here Is his suffering, and his satisfaction. That I may take it
again: Go up to Heaven, and take it again and intercede. Therefore does my
father love me. Oh! what a round of love is here: God the father out of love,
sends Christ into the world to die for man: God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son. Well, Jesus Christ out of love to us, he dies for
us: Who has loved us, and given himself for us. The Father loves the world in
giving Christ, The Son loves the world in dying for us; and the Father, he
loves Christ again, for loving us: Christ loves us, and the Father loves Christ
again for loving of us: a mighty high expression, That the Father should love
Christ, for loving us. So then look wherein the love of Christ is seen unto
poor sinners, the Fathers inclination, and disposition is untot hat as much as
Christ's: So that when he comes unto God the Father, and does intercede, he must
needs prevail, because the Father loves him for his interceding, the Father
likes the matter as well as he, loves you the better for it.

Thirdly, Sit thou down at my right hand (says God the Father to him) a note
of Honor. When Solomon would express his Honor to his mother, he set her
down at his right hand. Thus God the Father would express the Honorable
welcome that Christ had when he came to Heaven: Sit thou down on my right hand
(says he.) Now ye shall observe, that when soever this is made mention of, The
sitting down at the right hand of God the Father; it is made mention of, not
with the Kingly Office of Christ, but with the Priestly Office of Christ: as if
that he were set down there, to do the work of the Priestly Office: One would
think (I say) that this should be expressed with the Kingly Office of Christ: but
you shall find it running along in the Scripture, still with the Priestly
Office of Jesus Christ. Look into the 8. Chapter of the Hebrews, the 1. verse.
Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: We have such an
High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne, of the Majesty in the
Heavens. It Is named with the Priestly Office. And so again, in the 10. Chapter
of the Hebrews, at the 11. and 12. verses. Every High Priest stands daily
ministering, and offering often times the same sacrifices, which can never take
away sin: But this man, (speaking of Christ) after he had offered one sacrifice
for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God: It is carried a long
with the mention of the Priestly Office of Christ: as if he were sat down on
the right hand of God the Father in Heaven, on purpose to do the work of the
Priestly Office. When Jesus Christ came into Heaven, into the Holy of Holiest,
he came thither as our great High Priest; and he said unto God the Father;
Lord, I am not now come in mine own name, for my own sake only, but I come as
the great High Priest, having on this Breast Plate, the name of all the Elect;
and I come to intercede for poor sinners; I come as High Priest: Says God the
Father to him, Welcome upon those terms, welcome upon those terms, not which
standing thou do come in their names, come and sit down at my right hand,
says God the Father to him: Thus Father is engaged, for he received him upon
those terms into Heaven, as our great High Priest; the Father therefore is
engaged to hear his Intercession, and so the intercession of Jesus Christ, must
have a great deal of power, and prevalency with God the Father in Heaven. This
is the Second thing.

But, Thirdly, Does the Lord Jesus Christ intercede for us in Heaven, as our
great High Priest?

Yes, and he does do this, in a more transcendent, and eminent way and manner,
than ever any High Priest did before Him.

For First, He was tempted (says the text) that he might succor those that
are temped, as an High Priest: If he was Tempted, that he might succor those
that are Tempted; succor them as an High Priest, then the more he was Tempted,
the more experimentally able he is for to succor those that are Tempted. Never
any High Priest, that was Tempted like unto Christ. He was (says the Apostle)
in all things tempted, like unto us, sin only excepted. Poor soul, name any
temptation, that thy heart is scared at the thoughts of, and you will find,
that the Lord Jesus Christ, he was tempted with that temptation. You will say,
I am often times tempted to doubt Whether I be the Child of God or no, and that
very often. So was Christ too: you know the place in the 4. of Matthew: If thou
be the Son of God; and if thou be the Son of God, twice that the Devil would
set an If upon Christ's Sonship. Oh! but I am tempted often times to use
indirect means to get out of trouble. So was Christ too: Command that these
stones be made bread, says the Devil to him. Oh! but sometimes I have been
tempted, even to lay violent hands upon my self. So did the Devil tempt Christ
too; Cast thy self down off the pinnacle of the Temple; that was a temptation.
Oh! but I am tempted unto such evil things, that truly I am afraid to speak
of, such Blasphemies, such horrid, and wretched Blasphemies, as I think never
came upon the heart of any child of God, so that I am afraid to think of them,
and ashamed to mention them. And was not Christ so? was not he tempted so?
Says the Devil to him, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me. Oh! horrid Blasphemy! Blush, blush, O Sun: that the Lord Jesus, the
God of glory, should fall down to the Devil, and worship the Devil; what
wretched blasphemy was here, that he should speak this? and yet the Lord Jesus
Christ, he was tempted to it. What shall I say, He was in all things tempted
like unto us, sin only excepted. Now, there was never any High Priest that was
so tempted, and he was therefore tempted, that he might succor those that are
tempted. He is more able as our High Priest to intercede, to put in for you,
and to succor you, than ever any High Priest was before him.

Again, Hannah came and prayed, and Eli's heart was not touched with her
infirmity, at the first. But our High Priest cannot but be touched, he does
sympathize with us under all our infirmities. He is afflicted in all our
afflictions. It was the work of the High Priest to sympathize with the people;
and yet notwithstanding, there was a law, that the High Priest might not mourn
for his kindred, in that he might not, as others, sympathize, or mourn. But
now, our Lord Jesus, he does fully sympathize with us, and therefore goes
beyond all the Highpriests that ever was before him.

Further, He is more faithful in his office, Aaron was an High Priest,
butunfaithful in the matter of the golden calfe. But our Lord and Savior
Christ, he is more faithful than Moses was, In this 3. Heb. 1.2. verses, (and
so on.) Wherefore holy brethren, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also
Moses was faithful in all his house. He steps over Aaron, who was the the
High Priest, and he compares him here to Moses in faithfulness. Now Moses was
faithful in all his house: But our Lord and Savior here, he is preferred
before Moses in point of faithfulness; yet it is said, Moses was faithful in
all his house. When that the Lord commanded Moses any thing, as the Lord
commanded so did he, and rose up early in the morning to do the commandment of
God: He was faithful in all his house; and yet our Lord and Savior was more
faithful than Moses in the matter of his Priesthood. For so it is brought in
here, at the 3. verse. For this man was counted worthy of more glory than
Moses, in as much as be who has builded the house, has more honor than the
house. Verse the 5. Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant,
for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but Christ as a
Son over his own house. Look now, as a Child, or a son is more faithful in his
fathers house than a servant will be: so, (says the Apostle) Christ is more
faithful than Moses. And look as the builder of the house, does go beyond, and
excel every beam, and stone in the house, or every part of the building: So
does the Lord Christ in faithfulness, exceed Moses. You will say, there is a
great difference between a stone in the building, and the maker of the house:
Look what difference there is between a stone, or a piece of wood, and the
maker of the building! so great a difference there is (says the Apostle)
between Jesus Christ, in the matter of his Priesthood, and Moses; yet
notwithstanding, Moses is faithful in all his house. Oh! then, how faithful is
Jesus Christ, in the matter of his Priesthood! He goes before all that ever
went before him.

Again,

Yea,

And yet further: Numbers, 30. verse. If any man sin presumptuously, he shall be
cut off, and there shall be no sacrifice for him: No sacrifice, no intercession
by the High Priest then. But we have such an High Priest, that makes
intercessions for All sins. So he says himself: Every sin and blasphemy, shall
be forgiven, except the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Every sin, though it
boil up to blasphemy, it shall be forgiven; but without sacrifice there is no
remission: and therefore he has made a sacrifice, and so he presents the
sacrifice, and intercedes for every poor sinner: and therefore, he is such an
High Priest, that transcends all the highpriests that ever was before him.

In the Fourth place, How does all this conduce now to our Comfort, or our
Holiness, to ur Grace, or Peace?

First, To our Comfort. Very much to our Comfort. And therefore in the 1. Chap.
of Zach. good words, and comfortable are spoken upon this occasion: (ver. 8.)
says the Prophet, I saw by night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse,
and he stood among the myrile-trees that were in the bottom, and behind him
were there red horses speckled and white. Then said I, O my Lord, what are
these? And the Angel that talked with me, said unto me, I will show thee what
these be. And the man that stood among the myrtle-trees, answered and said,
These are they, whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the earth.
And they answered the Angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle-trees, and
said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and behold, all the earth
sits still, and is at rest. And the Angel of the Lord answered, and said, O
Lord of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and
ten years? Here is Intercession. And the Lord answered the Angel that talked
with me, with good words, and comfortable words. Give me leave to open the
words a little, and we shall see how much it makes to our comfort, this
Intercession of Jesus Christ. At the 8. verse, I saw (says he) a man riding
upon a red horse. This is the Lord Jesus Christ presented thus unto us. And he
stood among the myrtle-trees. The Saints and people of God, they are called
myrtle-trees, for their greenness, sweetness, and fruitfulness. And these
myrtle-trees were in the bottom. That is, in a dark, in a low, and a poor
condition: it is the condition of myrtle-trees, and of the Saints and people of
God to be often in bottoms, and in a dark and low condition. Well: Behind him
were there red horses, speckled, and white: And I said, O my Lord, what are
these? Now that this is Christ; First of all, he is called a Man, and an Angel
too. Secondly, As Christ walked between the golden Candlesticks, in the book of
the Revelation: So here he stood among the mirtle-trees, among the Saints. And
behind him (attending upon him) were red horses, speckled and white. That is,
Angels sent to and fro through the earth, upon his message, and upon his
errand; and unto him they come and give an account, and to none but Christ.
Then we shall see this Angel, that stood among the myrtle-trees, comes and
Intercedes: all the Angels they come and bring in this report, That the Church
and people of God were in a low condition. Then this Angel that stood among the
Myrtle-trees, answered and said, (at the 12. verse) O Lord of hosts, how long
will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years? It must needs
be Christ, for no Angel intercedes, but Christ alone. What is the fruit of this
Intercession? (at the 13. verse) The Lord answered the Angel that talked with
me, with good words, and comfortable words. I (indeed) good words, and
comfortable are the fruit of the Intercession of Jesus Christ. It is a matter
of great comfort this, That the Lord Christ, our great High Priest, is in
Heaven to intercede for us. Is it not a comfort to a poor man, to have a friend
above, near the King, or in the Court, that may be able to do him kindness? A
man sometimes says, I had a friend indeed in the Court, but now he is dead. I
but, here is a friend that never dies: He ever lives to make Intercession.
Friends may alter, and turn enemies; but he changes not. Our Lord and Savior
Christ said unto his Disciples, Rejoice not in this, that the Devils fall down
like lightning before you: but rejoice in this, That your names are written in
Heaven: it is a matter of great joy to have ones name written in Heaven: Oh!
but what is it then, to have ones name written in the chief part of Heaven, to
have ones name written there, upon the breast plate of Jesus Christ, our great
High Priest, that is gone into the Holy of Holiest. Thus it is, The Lord Christ
is now gone to Heaven, entered into the Holy of Holiest, and carries our names
into the presence of God the Father, and there pleades, and intercedes for us.
Oh! what matter of comfot is here!

But you will say unto me: This is indeed exceeding good, and very comfortable
in it self: but what is this to me? for I am afraid that the Lord Christ, does
not intercede for me: if indeed I could persuade my self, that the Lord Jesus
were in Heaven as my High Priest, to intercede for me, I think verily I should
have comfort, though I were in the lowest bottom, though I were in Hell it
self: but Oh! I am afraid to bear my self upon the Intercession of Jesus
Christ, lest I should presume.

This is the great Objection, and stands up continually,

First, I will show, It is no presumption for us, to bear our selves upon the
Intercession of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Who those are, that the Lord Christ does Intercede for in Heaven.

And Thirdly, How willing, how infinitely willing he is to Intercede for us:
that so I may bring the comfort nearer to our own bosoms.

First, Who has touched me? come forth; and the woman came forth trembling.
Our Lord and Savior Christ, does not say to this poor woman, How dare you thus
touch me? how durst you thus presume to do it? Consider, The woman had no
Command to do it, no Precept to back her: The woman had no promise to engage
her; that if she did touch the hem of his garment, she should be cured. The
woman had no Example; never any before that touched the hem of his garment and
was cured: No Commandment, No Promise, No Example: Surely now, if any woman,
or man, should Presume, it should be this woman, that had no Commandment, nor
no Promise, nor no Example; and yet the Lord Jesus Christ does not chide her
away, does not tell her, she had presumed; but, O woman thy faith has saved
thee, thy faith has made the whole. Let me speak this home, we have a Command
now to believe in Christ; and a Promise: Those that come unto him, he ever
lives to make Intercession for them: And we have Examples of many that have
come unto Jesus Christ, born themselves upon his Intercession, and have gone
away cured: what! was it no Presumption for the woman to come and touch Christ,
without a Commandment, and a Promise, and an Example? and have you Examples,
and have you Promises, and have you Commandments to believe, and will you say
this is Presumption? Be not deceived, it is no Presumption for thee, poor soul,
to bear thy self at length upon Jesus Christ.

Secondly, 1 John 2.1
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. You will say, This is to be carried upon those that were spoke of
before: and those were such as had fellowship with the Father: Truly, our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; Chap. 1. verse
3. Now if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. If any man that has fellowship with the Father, or Christ, sin;
they have an Advocate with God the Father. First therefore stand you by I pray,
that we will take for granted, all you that ever had any fellowship with God
the Father, or with Jesus Christ; this Doctrine of the Intercession of Jesus
Christ, and the comfort hereof does belong to you.

Moreover, In the 17. Chapter of John, there we find, that our Savior says,
He prays for those that do believe, and should believe. Those that he prays
for here, he intercedes for in Heaven: Neither pray I for these alone (at the
20. verse) but for them also which shall believe on me through thy word. I do
not pray only for those that do believe now, but for them also which shall
believe. Well then, here is a second sort, Those that do believe, and those
that wait upon the Lord in the Ordinance, that they may believe, or shall
believe; Stand you by also, you are another sort of people, that the
Intercession of Jesus Christ, and the comfort thereof does belong unto.

But now yet further, If we look into the 7. Chapter of this Epistle unto the
Hebrews, at the 25. verse, we shall find these words: Wherefore, he is able
also, to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make Intercession for them. Who are those? Those that come unto God
by him. Lay this, and 53. Chapter of I saiah the 12. verse together. He was
numbered with the transgressors (speaking of Christ clearly) and he bare the
sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. It may be thou can
not say, I have fellowship with God the Father: it may be thou can not say, I
do believe, I am persuaded that I do believe; thou can not say so: Well, but
can you say thus: Through the Lords grace, I do come unto God by Christ; I have
been, and I am a great transgressor, but I come unto God by Christ; I am one of
the coming-transgressors: I have been a transgressor, but I am a
coming-transgressor, I come unto God by Christ. Stand you by also, this
Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, it belongs unto you: And let me tell
thee for thy comfort (poor soul) whatsoever thou have been, that come unto
the Lord by Christ, the Lord Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, he is gone to
Heaven to intercede for thy soul.

But you will say, There is one thing that makes me afraid he will not
intercede for me, I have been so great a transgressor: for I have been a
transgressor against Jesus Christ, this High Priest: Oh! I have sinned against
this great High Priest, Jesus Christ, and therefore I am afraid he will not
intercede for me.

For answer to this, I shall only desire you to turn to the 16. Chapter of
Numbers, the 41. verse, and consider it duly; Moses, and Aaron: Aaron was the
High Priest: And (says the text) all the Congregation of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses, and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the
people of the Lord. They had murmured against Moses, and Aaron. Then (at the
46. verse) Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer, put fire therein from off the
Altar, put on incense, go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement
for them: for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. And
see what Aaron did: And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst
of the Congregation, and behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he
put on incense, and made an atonement for the people. And he stood between the
dead and the living, and the plague was stayed. They had sinned against Aaron
the High Priest, and yet Aaron (but the Typical High Priest, he was but a Type
of Christ) he ran in, although they had sinned against him, and he stood between
the dead and the living, and made an atonement for them. Oh! if there was so
much bowels, and compassions in the Type, in Aaron, when they had sinned
against him, as to go and intercede for them: How much more is there in our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Typified High Priest, to poor souls, to intercede
for them.

But now, The Lord Jesus Christ, he is infinitely willing to intercede for us.
We have seen who those are unto whom the Intercession of Christ belongs:
namely, Such as have had any fellowship with God the Father, or with Christ:
Such as do believe, or shall hereafter believe: And all those poor
transgressors that come unto God the Father by Christ. Now observe, how
infinitely willing the Lord Jesus Christ is to intercede for us that are thus:
That will appear thus:

First, He must needs be willing to do that which he has received his
anointing for. It is said of Aaron, that he was anointed; and that ointment ran
down upon his beard, and unto the skirts of all his garment: not a piece of
Aarons garment, but was perfumed with the ointment that Aaron was anointed
with. Surely, there is not a skirt of the garment of Jesus Christ, but the
anointment wherewithal He, our High Priest was anointed, does run down upon
him. He is the Messiah, the anointment: So he is called in the 10. of Isaiah.
The anointment. He was anointed with the oil of gladness above all his
fellows: above all the Highpriests that ever were before him. And he was
anointed for this very end, That he might do the work of the High Priest; which
is, to Intercede for the sins of the people. And therefore in that place in
John, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ. Christ signifies Anointed. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father: But who is that? He is Jesus, that signifies your Savior, and so he is
willing to intercede. I but, it may be he is not able to do it, it may be he
has not received the anointing to do it. Yes, He is called Christ. If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ: or if you will,
Savior, Anointing. So that he is anointed for this end and purpose, to be your
Advocate. Now if a man do receive money for to lay out for the benefit of
others, poor Orphans, or the like: if a man be faithful, certainly, he will lay
out the money for them, according to the intention of him that did trust him
with the money. The Lord Jesus Christ, he has received the Anointing, he is
anointed as our great High Priest, to do the work of the Priestly Office: and
this is one work, to Intercede, and therefore he must needs be very willing to
do it.

Again, The more any thing is the work of a man's Relation, wherewithal he is
clothed, the more (if he be faithful) is he willing to do the work. And I pray
mind it a little. When men are exalted, and come to Greatness, or Honor, then
they give down the comforts of their Relation unto those that depend upon them:
If a father come to any great preferment; the comfort of the Relation of a
father, then falls down upon the children, runs down then upon the fruit of his
loins. And so, if one friend do come unto preferment; the comfort of the
Relation, (or friendship) falls down. Now the Lord Jesus Christ, he is our
High Priest; and he is now exalted, he is gone to Heaven: and therefore all the
comforts of all the Relations that he stands in toward us, do now fall upon
us. And therefore, he is willing, he is very willing, because this is the work
of his Relation.

And further, It is the work of his Office. What a man does by office, that he
does willingly; what a man does by office, he does industriously, he does not
do it by the bye: what a man does by office, he does it readily; according unto
a man's place, or office, so will his interpretation be. Suppose now a Child
that has very good parts, come before three men, of three several professions;
A Lawyer, a Minister, and a Merchant. The Child having very good parts; the
Merchant says, He will make a very good Merchant: the Lawyer says, He will
make a very good Lawyer: and the Minister says, He will make a very good
Scholar: according to their three Relations, or Places, or Office, or work,
their interpretation is. So now, if three men, of three several Trades, whose
work lies about wood, come and behold a fine green-tree: One man says, It is
good for this: And another says, It is good for that: and the third says, It
is good for another use: according to his Place, and Calling, will his
interpretation be. So now, when a poor soul comes before God: Moses (the Law)
looks upon him: And the Devil looks upon him: And Jesus Christ looks upon him:
The work of the Law, is to Condemn; The work of the Devil, to Accuse; And the
work of Jesus Christ, is to Intercede, it is the work of his office. Now
therefore, as soon as the Devil sees such a soul, Oh (says he) here is a fine
instrument for me, here is a fit subject for me to enjoy. As Soon as Moses sees
this man, Here Is a fine subject for me to condemn unto all Eternity. But when
Jesus Christ looks upon such a soul, says he, Here Is a fine soul for me to save
unto all Eternity, to intercede for: why? because it is his Office, and what a
man does by office, he interprets accordingly. Therefore what the Lord Jesus
Christ does, he does by office, and he does it readily, and willingly. And I
will give you one demonstration of it; It was the end why Jesus Christ was
taken into Heaven, into the Holy of Holiest; that he might Intercede. According
to the Scriptures mentioned before, in Heb. 9.24. For Christ is not entered
into holy places made with hands, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. He does not say thus, Christ is now gone to Heaven, to
be glorified there; Christ is now gone to Heaven, to enjoy the bosom of his
Father, for his own happiness. No, but he is gone into Heaven to appear in the
presence of God for us. This is the end of his ascension. And so again in the
7. of the Hebrews, Wherefore, he is able to save to the uttermost, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for us. What? is he in Heaven to be glorified
there? No, but the end why Christ is in Heaven, Is to make intercession for
poor sinners: And therefore, he must needs be infinitely willing to do this,
because it is the end of his going thither, into the Holy of Holiest. Oh
therefore, be of good comfort, all you that do come unto God by him, for he is
willing to intercede for you. And let not any thing discourage you: It may be
you will complain, and say Oh! but I am much opposed here in this world. What
matter, so long as Jesus Christ does intercede for me in Heaven, and speaks
good words unto God the Father for me in heaven; what though I be opposed by
men? It may be you will complain, and say, Oh! but I am much tempted, and
cannot pray. Be humbled for it; but yet know this, That when you cannot pray,
Christ prays for you; and he prays that you may pray. It may be you complain,
and say, Oh! but I labor under such and such corruptions, and the Devil he is
busy with me, exceeding busy, and I cannot overcome them: and the Devil
stands at my right hand for to tempt me, and to lead me into such and such
sins. Well, be it so, yet notwithstanding, the Lord Jesus Christ, he is at the
right hand of our Father, and he is set down at the right hand of God the
Father, till all enemies be made his footstool; and your sins are his enemies:
And therefore be of good comfort, O all ye people of the Lord. Is there ever a
poor myrtle-tree, a soul that grows in a bottom, in a poor dark condition? be
of good comfort, the Lord Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, he is entered
into Heaven, into the Holy of Holiest, there to intercede with God the Father
for thee.

I but, Does not this conduce to our Grace, and Holiness too? and how does it
do it?

This Intercession of Jesus Christ;

First, He ever lives to make Intercession for those that come unto God by
him: Oh! then, who would not come unto God by Christ? who would not come unto
Jesus Christ? Me thinks a poor sinner should say, Indeed my sins were so great,
that I was afraid for to come unto God: But now I hear, that the Lord Jesus
Christ is in Heaven, to make intercession, for all those that come unto God by
him; Though I have been a Drunkerd, now I will go unto God by Christ: And though
I have been a Swearer, and though I have been an unclean wanton, yet I will go
unto God by Christ. Indeed, I thought that my time was past; for I have been an
Old Swearer; and I have been an Old Drunkard; and I have been an Old
Sabbath-breaker; and I have been a sinner so long, that I was even afraid of
going to God at all; and thought there was no mercy, nor no pardon for me: But
seeing now, that this is true, That the Lord Jesus Christ is in Heaven, to make
intercession for all those that come unto God by him; Well, through the Lords
grace, now I will go unto the Lord Christ, I will go unto Jesus Christ: I
indeed, am a young man, and I thought it was to no purpose to go unto God, God
would not regard poor ignorant ones, and I am a poor ignorant creature, and
thought it was to no purpose for me to go unto God: But now I understand this,
That the Lord Jesus Christ is in Heaven to make intercession for all those that
come unto God by him: Well then, Though I am ignorant, yet will I go unto God
by Christ: and though I am but a poor young thing, and scarce understand the
terms of Religion; yet will I go unto God by Christ. Oh! come unto Christ,
come unto Christ: Behold here, in the Name of the Lord, I stand and make
invitation to poor sinners; Come poor Drunkard, Swearer, Sabbath-breaker,
Unclean heart; the Lord Jesus Christ is in Heaven to make intercession for all
that come unto God by him; and will not you come? Oh! how will you answer it at
the great day? when it shall be said, The Lord Jesus Christ made a tender, and
offer of mercy to you, and you would not accept of it, you would not come unto
him. Here is matter of great Incouragment unto all poor sinners to come unto
Jesus Christ.

Again Secondly, The more I apprehend, or see with a spiritual eye, That the
Lord Jesus Christ does appear in Heaven for me* the more am Fingaged to appear
upon earth for him. (Mark I pray, that you may see how this does conduce unto
Grace, and Holiness.) Ah! shall the Lord Jesus Christ appear in Heaven, before
Saints, and Angels, and God the Father for my soul? and shall I be afraid to
appear before poor worms for him? Shall the Lord Jesus Christ own me in Heaven?
and shall not I own him upon earth? Shall the Lord Jesus Christ, as the great
High Priest, take my name, and carry it upon his breast into the presence of
God the Father? and shall not I take the Name of Christ, and hold it forth to
the world? Oh! I beseech you consider, what a mighty engagement is here, to
stand to and appear for the Lord Christ, and to own his Cause in these
backsliding times; because he is now in Heaven appearing for you, and making
intercession for you.

Thirdly, The more I confider, or apprehend, That the Lord Jesus Christ does
lay out himself for me, the more am I engaged to lay out my self for him. The
Scripture says, He ever lives to make intercession for you. He lays out his
whole Eternity for you. Me thinks we have here before us, the greatest argument
in the world for to make us to walk closely with God in Christ: For, shall the
Lord Jesus Christ, spend of his Eternity for me? and shall not I spend of my
whole time for him? He Ever lives: he Ever lives to make intercession. Before
the world was made, his delight was in the habitable parts of the earth, among
the children of men. He laid out himself in delighting upon you before the
world was made. Well, in due time, he comes down into the world; and here while
he was upon the earth, he laid out himself fully for you. Then he Dies, and
goes up to Heaven, and (says he) I go to prepare a place for you. He was at
work for you, before the world began; Then he comes down upon the earth, and
here he spends all his time for you: And now that he is gone to Heaven; the
text says, He ever lives to make intercession for you: he spends off all his
eternity for you. Oh! does not the Lord Jesus grutch me Eternity, to spend off
his Eternity for my soul? and shall I grutch the Lord Jesus Christ a little
time, to spend a little time for him? Surely, people don't think what Christ is
doing in Heaven for them, (you that are Saints especially) if you did, you
could not be padling in the world so much. Shall the Lord Jesus Christ be
appearing in Heaven for me? and shall I be digging in the world? Shall he be
making mention of my name unto God the Father, and interceding for me? and
shall I be sinning against him? shall I be contending with his children? shall
I now be joining with his Enemies? shall I be opposing his ways? Oh! if people
would but think, what the Lord Jesus Christ is doing in heaven for them, they
could not rebel so in the world against him as they do. Wherefore, that you may
be kept from your sins, and kept from the world, think of these things. The
Apostle says, These things have I written unto ye, that ye sin not: and if any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And
so say I to you, I have been here delivering to you this Doctrine, concerning
the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ: and these things have I preached unto you,
that you sin not. And therefore, that you may be kept from sin, and your hearts
made more Holy; think of the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ, he is gone into
Heaven to make intercession for you. And thus have I discovered the Second
Particular of the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ. A Third follows.

SERMON III.
HEBREWS 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him, to be made like
unto his brethren, that be might be a merciful, and faithful High Priest,
Preached at Stepney May. 9. 1647.
in things pertaining to godliness, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people. For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted.
WE have found already, That the work of the High Priest was, and is, To
Satisfy, and to Intercede for the sins of the people

Now if we inquire further, we shall find also, That the work of the
High Priest was, and now is, To offer up the gifts of the people unto God: To
present our, Prayers, Praises, Duties, Services, and all spiritual Performances
unto God the Father, and to procure acceptance of him. This was done thus: In
the times of Moses, in the Tabernacle there were two Parts, or Courts; (as we
read in the 9. Chapter of the Hebrews) In the one, which was called, The Holy
of Holiest; there was the Arc, the Mercy-Seat, the Cherubims of glory, and the
golden Censer. In the other, there was the Brasen-Altar, upon which they
offered sacrifices, there was the table of Shewbread, the golden Candlestick,
and the golden Altar, upon which incense was: This is expressly laid down in the
2, 3, and 4. verses of that 9. of Hebrews: For there was a tabernacle made, the
first wherein was the candlestick and the table and the shewbread; which is
called the sanctuary. And after the Second vail, the tabernacle which is called
the holiest of all, which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant,
overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and
Aarons rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; And over it the
cherubims of glory shadowing the Mercy-Seat. And as every day, morning and
evening, there was a lamb offered, a sacrifice for the sins of the people, upon
the Brasen-Alter; So every day, morning and evening, there was incense also,
upon the golden-Altar: which was performed while the people were without at
prayer, mingling that incense with their prayers; As it is in the 1. Chap. of
Luke, the 8, 9, and 10. verses. It came to pass that while he (that is,
Zacharias) executed the Priests Office before God in the order of his course,
according to the cusiome of the Priests office, his lot was to burn incense
when he went into the temple of the Lord: and the whole multitude of the people
were praying without, at the time of incense. So that the incense, was at a
time when they were sweetly mingling their prayers and the incense together.
But now, although that there was a sacrifice every day, yet once in the year,
the High Priest came, and he took the blood of the Sacrifice, and carried it
into the Holy of Holiest, and sprinkled the Mercy-Seat therewith. And although
there was incense too, from the Golden Altar every day, yet once in the year,
the High Priest came, and he took the golden Censer, and putting incense into
it from off the golden Altar, went into the Holy of Holiest and caused a cloud
of perfume to arise upon the Mercy-Seat. All which was a great Type of Jesus
Christ our High Priest: who though he offered up himself a sacrifice once for
sin without, yet when he died, and ascended, he carried the virtue of that his
blood into the Holy of Holiest, into Heaven, and sprinkled the Mercy-Seat
therewith: Although he began to make Intercession while he lived, as we read
in the 17. of John; yet when he ascended up into Heaven, the Holy of Holiest,
then he did take his golden Censer, and carried his Intercession into Heaven,
causing a cloud of sweet perfumes to arise upon the Mercy-Seat: which still he
does, whilst we are praying here without, he mingling all our Duties with his
Intercessions; and so taking all together as one, presents it unto God the
Father for our acceptance. And this he does now as our High Priest; for if we
look into this book of the Hebrews, we shall find, That the Apostle speaking of
the High Priest, relating unto Jesus Christ; says, in the 5. Chapter and the
1. verse, That it was his work to offer Gifts: That he may offer both Gifts and
sacrifices. And so in the 8. Chapter and the 3. verse. Every High-Prist is
ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. Thus we have another great work, of our
great High Priest; which is, To offer up all our Prayers, our Duties, our Gifts
unto God the Father: which if ye will, we may call another part of Christ's
Intercession; but I handle it distinct.

Now that I may open and clear this great Gospel-Mystery, I shall endeavor to
discover:

First, What Jesus Christ, our High-Prist, does, when be does offer up our
Gifts unto God the Father.

Secondly, What abundance of favor, and acceptance, this our great High Priest
himself has in Heaven.

Thirdly, That he does improve all that his own acceptance, for our acceptance;
planting all our Duties upon his own acceptance, upon that acceptance that he
has with the Father.

Fourthly, What abundance of acceptance therefore we have, in all our Duties by
him.

Fifthly, How this does conduce to our Grace, and to our Comfort?

First, What does our Lord and Savior Christ, our great High Priest, when he
offers up our Gifts unto God the Father?

First, He does take our persons, and carries them in unto God the Father, in a
most unperceivable way to us. He knows, that if our Person be not first
accepted, our Duty cannot be accepted. Love me, and love my Duty; love me, and
love my Service: hate me, and hate my Service. In the Covenant of Works, God
did first accept of the work, and then of the Person, the Person for the work:
But in the Covenant of Grace, God does first accept of the Person, and then the
Work. Now therefore, that our Work, and our Duty may be accepted with God the
Father; The Lord Christ, our High Priest, does first take our Person, and our
Name, and carries them into the presence of God the Father. This was plainly
shadowed out unto us, by that of the High-Prest; Who went into the Holy of
Holiest, with the Names of all the Tribes upon his breast. Which the Apostle
speaks out plainly: Ephesians. 3.12 (...)
In whom we have access with boldness. The word Access, as some observe, is
Manuduction, Hand-leading: In whom we have an Hand-leading; or by whom we are
led by the Hand, unto God the Father. As a child, having run away from his
Father, is taken by the hand of a friend, or of his Elder brother, and brought
again into the presence of his father: So, all we having run away from God, are
taken, and led again into the presence of the Father by the hand of Jesus
Christ. He is that ladder that Jacob saw, upon whom we do ascend into the
bosom of God, and go into Heaven. Our High Priest Jesus Christ, does first
take our Persons, and lead us into the presence of God the Father. That is the
first.

Secondly, As he does take our Persons, and lead, and carry us into the
presence of God the Father: So, when we do perform any Duty, he does observe
what evil, or failing there is in that Duty, and draws it out, takes it away
before he presents the Duty-unto God the Father. A Child that would present his
father with a Nose-gay, or Posie, goes into the garden, and he gathers flowers,
and weeds together; but coming to his mother, she takes them, and picks out the
weeds, and binds up the flowers by themselves, and so it is presented to the
father, Thus it is with us: We go to Duty, and we gather weeds, and flowers
together: But the Lord Jesus Christ, he comes and picks out the weeds, and then
he presents nothing but flowers unto God the Father.

And this we have plainly set forth unto us, by that of the High Priest taking
away the iniquities of the Holy things of Gods people, in the 28. Chapter of
Exodus, Thou shall make a platform of pure gold (at the 36. verse) and grave
upon it like the ingravings of a signet, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD. And thou shall
put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the Mytre; upon the forefront of the
Mytre it shall be. Then at the 38. verse, And it shall be on Aarons forehead
(that is, the High Priest) that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things,
which the Children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts: and it
shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord.
Thus taking away the iniquity of their holy things. So it is said concerning
our Savior Christ, in the 3. Chapter of Malachy, the 2, 3, and 4. verses, Who
may abide the day of his coming? (plainly understood of Christ, as appears by
the first verse.) Then at the 3. He shall sit as a refiner, and purifier of
silver; and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and
selver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. Then
shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the
days of old. Then shall their offerings be pleasant; When? when he has purged
their sacrifices, and their offerings. This in the days of his flesh and now
much more. This is the Second thing, that the Lord Christ, our great
High Priest does in offering up our Gifts unto God the Father, He takes out the
weeds.

Thirdly: As he takes away the iniquity of our holy things; So he observes what
good there is in any of our Duties, or Performances; and with that he mingles
his own Prayers and Intercessions; his own Intense; and presents all as one
work mingled together unto God the Father. This we have so fully in the 8.
Chapter of the Revelation, that I need name no other place. Another Angel (at
the 3. verse) stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given
unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints
upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne. And the smoke (at the 4.
verse) of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up
before God, out of the Angels hand: This must needs be understood of Christ;
for no Angel does intercede but Christ, who is called, The Angel of the
Covenant. It Is said here, He stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer: Which
none of the Highpriests had: and there was given unto him much incense, and
this he offered with the prayers of all the Saints; and the smoke of the
incense came with the prayers of the Saints, and ascended up before the Lord.
He alludes unto the way, and custom of the Jews, and the High Priest:
showing, that the Lord Jesus Christ does all this for us, as our great
High Priest: that is the meaning of it. So that this is plain what he does,
when as our great High Priest, he offers up our Gifts unto God the Father.

But in the Second place: Suppose he does so, What Favor, or Acceptance has
this our great High Priest in Heaven?

He has very much: Father (says he) I thank thee that thou hear me
always. He never spoke a word unto God the Father, but the father heard him
always. We read (as I remember) but of Two places in the new Testament, where
the Lord by an audible voice, gives testimony of Jesus Christ his Son: And in
both those places, we have the same words uttered, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased: And again; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. We may know what favor a man has with another, by the Trust that he
does commit to, and repose upon him: Joseph had great favor in the eyes of
Pharaoh; and how did it appear? It appeared by this, Because Pharaoh trusted
him with so much. Now God the Father, has trusted Jesus Christ, this our great
High Priest, very much. This I shall evidence in Four Particulars, viz. What a
great Trust God the Father has put upon him.

First, It was an agreement between God the Father, by the blood of Christ, and
before Christ had died. So then, God the Father saved them upon Christ's bare
word, That he would come into the world, and die for them. What a mighty Trust
was here? That so many hundred thousand souls should be saved, upon a bare word
of Christ That he would come into the world, and die for them afterward.

Again, Pharaoh trusted Joseph, all the whole kingdom was put into his hand,
with the Corn thereof, and not a grain was to be given out to any but as Joseph
gave it out: which argued a mighty Trust. So now, That not any Grace, or
Comfort, given out to the children of men, but only by the hand of Christ, it
argues a mighty Trust that the Father put upon him.

But yet further, Thou have now suffered, Ask of me, and I will give thee the
Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession: all the world at one word. Ask of me (says he) and at the first
word I will give thee the whole world. It was a mighty, and a great Trust that
the Father did put upon him.

Yea, Revel. 18. ver. I am he that lives, and was dead: and behold, I am alive
for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of Hell and of death. There Is no man
that goes to Hell, but he is lok't in by Jesus Christ: And there is no man goes
to Heaven, but Christ has the keys of Heaven, and he locks him in there unto
all Eternity. The Lord Jesus Christ, he has the keys of Hell, and of Heaven;
he has the keys of all men's Eternities hanging at his girdle. Oh! what an
infinite Trust is here, that God the Father has put upon him! Then let us
conclude, if that Trust do argue favor; and the Lord Jesus Christ, our
High Priest, has such a great trust as this put into his hands by the Father;
what infinite Acceptance must he needs have with God the Father.

In the Third place,: Suppose that he have all this favor, and Acceptance in
Heaven, Does he Improve this his Favor, and Acceptance for our Acceptance, and
for our Favor?

Yes, He Improves all this his favor, and acceptance, Lord, (says he unto his
Father concerning believers) I will, that where I am, they may be also: I will,
O Lord, that they may be One, even as thou Father and I am one. He does not
count himself full, and happy, but in the happiness, and fullness of the Church.
And therefore, as Christ is called, The fullness of God the Father: So the
Church is called, The fullness of Jesus Christ: in the 1. of the Ephesians, and
the last verse; Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.
When our Lord and Savior Christ came to die, and the heart and love of God the
Father was let out unto him: Ye shall find, if ye look upon that 17. of John,
and read it all over, That he spends his time, not so much in praying for
himself: The time was but short, and his prayer short, Father, if it be
possible let this cup pass: if not, yet not my will, but thine be done. But he
spends most of the time, in praying, and interceding for those that did
believe, or should afterward believe. The favor, and acceptance which the
High Priest had, in the times of Moses, was not for himself: he had a Mitre
upon his head, and a golden girdle upon his loins, Priestly garments; and he
had great acceptance when he went into the Holy of Holiest; but it was not for
himself, he did improve it all for the people: he was to lay it out all for the
people, and not for himself. Our High Priest, goes beyond all other
Highpriests in this particular also: for now, as for other Highpriests,
though they went in with their incense, and covered the Mercy-seat with a
cloud; yet it was but once in the year: But our High Priest, is always in the
Holy of Holiest, and never goes out of it, ever covering the Mercy-Seat with
his Intercessions. Take their High Priest, and though he were very Holy, as
Aaron was; yet sometimes he made the people naked, unacceptable: But our great
High Priest, never makes his people naked, but always clothes them with his
own righteousness.

Take their High Priest, and though he did go into the Holy of Holiest for the
people, yet he never led the people into the Holy of Holiest, they stood
without: But our great High Priest, is not only gone into the Holy of Holiest
himself, but does also lead every poor believer into the Holy of Holiest: as we
read in the 10. of the Hebrews, and the 19. verse: Having therefore brethren
boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus Christ. The people
might not enter into the Holiest, in the time of the Jews: But our great
High Priest, has improved his favor for us thus far, that every man may come
into the Holy of Holiest.

Now, If our great High Priest in this respect, go beyond all the Highpriests
that ever were before him, and they did improve their interest, and their
favor, and their acceptance for the people, much more does the Lord Jesus
Christ, our High Priest, improve the favor, interest, and acceptance that he
has in heaven, for our acceptance, and and the acceptance of all our Duties.
And that is a Third Particular.

But, If that it be so; then surely we have great acceptance in all our Duties:
but have we so?

Yes, John, our Lord and Savior says, Whatsoever ye ask in my Name (at the
13. verse) that will I do. I but, may we be sure of this? He repeats it again
(in the 14. verse) If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. Yea,
that ye may see what great acceptance we have now through him, in all those
Duties that we offer up to God the Father: says he, in the 16. Chap. and the
26. verse. At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto ye, that I
will pray the father for you: for the father himself loves you. It is a mighty
high speech. I don't say, That I will pray for you: Ye shall have so much
favor and love in Heaven, from the Father imediately, that he will hear you
presently. I, but is not all upon Christ's account? Yes, and therefore says he,
at the 13. verse of the 14. chapter, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. So that all is upon
Christ's account. Great was the testimony of Christ's acceptance which he had
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Now if we look
into the Scripture, we shall find, that the same words are given unto the
Saints. Is the Lord Jesus Christ called the Son of God? My beloved Son: So are
Believers too; As many as receive him, have power to be called the Sons of God.
Is he called, The Beloved Son of God? This is my beloved Son: So are the Saints
also; In the 31. chapter of Jeremy, at the 20. verse. Ephraim my deer Son, a
pleasant child. Ephraim; that is, Israel, my deer Son, a pleasant child. Well,
Is it said, In whom I am well pleased? my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: The same word also is given to men. When our Lord and Savior Christ
was born into the world, the Angels they came and sung at his birth, and they
sung, Good will toward men; So we read it: but it is the same word that is
used concerning Christ himself, My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So
that whatsoever word there is in all this speech. This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased: whatsoever word there is in that sentence concerning
Christ, it is given also unto the Saints, unto Believers; so greatly does he
improve his own favor and acceptance for our acceptance, and so great
acceptance have we through Christ.

Yea, As the Lord Jesus Christ is said to be made sin for us, in the Abstract:
So are we said to be made Righteousnesses by him; in the Abstract too: As we
have it, in the 1. of the Canticles, and the 3. verse. Therefore do the Virgins
love thee: so we read it in our english translation: But in the Hebrew it is
Therefore do the Righteousnesses love thee. The Saints and Believers through
Christ, are called, Righteousnesses, in the Abstract. So that here is the great
acceptance, that the Saints, and Believers do find through this acceptance of
Jesus Christ our High Priest.

But, Suppose a man be very poor, and lives in some mean cottage; which has
but one room to lie, dine and sup in; and that a smoky, dark room too: and this
poor creature comes and prays unto God: Will the Great and Glorious God of
Heaven and Earth take notice of such a prayer, from such a worm as this? and
shall he find acceptance with God the Father?

For answer to that, Canticles, and the 14. verse. O my dove that art in the
clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy
countenance, (they are the words of Christ) let me hear thy voice; Why? for
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. But I pray, where now is the
Church? In the clefts of the rock, and in the secret places of the stairs: in
a hole under the stairs (as it were) in a poor distressed place, an hidden
place; now (says he) here thy voice is sweet, and thy tountenance comely.

Well, But suppose that a Duty, or service be performed by one that is weak;
weak in Grace, or weak in parts and Gifts: for this is my case, (will some say)
I am one of very weak parts and Gifts, and I have little Memory, or Ability of
speech; there are some men indeed, that are of great Parts, and Graces, and
when they pray, I make no question but their prayers do find acceptance; but as
for me, I am one of very mean Abilities; Oh! can there be any acceptance of
such prayers as mine are through Jesus Christ? Will God answer such
stammerings, lispings, halfe-words, broken imperfect petitions?

Yes, toward the making of the Tabernacle, they were welcome: and shall it not
be so now, much more in the times of the Gospel? That which is little, in
regard of Quantity, it may be great, in regard of Proportion; as the widows
mite was. The Sun falls (we know) with a common influence upon all the Herbs,
and Plants: but there is a several sweetness, and flowers that are of a
several, and different growth: There is the Rose, and there is the Violet: The
Violet is not so Tall as the Rose, the Violet lies on the ground; but though
the Violet be not so tall as the Rose, the Violet has its sweetness; and it
may say to the Rose, Though I be not so tall, yet I have my sweetness as well
as thou have. So now, there is a common influence from Jesus Christ upon all
the Saints, and they have their several sweetness; one as the Rose, and the
other as the Violet: It may be, here lies a poor Christian upon the ground like
the Violet, and is not so tall in Gifts and Parts as the other is; but yet
notwithstanding, he has his sweetness. Christ takes that lovingly that comes
from love, whatever it be, though it be never so weak.

Well, But suppose that a man's Duty, or Service be performed with many
failings, infirmities; Hardness of heart, Straightness of spirit, distracting
thoughts; this is my case: Oh! is there any acceptance for such a Duty as this
is? will the Lord Jesus Christ, the great High Priest, take such a Duty as this
is, and carry it in unto God the Father, and is there any acceptance for such a
Duty as this?

We know how it was with Nicodemus, came and justified the ungodly, when he
justified you: He comes, and he finds a poor soul in a sinful condition, and he
imputes his righteousness unto that soul, and justifies an ungodly one, not
justifying him so, as to go on in sin; it is the word of the Apostle, He
justifies the ungodly. So the Lord comes, and finds a great deal of ungodliness
in your Duty, and he imputes his righteousness unto that Duty; and he justifies
the Duty, which in your eye is an ungodly duty. This indeed is the wonder of
all, that he should deal thus by us: For, did we ever hear of any garment, that
would make the crooked straight? If a man have a crooked back; come and put
velvet upon him, silk, scarlet upon him, it may make him handsomer, but it will
not change his back, and make him strait. But when the Lord Christ comes, he
finds all our souls crook-back't, as it were, and he puts on his righteousness,
and this garment makes that that was crooked to become strait; it makes the
very crook-back't Duty, to become a strait Duty. Did we ever hear, or read, of
any Seal, that when it was set upon the wax, would change the wax into gold, or
into silver like the seal? it may leave it is impression, but it does not change
the wax into it is own metal. If there be a stamp set upon silver, or gold,
the metal remains as it was before: But if a stamp be set upon brass, it
don't make it silver; or if it be set upon silver, it don't make it gold. I but
when the Lord Jesus Christ comes unto a Duty, and sets his own stamp, and his
own righteousness upon a Duty, that which was brass before; full of failings,
and much unrighteousness before, changes it into gold, into silver. He only
has the Philosophers stone (as I may so speak) all that Christ touches turns
into gold; turns all our Duties into gold: and when he has done so, he
presents them unto God the Father. This our great High Priest does. And this is
the Fourth thing.

But how does all this make for our Comfort, or for our Grace?

Surely,

Is it not a comfortable thing, for a man to know, that his Duties are not
lost? that his Prayer is not lost? that his Hearing the word is not lost? that
his Searching the Scriptures is not lost? that his Conference, and Communion is
not lost? A man is unwilling to lose any thing: and the more precious it is,
the more unwilling to lose it. If we have a venture at Sea; we are unwilling to
lose our venture: and the greater our venture is, the more unwilling to lose
it. If a man have but a quarter of his Estate in a vessel, he is unwilling to
lose it; more unwilling if he have half his Estate; most if he have all, and
his children there in the vessel too. Now as men are unwilling to lose their
worldly venture: So, a man that is sensible of his soul, is very unwilling to
lose his souls venture; to lose his Prayers, and to lose all his Duties.
(Friends) here is an Insuring-Office; The Lord Jesus Christ is our great Insurer
in this respect: and he does as he is our High Priest, offering up our Gifts
unto God the Father, assure us that none is lost, not any lost. Indeed, if we
had such an High Priest, as were not able to take notice of the Circumstances
of our Duties, much might be lost: but, this our Lord Christ, our great
High Priest, does not only take notice of our Duty what ever it be; but of all
the Circumstances of our Duties, and so presents them unto God the Father, in
the full latitude, in all the gracious Circumstances of them. Therefore says
he, unto the Angel of the Church of Pergamos in the 2. of the Revelation, and
the 13. verse; I know thy works. Why, but Lord, though thou do know our
works, yet it may be thou do not take notice where our work is done: Lord,
it may be thou do take notice of my Prayer, but Lord, thou do not take
notice where I dwell, and live, and in what family I do pray unto thee; Lord, I
am in a wicked, and a wretched family, that does oppose Prayer: Lord, may be
thou do take notice of my Prayer, but thou do not take notice, of this
Circumstance: Yes, (says he) I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even
where Satan's seat is. Well, and thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied
my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was
slain among you, where Satan dwells. It Is remarkable, The Lord Jesus Christ
takes notice, not only of our Duty; but of every Circumstance of the Duty, and
so he presents it unto God the Father, not only the Duty, but the Circumstance
of the Duty; and therefore there is not a hair of your Duty lost, not one
grain of your Duty lost: is not this an unspeakable Comfort unto a poor soul,
that it knows that nothing is lost of all the Prayers it has made unto God,
that there is no loss at all? The very pantings of our hearts at the Throne of
grace, are received into the bosom of our Heavenly Father.

Further, That they sit in the seat of the scornful. There is, (it seems then)
the seat of the scornful; and there is a Mercy-Seat: A Drunkard, when he is
with his drunken company, and sits upon the Ale-bench (it may be) scorning, and
jeering at some of the godly, making songs on them, he is set upon the seat of
the scornful; that is a cursed seat. I but, there is another seat, there is a
Mercy-Seat; and there is never a poor Saint and Child of God, but he may go in
to the Mercy-Seat of the Lord Jesus Christ that has all the favor, and
acceptance in Heaven; he carries him into the Mercy-Seat, and God the Father
will never put him by; what Comfort is here!

Besides, acceptance, and according to these we shall be judged. Surely then,
if he takes our Duties and carries them in for acceptance, unto God the Father,
he will never judge you for them, and condemn you for them at that day. Here is
Comfort!

Once more, Is it not a Comfort,

Indeed if I were able to say, That the Lord did accept my Duty, Cbj.
this were Comfort indeed; if I were able to conclude, That the Lord Jesus
Christ did take my Prayers, and my Duties, and carry them in unto God the
Father; this were sweet consolation: but how shall I know that?

If the Lord Jesus Christ be our High Priest,

But yet a little further, to bring this Comfort nearer to your hearts; give me
leave to appeal to you:

First. Whosoever thou art that makes this Objection:

Again,

Further, Canticles, says the Spouse there, ver. 5. I am black (O ye daughters
of Jerusalem) as the tents of Kedar: Look not upon me because I am black, ver.
6. Now would you see Christ's opinion of her, that counts her self black? says
she, Black, and Black again: but Christ says concerning her; verse, 8. O thou
fairest among women. She calls her self Black, and Christ calls her Fair, and
the Fairest among women. Now, when a man does count himself most unworthy, God
counts him most worthy: and when a man looks upon his own Duties, and
Sacrifices, as most unworthy, they are looked upon by Jesus Christ as most
worthy, poor prayers in our eyes, are precious in Gods eye.

A word more, Exodus; compared with the 41. of Ezekiel. In the 30. Chapter of
Exodus, The Lord commands an Altar to be made to burn incense upon; Of Shittim
wood shall thou make it; verse the 1. A cubit shall be the length thereof,
verse the 2. The Altar is for Incense; it is the matter that now we are upon: A
cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and two
cubits shall be the highth thereof. Now in the 41. Chapter of Ezekiel, he speaks
of the Altar in the times of the Gospel: and (says he) at the 22. verse, ('it is
the Altar of incense that there is prescribed to be made, the Altar of wood, of
Shettem wood.) The Altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof
two cubits. And yet again, this altar of incense in the times of the Gospel, is
to be as large again, as that in the times of the Law; as high, and as long,
and as large again. In the times of the Law, times of the Old Testament; a poor
soul might go unto the High Priest, and might challenge a right in him, and
might say, That his Service, and his Duty, and his Sacrifice was accepted by
the High Priest. If in the times of the Old Testament a man might say so; much
more may a poor soul now go unto Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, and say,
That his Service, and his Duty, and Sacrifice, is accepted through him. Here is
abundance of Comfort unto the Saints: be of good comfort, all you that do
believe.

But, How does this make unto our Holiness, unto Holiness of life? We confess
indeed, that there is abundance of Comfort in this, That the Lord Jesus Christ,
our great High Priest, takes all our Gifts, and al our Prayers, and presents
them to God the Father, and that in his acceptance, we have acceptance: but I
pray, how does all this conduce to our Holiness of life?

Much every way:

First, In case I be Ungodly, a Wicked man: this true, That the Lord Jesus
Christ, takes every Prayer, of the meanest of Gods Children, and carries it
into the bosom of God the Father? and shall I spit upon that that Christ owns?
shall I dare to oppose that that the Lord Jesus Christ presents unto his
Father? The Lord in mercy pardon me: I have sinned and done foolishly, and for
ought I know, I may have spoken evil of that Duty, that Christ has carried
into the presence of God the Father: Oh! through the Lords grace then, for ever
will I leave to make any opposition, against any of the good ways of God
again, and I will never speak one word against the persons, meetings, or
supplications of the godly again.

Again, Jacob saw, by whom we go up to Heaven? does he take all our Duties, and
Prayers, and present them to God the Father for acceptance? Then, till I do
come to Christ, all is nothing, all is lost: if I be a Drunkard, and will not
come to Christ, Prayer is all lost; if I be a Swearer, and will not come to
Christ, an Unclean wretch, and will not come to Christ; all my Prayers, and all
my Duties are lost: Oh! the Lord pity me, (may many a poor soul say) I have
lost too many Prayers already; through the Lords grace, now I will lose no
more: Oh! I come to Christ, Lord, I come, I come. This is a mighty
encouragement, to make every man now for to come unto Jesus Christ: because the
Lord Jesus, our High Priest, takes every Duty; and carries it into the bosom.
of God the Father for acceptance. Thus for Ungodly.

Secondly,

If I be Codly: intercessions with it, although it be but a sigh, and a groan.
The Apostle upon this account, makes this use of it; having spoken of Christ
our High Priest; Therefore (says he) let us come with boldness unto the Throne
of grace. Heb. 4.16
The word signifies, to speak all ones mind; let us come speaking all. Having
such an High Priest indeed, as will carry all into the presence of God the
Father, for acceptance, every sigh, and every groan; then, who would not be
much in prayer? speak all to Christ, be free with Christ, come with boldness?
There Is many a poor soul, that is much discouraged, and he dares not go to
prayer, many times, afraid to go to the Throne of grace. The reason is, because
he looks upon his Prayer, or Duty, as it lies upon his own heart, or as it
comes from himself. Whereas, my beloved, it is with your Prayers, and Duties, as
it is with fire: Your kitchen fire is troubled with abundance of smoke, and
there is filth about it; fire upon the hearth has much smoke: but fire above,
in the Element of fire, there is no smoke. So, your Prayer, when it lies upon
your own hearth (as I may say) there is a great deal of smoke; but when it gets
once into the hands of Jesus Christ, there is it is Element, and it is freed from
all it is smoke. Or as it is with a man's Body: so long as he lives here upon the
earth, he is feeble, and weak, and many times sickly: as soon as he is come into
Heaven, all his weakness is taken away, and his body being in Heaven, it is
presently glorified, and strength put upon it, and all his diseases are gone.
So it is with our Prayers: So long as they are here below, in our own bosoms,
they are full of weakness; but as soon as our Prayer is out of our mouth, it is
in the hand of Christ, it is in Heaven, it is glorified, the weakness is now done
away; Oh! it is a glorified Prayer; when once it is gone from you, it is in the
hand of Christ. And therefore, this is a mighty encouragement unto all those
that are godly, to be, not only in Prayer, but to be much in Prayer, come with
boldness unto the Throne of grace.

Again, If ye be Godly; yea, if ye be Ungodly: see infinite reason, why I
should receive every Truth that comes from Christ, though accompanied with many
failings in him that speaks it. The Lord Jesus Christ, he accepts of every
prayer, and duty that comes from me; though it have many weaknesses: yea, he
takes my Prayer, and carries it into the presence of God the Father for
acceptance, my poor Prayer, laboring with many weaknesses: Then when a Truth
comes from Christ, shall not I accept of it? what though the Minister, or
Preacher that speaks it, labor with this or that weakness? There is Pride, or
there is some miscarriage in the delivery, or the like: Shall the Lord Christ
take my Prayer, laboring under infirmity, and accept thereof, and carry it
into the presence of God the Father for acceptance, notwithstanding all the
failings of my Duty? and shall not I accept of Truth that comes from Christ,
notwithstanding all the failings of the poor messenger that brings it?

Further, The more Evangelical you are in your Obedience, the more Holy ye are
in your lives. This truth that is now before ye, well studied and considered,
will make you more Obedient in an Evangelical way. And ye shall find therefore,
that the Lord himself from Heaven does make this use of it: pray consult with
the 17. of Matthew, and the 5. verse. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased: hear ye him. Those words follow, Hear him. Hearing notes Faith, and
Obedience; not a bare Hearing with the ear. Compare this, and the same speech
together, which ye have in the 3. of Matthew, and the 17. verse. Lo, a voice
from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye
him, is not there in the 3. of Matthew; but here in the 17. of Matthew, these
words are added, Hear ye him: What should the reason be, that, Hear ye him,
should be added here in the 17. of Matthew, and not in the 3. of Mat. thew?
Give me leave to give you some reason for it, so far as may make to our present
purpose: Not to say any thing of that which Moses said, In his days a Prophet
will the Lord your God raise up unto ye like unto me, hear ye him. And now
here, in this 17. of Matthew, at the transfiguration, Moses and Elias appeared,
which they did not in the 3. of Matthew.

First, Consider, Hear, and not upon the word Him, only: This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased: Hear ye him; His face did shine as the Sun, and his
raiment was white as the light. And Christ appeared in great glory, and they
stood looking upon him; Nay, (says the Lord from Heaven) do not make it a
gazing matter, but, Hear him: don't stand looking upon him, but Hear him. He
don't appear in such a glory in the 3. of Matthew, when he was baptized; and
therefore those words are not added there.

But again, Here now in the 17. Chapter of Matthew, Moses, and Elias. Behold
(at the 3. verse) There appeared unto them, Moses and Elias talking with him.
Moses that gave the Law; Elias that restored it. Then answered Peter and said
unto Jesus; Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou will, let us make here
Three Tabernacles; one for Thee, and one for Moses and one for Elias. Peter and
so the rest of the Disciples, began for to equallize Moses to Jesus Christ: One
for Moses, and one for Elias, and one for Jesus Christ; no more for Christ than
for Moses. Now the Lord takes Peter off from all his mistakings: Your eye is
upon Moses (says he) but I (says the Lord God Almighty) am well pleased in my
Son: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. I am well pleased with
you, and with your Duties, through this my Son, and not through Moses; and
therefore Hear Christ, and not Moses. He lays this in upon it, that therefore
they should be Evangelical, and hear Jesus Christ, because the Lord Christ
gives acceptance unto all, and by him God is well pleased with them.

Again further, The more glory Christ does appear in, the greater reason there
is why we should hear him. Now here the Lord Jesus Christ appeared in glory;
his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light. In the
3. of Matthew, he was there baptized, and he did not appear in glory: but now
here he appears in glory; and therefore says the Lord, now Hear him; this is
your glorious Savior, Hear him. Beloved! what greater glory can Jesus Christ
appear to your souls in, than this, the glory of his love? he takes every one
of your Duties, and your Prayers, and he carries them in to the bosom of God
the Father, and by him you have acceptance. Oh! what a glorious Savior have
ye! therefore Hear him: This is that, if any thing, will make ye very Obedient
to Christ, more than to Moses, to be Evangelical in all your Duties.

Yet further, The more a man can rejoice in spiritual privileges with
humility: and the more humble a man is, and yet can rejoice in his spiritual
privileges, the more holy he is: there goes a great deal of Holiness to it, to
join these two together: for a man to rejoice in his spiritual privileges and
yet to be humble: and to walk very humbly. Some there are, that look upon there
spiritual privileges, and rejoice much; but they don't walk humbly: Some
labor to walk humbly, and are much troubled in the consideration of their own
evil; but they don't rejoice in their spiritual privileges. Give me a
Christian that does both, and he is a blessed man. The study of this Truth that
is now before you, will teach you to do both, to do both together For, what a
great privilege is this, not a figh, not a groan, not a duty, but the Lord
Christ takes it, and carries it in, and presents it to God the Father for me,
whereby I have acceptance? Considering this; here is matter of much joy and
rejoicing. I but, It is Christ that does it; there is no such worthiness in
mine own duty; it were lost, and cast away, if Jesus Christ did not take it in
his hand, and carry it into the bosom of God the Father; and therefore, why
should I not walk humbly.

I conclude all with this, If that the Lord Jesus Christ, our great
High Priest, offers up all our Gifts unto God the Father, whereby we have
acceptance: What infinite cause have we all to be Thankful to God for Christ,
and to love Jesus Christ for ever!

Suppose one of you had been among the Disciples, when the Lord Christ washed
his Disciples feet; and he should have come, and washed your feet, and have
done it; would not your heart have glowed with love to Jesus Christ? Yet when
the Lord Jesus Christ washed his Disciples feet, it was in the days of his
flesh, when he was here on the earth: but now he is in glory, and yet for all
this, he takes your dirty prayers, and does (as it were) wash the feet of your
prayers, that he may present them to God the Father: he washes your tears over
again in his blood, and presents them to God the Father: he takes all your
Duties, and perfumes them with his intercessions, and so presents them unto God
the Father. Oh! what cause have we to love Jesus Christ! Oh! you, that never
loved Christ, love him now; and you that have loved him before, love him much
more: you that fear the lord, love the Lord: and let us all, even go away with
our hearts warmed with this love, blessing, and praising the Name of the Lord.

And thus I have led you into a Third work of our great Hight Priest, which is
this, To offer up the Gifts of the people unto God the Father: A Fourth
follows, etc.

SERMON IV.
HEBREWS 2.17, 18. Wherefore in all thing it behoved him, Preached at Stepney
May. 16. 1647.
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful
High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins
of the people. For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, he is able
to succou them that are tempted.
IT has been opened and applied, that the work of the High Priest, was, and
is, To satisfy for the sins of the people; to make Intercession for them; and
to offer up their Gifts unto God the Father; all which Christ does for us.

I shall speak of one work more of our great High Priest, and that is, To bless
the people. We read in the Old Testament, of two sorts of Highpriests: One
according to the order of Aaron, the Levitical High Priest, (as I may so speak)
and his work was, for to Bless the People; as we may read in the 6. Chapter of
Numbers, and the 23. verse: Speak unto Aaron, and unto his Sons, saying, On
this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them etc. There
was another High Priest; not according to this order of Aaron; and that was
Melchisedec: and he also did Bless Abraham. And the Apostle speaking of him as
a great Type of, and in relation to Jesus Christ our great High Priest, in the
7. Chapter of this book of the Hebrews, and the 6. verse, says, That he
blessed Abrabam: But he whose descent is not counted from them, received tithes
of Abraham, and Blessed him that had the Promises. So then, this Blessing of
the people, being the work of both the Highpriests; and both Aaron and
Melchisedec being great types of Jesus Christ our High Priest; Surely, it must
needs be one of the great works of our High Priest, for to bless the people.

For the opening, and clearing up of this Truth, I shall endeavor to discover:
First, What the Blessing of Christ our High Priest is, wherein consists, and
what Christ does when he does Bless the people. Secondly, That it belongs unto
Jesus Christ especially, for to Bless the people. Thirdly, That our Lord and
Savior Christ, our great High Priest is exceeding willing for to Bless poor
sinners; and that this Blessing of the people, is a work whereunto he is much
inclined, and wherein he is much delighted. Fourthly, That he does this, and
does it fully. Fifthly, according to our method: How all this does conduce unto
our Comfort, and unto our Holiness.


First If ye ask me, What the Blessing of Christ, and of the Gospel is; and
wherein it consists?

I answer First in the General, That the Blessing of the Gospel, and of Christ,
consists in Spiritual things especially, and not in Temporal. And therefore
says the Apostle, in that 1. of the Ephesians, and the 3. verse: Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us, with all
Spiritual blessings, in Heavenly places in Christ. The Curse, and Judgments of
God, that do befall men now under the Gospel, are not in outward afflictions,
and bodily troubles so much; as in Spiritual miseries, Blindness of mind, and
Hardness of heart: And so also on the contrary, the blessing of the Gospel,
does not consist much in Outward things, as in Spiritual, Who has blessed us
with Spiritual blessings. Indeed, if we look into the old Testament we shall
find, That when Moses did bless the people, he blessed them much in Temporal
blessings. in the 28. of Deuteronomy, and the 2. verse. All these things shall
come upon thee, and overtake thee, if thou shall hearken to the voice of the
Lord thy God. What blessings are those? Blessed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed shall thou be in the field: blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine,
and the flocks of thy sheep: blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Thus he
goes on in outward blessings. But now, if we look into the Gospel, and consider
the blessings of Jesus Christ, and lay them together with Moses, we shall find
them to be Spiritual blessings. In the 5. of Matthew, and the 3. verse, etc.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed
are those that mourn, for they sall be comforted. Indeed the promise of the
earth comes is at the 5. verse; but he returns again to Spiritual blessings:
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after rightousness; for they shall be
filled. Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God. Here are
Spiritual blessings; this is the stream of the Gospel, it runs this way. When
the Lord blesses a man, he gives him that which is suitable to him. In the
times of the Gospel, men are more Spiritual than they were in the times of the
Law; therefore Gospel-blessings, they are Spiritual blessings. Every thing
gives, and communicates to another, according to what it has it self: The Sun
communicates light unto the world; because it has light it self: And man
communicates the nature of man unto his child, because he has the nature of
man himself. So our Lord Christ, when he Blesses, he communicates according
unto what he has himself; and his blessings especially consisting in spiritual
things, so he does bless. Indeed, as in the times of the Old Testament there
were Spiritual blessings, that were mixed with Temporal, by virtue of the
Covenant that was made with Abraham: So now, Outward blessings are thrown in as
an overplus: but yet notwithstanding, though they be not spiritual in their
nature, they are spiritual in their end; and so it is true to say, That the
blessing of the Gospel, and of Christ is a spiritual blessing.

But more particularly, if yet ask me wherein this consists? I shall name but
Two things:

First, This Blessing of the Gospel, or of Christ, it consists in a
supernatural, and spiritual enjoyment of God in Christ, the love and favor of
God in Christ. When the Priests blessed in the time of the old Testament, in that
6. of Numbers, they said, The Lord cause his face for to shine upon you. The
Lord make his face for to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord
lift up his countenance upon thee: the Lord bless thee, and keep thee. Verse,
24, 25, 26. Which the Spostle Paul expounding, in the 2 Cor. the 13. Chapter
and the 14. verse, renders it thus: The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. The
Lord bless thee, the Lord cause his face to shine upon you; the Lord lift up
the light of his countenance upon you: Three times, the Lord, the Lord, the
Lord; noting the Trinity; which the Apostle here explains by the Father, the
Son, and the holy Spirit. Blessed are the pure in heart: Mat. 5.8
for they shall see God. Seeing of God, is a blessing out of the mouth of
Christ, a Gospel-blessign. And what is it for a man to see God? In the phrase
of the old Testament, the Hebrew, to See, it is ordinarily used for to Enjoy.
In the 4. Psalm. Who will show us any good? The word in the Hebrew is, Who
will make us to See any good? that is t Enjoy good. So then, to see God, it is
to enjoy him. When Jacob enjoyed God, he saw him; and the place it was called,
Peniel; for he had seen the Lord, and there the Lord blessed him. There Is no
seeing of God but in Christ. And therefore I say, that herein confists the
blessing of the Gospel, in a supernatural, and spiritual in joyment of God in
Christ, the favor and love of God in Christ.

Again, It consists also, in the Inhabitation of the holy Ghost in our hearts:
the giving out of the holy Ghost unto the hearts of men. And therefore it is
added in that place of the Corinthians; And the Communion of the holy Ghost, be
with you all. Amen. That must needs be the great blessing of the Gospel, and so
of Christ; that is the thing promised in the Gospel. What is that? If we look
into the 1. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the 4. verse, It is said
there of the Disciples, That they should wait for the promise of the Father.
Christ commaded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for
the promise of the Father. What is that? We know what it was, and is, that
which befell afterward; it was the giving out of the holy Ghost: the holy Ghost
fell upon them, and this is called THE promise of the Father. That as in the
times of the Old Testament, the promise was, the giving of the Son, and coming
of the Second Person: So after Christ came, the great promise was, the coming
of the Third Person, and the giving of the holy Ghost. When I am gone (says
Christ) I Will send ye another Comforter. He that believes, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water. This he spoke concerning the Spirit, which
was not yet given, in those extraordinary emanations of gists and graces,
because he was not yet glorisied. So then, the great Blessing that was to be
given unto the children of men, the great Gospel-blessing, was the giving out
of the holy Ghost: this is a Gospel-blessing indeed.

Well, But what does Christ do, when he does Bless?

It Is observable, Isaac, and Jacobs time; the choice good it was, The dew of
Heaven: and when they did bless their children, they wished unto them the dew
of Heaven. So now, when our Iord Jesus, our great High Priest does bless any
man; observing that the choice mercy of the Gospel, is the enjoyment of God in
Christ, the favor and love of God, and the giving out of the holy Ghost into a
man's heart; he does wis all this good unto him, and he says unto God the
Father; Lord, let this poor soul have thy favor; Oh! cause thy face to shine
upon this poor soul, and give out the holy Ghost unto it that it may walk after
the spirit.

In the Second place, It Is observable, That when the Priests did Bless the
people, they did not barely wish good unto them, but they did Authoratatively
pronounce them blessed. Numb. 6.27.
They shall put my name upon them (says the Lord) when they bless. So when the
Lord Christ, our great High Priest, does Bless a man, he does not barely wish
him good, The Lord cause his face for to shine upon that soul, in a way of
wishing: but the Lord Christ being a High Priest, when he blesses, he does
authoratatively pronounce such a soul to be Blessed.

Thirdly, When the Priest Blessed, Go, and whosoever sins ye remit, they shall
be remitted: I Will stand by you in it. So says the Lord in that same place, the
6. of Numbers. On this wise shall ye bless the children of Israel, saying unto
them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee. and at the 27. verse, They shall put
my Name upon the children of Israel, and I will blessethem. I Will stand by them
in this. So when the Lord Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, does Bless; he
does not only pronounce a man to be Blessed, but he does Absolve him from all
his sins; and (says he) by authority that is given to me from my father, the
Keys that are put into my hand, I do Bind this blessing upon this poor soul.

Further, The Priest when he blessed,

In the Fifth place, This our great High Priest, Blessed, he said unto those
things that he blessed, Increase and Multiply: still when he blessed, Increase and
Multiply. So the Lord Jesus Christ our High-Preist, when he comes to bless, he
does not barely wish good unto a poor soul, or pronounce him blessed, or beslow
a good thing upon him; but says he, O soul, Multiply in this good; the Lord
increase thy Graces, and thy Gifts, and thy Comforts; poor soul, Increase and
Multiply herein. This the Lord Christ our great High Priest does. Thus it is
clear what the Blssing of the Gospel is, wherein it consists; and what our
High Priest does, when he does bless the people.

But Secondly, Does this Blessing properly, or specially belong unto Jesus
Christ?

Yes, Answ. For he was made a curse for sin; he and none else made a curse for
sin: and therefore it belongs unto him above all the world for to bless. For
look what evil Jesus Christ endured, the contrary good he merited for the
children of men, a power to bestow that good. Now he above all was cursed, hung
upon the Cross, and died a cursed death, he was made a curse; therefore it
belongs unto him above all for to give the blessing, for to bless poor
sinners. Primum in quolibet genere etc. The first in every kind is the cause of
the rest. The Sun is the cause of all the light we have here below, and it is
the first light body. And the Lord Jesus Christ, he is the first blessing:
Therefore has they God blessed thee for ever. There are Three that we read of
in Scripture especially that did bless: The Father, the King, and the Priest:
The Father did bless his Children; the King blessed his Subjects, and the Priest
blessed the People. Now the Lord Jesus Christ He is our Father, The Everlasting
Father; He is our King, I will set my King upon my holy hill; And he is our
great High Priest: and therefore, all these relations meeting in him, it
belongs unto him above all for to bless the people.

But is the Lord Jesus Christ Willing for to Bless poor sinners, and inclined
unto it?

Yes, is a work whereunto he is much inclined, and wherein he is most
delighted. Ye shall observe therefore, what abundance of blessings Christ
scattered among the people when he was here upon the earth. Ye don't read that
ever he cursed any man, formally cursed him: Once indeed, he pronounced a
Curse, but it fell upon a barren fig tree, not upon a man: But take your
Bibles, and turn over from leaf to leaf, and see how frequent he was in
blessing: and consider whether you do read in all the Bible, of any Preacher,
or Prophet, that ever in the way of their preaching, pronounced so many
Blessings as Christ did? He begins blessing, Blessed are the poor; and Blessed
are those that mourn; and Blessed are those that hunger and thirst; and Blessed
are those that are persecuted for my Names sake: Blessed are those that hear
the Word of God and keep it: He took little children into his arms and Blessed
them. Do but mark in all the Gospel, how frequent Christ was in Blessing, never
in Cursing; more frequent in blessing, than ever any Preacher was in all his
Sermons: What Is the reason of this? Because this work of Blessing the people,
is a work wherein the Lord Jesus Christ our High Priest, is much delighted, a
work whereunto he is most in clined.

Well, But does he do it?

Yes, He does do it, and does it fully. Ephesians, and the 3. verse, Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in beavenly places IN Christ. Nor only meritoriously, but
by the hand of Christ. And (says he) He has done it: with all spiritual
blessings, and he has done it by Jesus Christ.

You will say, We don't see that men are thus blessed by Christ: Oject.
for where Christ blesses, he does not only wish well, and good unto a wan,
but he bestows it, yea, he does not only bestow good, but he does increase
and multiply; But upon this account, how few are there in the world that are
blessed by Christ!

For Answer, It is a hard thing (sometimes) unto a Christian for to
discern-this Blessing of Christ. Ye can see the Boughs, Fruit, Body, Bark of
the Tree; but if ye will see the Root, ye must dig, and take pains for to see
it: it is an easy thing to see the Leaves, etc. but if you would see the Root,
ye must dig and take pains for it. This Blessing of Jesus Christ, it is the
Root of all; and if you will see this, you must dig and take pains to see it,
it does not lie open to every ones view. The Lord Jesus Christ our High Priest,
does not Bless as man blesses; and so his Blessing is very much hidden from
our eyes; he does not bless as we do; he does not bless as the world does: if
the world sees a Rich man, it pronounces him blessed: Oh! there is a blessed
man, and there is a happy man! what an excellent Dwelling has he, how
healthful! his Table is spread etc. The world blesses Rich men, pronounces them
Happy and blessed. But our Lord Jesus Christ, he does as Jacob did; when Joseph
brought his two Sons to Jacob to be blessed by him; he set Ephraim the younger at
the left hand of Jacob; and he set Manasses the elder at the right hand of
Jacob; that Jacob might give the right hand blessing to the Elder, and the
left hand blessing to the Younger: but when Joseph had set them thus before
Jacob, Jacob crosses hands, and he turns the right hand blessing to the
Younger. So, two men are brought before Christ; a Rich man (it may be) and a
Poor man: and in the eye of the world, the Rich man must carry the blessing:
Oh! but our Lord Christ, he crosses hands, and he lays the blessing upon the
younger brother many times. And so in regard of Ordinances. Two sorts of
Ordinances are brought before Christ; Gods Ordinance, and Man's Ordinance; and
Man's Ordinance, in the eye of the world, is the Elder brother, and Gods
Ordinance the Younger brother; and both these are brought before Christ for a
blessing, and the Ordinance of Man is set at the right hand of Christ by the
world; but the Lord Christ, he crosses hands, and he lays the blessing upon
the younger brother in this respect. And so, two men are brought before him; a
proud Pharisee, and a poor brokenhearted sinner; the Pharisee comes unto the
right hand of Christ, and thinks for to carry the blessing: but the Lord
Christ, crosses hands, and lays the right hand blessing upon the poor
brokenhearted sinner, and passes by the proud Pharisee. The Lord Christ does
not bless as the world blesses.

Again, As he does not Bless as the World Blesses, so he does not Bless
always as Professors Bless. Professors, they do ordinarily Bless men,
according unto their outward Privileges, Gospel, and Church Priviledges: Oh!
says the woman unto Christ, Blessed is the womb that bare thee: and blessed
are the paps that gave thee suck. Christ crosses hands. Nay but (says Christ)
Blessed are those that hear the word of God, and keep it, and do my
Commandments. You bless according to Outward Privileges; I don't go that way
of blessing, says Christ: He does not bless as Professors bless always.

Thirdly, He does not bless as Godly men do bless always; as Gracious men
bless, not always. For, you that are Godly, you pronounce such a man blessed,
as has much Grace, and has Assurance of the love of God in Christ; and one
that has strong, and great Parts, and able to carry away whole Sermons word
for word; and of strong Memory, and large Gifts, that are head and shoulders
above their fellows: But the Lord Jesus Christ does not always bless thus:
Blessed are the poor in spirit, says he. Blessed are those that mourn. He
don't say, Blessed are those that rejoice; or, Blessed are those that have the
Assurance of Gods love; or, Blessed are those that are strong in grace: No, but
do thou know a poor, weak Christian, a mourning soul like a dove of the
valleys; says the Lord, I bless him.

Thus I say, the Lord Jesus Christ our great High Priest, he does not Bless as
We bless; he does not bless as the World blesses; he does not bless always
as Professors bless; he does not bless always as Godly men Bless; and
therefore no wonder that his Blessing is hidden. Children when they are very
young, are often blessed by their Parents, and they don't mind it, or take notice
of it; children of two or three year old: And so it is with many a gracious
soul, blessed by Jesus Christ, and don't take notice of their fathers blessing.
But the Lord Christ does always bless his people; only, there are several
times, special seasons that he gives out his blessing: let me tell ye of those
times a little, that so ye may come for his blessing while his hand is in, as
it were: so that you may be crowned with spiritual blessings in and from Jesus
Christ.

First, When Christ our High Priest does see that a man is weak in Grace, or
weak in Gifts, and has some work, or service for him to do, some employment to
call him forth unto; then the Lord Christ does Bless him. There are Two times
especially (as I remember) that the Lord speaks those words concerning man,
Increase and Multiply. Once in the beginning, when he had made man and woman;
And once in the 9. of Genesis, when he had brought Noah out of the Ark: Why
does he rather choose for to speak those words, Increase and Multiply, at these
Two times especially, rather than at any other time? In the beginning there was
but a little stook of mankind, and the Lord had a design upon man, to make use
of him in the world; and therefore in the beginning says he, Increase and
Multiply: but afterward, that the flood had swept away man, Noah and his family
being preserved, when he came out of the Ark, the Lord having yet a further
design upon man, to use him, he renews those words again, Increase and
Multiply. So when the Lord Christ sees, that a man's heart is upright, and
sincere with him, and he has some work and service for him to do, then the
Lord comes forth and blesses him; O soul, Increase and Multiply, increase in
thy Gifts, and Graces, and Multiply. That is one.

Again, As the Lord does bless weak Gifts, and Graces, when he intends to use
them: so also, when as he has made use of a man; when a man has done the work
of God, and done it to purpose, then the Lord blesses that man. Melchisedec, a
great Type of Christ, here when Abraham had been upon a great service, slaying
Kings, and resoued Lot, then Melchisedec the High Priest* comes forth and
blesses him. So when the Lord Jesus Christ our great High Priest, sees that a
poor soul has been upon his work, upon his service, and has done his work
faithfully; then he comes forth and blesses that soul, O soul, live for ever.

Again, As he does bless at this time, Abraham, Thou shall be blessed. In
Blessing I will Bless thee, and thou shall be blessed. Upon what occasion?
Abraham (says he) get thee out of thy Country, and go to a land, and place
that I will show thee. and Abraham did so, Abraham pulled up his Tent, and went
after the Lord, and left his own Relations: and thereupon the Lord fell upon
him, and blessed him. So when the Lord Christ our High Priest, sees a soul
willing, even to trample upon his Relations for to follow him; willing to leave
all natural engagements for to be his servant; then the Lord Christ comes out,
and says he, This soul do I bless: In blessing I will bless thee, and I will
bless thee exceedingly. That is a Third time.

Fourthly, The Lord Christ our High Priest, does bless, when the world Curses.
a special time of Christ's blessing is, when the world Curses. When Rabshekah
reviled, blasphemed and Cursed, then God blessed. When Balak hired Balaam for to
Curse the people of Israel, then the Lord blessed them by the mouth of Balaam
himself. And ye see what Christ says to this purpose, in that same 5. chapter
of Matthew, at the 10. verse. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake: But when are they blessed? Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake. Blessed are ye when men shall persecute you. I but, suppose
it don't come to a bodily persecution, men may not be thrown in prison, or
brought to the stake. Says he, Blessed are ye when men shall Revile, persecute
you with the tongue, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake. When
the world says of such a poor soul, That he is an Hypocrite, a dissembler, and
speaks all manner of evil that can be divised against a poor soul for the
Name of Christ; that is the very time, that Christ comes for to bless that
soul, then does Christ bless; it is a blessed season.

In the Fifth place, The Lord Christ does also Bless, when as People do
graciously enjoy the Ordinances, purely, and Evangelically administered. It is
said concerning Zion, There commanded he his blessing for ever, Psa. 89.15.
Blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound: they shall walk in the
light of his countenance. It is written of the Priests in the times of the
Old Testament, that when the people, the Congregation were come together, they
blessed them: when the People were come together, for the enjoyment of Ordinances
according to Gods own appointment, then the Priests blessed them. And did their
High Priest bless them then? and shall not our High Priest do it now? Did
their High Priest bless them when they sat under Mosaical Ordinances? and
shall not our High Priest bless the people that sit under Evangelical, and
Gospel Ordinances purely, and Evangelically administered? The people then might
make account of the greatest blessing; and so may you do also, of the blessing
of Jesus Christ when thus you do enjoy Ordinances. Only there is this
difference: (other differences there are, but this only I shall speak of) Then
the Priest did bless the people when the Congregation was dismissed: but now,
the Lord Jesus Christ our great High Priest, he is blessing of the Congregation
all the while; he is going up and down in the Congregation all the while that
the Word is preached, and Ordinances administered, and he is blessing poor
souls, as they sit longing after him, and sighing toward him; he is blessing
of them all the while. Thus he does bless, and though you don't always
perceive it, yet he does bless his people.

But yet you will say, How does all this conduce unto our Comfort, and unto our
Holiness?

Much every way:

First for Comfort, Beloved, Is it not a Comfortable thing to be blessed by
Jesus Christ? Children counted it a great matter to be blessed by their parents.
when as Jacob had gotten the Blessing from Esau; Esau goes and fits down, and
mourns, he could not be comforted because the blessing was gone: and Jacob,
though he were thrust out of doors, yet because he had gotten the Blessing, he
went away cheerful; and it was but an Isaac's Blessing. But behold a greater
then Isaac is here! Oh! was it such a matter to have an Isaac's Blessing? what
is it then to be Blessed by Jesus Christ? Beloved! when as Christ does bless,
he turns all our Curses into Blessings, and our Miseries into Mercies. When God
Curses, he turns our Table into a Snare: and when Christ Blesses, he turns
our snare into a Table, quite contrary. Jacob pronounced a Curse upon his two
sons, Simeon and Levi (you know upon what occasion) They should be divided and
scattered in Israel: afterward the Tribe of Levi stands up at the commandment
of God to execute Justice and Judgment, and the Lord blessed them: And how did he
bless them? They were to be the Preachers unto all the Tribes; and so that they
might be Preachers unto all the Tribes, they were to be scattered into all the
tribes, and so Jacobs curse was turned into a blessing to them.

Is it not a Comfortable thing, for a man to have all his Cursers, to be
Blessers? It Is a Comfortable thing, for all a man's Curses, to become Blessings:
But now I say, it is a Comfortable thing, for all a man's Cursers, to be Blesters
to him. When the Lord Christ Blesses, he will make men's Cursers, whether they
will or no, (in the day of their visitation at least) for to Bless. Ye know that
Balaam would have Cursed Israel, but the Lord had blessed them. Balaam got upon a
high mountain, and from thence he would have Cursed Israel, but it would not
be. Then he gets upon another high Mountain, and from thence he would have
Cursed Israel, but it would not be. Then he gets upon another high Mountain:
thinking that would have done it, and from thence he would have Cursed Israel,
but that would not do it. Oh! says he, The Lord has seen no iniquity in
Israel, and therefore he Blesses them: the Curse is turned into a Blessing: So
there are many that deal thus by the people of God in these days: They get
upon such a high Mountain, such a great and high means, and they think to Curse
the people of God from thence, but it will not be. Then they get upon another
Mountain, another means, thinking from thence to Curse the people of God, but
it will not be. Then they get upon another high Mountain or hill, and think
then to Curse the people of God, and do them mischief, but it will not do it.
Why? for the Lord Christ sees no iniquity, the Lord Christ has blessed them: and
so at last, in the day of wicked men's visitation, they are forced to say, These
are the people of God, and these are Blessed, and shall be blessed. We know
what is said in the Scripture, The blessing of the Lord makes rich: and he
adds no sorrow therewithal. Is it not a good thing then, to be blessed by
Christ? If a man be blessed by Jesus Christ, he may bless himself in the Lord,
and he may comfort himself in every Condition, and he may say thus, Well,
though I be a Poor man, yet I am blessed by Christ: And though my Estate be sunk,
and decayed, yet I am blessed by Christ: And though I be reproached, and hated by
men, yet I am blessed by Jesus Christ; a man may comfort himself in every
condition.

But you will say, Indeed if a man be assured that Christ has blessed him, he
may do thus; but I am afraid that Christ has not blessed me, or that he is not
willing to bless me: if I could be assured, that this great High Priest, had
once laid his hand, his blessinghand upon me, I should have comfort in all
conditions.

Give me leave to lay Two or Three things before you concerning this.

First, Abraham, he said unto him, In thee, and thy seed shall all Nations be
Blessed. It Is a sign unto Abraham, that he was blessed, because others were blessed
by him. So now, when a man's Parts, Gifts, Graces, and Comforts are blessings to
others, it is an argument that that man is blessed himself.

Further, When a man is blessed by God, or Christ; Come ye Blessed, Go ye
Cursed. Blessing has an attractive Nature, Come ye Blessed: when the Lord
Christ does bless a man, he does draw him, Come ye Blessed. When a man is
brought nearer to God by Affliction, he is blessed: when a man is brought
nearer to God by his Estate, by any Comfort, by any Sorrow, here is blessing,
Come ye Blessed. Blessing draws one nearer to God with a cord of love.

Thirdly, Where the Lord does Bless, he does cause a man to Increase and
Multiply, in that thing wherein he is Blessed. Plenty is put for Blessing. I will
give you but one clear place for it in the new Testament, the 2 Cor. 9.
Chapter, 5. verse. Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren,
that they would go before unto ye, and make up before hand your Bounty. The
word is, your Blessing. Whereof you had notice before; that the same might be
ready as a matter of Bounty. The word is, as a matter of Blessing. But
especially in the next verse. But this I say, he which sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly: and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. And he
which sows with Blessing (as it is in the Original) shall reap with Blessing:
And here it is opposed to Sparingly, and translated Bountifully. Where the Lord
does bless, he does always cause a man to Increase and Multiply.

Now beloved in the Lord, I appeal unto all your souls, you that make this
Objection, that are afraid the Lord Christ has not blessed you as your
High Priest, has not laid his hand upon you, and blessed you: yet don't ye know
more of Christ than ye have known before? has not the hidden truths of the
Gospel been increased and multiplied upon your hearts? has not your hearts
been brought nearer to God by Affliction? has not your souls been drawn nearer
to God by his outward dealings with you? And as Abraham was therefore blessed,
because he was made a blessing to others: So I appeal to ye, have not your
Parts, Gifts, and Graces, in some measure been blessings unto others, even unto
your poor Family, and unto others also? Then be of good Comfort (man or woman)
where ever thou stand'st, the Lord Christ has blessed thee, and thou shall be
blessed, hold up thy head poor blessed soul, the Lord Jesus has blessed thee:
when the Lord did lay this blessing upon thee, I cannot till thee, but I find
thee a blessed man, stay thy self upon the Lord, cheer up thy drooping heart,
thou art a blessed soul.

But you will say, How does this make unto our Holiness? I confess this is a
very Comfortable Cordial, That the Lord Jesus Christ is in office to bless poor
sinners; but how does this conduce unto our Holiness?

Very much: Gilgal, for then the Curse is rouled away from him. Blessed is the
man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is pardoned. The first day, the
first minute that he comes to Christ, his sin is pardoned, and he is blessed.
Who would not then come unto Christ presently, that he may be blessed for ever?
When as Esan had sold his Birthright for a mess of pottage, the Lord looked
upon him as a Profane man, and he stands upon record in Scripture for a
Profane man unto this day, because he sold his Birthright. And says the
text, Though he sought the Blessing (it was a blessing) with tears, he never
recovered it. The Lord Jesus Christ, he is now among us, and offering to bless
us; and if I will rather keep my sins than come unto Jesus Christ, the Lord
will look upon me as a Profane man; and I may go and seek the blessing with
tears, and never recover it again. Oh! here is that (me thinks) that should make
every wicked man; if there be ever a Drunkard, Swearer, or Unclean wanton that
reads this book, mind what is said for your Everlasting peace: I say, here is
that (me thinks) that should make every wicked man, to look upon the Godly, as
David did upon the sparrows, and upon the swallows: Says David, These birds
full nigh thine Altar may, have place to sit and sing: as ye have it in your
singing Psalms. These birds can come and make their nests; but as for me, I am
kept at a distance: He was provoked by the sparrows, and swallows making their
nests near the Altar. So may a wicked man say, There Is a godly man indeed, he
may go to Jesus Christ, he may go to Prayer, and he may offer up his Gift to
God the Father by the hands of Christ, he can come near to God by Christ: But
as for me, I am yet without Christ, I am not yet gone to Jesus Christ; I am
such a cursed Swearer, I am such a profane Drunkard, I am such a vile,
wretched Wanton, such a Notorious, Scandelous sinner: Oh! these people are
blessed, but I am Cursed, but now through the Lords grace I will go unto the
Lord Christ that I may be blessed.

Yea, My beloved, here is (me thinks) a strong Invitation, unto all those that
are young people for to come unto Jesus Christ: even those that are very young.
Hear the word of the Lord ye Children. The Lord Jesus Christ received Children
into his arms, and he blessed them. You that are nine, ten, eleven, twelve,
thirteen, fourteen, or fifteen years old; you can be solicitous for your
fathers blessing, and have gone down upon your knees often unto your father,
and you have said, Pray father, pray to God to bless me. Oh! will ye go to your
outward father for his blessing? and will ye not go unto Jesus Christ? He is an
Everlasting Father, this your earthly father will be dead erelong; He is an
Everlasting father (children) and he is able to bless ye, and willing to bless
ye. Have ye gone down upon your knees to your outward father? Oh! children,
down, down upon your knees before the Lord Jesus Chrit, and go to him for his
blssing. Some of you (it may be) never went yet to Christ for his blessing; ye
have lived so many years, ten, eleven, or twelve years, and never went to
Christ as a High Priest, for his blessing all this while: Oh! what a mighty
encouragement is here unto all men to come to Christ, that they may be blessed
by him.

But yet further, So this argument does also encourage us to go on in the good
ways of Christ, notwithstanding all opposition that we meet withal: (I say)
it does speak encouragement, to go on in the face of all opposition. For when
Abraham had been at battle, then came Melchisedec the High Priest to bless him:
And when a poor soul goes out to battle for Christ, then comes our great
Melchisedec, our High Priest, and blesses that soul. The time of opposition, it
is the time of Christ's blessing. Therefore, why should I be dilcouraged, or
beaten out of the way of Christ, by reason of any opposition, though it be
never so great? Times of opposition are Christ's blessing-time.

Again, But it does also encourage us to go on in the good ways of God when we
are called unto it, though we have but little strength, and weak parts. Though
there be but little oil in the Cruse, though there be but little meal in the
barrel, if Christ call to the work, he will bless a man in it: and when Christ
blesses, he does multiply and increase a man's parts in the using of them. As
when he commanded them to sit down, and eat, he did multiply, and increase the
bread in their eating: So now, does Christ call me to any work or service, well
then, though I am weak, though I have not oil enough, though I have not meal
enough, though I have not strenght enough; yet the Lord Christ will bless, and
when he blesses, he does increase and multiply: and therefore, why should I not
go on upon his work, if he do call me thereunto, though I have never so little
strength.

And yet further, If all this be true: All, as Jacob oncesaid, I have All.

Yea in the Fifth and last place: Here is that,

Well, But what will make a man to be always Blessing, and Praising of God in
Christ?

The knowledge that a man is blessed by Christ, Ephesians, and the 3. verse.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: Why? Who has blessed
US. When once a man can come to this, for to say, That the Lord Christ has
blessed him; then he will break forth into blessing and praising of the Lord; Oh!
Blessed be the Lord: Bless the Lord, O my soul; and bless the Lord all that
is within me: For the Lord has blessed me with spiritual blessings. Do you
therefore desire to be always in this work of blessing the Lord? think much of
this.

To conclude al; give me leave to call upon you, to remember what ye have read.
Ye have read, That it is the work of our great High Priest, To Satisfy for the
sins of the people. To answer unto all Accusations that are brought against
them: To offer up all our Prayers, and Gifts unto God the Father: And to Bless
poor souls. Now then beloved, according to all your Wants, and according to all
your Temptations; I do beseech you in the Lord, Go to Jesus Christ, unto this
High Priest; try and see if you don't find it true, That the Lord does make
good all this unto you. In case that you be under any spiritual Want, or
Temptation; put your souls unto this Disjunction: Come, O my soul, Either the
Lord Jesus Christ is our great High-Friest; or else he is not: If he be not,
what means this and that Scripture? And if the Lord Jesus Christ be our great
High Priest; then surely he being faithful, will do all the work of the
High Priest for my soul. Indeed I have sinned, and sinned greatly; but O Lord,
it is the work of our High Priest to Satisfy: Now, Lord Jesus, I come to thee
as mine High Priest, Oh! Satisfy for me. Indeed, I confess, mine own
Conscience does Accuse me, Satan does Accuse me, Moses does Accuse me: but it
is the work of our great High Priest, to take off all Accusations brought
against poor believers: Now Lord, I do come unto thee, as to my great
High Priest, Oh! take off this Accusation that any poor soul does labor under.
Indeed, when I look upon mine own Duties; there is so much deadness, so much
hardness of heart, and so many distractions that do accompany them, that I am
afraid they will never be accepted: but, O Lord, it is the work of our great
High Priest, to take away the weeds of the Duty, and to present the Duty; now O
Lord, I come unto thee as mine High Priest, Oh! carry my Prayers into the bosom
of God the Father. Yea, when I look upon my former life, Lord, I cannot but
conclude my self, a poor cursed finner: but yet notwithstanding, it is the work
of our great High Priest, for to bless the people: O Lord, I do therefore now
come unto thee as mine High Priest, Oh! bless me, and say unto all my graces,
Increase and Multiply.

FINIS.
SATAN'S Power to tempt; AND CHRIST'S love to, and care of his people under
temptation.
HEBREWS 2.18 For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, Preached at
Margrets New-fish street October. 5. 1646.
he is able to succor them that are tempted.
THE Scope and Drift of this Epistle, is to raise and strengthen the faith of
the Hebrews, and so the faith of those that are weak in grace. Our Apostle
Paul therefore (whom I take to be the Penman) labors to discover the
transcendent Excellency of Jesus Christ, with his love and good will to the
Children of men. And because his Excellencies, were either such as relate his
Person; or such as relate his Offices, of King, Priest, and Prophet: He tells us
in the first Chapter, that for the Personal Excellencies of Jesus Christ; He is
the Son of God; Heir of all things; by whom were the Worlds made: being the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express Image of his Person, in the 2,
and 3. verses of that Chapters. That he is far above the Angels, at the 4.
verse. That he is God himself, at the 6. verse. And as for those excellencies
that relate his Offices: He tells us at the 1. verse, That he is the Prophet of
Prophets. That he is the great King, at the 8. verse. That he is an
High Priest, in the 2. Chap. and the 17. verse: and therefore who would not
trust unto him, and take heed unto such things are he shall speak unto them.
And as for the love, and good will that he bears unto the Children of men; the
Apostle speaks it out in all this Second Chapter.

The greater Condeseention in the person loving, to the person loved, the
greater is the love. Now though Jesus Christ be Heir of all things; and had all
things put under his feet; far above all Angels: yet notwithstanding, at the 7.
verse, He is made a little lower than the Angels, takes our nature upon him,
etc.

The more Profitable any love is, to the person loved, the greater is the love.
Such is the love of Christ; for his love is such, That by him many sons are
brought to glory, at the 10. verse. Sanctified while they live, at the 11.
verse. Satan their deadly enemy subdued for them, at the 14, and 15: verses.

The more Distinguishing any love is, the greater is that love. Now Jesus
Christ, as the great Lodestone, passes by the golden mettel of Angels, and
draws unto himself the Iron-mettal of man kind, at the 16. verse: For verily,
he took not on him the nature of Angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

Again, The more the person loving, does Suffer for the person loved, the more
and the greater is the love. Christ suffered death, and he was while he lived
subject to our infirmities, and unto our temptations: He was in all thing made
like unto us, at the 17. verse. And he was tempted as we are tempted, that he
might succor those that are tempted, at the 18. verse.

And would you have an Account, or a Reason of all this? it is, that he might
show mercy unto the children of men, verse the 17. Wherefore in all things it
behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest, in things partaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. If he were not made like unto us in regard of our
infirmities, he could not so experimentally pity us under our infirmities: If
he were not tempted like unto us, he could not so feelingly succor us under
our temptation; and so he had not been so fit to have benn our High Priest: but
our High Priest he is gone into the holy of holiest, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like
unto us, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest: For in that he
himself has suffered being tempted, be is able to succor them that are
tempted,

I will not hold you longer in the Coherence, or Division of the words, or
further Explication: I shall open the words (God willing) more particularly,
and distinctly, as I shall come to the Observations that shall be raised from
them. And I begin with the last, being made the reason of the former. For in
that he him self has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. Tempted twice: He tempted, and They tempted.

This word Tempted, or Tempt; it is given in Scripture phrase, sometimes to
God, sometimes to Man, and sometimes to the Devil; and accordingly it is used
Three ways: Sometimes it is used for to Prove; and so God is said for to
Tempt, in the 13. of Deuteronomy. Sometimes it is used for to Try, to make
experiment of a Thing, or a Person, whom or which we did not know before; and
so it is given to Man (as I take it) in the 6. of Judges. Sometimes it is used
for a Solicitation, and Drawing unto what is evil; and so it is given unto the
Devil, in the 4. of Matthew, Christ was led into the axilderness to be tempted.
If ye look into the Scripture, ye don't find in all the old Testament, that the
word Temptation is given to Satan, that Satan was said to Tempt any: Satan did
frequently Tempt, we read in the old Testament; but I say, the word Tempt is
not given unto him. Satan tempted Job, but Job's afflictions in the old
Testament, are not called Satan's temptations. As our Lord and Savior Christ in
the old Testament was Veiled, the old Testament was full of Christ, yet Christ
was hidden there: So was Satan and his temptations mask't. Now when the light
of the glorious Gospel shined more clearly in the coming of Jesus Christ, as
Christ's vail was taken off, so Satan's Mask was taken off; Satan's temptations
are no longer called afflictions, but bare Temptations, throughout the
New Testament. Indeed, this word Temptation, in the phrase of the new
Testament, is used sometimes for Affliction; Sometimes for Satan's Suggestions;
sometimes for our own Sins. Temptation used for our Afflictions: in the 1. of
James, 2. verse, Rejoice when ye fall into diverse temptations. That is,
Afflictions. Sometimes for the Devils suggestions, Solicitations to evil. So in
the 4. of Matthew, Christ is led into the wilderness to be tempted. Sometimes
for our own sins. Galatians the 6 chapter, and the 1. verse. If any man be
overtaken with an infirmity, you that are spiritual, restore him, considering
that you also may be tempted. Now though our Savior Christ is said to be
Tempted, in the two first respects, and not in the third; yet when it is said
here in the text, He himself has suffered being tempted; I take it to be meant
in the second way, not the first: for otherwise, there would be an identity
thus: He himself has suffered; having suffered; that would be the sense of it
else. And though we our selves are said to be tempted in all three respects, In
regard of Afflictions, Satan's Suggestions, and our own Corruptions, and Sins;
yet when it is said in the latter end of the verse, He is able to succor them
that are tempted; I take it to be meant especially in he two last respects, and
not in the first: for it has relation unto that which goes before the last
verse being a reason of the latter end of the 17. verse. To make reconciliation
for the sins of the people, for in that he himself has suffered, being
tempted, he is able to succovr them that are tempted. Hence the Observation
that I shall present unto you is only this.

That God does suffer his own Servants, and dearest Children, to be sorely
tempted. Yea, even to suffer by the hand of the temptation.

Our Lord and Savior Christ, the Son of God, the only Beloved Son of God, yet
says the text, He himself has suffered being tempted: not only tempted, but
suffered being tempted. And it is said, of his Brethren, (for so his people are
called, in the beginning of the 17. verse) that they are tempted: He is able to
succor them that are tempted. Succouring presupposes suffering.

For the opening, and clearing of this Truth, I shall deliver my self these
Three ways.

First, That there is a suffering, Afflictive disposition in every Temptation,
though it don't prevail.

Secondly, That the Saints and People of God do thus suffer, and why?

Thirdly, Answer to an Objection; and so come to the Application.

First, There is a Vexing, Corroding, Afflictive disposition in every
temptation, when it takes least, though it do not prevail These Grenades,
fire-bals, fire-darts of Satan have a danger with them; though they do not burn
down our spiritual building to the ground, they are afflictive, there is
somewhat of a suffering with them. Paul calls his buffetings, a thorn, or a
prick in the flesh: a Buffetting and therefore Afflictive; a thorn, or a prick
in the flesh, and therefore Afflictive. Notable is that expression which our
Savior Christ uses, in the 22. of Luke, at the 31. verse, to Peter. Simon,
Simon, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat. There is
never a word here, but carries a suffering with it. It is some affliction, to
have so great an Adversary as an Angel is, who is great in Power; the Devil is
called an Angel, and he is called Satan, that is an Adversary. [Satan has
desired] the word that is used there, Desired, (...)
it is not used again in the new Testament, (as I remember) But in other
Authors that use it, it signifies such a Desiring, as when one man does
challenge another into the field to a Duel: Or such a Desiring, as when a man
comes and calls for open, and public Punishment upon a man: and all this is
Suffering, and Afflictive. Or, as your translation has it: Satan has desired
to Have you. He does not say thus: Satan has desired to Sift you; but Satan
has desired to Have you. Is it not an affliction to a child, to hear a Beggar
stand craving, and begging of his father to have him away, to carry him away
from his house? There is never a Temptation, but in that Temptation Satan
desires to Have you, you that are the Children of God, Satan desires to have
you. Then again, He has desired to have you that he may [sift you as wheat.]
Now though in sifting, there is a separation between the Chaff and the wheat,
yet it is not without a concussion, and a shaking of the wheat: the wheat and
the grain is shaken, though the chafe be blown aside, and laid on heaps. And
though through the skill of the sifter, the wheat may be so kept, as it does not
fall into the chaffe-heap; yet notwithstanding, there is some danger in sifting,
that the grain should fall over into the heap of chafe, and be burnt with the
chafe: So here. Especially where Satan, the great destroyer of mankind, has
the fan in his hand: Says Christ, Satan has desired to have you, and has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; and I tell you, there is so
much danger in it, that nothing but my prayer can secure you, But I have prayed
for you. So that you see, there is something of a Suffering in a Temptation.
You know it was a Law in the old Testament, that if a woman were abroad in the
fields, and there met her some that offered violence to her; if she cried out,
and did not consent, she was not guilty: but now, though she were not guilty,
but inocent, if she were abused, it would be a continual affliction, to a
modest good woman. So it is here, Satan comes to meet us, and though we do not
consent to him, yet a gracious heart cannot but look upon it as an affliction,
to be thus followed, and haunted with a Temptation. And the holy Ghost alluded
to this practice, when he says here in the text, Jesus Christ is able to
succor: The word Succor, (...).
signifies such a Succouring as brings in help unto those that cry out; to come
in, and run in with help upon ones crying out. In the 12. of the Revelation, it
is said, Woe to the inhabitants of the earth; for the Devil is come down with
great wrath, for he knows that his time is short. There is a Woe in it, where
the Devil comes down with great wrath. Now he looks upon all the Saints, as
having their time but short, and he comes down upon them in great wrath with
his temptations: and there is a Woe in it, although the temptation takes not:
And for ought I know, upon this account, the New Testament may so promiscuously
use the word Temptation, both for Affliction, and Satan's Suggestions, even
because seldom any Affliction comes, but it does bring Temptation with it:
never any Temptation but brings Affliction: always something of a Suffering in
every Temptation, even at that very time when it does least prevail. This is
the First thing.

Secondly, Does God suffer his own children thus to Suffer?

Yes, And many times the best, most tempted, the best men meet with the worst
temptations, those that are most eminently Godly, are most foully assaulted.
David, Job, Peter, Paul, and Christ himself was. Yea, God does not only suffer
Satan to come, and present evil objects before his servants, but suffers him to
go so far, as to solicit, to press, to follow on his temptation. And therefore
it is said concerning David, That Satan stood up, and provoked him to Number
the people. He did not only present an evil object to him, but he followed his
temptation, he solicited, he stood up and provoked David to Number the people.

Yea, God does not only suffer this: but at that very time, when the Saints
have had most of God, then they have suffered by the hand of temptation. when
Paul had been taken up into the third Heaven, then a messenger, Satan was sent
to buffet him. And when Jesus Christ had heard the voice, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased: Then (says the text in the 4. of Matthew 1.)
was he led by the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. And
so with the Saints now: when they have been, as it were, in the third Heaven
with God, when they have had most of him, when they have heard the Lord saying,
This is my beloved child; after special manifestations of his love, then most
tempted: Oh! who would be secure, after manifestations of Gods love?

Further, God does not only suffer it thus far: but sometimes he suffers his
children to be so far tempted, as they seem to have the worser, Satan the
better; Satan taking the wall of them, the upper hand, In the 3. of Zachary, it
is said concerning Joshua: That Satan stood at his right hand: Satan took the
wall of him, took the upper hand of him.

Lastly, God suffers this to be, and to continue a long time with some of his
children. Paul says, he had prayed thrice: that is, often; and all the answer
he could get was this, My grace is sufficient for thee, (Paul) I don't say, I
will deliver thee, but thou shall have grace enough to uphold thee, My grace
shall be sufficient. Thus God suffers his own dear children to Suffer under the
hand of temptation.

And would you know the Reason? That God suffers his own dear children to be
tempted, that they may be more enlightened. Temptation inlightens the tempted;
there by they are more experienced, and so more enlightened: God is pleased to
answer them by this secret of thunder.

God suffers his children thus to be tempted, That they may be cleansed. This
is Gods usual way, he does wash us from our own filth, by the dung and
excrement of these unclean spirits: and scowres of the rust from his chosen
vessels by the messengers of Satan: these are Gods scullions to make his golden
pots of the Sanctuary the brighter.

God suffers his own children to be tempted, That they may be conserved, or
kept: He preserves them from one sin, by being tempted to another. And Paul
says, That he received that messenger of Satan, twice, that he might not be
exalted.

God suffers his children to be tempted, That their graces may be increased. As
the fire is blown up by the wind of the bellows; and the strength of an
Argument, draws out the strength of the Answerer: So does these temptations
draw out the strength of the tempted.

God suffers his Children to be tempted, That they may be discovered to
themselves, and others; what their sins and graces are. You don't know what the
liquor is, till the vessel be bored, then you know it. And the word that is
used here for Temptation, Originally signifies to bore, as a vessel is bored.
(...)
The love of a woman is never more known, than when her husband is from home,
and she is solicited to folly, then her love is tried to her husband.

God suffers his children to be tempted, That occasionally they may be made
more fit to receive the fullness of Christ as a Savior. A man not tempted may
receive the fullness of Christ as the head: but unless a man be tempted, not
fit to receive the fullness of Christ as a Savior.

Hereby they are made like unto Jesus Christ. the Suffering part of it: For in
that he suffered being once tempted, he is able to succor those that are
temped.

And upon the same reason, or account, that God suffered the children of Israel
to be Vexed, and to suffer by the hands of the Egyptians, he does suffer his
own dear children to be stung, and vexed by these temptations. Give me leave a
little in that.

God suffered the Isralites to be vexed, That so be might make his glorious
power the more to appear for them, and in them. For when men saw, that the
Isralites increased and prospered, the more they were oppressed, and the more
that the Egyptians labored to cut them off: then who would not say, Oh! what
power, and what mercy is here? So now, when as men shall see, that the graces
of the Saints increase the more by temptation, and by spiritual oppression; who
would not say, Oh! what mercy, and what power is here?

God suffered the Isralites to be vexed by the Egyptians, That the Isralites
might not learn their manners, and their Superstitions. They were very apt to
drink-in their manners, to imitate, to follow them. Notwithstanding all the ill
usage that the Israelites had at the hand of the Egyptians, they were very apt
to learn their manners: had they had better usage, how would they have drunk
them in much more then? Beloved! God would not have us to learn the manners of
Satan, we are apt to drink them in too much notwithstanding all the hard
dealing that we have from our temptations that do come from Satan: had we
better entertainment, how should our souls mingle, and incorporate with those
temptations?

God suffered the Israelites to be vexed by the Egyptians, That so they might
be provoked against them, to cut them off, and destroy them utterly. We never
cut off an Enemy, and destroy him utterly till we be provoked; and we are
provoked by the ill usage that we have at their hands. God would have Satan
destroyed: for this cause was Christ manifested in the flesh, that he might
destroy the works of Satan; And what Christ did for us, he does work in us: and
we will not destroy him till we be provoked and therefore God is pleased to let
us have such hard dealing, and suffering work from the hand of temptation, that
we may be the more provoked against him.

God suffered the Israelites to be vexed by the Egyptians, That so they might
long for Canaan the land of rest. And why does God suffer his people to suffer
thus by their temptations, but that they might cry out for help, and for the
land of rest? as David, Oh! that I had wings like a dove for then would I fly
away and be at rest.

If the children of Israel had not suffered thus from the hands of the
Egyptians; in all likelihood they would have returned to Egypt much more than
they did. They made them a Captain to return again, notwithstanding all the
hardness that they underwent in Egypt: but had the children of Israel had good
usage in Egypt, how would they have returned again thither; Beloved! we are apt
to return again to folly, you that are the servants of God, too apt to return
to folly; notwithstanding all the hard usage that you have from the hand of
your temptation, how apt and ready are you to retturn to folly; now God loves
you, and would not have you to return again, and therefore that you might not
return to your garlike, onyons, and fleshpots again, he suffers this Spiritual
Phatoah thus to follow you, and lie hard upon you in these temptations. And
thus you see what a glorious design of love God has, even in the suffering
part of his childrens temptations: Gods own children do suffer thus by the hand
of a Temptation.

But you will say, Third place (to answer the Objection) If Gods own people,
his dearest children be sorely tempted, yea, suffer under the hand of a
temptation: how is that true, which you have in the 1 Epistle of John, the 5.
chapter and the 18. verse: Whosoever is born of God sins not: he that is
begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not; the Devil
touches him not: and if the Devil does not so much as touch him, how can this
be true, that he suffers thus by the hand of his temptation.

For answer hereunto, ye must know, Touching, in Scripture phrase, besides the
litteral sense, sometimes notes an Hurting, or Harming of one. So in the 105.
Psalm, and the 15. verse. Touch not mine anointed. Which is explained in the
following words, and do my Prophets no harm. We read of Christ's Touching, and
the Devils Touching. Christ touching those that were sick, and he cured them
with his touch, it was an healing, curing touch, the touch of Christ. And we
read of the Devils touching: So he speaks unto God that he would touch Job;
that is, that he would break him, and break all his Estate: Christ touch is an
healing touch, curing touch; but Satan's touch is a destroying touch, a breaking
touch. Now though God suffers his own children to be tempted, yea, and to
suffer by the hand of a temptation, yet notwithstanding, the evil one touches
him not, so as to harm him, to hurt him; But in the conclusion, so as to heal
and to cure him, which is no touching.

Again, This same word Touching, in Scripture Phrase, sometimes notes
Fellowship and Communion: and so when the Apostle forbids the Corinthians
fellowship and communion with Idolaters; says he, Be ye Separate, and touch no
unclean thing. Touching there noting Communion and Fellowship with them in
their Worship: don't in the least measure have any communion with them. So now,
although it pleases God, to suffer Satan thus to vex his children with
temptation, yet notwithstanding, they have not fellowship or Communion with
him, Satan knocks at their door, but they don't frequently, and ordinarily open
and let him in, so as to sup with them: Christ stands at their door and knocks,
and they open, and he comes in and sups with them, and they with him: they have
fellowship with the Father, and they have fellowship with Jesus Christ, but
they have not fellowship with the Devil; they don't delight in him, they don't
converse with him, they have not this fellowship with him: and therefore though
they meet with temptation, yea, and though they suffer under temptation, yet in
this respect the evil one touches not, but suffer they do. And so I have
cleared the Point: God suffers his own dear children to be sorely tempted, yea,
and to suffer under the hand of a temptation.

I come to the Application.

If this be so: Applyca.
Then why do you that are the Servants of God question Gods love to you, and
call your own condition into question because of your temptations, or because
of the hard things that you meet withal from the hand of your temptation? Oh!
says one, if God loved me, I should never be thus tempted, I should never
suffer such hard things by temptation as now I do: was there ever any of Gods
Children tempted thus? Surely this cannot stand with grace. But was not Jesus
Christ tempted? Yes. But I am tempted many times to doubt of my Child-ship,
whether I be the Child of God, Son of God I or no. And was not Christ thus?
There were Two special times of Christ's temptation: Once when he entered upon
the Ministry: Once when he went out of the world; and you shall see, how at
both these times, he was followed with this temptation: In the 4. of Matthew,
there you read of the first, and in the combat, twice, If thou be the Son of
God? says the Devil: putting an If upon his Sonship: and again, If thou be the
Son of God: putting another If upon his Sonship. So when he was upon the
Cross; the Devils Instruments speak his own Language, they had not forgotten
it: If he be the Son of God, let him come down? putting an If upon his Sonship
again. The Devil follows this close. Oh! but I am tempted many times to use
indirect means to get out of trouble, out of mine affliction. And was not
Christ so? when he was an hungry, says the Devil to him, Command that these
stones be made bread. Oh! but I am tempted, I am loath to say what it is,
sometimes even to lay violent hands upon my self. And what said the Devil to
Christ? Throw thy self down off the pinnacle of the Temple. Oh! but I am tempted
to horrid and blasphemous things that I am afraid to name, and my heart
trembles to think of. And was not Christ thus tempted? says Satan to him, All
this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. What? worship the
Devil! Oh! horrid blasphemy! Blush, O Heavens, and be astonished: All this will
I give thee, If thou will fall down and worship me. Oh! but I am tempted to
depair: sometimes; I confess I am able to read Gods love, and to say, that
God is with me, and I think I can say, I know that God is with me: but at
another time, Oh! how unlike am I unto my self, and I say, Mercy is gone, and
Christ is gone, and has left me as an orphan. And I pray consider how it was
with Christ in this respect; he went as near to it as could be, without sin. It
is Musculus his Observation. In the 16. of John: Behold (says Christ at the
32. verse) the hour comes (speaking of his suffering hour) Yea, it is now
come, when ye shall be scattered every man from his own, and shall leave me
alone: and yet I am not alone because the Father is with me. (Speaking of his
suffering hour) And yet when he was upon the Cross, he says, Father, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? How diverse does he seem to be from himself?
Says he, I am not alone, because the Father is with me: And yet when he comes
into the hour, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh! but I have
suffered as much as ever any did, I have suffered by the hand of my
temptations, they have been a continual torment to me, and I have suffered much
from them. Well, but have ye suffered more than Christ suffered? It is said in
the text, For in that he suffered being tempted: What a mighty suffering was
it, for the glorious God of Heaven and Earth to have such temptations thrown in
upon him? any one temptation to be lodged in his mind, what a mighty suffering
was this? Thus you see how Christ suffered.

And beloved, He suffered, and was tempted, that he might succor you that are
tempted. Will you question his love then, because of your temptation, or your
own condition? do ye know what you do? Suppose that your Father should leave
you a great Estate, and give you good Evidences; and a cunning Lawyer comes,
and writes upon the backside of your Evidence, Naught, naught: will ye because
of that, join with him and say, that your Father has given you nothing? Christ
has given you in a great Estate of Mercy, and has given you good Evidences
for it; and Satan now, comes and writes upon the backside of your Evidence,
and says, This is naught. Will you join with him against God and Christ? what
wrong is this to his love? think of it, I pray, you that are the Saints and
people of God: Be humbled under every temptation, though it be never so small;
but never question your condition, though your temptation be never so great.

There is indeed, something of a suffering, a malignant quality, an affliction
in every temptation when it takes least: and therefore, look how you would walk
under an affliction, so walk under your temptation. In your affliction, you
will walk Humbly: so under your temptation do. In your affliction, you will
examine the Cause, especially if your affliction lie long upon you: So in your
temptation do. In your affliction, you will seek God Early: So in the morning
of your temptation do. In the day of your affliction, you will Engage to God;
the day of affliction, is the day of engaging, and you say, Oh! if the Lord
will deliver me, through his grace I will do so and so: So in your temptation
do. In your affliction, you will take heed of those sins that you are most apt
unto in the time of affliction: so do in the time of your temptation: For
example thus: in affliction, a man is very apt to be discouraged, to have his
heart sink and to die within him: So in temptation, take heed of that. In
affliction, a man is apt so to mind his present burden, as to forgit all his
former mercy: so in the time of temptation take heed of that. In the time of
affliction, a man is very apt to be froward, and impatient, to break out into
frowardness, and impatiency though he did not so before: As the wood that is
laid upon the fire, sends forth filth which you did not see in the wood before
it came upon the fire: So men are apt to send forth filth, and much frowardness
and impatiency in the time of affliction, when you took them for good natured
people before, and thought there was no such frowardness in them, and no such
impatiency: So in the time of temptation also take heed of that. In the time of
affliction, men are apt to make an evil construction, and interpretation of
things: Affliction raises Passion, and Passion puts other colors upon things
than formerly; and so in time of temptation, we are apt to make strange
constructions of Gods dealings, and Christ's dealings with us: take heed of
that. In time of affliction, men are apt to change their behavior; David did
so, he let fall his spittle upon his beard, and feigned himself mad; he changed
his behavior: and so are men apt to change their behavior in times of
temptation: take heed of that. In time of affliction, men are apt to stint, and
limit God, and say, Can God provide a table now? and can God deliver now? and
so also in the time of temptation, men are apt to say, Can God provide now? and
can God deliver now? and so stint, and limit the Holy One of Israel; take heed
of that. In the day of affliction a gracious heart does rather rejoice that he
has any opportunity to exercise his grace, than mourn for his present burden:
so do you now. In the day of affliction, a gracious heart does more desire to
be cleansed, than to be delivered; wishes rather that his heart may be
sanctified by his affliction, tha^ that his affliction may be removed. There is
something of a suffering (ye have heard) in every temptation: now then, does a
temptation arise, and press in upon you; Go to the Lord and say, Lord, though
I meet with hard things from the hand of my temptations, and these temptations
have lien long upon me: yet I do rather choose Grace than Peace; rather to be
Cleansed, than to be Delivered: Oh! my beloved, how well might it be with us,
if we did but improve our temptations? what againing day, what a learning day
might the day of temptation be? yea, what an harvest-day unto us, when Satan
desires to winnow us?

But you will say unto me; We are greatly unskil'd in this matter: temptations
I have, and great temptations, where ever I go, in every business: but Oh! how
should I so order things, and manage my thoughts, and my heart, as that I may
be able so to walk under these temptations, that I may have peace and comfort
in the latter end.

Beloved, the next point tells us,

First, Take heed that you don't yield to any thing, that you may be rid of;
that you don't yield to any part of the temptation, that you may be delivered
from. It is more easy to keep the Enemy out of the town, than to get him out
when he is come into it: if he get into the town, and get into the marketplace,
it will be a more hard thing to get him out again. It is an easy thing to keep
a stone on the top of an hill, while it lies there; but when once it begins to
roll down, it is a hard thing to stay it, and you cannot say how far it shall
go: How many are there that say when they are tempted, I Will yield but once,
I Will yield but a little, and I Will never yield again, this is the last time: Oh!
but, your once yielding, and your yielding but a little, ingages your heart to
the whole work. you should watch and pray against temptation; Watch and pray
that ye enter not into temptation: he does not say, Watch and pray, that you be
not tempted; but watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation. It Is one
thing for temptation to knock at the door, and another thing to come in: When
temptation enters you, you enter into temptation; take heed of that.

Again, Take heed that you don't carry the sin, and the guilt of your Old
condition, into a New condition. See your Call into a New condition, before you
leave your Old condition. Never count your self safe, or secure in any
condition, but as soon as ever you come into any condition, observe what are the
snares, and temptations of that condition. Some there are that carry the evil
of their former condition, into an after condition, into a new condition; and
then as Rachel carrying a way her fathers Idols, tempted Laban to follow after.

Some again, they don't much mind their Calling to a condition, nor don't go in
the strength of their Call: whereas you shall observe, that when Peter was
called to stand before the Princes, and Rulers, he did boldly profess Christ,
because his call did lead him thereunto: but when he was not Called into the
Highpriests hall, then he falls before a tempting wench. Others again there
are, that think their condition will secure them: Oh! says one if I were but in
such and such a condition, then I should be safe and free from Satan's
temptations; whereas, several conditions, have several temptations: and the
Devil does use sometimes to tempt a man to alter his condition, so that by your
very avoiding a temptation you fall into it. Take heed of this.

Thirdly, If temptation do arise, observe the temptation; and know that there
is some suitable disposition of your own, wherein the Devil does lay that
temptation, and labor to file, and pare off that disposition. Beloved, the
Devil observes the situation of our hearts, and accordingly does plant his
Ordnance: he seldom tempts, but he lays his temptation in our own disposition,
something suitable unto the temptation. So when David had a mind to number the
people, then the Devil stands up, and provokes him to number the people suitable
to his own disposition. When our Lord and Savior Christ was an hungry, then he
comes and tempts him to turn stones into bread. When again, he cried out and
said, My God my God why have thou forsaken me? then says the Devils
instruments, If thou be the Son of God, then come down and show thy self. He
does usually lay his temptation in our own disposition that is suitable to the
temptation. And therefore, I say, first observe the temptation, then know you
have a disposition subservient thereunto, and the Devil lays his temptation in
that disposition, and presently falls to work, and labors to file, and pare off
more and more that disposition in Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, When a temptation arises, don't always stand to answer it in the
kind, but sometimes turn your mind and thoughts off it to another object. It Is
in our deliverance from a temptation, as in our comforts under an affliction: a
man has a great affliction upon him; possibly the death of some friend that is
near and dear unto him, and you go to comfort him, and in comforting him, you
fall a speaking of his friend departed: whereas the way to comfort him, is not
to speak of the person departed, but fall into conference about some other good
thing different; and by that time his heart is settled upon some other thing,
then you may come back again, and speak of the friend departed without grieving
of him, but otherwise, even in your comfort you fetch out tears. And so I say
in regard of temptation: the way to avoid temptation, is not always to apply a
salve directly pertinent to the temptation; but turn off your mind and your
thoughts to some other good objects, and by that time your mind is settled upon
other objects, you will be easily able to meet with the temptation.

Fifthly, Above all things take the shield of faith. Whom resist siedfast in
the faith, Simon, Simon (says our Savior) Satan has desired to have you,
that he may winnow you: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not:
that must do it. That same woman that came to Christ for her daughter, she met
with great temptations: There was the temptation of her calamity; her daughter
possessed: There was a temptation of Christ's not answering, but delaying his
answer. There was a temptation of Christ's seeming denial; I am not sent but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel: There was a temptation of her own
unworthiness; It Is not lawful to take the childrens bread and to cast it to
dogs: yet notwithstanding she believes, Oh! says our Savior, Woman, great is
thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. And so I say, though your
temptations be twisted one within another, and one stands at the end of
another; do but get the prospect of faith, and you will be able to look over
all. When temptation therefore arises, say, Lord, though thou kill me, yet will
I trust in thee: And Satan, though thou slayest me, I will keep to Jesus
Christ. It was the speech of Taulerus, one that Luther prizeth above all: Says
he, Though the Mariners may make use of their Oars in the time of calm, yet
when a storm comes down, the Mariners leave all and fly to their Anchor. So,
though at other times we may make use of Resolutions, and Vows, and the like;
yet when the storm of temptation comes down, nothing then, but fly to the
anchor of faith, nothing then like to casting of anchor into the Vail. And as
if the holy Ghost, put al on this, he calls Faith our Anchor; and he calls Faith
our Shield: All dangers are either Sea-dangers, or Land dangers: if your
dangers be Sea-dangers, Faith is your Anchor; and if your dangers be Land
dangers, Faith is your Shield. And therefore I say, when temptation arises,
labor then to exercise your faith, and say, Oh! how should I do this thing,
and sin against my Christ, and sin against my God? Satan, thou tellest me, All
this I will give thee, if I will do this thing: I but, how shall I do this, and
sin against Jesus Christ who has loved me, and given himself for 'me? Satan,
thou tellest me, that if I do yield, God is merciful, and God will pardon me:
Yea, but Satan, God has pardoned me already, and therefore I will not yield;
and because I know that the Lord would pardon me if I did it, therefore I will
not do it. Thus labor to exercise your faith in time of a temptation.

Sixthly, Be sure of this, When temptation arises, don't fear too much: nor
don't fear too little. I confess, it is an hard thing to carry it equally,
between too much, and too little: but (beloved) if you fear too Much; you
honor Satan, you weaken your selves: immoderate fear weakens. And if you fear
too little, then you grow secure: security betraies you, and so you lose all
before you strike a stroke. Wherefore this Rule is: If temptation arise, don't
fear too much, though the temptation be never so great: don't fear too little
though the temptation be never so small.

Seventhly, Art thou assaulted by temptation? Either you do overcome; or you
are overcome: if you do overcome, be Thankful, lest you lose your former
Victory, by your after-Vnthankfulness. And if you be overcome, yet don't lay
down the weapon, hold it up still, stand upon your guard. The Devil tempts that
he may tempt; and he is willing to be overcome in the skirmish, that he may
overcome you in the battle: and he brings up the greatest temptations in the
rear: As Jobs afflictions were greatest at that last: yea, he tempts us to
break the Law, and sin against the Law, that he may tempt us to sin against the
Gospel. This is the Seventh Rule: If you be overcome, or be not overcome, walk
thus.

Eighthly, and Lastly, If temptation do arise; Be sure that you make some
improvement of it for the better. If an enemy come and make an assault against
one of your garrisontowns, and he goes away, and gets no hurt, he is
encouraged, and invited to come again; for (says he) I lost nothing; though I
did not gain, and carry the Town, yet I lost nothing: But now, if upon his
assault he loses many men, and his Ordnance, I Will come no more there (says he)
for there I had such and such a great lost. Thus it is with Satan when he
comes before a soul with his temptations; there is a soul (says he) I came
before him with my temptations, and though indeed I did not carry it, I did not
get the thing I would, yet I lost nothing, and therefore I Will go again. But
there is a soul, and there is a heart, I came before him with my temptations,
and I confess I lost much; I tempted and he prayed, and the more I tempted the
more he prayed, and the more I tempted still, the more he did go to Jesus
Christ, and therefore I will tempt him no more. Beloved, labor to improve your
temptations, go to God with your temptations in your hands, and pray over your
temptations: and if you improve your temptations, you shall not be troubled
with Satan; and therefore you are troubled with Satan so much, because you
improve your temptations no more. Oh! how well might it be with us, if we did
but improve our temptations? what a good day would this be? what a good day
might be this sad day of our temptation, if we did but improve our temptations?
And I beseech you think of it, how we may improve them more and more. You know
what our Savior said concerning the false ground; in the time of temptation it
fell away: let that awe our hearts. You know what our savior says again by
way of comfort unto his Disciples; You continued with me in my temptations, and
therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom: and blessed are they that do continue,
and hold out this siege. Beloved! these turning times, are tempting times: and
I think I may truly say, if ever there were an hour of temptation upon this
kingdom, this is the hour of Englands temptation, it is an hour of temptation.
Oh! you that are the servants of God, and the Disciples of Jesus Christ, will
ye not watch with him one hour? an hour of temptation it is, but this is our
comfort, it is but an hour: and therefore you that are his servants and
Disciples, will you not watch with him one hour? Watch and pray, watch and
pray: some pray, but they will not watch; and some pretend to watch, but they
don't pray. Therefore that I say to you, to my self, and to all is, watch and
pray: if you watch, you enter into your masters joy; if you watch not, you
enter into temptation: Oh! let us all watch and pray, that we enter not into
temptation.

SERMON II. Of TEMPTATION.
HEBREWS, 2.18. For in that He himself has suffered being tempted, Preached
at Margrets New-fish street October. 12. 1646.
he is able to succor them that are tempted.
BY the word Tempted in the first clause, relating to Christ, we are to
understand Satan's solicitations to evil, (as ye have read in the former
Sermon:) By the word Tempted in the last clause, He is able to succor them
that are tempted, specially to understand those solicitations of Satan and our
own sins, by comparing the former verse with this. As if the Apostle should
say: For in that our Lord and Savior Christ was tempted by Satan, solicited to
what was evil; He is able to succor them that are both, either solicited to
evil, or overcome thereby.

But how is it said here, He is able to succor them that are tempted; in that
he himself suffered being tempted? Was he not as God, able to succor them that
are tempted? Why then is it said, In that he suffered being tempted, he is able
to succor them that are tempted?

There is an ability of Sufficiency: and an ability of Idoniety. As God
(indeed) he is able to succor those that are tempted: but by being tempted in
the flesh, he is able, that is, apt, and idonious to succor those that are
tempted. There is an Absolute ability: and a Respective ability as he is
High Priest. As God indeed, he was able to succor them that are tempted,
though he had not been tempted: but he speaks of Christ here as our
High Priest; and so by being tempted, he is able to succor them in that way.
There is, (as I may so speak) a Scientifical ability, or an Experimental
ability. As he was God, he was able in the first sense to succor, it is true:
but by being tempted, he is able Experimentally to succor them that are
tempted.

It is an ability of Disposition and Compassion that here he speaks of. And
therefore in the fifth Chapter, speaking of the same thing, he says concerning
the High Priest, That he can have Compassion on the ignorant, and those that
are out of the way. So then, Christ by being tempted, is able to sucour those
that are tempted with an ability of Idoniety, an Experimental ability: with an
ability of Compassion and Disposition, and gracious Inclination. And so the
Observation that lies before us, is this: The Lord Jesus Christ,

In the former Doctrine ye heard, That God suffers his own servants, and
dearest children to be sorely tempted: Now this Doctrine holds forth the
remedy, Jesus Christ is a succouring Christ to tempted souls. As our hearts are
full of Sin, So his heart is full of Succor, he is a succouring Christ. His
Names, and Titles speak him so. His Nature speaks him so. His Officies, His
Doctrine, His Life and Conversation; His Death and Sufferings call him a
Succouring Christ. I shall not run through all these particulars. But because
men are known by their Names, I will fix there a little: and we shall see, how
all the Names and Titles of Christ call him a Succouring Christ.

If we search the Scripture, we may observe, That the Names of Satan, of the
Devil, carry malice with them, and evil against them: And the Names of Jesus
Christ are contrary thereunto, as holding forth a Succor against all that evil
that is in him, who is The Evil One.

Is the Devil called Satan? that is, an Adversary: Jesus Christ is called our
Friend. Is Satan called Diabolus? the Accuser, or the Accuser of the brethren:
Jesus Christ is called our Advocate. Is Satan called a Destroyer? Jesus Christ
is called our Savior. Is Satan called a Lion, that goes up and down seeking
whom he may devour? Jesus Christ is called a Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Is
Satan called a Serpent? and, Old Serpent? Jesus Christ is called the
Brasen-Serpent. Still Names of relief and succor answerable unto those Names
of Satan.

We shall observe, that there is no Evil in Sin, but there is somewhat in the
Name of Jesus Christ that speaks the contrary, contrary succor. Is sin
called (...) or a transgression of the Law? Jesus Christ is called our
Righteousness: The Lord our Righteousness. Is Sin called Folly? Jesus Christ is
called Wisdom, The Wisdom of the Father. Is sin called an Infirmity, or
Weakness? He is called the Rock, and the Rock of ages, and the Arm of the
Lord. Is sin called Darkness? He is called Light Is sin called Pollution, or
Uncleanness? His blood is the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness to
wash in. Is sin called Death? He is called Life. Is there Ignorance in sin? He
is called our Prophet, in opposition to that. Is there Disorder in sin? In
opposition to that, he is called our King to order. Is there Guilt in sin? In
opposition to that, he is called our Priest; he is called our Propitiation, in
that place of John: But in the 3. of the Romans, and the 25. verse, He is
called our Propitiatory: Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation (so you
read it) but rather, a propitiatory: (...).
the Same Greek word that the Septuagint used for the Jews Propitiatory: And
in that he is our Propitiation, or Propitiatory; this speaks him a succouring
Christ.

Famous was the succor, and relief that the Jews had from their Cities of
refuge: and as if the holy Ghost intended the confirmation of this Truth that
is now before us, those Hebrew Names that were given to the Cities of refuge
are given to Christ. Is any of the Cities of refuge called Kedesh? signifying
Holy: He is called Holy, Holy, Holy. Was another City called Shechem?
signifying Shoulder: Upon his Shoulder is the government; and the lost sheep
brought home upon his Shoulder. Is another City called Hebron? from Society, or
Fellowship: By him we have fellowship with the Father. Is another called,
Golan? signifying one Revealed, or Manifested: It Is said of him, He was
Manifested in the flesh. Is another City called Ramoth? Things Exalted: Him
has God Exalted, and by him are all Exalted. In the phrase of the
New Testament, he is called our Father, and our Brother, and our Friend, and
our Shepherd; a Hen, a Lamb, a Door: there is none of all his Names but speak
him full of sweetness and loving disposition, and succor unto poor souls.

But that I may the better clear up this Truth I shall deliver my self these
Four ways.

First, That Jesus Christ is able to succor tempted souls. Secondly, That he
is willing to do it. Thirdly, That he is faithful in doing of it. Fourthly, How
he does it, in the day and time of their temptation; and so come to the
Application.
First, He is able to do it. He is able to succor them that are tempted. He is
able (says our Apostle in that 17. of the Hebrews) to save those that come
unto God by him, he is able to save them to the uttermost: (...)
As Satan tempts to the uttermost, he is able to save to the uttermost. And as
they sin to the uttermost, he is able to save to the uttermost. A man is said
to be able to do all that which he has a commission, and power from God to do:
The Lord Jesus Christ in the 3. of the Romans and the 25. was set forth to be a
propitiation: Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation. He has laid help
upon one that is Mighty; and that is Christ. Designed, and called he is to the
office of the High Priest. The proper work of the Highpriests office was, to
condole with, relieve and succor the people against their sins: And the more
Eminent any High Priest was, the more in this work. In the 17. of the Hebrews,
we find all along, how abundantly he excels all the Highpriests that ever
were. As for other Highpriests, they did not take an Oath when they came into
their office: but he swears. Other Highpriests, had sins themselves to offer
for: but he Holy, and Separate from sinners. Other Highpriests, dyed, and did
not continue so for ever: but he lives for ever to make intercession. Other
Highpriests, offered not Themselves: but he offered up Himself. He was a King
and a Priest: they were not. They indeed entered into the Holy of Holiest, but
it was Earthy: he is gone into the Holy of Holiest, and that is Heavenly. They
were but Types of him, Shadows: if a shadow fall upon a dirty ground, it cannot
make it dry; but the Sun can: and yet notwithstanding, these other
Highpriests, the Apostle says of them, Being compast about with infirmities;
they could have compassion on those that are ignorant, and out of the way; They
men of Infirmities, sinners; They in the time of the Law: How much more is
Jesus Christ able to succor, who is so transcendent an High Priest, and
excelling all others that ever went before him. I Will say nothing of the great
Power that he has with the Father, or in his own hands: The Keys of hell and
death. He is able by Conquest for to succor you that are tempted: he is able
by Conquest for to raise the Siege that is laid against our souls; he has
beaten through the Enemy: As now, if a Town be beleaguered straightly, besieged
by an Enemy, and the Enemy abroad in the Field, having an army in the Field: if
any will come to raise the Siege, they must fight through the Army, they must
beat through the Army before they can raise the Siege. Never a tempted sold
but is thus besieged with temptation, closely begirt, and the Devils were
abroad in the field, were the Masters of the field till Christ came: and no
man, nor Angel was able to beat through: but Jesus Christ beat up the Quarters
all along, beat through the Enemy, cast out Devils all along, overcame. Paul by
being tempted overcame temptation. So by his dying he overcame death; and by
taking our infirmities upon him, he overcame our infirmities; and by being
subject to the Law, he overcame the Law, and the curse of the Law: and so by
being tempted, he overcame temptation; and having beaten the Enemy out of the
field he is now able to raise the Siege; he is absolutely able to raise the
Siege, which none else is able to do: He is able to save to the uttermost. We
shall not need to stand long on this.

But you will say, We will grant Christ is able to succor tempted souls: but
is he willing?

Yes, He is infinitely willing to succor poor tempted souls. Our great succor
lies in Reconciliation with God the Father; as by comparing these two verses
together does appear. God the father has set him forth to be a propitiation:
it was the will of God the Father, that Jesus Christ should come and make
propitiation, it was his will. Now, look into the 40. Psalm, and see what
Christ says concerning the will of the Father; verse the 7. Lo, I come: in
the volum of the book it is written of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God:
yea, thy Law is within my heart: Some books read it, Thy Law is within my
bowels: thy Law is within my heart, it is in my desires. Yea, not only (says
he) in my desires: but in the Gospel we read it, With desiring have I desired
to eat this Passover, before he suffered. Desiring have I desired. And (says
he) I have a baptism to be baptizeds with, and I am straitened till it be
accomplished: I can have no rest till it be done, I am straitened till it be
accomplished. Yea, not only so: but (says he) here in this Psalm, I delight to
do thy will: it is the will of God he should make propitiation; and so succor:
I delight to do thy will. And in the 8. of the Proverbs: My delights are with
the sons of men: some read it, All my delight: but it is in the plural number.
When God laid the foundations of the earth my delights were with the sons of
men. A high, and a great expression. Surely, Jesus Christ cannot but be willing
to succor tempted ones, when his delights are with the sons of men.

Again, A man must needs be willing, to do that which he is willing to suffer
much for, to be at much cost and pains for. David was willing to build the
Temple, because he laid out so much by way of preparation. And Araunah was
willing to have a sacrifice, because he gave up his threshing-flowr, it
appeared he was willing. And now when Jesus Christ is content to suffer so much
that he may make a propitiation for sinners, and reconciliation with the
Father, and so succor; it argues that he is very willing.

Besides, A man is willing to have that done which he is much troubled for if
it be not done. You know when Christ came to Jerusalem, he wept (says the
text) and he wept: He came a succouring, and they would not be succored: How
often would I have gathered thee as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and thou would not? A Hen is a succouring creature: Christ came a
succouring, came to gather them as a Hen. A Hen sits upon the eggs, and
hatcheth with the warmth of her body: So does Christ do with the warmth of his
love. A Hen sits till the feathers be off her own body, makes her own body
naked for to hatch up: And so did Christ. When the chicken is hatched, she
succors it, and covers it under her wings: and when the chicken can run
abroad, let the hen find but a grain of corn, she clucks, and calls the chicken
to her to have part of it: And so did Christ. And when danger comes, the Kite
comes, she calls the chicken under her wings again to succor it: So does
Christ. When he says thus, he came to gather them as a Hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, he came to succor them, but they would not be
succored; see how he takes it: the text says, He wept, he wept; he was much
troubled. Wise men don't use to weep before company; children will: but those
that are very wise, if they will weep, they weep in private: Jesus Christ (that
was the wisdom of the Father) falls a weeping, and all because they would not be
succored; Surely then, Jesus Christ is very willing to succor poor sinners.
And beloved! this was his love, and this was his compassion in the day of his
infirmity; how great is it now in the day of his glory?

Again, It argues that he is very willing to succor poor tempted souls,
because he was so willing to cure diseased bodies; when he was upon the earth
he was willing to cure them: So willing, as though it did cost a miracle, yet
he would do it. So willing, that though they did not know him as he was, but
thought him a Prophet, yet he would do it. So willing, as that though they did
not desire it themselves but were brought by others, yet he would do it. So
willing, as that though they were unmannerly in their coming to him; withness
the pulling the tyles off the house, yet he would do it. And that so willing,
though much unbeleef express by those that were brought unto him, yet he would
do it. I beseech you consider it: this was a work that Christ came into the
world to do; this is The work: the work that Christ came to do, it was to bind
up broken hearts: The work that Christ came to do, was to open the prison doors
to poor captives: The Spirit of the Lord is upon me (you know the place.) To
administer a word in due season to those that are weak: He has given me the
tongue of the learned to administer a word in due season to those that are
weak. Now then, if Jesus Christ was so willing to do the other work which was
but his work by the bye, which was not The-work that he did come about: how
infinitely willing must he needs be to do The-work that he did come about? but
I say, to succor poor tempted ones, this was The-work that he came upon;
Heaven has not altered him, he has lost none of his love by going thither:
Surely therefore, the Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely willing to succor poor
tempted souls.

Well, But though he be able, and willing, yet it may be he is not faithful.

Yes, says the former verse, Faithful: merciful, and faithful High Priest.
Faithful in all his house as Moses was. What honest man will break his word? go
contrary to his oath? He is sworn into this office of the High Priest. Yea, we
have not only his Promise, and his Oath, but the fathers Bond for the Sons
performance: The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: it shall
bruise his heel, she shall break his head. The pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. This is the work that is in his hand, to succor tempted
ones: it shall prosper in his hand. In the 8. Chapter of Matthew, We read
there at the 16. verse, That he cast out spirits with his Word, and healed all
that were sick: That is might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
Prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Because
he took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses, he took himself to be engaged
for to heal the sicknesses, and diseases among the people. Beloved! he has
taken our infirmities, He has borne our sins, and therefore he takes himself
engaged also, for to heal our soul-diseases, to heal those temptations: He is
very faithful.

Well, But suppose he is faithful: How does he succor those that are tempted,
in the day and time of their temptation? (that is the Fourth thing.)

He succors Before temptation: He succors In temptation: He succors After
temptation.

Christ succors tempted souls Before the temptation comes; sometimes: By a
special manifestation of himself, ihs love, and fullness to them. When Christ
himself was to be tempted, immediately before, the Father said from Heaven,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And so, when Christ sees
that a soul is to go into temptation, he speaks out from Heaven, and says,
This is my beloved servant in whom I am well pleased.

Sometimes he succors Before temptation; By laying in of Gospel-principles,
and Gospel-dispositions in the heart. The Law is weak, says the Apostle. As it
is weak unto the point of Justification, the matter of Justification; so a
legal disposition is weak as to the matter of resisting temptation: a
Gospel-disposition is able to bear it off. Christ foreseeing a temptation,
lays in such a disposition, and then when it comes, Oh! says the soul, How
shall I be able to close with all this love of the world, having received so
many love tokens from my dear Savior.

Again, He succors Before the temptation: By filling the heart with the holy
Ghost. When the vessel is filled with one liquor, it keeps out another. I will
return to my house (says Satan) and I came and found it empty; and so he
entered. The Lord therefore, fills the house, the soul with the holy Ghost, and
so keeps Satan from entering.

He succors also, Under temptation: By opening the eyes of him that is tempted
to see that it is but a temptation. A temptation is half cured, when a man knows
that it is but a temptation: when a man's eyes is open to see the tempter, and
the temptation. Therefore men are so hardly cured, because they are hardly
persuaded that it is a temptation; when they see that, then they say, Get thee
behind me Satan. Christ opens their eyes.

Again, He succors Under temptation: By letting fall some glimpse of his love,
some love-look upon a tempted soul. And so, when Peter was in the Highpriests
hall, Christ looks upon him, and he went out and wept bitterly. It was the
sweet look of Christ, that made Peter weep bitterly; Peter's tears, came from
Christ's eyes first: and though he were much engaged, yet having a love-look
from Christ, I Will stay no longer, and away he goes. And so, when a soul sees
but the gracious eye of Christ looking on him, he breaks off from his
temptation: thus he succors.

Again, He succors Under temptation, by temptation, even from temptation.
Beloved! the Devil seldom tempts with one single temptation: As we seldom
commit single sins, or receive single mercies; so the Devil seldom tempts with
a single temptation. One may be laid in our Natures; and the other laid in our
Callings: Christ sees now, that one is given to Uncleanness, or to Pride; and
so he lets out Satan upon him, to trouble him with blasphemous thoughts, and by
the afflictions of those blasphemous thoughts, they are kept from Pride, and
from Wantonness, and delighting in other sins.

He does succor From temptation; I say, from temptation by temptation
(sometimes) by causing a word in the temptation to standout, so as thereby to
give the tempted man an hint to Jesus Christ. So when Christ tempted, and tried
the woman of Canaan: It Is not lawful to cast childrens bread before dogs: There
stood out a word, that word Dog: she lays hold on it, True Lord: yet the dogs
eat of the crumbs. Christ does so order the very temptations of Satan, that
some word or other in the very temptation does so stand forth as to hint the
soul again unto Jesus Christ.

Sometimes he succors Under temptation: By throwing in a Promise, lotting the
soul upon some Promise; which as a Cable, keeps the heart fast in the time of a
storm.

And sometimes he succors Under temptation (again:) By weakending the
temptation, and by keeping the heart, and the temptation asunder; may be, by
raising up some Affliction: Woe to that soul, when the heart and temptation
meet, corruption and temptation meet. The Lord Christ therefore, sometimes is
pleased to raise up an Affliction between them, that so these two wicked lovers
may be kept asunder. Thus Under temptation.

After temptation he succors: By filling the heart with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. By sending the Angels to Minister: As when the Devil left
Christ, had tempted him and left him; then came the Angels and Ministered to
him. Every way, Before temptation: and In temptation: and After temptation, the
Lord Jesus Christ is asuccouring Christ to tempted souls, he is a succouring
Christ: Beloved! he was aman of sorrows, that he might be a God of succors;
his heart it is full of succors.

I come to the Application
Whist I stand upon this Truth, Applyca. 1.
me thinks I hear a solemn, and gracious Invitation to all poor tempted souls
to come unto Jesus Christ, to come for succor. There Is none of you all, but
labor under some temptation or other. Ye have read that the Lord Christ is a
succouring Christ: shall I need to invite you to come unto him? Ye have read
how able he is: and willing he is to succor. His heart is bent to succor you,
his arms are open, his bosom is open, his heart is open to poor tempted souls
that they may receive succor from him. Oh! therefore, you that are tempted,
Come unto Jesus Christ that you may be succored by him, Come unto Christ, Come
unto Christ alone.

You will say, But does he succor all that are tempted? why then are any
damned?

Some men will not come unto him: Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have
life. Some come unto him, but make an half Christ of him: They will not come
under great temptations, then they are afraid, and then they despair: They
will not come under small temptations, then they despise: But for middleing
temptations, those they will come to Christ for succor in; and thus they make
a half Christ of him. Some come to him as to a Moses, make a conditional
Christ of him: they must have their own Preparations, and Humiliations before
they come unto him, or else they will not come unto him. But beloved! ye know
what our Apostle says, in the 7. of the Hebrews: He is able to save unto the
uttermost those that come to God by him. Those that come to God by Him: if you
do come unto Him, he will succor.

But my temptation is an Old temptation, an Ancient temptation; I have gone
under fears, and temptations for many years together, I may say, almost my
whole life: and will Jesus Christ succor such a one as I am?

Pray what think you of the verse that goes before the text? He himself took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil. And (at the 15. verse) Deliver them from Satan that
were all their life time subject to bondage. That he might deliver them from
Satan that were all their life time subject to bondage: in fear of death, and
all their life time subject to bondage.

Art thou therefore, a man or woman, that has gone up and down all thy days
in fear of death, and fear of hell, and been in bondage all thy life time? See,
he came to deliver such souls, such tempted souls as these are Christ came to
deliver.

Oh! But my temptation is not a bare temptation, there is much affliction that
is mixed withal: and will he deliver those?

Yea, you know how it was with Jacob: Jacob used indirect means to get the
blessing; Esau's heart rose against him: Jacob flies for it; when he was in the
field, in the night, then Christ appears to him: A ladder, whose top was in
Heaven (the Deity) the bottom on Earth (the Humanity) and Angels ascending and
descending. All the while he was in his fathers house, he never had this Vision
of Christ, but now, when he lay in the open field, Christ appears for his
succor, by his Angels thus.

Oh! but my temptation is not such; but my temptation is mixed with much
Corruption; I have a Proud heart, an Unclean heart, a froward heart; Will the
Lord Jesus Christ lay such a wretched heart as mine is in his bosom? Oh! will
he succor such a soul as I am?

For answer to this,

First, He will succor tempted sinners most, when they are most tempted. When
the Child is sick, and when the Child is most sick, then the Mother comes forth
and succors it, then love sits upon the bedside, then love lays the Child in
her bosom. And (says he) in the 66. chapter of Esaias, and the 13. verse: As one
whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you.

Again, He will not only succor thus: but he will succor you that are
tempted, when you cannot succor your selves; when your own thoughts cannot
succor you, when your own thoughts dare not succor you, or when your own
thoughts trample-upon your Evidences, and when your own thoughts shall make a
Mutiny in your hearts, and set al on fire: In the multitude of my thoughts thy
word comforts my soul. The Lord knows how to deliver in the time of temptation,
though you do not know; and when you do not know it, then he knows, and then he
will deliver when you know not. Read again the same place, the 13. verse of
the 66. of Esaias. As one whom his mother comfort so will I comfort you. Who
are those? (says he) at the 5. verse. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that
tremble his word, and you that are cast out by your brethren: As one whom his
mother Comfort, so will I comfort you: you that lie and tremble before the
promise, and dare not draw near unto it, As a mother comfort, so will I
comfort you.

Thirdly, with a Notwithstanding; Notwithstanding all their failings,
Notwithstanding all their infirmities. Joseph, a Type of Christ, his brethren
sold him away, he endured much misery: Afterward his brethren came to want; and
they go down to Egypt to him; and when they came there, Joseph succors them,
Notwithstanding all their former unkindnesse; I am your brother Joseph, I am
Joseph your brother; it is true, you sold me, and thus and thus you dealt by me;
but you are come for succor, and I will succor you with a Notwithstanding. So
says the Lord Jesus Christ; Poor tempted soul, I know how thou have dealt by
me, how thou have sold me, how thou have neglected me, how thou have crucified
me: but I will succor thee with a Notwithstanding, Notwithstanding all thy
guilt, and all thy fear, I will succor thee with a Notwithstanding.

Three great succors that the Jews had in the wilderness: Succor from the
Rock, that gave out water: Succor against their Thirst. Succor from the
Mannah that came down from Heaven: succor against their Hunger. Succor from
the Brasen-serpent: from the fiery serpents that stung them. All these Three
were great Types of Christ. And the Rock was Christ, says the Apostle. And
says Christ himself: I am the bread, (speaking of the Mannah.) And when I am
lifted up, (speaking of the brasen-serpent, alluding to it.) Now, look into the
story and you will find; God did not give out these succors to them till they
murmur; in the 15. of Exodus, there they murmur, and murmur, and murmur, and
then God opened the rock, and God gave them water notwithstanding. And in the
16. of Exodus, there he gives them bread. And in the 17. there he opens the
rock: but first they murmured; the Lord gave them these succors with a
Notwithstanding. The thing that I mean is this: Will the Lord give them a
Typical Christ for their succor, with a Notwithstanding? and will he not give
poor tempted souls the Real Christ with a Notwithstanding, Notwithstanding all
if they do come unto him, if tempted souls do but come unto him? Oh! what a
mighty encouragement is here unto all poor tempted souls to come unto Jesus
Christ? Oh! you, Come unto Jesus Christ, you that never came unto Jesus Christ,
Come unto Jesus Christ, you shall find him a succouring Christ.

Secondly, If this Doctrine be true: Esau's clothes upon him; we make him an
Angel of darkness and then we fear him. Ye don't look upon him as a succouring
Christ, and therefore you are so full of Doubtings: or if you do, you don't
actuate your considerations, and you notions on him.

Beloved! Either there is a truth in this Doctrine; or else there is not. If
there be not, what mean all the proofs that ye have had? And if there be a
truth, if the Lord Jesus Christ be a succouring Christ to tempted souls; why
then should you not triumph in him? and say, Well, nothing shall separate me
from the love of God in Jesus Christ: I am persuaded, I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other ereature,
shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Thus Paul reasoned in the 8. of the Romans. And I pray mark it; Who then
shall separate us? (says he at the 35. verse) shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay in all these
things we are more than conquerers, through him that loved us. I am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, etc. Whence did arise this persuasion? (at the
33. verse) Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies. (Mark) He does not say, It Is God that justifies me; but only in the
general, It Is God that justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
died. He does not say, It Is Christ that died for me: but it is Christ that died.

You will say, I, indeed, if I could say, That God justifies me; and Christ
died for me; then I would say with Paul, That nothing shall separate.

Paul raises his persuasion thus: It Is God that justifies, and it is Christ that
died.

I but, Paul speaks on?

Yes sure: That in all these things we are more than conquerers? There is an
adversary power in this. And what think you when he says, That neither life,
nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, and powers? Does not the Devil come
in there, under principalities and powers? Neither does he say thus: I Will hope
well now, That because Christ dies, and it is God that justifies; I Will hope
well: No, but I am persuaded, none of all these shall separate me from the love
of God in Christ. Though I have feared, I will fear no more. Thus he makes his
Triumph. Oh! what strong consolation is here to all the Saints? You that are
the tempted Saints of God, do not your hearts burn, and glow within you with
love to Jesus Christ? and will you question his love to you? Did Christ Come
and succor you? and will not you succor your selves? Is his heart full of
succor toward you? and will not you own it? The Lord rebuke our unbelief.

Thirdly, If Jesus Christ be a succouring Christ: Then let us be succouring
Christians. Shall the Lord Jesus Christ take a poor tempted soul into his arms?
and shall I thrust him away with my hand? Shall the Lord Christ take him into
his Bosom? and must I thrust him out of the City, and the place where he
dwells? Shall the Lord Jesus Christ carry a poor tempted soul upon his shoulder,
by way of succor? and shall I carry him upon my shoulder as a burden? It was
Christ's Command: See that ye love one another, as I have loved you. And how
did Christ love us? He loved us, and gave himself for us: He loved us, and was
made in the form of a servant, took our Infirmities upon him: he loved us, and
was tempted for us, suffered being tempted: And shall not I be willing to
succor those that are tempted? You look upon another man's Opinion, or his
Practice, or his froward disposition, and you are offended at it whom otherwise
you would love, and do account godly: But how do you know whether that be not
his temptation? that his disposition, and Opinion, and Practice; how do you
know whether that be not his temptation that he lies under? and will you not
succor him? Oh! my beloved, How contrary are our dispositions to Christ's?
Christ came from Heaven to succor those that are tempted: and we call for fire
from Heaven against those that are tempted. Christ would bear with much smoke,
for a little fire: and we will quench a great deal of fire because of a little
smoke. Oh! therefore, as you desire to be like unto Jesus Christ, succor the
Saints: and if there be any thing in their life that does offend you, say with
your selves; I but, may be it is a temptaion that such a man lies under; and
Christ came to succor those that are tempted, why should not I?

Fourthly, If the Lord Jesus Christ be a succouring Christ? Then why should we
yield unto our sins, and to our temptations? Though the Siege be straight, and
violent, and fierce, if a City be block't up, be beleaguered; if it have but
hopes that succor and relief will come, it will hold it out: and if it know
for certain that succor will come, it will hold out unto great extremity.
There Is never a temptation but you are beleaguered by it: and when your
temptation is about you, say, O my soul, be quiet, yield not; the Lord Christ
is a succouring Christ, and succor will come, and therefore hold it out. Shall
the Lord Jesus Christ, shall he succor me against my temptations with his
bosom? and shall I take my sins, and temptations into mine own bosom? Shall he
come to succor me against my sins? and shall I succor my sins that he comes
against? What a mighty argument is here to keep us from all our sins, and from
yielding to our temptations? Jesus Christ is a succouring Christ to tempted
souls.

In the fifth place, Christ is a succouring Christ: Let us all labor to answer
Christ. Beloved! it is the duty, and the property of the people of God, to
observe what God is doing upon their hearts, and to help on that work. If Jesus
Christ be succouring of any of your souls, against your temptations; Oh! help
it on, help on the work; it is your duty for to help it on, and to answer him.

But you will say, Christ succors Before temptation; and he succors Under
temptation; and he succors After temptation: how shall I answer this? how
shall I help his work on?

Give me leave to give an answer unto this Question, Does the Lord Jesus Christ
succor Before temptation? Observe his succors, and lay them up in your hearts
against a rainy day: Gird your sword upon your thigh, it may not be to seek
when the enemy comes: have it in readiness. You don't lay the plaster on upon
the wrist for the Ague, when the Ague is on, but before it comes. Observe what
those tokens of love are that Jesus Christ does throw into your bosom before a
temptation comes, and lay them up carfully there.

And beloved in the Lord; Labor to keep the sense of his love warm upon your
hearts; Look as it is with water in winter; so with your hearts in this
respect: So long as the fire is under the water, and the water is hot, it
freezes not; but when the heat goes off, and the water is cold, then ice comes
upon it. And so long as your heart is kept up in the sense of Christ's love, and
warm with Christ's love; so long the ice comes not, the temptation comes not.
The slumber of grace, is a preparation to sin, and a preparation to temptation.
When once our hearts grow cold, and grow remiss; then way is made to
temptation: and therefore, if you would answer Jesus Christ; Oh! labor to keep
the sense of his love still upon your hearts.

And when the temptation is come: Then look upon Jesus Christ. No temptation so
violent, or fierce, but a thought may steal out, and get a look upon Jesus
Christ. The sight of Christ on the Cross, is a Judge upon the Bench against all
temptation. The consideration of Three things, keeps one from the power of
temptation. The worth of a soul: The hainousness of sin: And the love of
Christ. And you see all these in Christ upon the Cross. When temptation comes,
stand and look upon him. You know, that when the Israelites were stung, they
were then to look upon the brazen serpent, and by their very looking upon it,
they were cured thereby. The Lord Jesus Christ is our brasen-serpent, lift up
upon Gospel poles, having more excellency than any brasen-serpent: That was but
a piece of brass: he is the God of glory. That for a time: he is our
High Priest, and lives for ever. That for the Jews only: but he for Jew and
Gentile. That for those that could see; and if any poor, blind man was stung,
it was a case, what should become of the blind man, how should he look upon the
brazen serpent? how should he be cured; but this our brazen serpent, is able to
give you an eye. Beloved! this Ordinance is still on foot spiritually. And
therefore Christ says by the Prophet Esaias, Look unto me from all the ends of
the earth, and be saved. Oh! when a temptation comes; poor tempted soul,
address thy self to the Lord Jesus, stand wishly looking upon him.

And then: Give thy soul over into the hands of Christ all thou can: put thy
self out of thine own hands. So long as the planck, or the board swims in the
stream, in the midst of the water, you may draw it along with a little thread:
but if once it come toward the banck, toward the shore, and touches upon the
ground, then you can hardly draw it. So long as your temptation is in the
stream of Christ's love, and of his blood, you may draw it along the more
easily: but if once it come to touch upon your own shore? Oh! then you draw
hard. Whenever therefore, a temptation arises, go unto Jesus Christ, and say,
O Lord, I have no strength to stand against this great Enemy: I confess it is
my duty to resist this temptation, but it is thy promise to succor me under
this temptation, and therefore I put my self upon thee.

And then, rest upon Christ. As I use to say, Your very resting on him makes
him yours; your resting on his strength makes it yours; and your resting on his
succor makes that yours.

And if the Lord command you to the use of any means; Don't rest upon any
because they are great: Or despise any because they are small. You do observe,
that the great Victories amongst the Jews, they were obtained by the weakest
means; and by the blowing of rams horns walls fell down. Those were but Types of
those spiritual Victories under the Gospel.

God seldom does wound the head of a temptation, but first the heel (the means)
is bruised whereby the head of the temptation is wounded. As Christ's heel is
bruised in his wounding of Satan's head; So I say, it is in regard of means:
seldom that any means does wound the head of a temptation, but the very heel
of that means is first bruised: and therefore, don't despise it though it be
small.

And if it please the Lord, to cast in any Promise, when you are under a
temptation: Oh! take heed, that you don't live upon the letter of the Promise.
I mean, don't live upon the Conveyance, but upon the Land: and yet how many do
live upon the bare Promise, bare letter of the Promise. When a temptation
comes, pass from the temptation unto the Promise; and through the Promise unto
Jesus Christ, and learn to live upon the thing Promised, and not the letter of
the Promise.

After temptation is over, (I can but touch on things) Either you have the
better of Satan: Or else the worse. If you have the worse; Be for ever Humbled,
but never Discouraged. And if you have the better of him: Then rejoice in the
Lord, and in all his goodness toward you, and in all his succouring love and
mercy. Rejoice in the Lord evermore, and again I say, rejoice. As one whom his
mother comfort, so will I comfort you: and then it follows, They shall
rejoice; your hearts shall rejoice. But take heed your spiritual joy after
Victory, don't degenerate into carnal joy, and you be drunk therewith. It Is
reported of the English, that once going into Spain, and taking in a Town
there: after they had taken it in, there being much wine in the Town, the
soldiers fell a drinking of themselves drunk; and the Country came down upon
them, and beat them out, and recovered the Town again. So it is with many: They
have a Victory over temptation, and they begin to rejoice spiritually; but
their spiritual joy degenerates into carnal joy, and they are drunk with their
joy, and so lose their Victory. Beloved! Joy not in your Joy, but in the God of
your Joy after Victory.

And if you have the better after temptation, if you have the better: be sure
of this, That you improve your Victory to more assurance. If the Devil get the
better of you, he will be sure to improve his Victory to your despair: I say, if
he get the better of you, he will be sure to improve his Victory to your
despair. Therefore, if you get the better of him be sure that you improve your
Victory, to more assurance of Gods love in Christ.

Yea, (my beloved) for ought I know, there is no temptation that a child of God
meets withal, but he may improve it to more assurance. As thus:

Surely, If I were the Devils own, he would never trouble me thus. When the
strong man keeps the house, all is at peace, and all is at quiet. Now ever
since, from the very first day that I have set my face toward heaven, and
Christ; Oh! how have I been troubled, and tempted, and perplexed, and vexed in
my spirit? Surely therefore, I am none of the Devils. Now if I had been his
own, I should have been more quiet under him: but because I am thus troubled. I
hope in the Lord I am none of the Devils, I am the child of God. Thus a man may
improve.

And, Oh! what a good thing were it, if we did make improvement of our
temptations! what gracious improvement might we make of all our temptations?
and what a blessed issue might we have in our temptations, if we did go unto
Christ for succor.

I beseech you therefore in the Lord, when as any temptation arises, go unto
Jesus Christ, he is a succouring Christ. He has National succors; and he has
Family succors; and he has Personal succors: You have National temptations;
and you have Family temptations; and you have Personal temptations;
Soul-temptations; temptations when you are alone. Therefore go unto Christ for
succor.

To conclude, I beseech you (beloved in the Lord) go to Christ and try him, put
him to it: The greater your temptation is, the more fit work for Christ to
cure: do not despair, do not sit down; go to Jesus Christ, you shall find him
better than I have spoken, you shall not find him worse; he will go beyond my
words, he will not fall short of my words. As the Devil goes about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour: So Jesus Christ in the Gospel, goes
up and down with his succor, seeking whom he may succor. Go to him for
succor: and the God of peace, even Jesus Christ himself, tread down Satan
under our feet shortly.

SERMON III. Of TEMPTATION.
LUKE 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to
have you that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not.
AFTER our greatest enjoyments of God, usually follow the greatest temptations
of Satan. And therefore our Savior speaks these words unto his Disciples. In
the 19. verse of this Chapter, we find them at the Lords Supper with Christ
himself; This is my body which is given for you; This do in remembrance of me.
Having received the Supper with Christ himself, and having had sweet Communion
with him there, our Savior gives them out a most gracious and blessed promise,
at the 28, 29, and 30. verses, Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations, and I appoint to you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me: that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Having said thus unto them; He comes in
the very next words to acquaint them with a great temptation that was coming
down upon them all: and therefore these words are knit together with the former
by the word And; And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired.
Though you have had this Communion with me; and though I have made you this
gracious and blessed promise, know, that there is a great storm of temptation
coming down upon you.

Here are two things: The Danger of the temptation; and the Remedy against it.
The Danger in the 31. and the Remedy in the 32. verse. In the 31. verse we have
considerable, The Tempter; called Satan, which signifies an Adversary. The
Tempted; and those are, not Simon only, but all the Disciples. Satan has
desiredyou: it is in the Plural number: he directs his speech unto Simon, but
the temptation spreads larger upon all the Disciples: That he may sift you.

The Manner of the temptation, in Two expressions: Satan has Desired you:
according to the Original word, Satan has challenged you into the field; (...)
as one man does another: And has desired you, that he may sift you as wheat,
and leave you nothing but chafe. Plainly then, here this Observation.

The Lord Jesus Christ does give leave sometimes unto Satan, to tempt and
winnow his own and best Disciples; Christ's own, and best Disciples are exposed
to Satan's temptings, and winnowings: not Peter only, but James, and John, and
all the beloved Disciples of Jesus Christ were exposed here unto Satan's
winnowings. He has desired You, in the Plural number, not thee Peter only, but
you all my Disciples, that he may sift you as wheat.

For the clearing and making out of this Truth, I shall labor to discover.

First, What great power Satan has to tempt, molest, and annoy the children of
men. Secondly, That he puts forth this power especially upon the Saints,
Christ's own-and bestDisciples. Thirdly, How he comes by this power, and why God
the Father gives him this leave. And so to the Applycation.
First, What power Satan has to infest, molest, and thus to tempt the children
of men?

I answer, First, ye know that Satan is an Angel still; and being an Angel, he
is a Superior creature to man, and therefore, according to the rank of
Creation he has a great deal of power over man. Man has a great power over
the Beasts, for man is a Superior. The Beasts have a great deal of power over
the Herbs, and the grass, for the Beast is the Superior. The Angels by
Creation are Superior to man, Satan, though fallen, is an Angel still:
according to the rank of Creation, therefore he must needs have a mighty power
over the children of men.

But he is not only a Superior creature, Spiritual creature than man, he is a
spirit; and upon that account, he is more able to come within a man, to close
with a man's soul and spirit: being spirit himself, he is more able to converse
with, to close and get within our souls and spirits.

Thirdly, He is able to suggest unto man whatsoever he pleases, and to cast in
a thousand sinful objects into a man's mind one after another.

Yea, and he being so well experienced,

Further, He is not only able to present and suggest; follow his suggestions.
It is said, That he stood up, and provoked David to number the people: he did
not only present that evil unto David, but he did solicit, he provoked David
to number the people (says the text.)

He is not only able thus; but he is able also, to bemire the fancy, to raise
storms in that lower region: A man's soul (ye know) it works by organs, it
works by the body, and by the fancy: now Satan being able to disturb the
fancy of a man, is thereby able also, to hinder the very operation of the
soul.

He is able to hold down a man's mind unto that particular thing,

Lastly, to enlighten a man: Satan is said for to blind him, The god of this
world has blinded their eyes; says the Apostle. The Spirit is said to Rule in
us; Satan is said, To rule in the children of disobedience. The holy Chost is
said, To work in us mightily, the same word is used for Him also. The holy
Ghost is said, To fill the hearts of believers; They were filled with the holy
Ghost: So are men's hearts said, To be filled with Satan: Says Peter to
Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart? Indeed, there are three things
especially, wherein he does fall short: for though Satan is able to discern what
temptations would take best with a man, yet he don't know man's thoughts, for
God only is the knower of ones thoughts; that is Gods prerogative. And though
Satan may work very effectually in the children of disobedience, yet
notwithstanding, he does not work with an Almighty power. When the Lord
converts a man, he puts forth an Almighty power in man's conversion. The same
power (says the Apostle) that raised up Christ from the dead, makes ye to
believe. The Devil is Magnipotent (says Luther) but not Omnipotent: the Devil
may be very powerful, but he is not Almighty: neither does he put forht an
Almighty power in his temptations, as God does in the conversion of a sinner.
And though he may suggest, and provoke unto what is evil, he cannot force, or
determine any man to evil. And therefore says the Apostle Peter, why has
Satan filled thine beart? he asked Ananias that question, because Satan, though
he did fill his heart, he could not have forced, or determined him without his
own will thereunto. But very powerful Satan is. In the 6. chapter to the
Ephesians, you shall see the Apostle speaks thus much unto you there: at the
12. verse. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickdness in high places. He speaks concerning Satan,
as you see in the former verse, Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be
able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood, etc. It is something for a man to have all the world against him, to
have all mankind against him: if all mankind should be aginst one man, you
would say, there were a great strength; but behold more than that, here is
something more than flesh and blood that every man does wrestle against: For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood: all mankind is but flesh and blood, and
so there is a weakness; but we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, for Authority; and against power, for Strength; and against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, and against spiritual wickedness in high
places. Oh! what a mighty power then has Satan to infest, molest, and to tempt
the children of men.

Whether does Satan put forth this power, and exercise this his tempting power
upon the Saints and Children of God?

Yes, Ephesians; For we wresile not against flesh and blood. You that are
Ephesians, and you that are Saints We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities and powers. Properly, ye don't wrestle with a man that
is down; ye wrestle with a man for to throw him down; but he must be a standing
man that ye wrestle withal: ye don't wrestle with one that does run away but
one that stands to it. Now all wicked men, they are down, but the Saints they
stand, and they labor to throw Satan down, and Satan labors to lay them all
along in unbelief: but they properly do wrestle with Satan, for they stand, the
other are fallen already.

Yea, the Saints are not only tempted by Satan; but the best, and the most
beloved Disciples of Jesus Christ. In the old Testament: who more beloved than
David, and Job? yet they tempted. In the new Testament, who more beloved than
Peter, and Paul? One of the Circumcision, and the other of the Uncircumcision
and Apostleship, and yet both had special temptations.

Yea, it is possible for one of Gods own children to be so far oppressed with
Satan, that he may even be weary of his life. In the 10. of Job, and the 1.
verse, says Job under his great temptations: My soul is weary of my life. And
if Rebekah were weary of her life, because of the children of Heth: much more
may a poor, gracious soul be weary of his life, by reason of these children of
darkness, these powers of darkness, these temptations of Satan.

But you will say, Why should Satan lie so heavy upon Gods own children and
people? for he may know, that they shall be saved do he what he can: Satan had
heard our Savior Christ say to Peter, The gates of Hell shall not prevail
against thee; and yet now Satan tempts: if Satan know this, why should he
follow Gods children, yea, the best of his children so sorely with sad
temptations?

Satan is the envious man we read of in Scripture;

But there is this great reason for it. David: it is said, in the 1 Chronicles. 21.
chapter, and the 1. verse. That, Satan stood up against Israel to provoke David
to number Israel. It is not said thus, And Satan stood up against David, and
provoked David to number Israel: no, but thus, And Satan sood up against
Israel, and provoked David to number the people: he stood up against Israel;
why? because he know, that if he did make David thus to number the people, it
would be a stumbling for all Israel, and all Israel should fare the worse by
it. When Satan stands up, and tempts the master of a family unto sin, he does
not barely stand up against him, but in tempting him, he stands up against all
the family. When Satan tempts a religious holy man, a beloved Disciple of
Christ in a Town, Satan stands up against all the Town in tempting that one
man. He stood up against Israel, and tempted David to number the people: and so
when he tempts those that are the most beloved Disciples of Christ, he stands
up against others; and therefore though Satan knows, that their sins shall be
pardoned, yet he does follow them with sad and sore temptations.

Thirdly: Satan loves to divide between friends: he is the great make-bait of
the world, he loves to divide. He may know, that there is so much goodness
between man and wife, that he shall never part them; and yet he will labor to
sow discord between them, that they may live uncomfortably. And so, though he
knows he shall never part Christ and a poor believer; yet he will labor to
throw jealousies into the heart of a believer concerning the love of Christ. He
knew well enough what was said concerning our Savior Christ: What was said by
the Angels at the birth of Christ; what was said by the Angel to Mary; what was
said by Elizabeth; he heard what was said from Heaven, This is my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased: and yet presently he comes to Christ with an If: If
thou be the Son of God: laboring to throw a jealousy into the heart of Christ,
and to doubt of his Sonship, even with God the Father. So I say, although
Satan should know, that the Lord will pardon such of such a man, yet he loves
to make a division between God and the soul, and to cast in jealusies between

Christ and a believer. As for others (says he) they are my own already, I
shall not need to break into that house, there is nothing but chafe lies there;
but here is a godly man, and here is treasure; and therefore he does especially
lay his battery against the Satines, and those that are the most beloved
Disciples of Jesus Christ.

But you will say unto me, How does Satan come by this tempting power; this
infesting, and molesting power?

Great is the power (as we have read already) that he has as he is a Superior
creature: Ausw.
but Satan has yet another power, and that is the power of Conquest; for in
Adams fall, Satan conquered the whole world, all mankind, they were the Devils
conquest upon the fall. When a man is Converted, and trun'd to God, then he
comes out of the kingdom of Satan. But I say, upon the fall the Devil made a
conquest upon all mankind, and so by conquest he has a great power. Satan
has heave from God the Father to tempt; I don't say, that he has a special
leave for every temptation, not a special commission, or permission, or leave
for every temptation; but there is no great, or extraordinary temptation that
does fall upon the children of God, but Satan has a special leave from God the
Father for it. There was a special temptation upon the Country, in his running
their herd of swine into the Sea, and he had leave for that before he did it.
There was a special temptation upon Ahab, in the lying spirit of the Prophets,
and he had a special leave, and permission from God for that. There was a
special temptation upon Job, and he had a leave for that. Here was a special
temptation coming down upon the Disciples, and he had leave for that. Simon,
Simon, Satan has desired you. He was fain to ask leave, and he had leave for
that. There is no extraordinary, or great temptation befalls any of the children
of God, but Satan is fain to ask leave for it: he has a leave for it, before
he can come and tmept the soul.

But you will sa then unto me, Why does God the Father give Satan leave thus to
tempt his own Children, and Christ's own Disciples?

First: take it thus, Lood whatsoever is the end, Adam and Eve? They fell and
then the righteousness of Christ, and eternal life thereby was brought in: this
was the end and the issue of it. Now God the Father had this design upon Satan's
temptation, all the while Satan was tempting of Adam: and the Lord would never
have suffered our heel to have been bruised by Satan's temptation, but that he
did intend to break the head of Satan. It was a great temptation, that of
David, when as Satan stood up, and provoked him to number the people: pray,
what was the end, and issue of that temptation? I shall only name the
Scriptures: The 1 Chronicles. the 21. chapter: and the 22. chapter and the beginning
of it, and the 2 Chronicles. the 3. chapter, and 1. verse, compared together, you
shall find this: First Satan tempts David; he numbers the people, the people
being numbered, a plague breaks forth: the plague prevailing, David goes and
offers up a sacrifice at the threshing flower of Ornan; and there God told him
the temple should be built. David had a long time desired to know where the
Temple should be built: he says, he would give no rest unto himself, no sleep
unto his eyelids, until he had found out a place for God: you shall find, that
David had this place discovered as the issue of this temptation, this was the
issue of it, the Devil had as good have let David alone, he had as good have
been quiet, for David now had the end and the issue, attained unto that, that
he never did attain unto before. So I say it is with the people of God, the
Lord never suffers his own children to fall into any sin, but he does intend to
wean them from that sin that they do fall into, even by the falling into it:
the Lord never suffers any of his own children to be tempted, but he intends to
break the back of that temptation, even by their being tempted. This is the
design of God the father: Oh! what a glorious design of love, and mercy is here
upon all the temptations of Gods people!

But God has yet greater,

The manifestation of his Power. When Paul was tempted, and buffeted by Satan,
the Lord said unto him, That his sirength should be perfected in weakness: in
Paul's weakness, Gods strength should be perfected.

The manifestation of his Wisdom, The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out
of temptation, says the Apostle.

The manifestation of his Faithfulness. In the 1 Cor. 10.13. The Lord is
faithful, and will not suffer ye to be tempted above what ye are able to bear.

The manifestation of his Free-love and grace. And therefore, when Paul was
tempted and bufferted by Satan, and prayed against his temptation, the Lord
answered thus: My grace is sufficient for thee.

But in regard of the Saints themselves: How should they give a Probate, or
Testimony of their uprightness, and sincerity, their firm, and fast cleaving to
God, if they were never tempted: read for this purpose, the 13. of
Deuteronomy, and the 2. and 3. verses. Before Job was tempted, Satan thought
that Job had served God for a boon, for something: Have thou not seen my
servant Job (says God) I, says Satan, but does Job serve God for naught?
Job's an Hypocrite, all things go well with him, Job's in a fair, and blessed
outward condition, and Job was never tempted; does Job serve God for naught?
but now touch him, and let me tempt him a little, and see if he don't blaspheme
God then: thus Satan then. And just thus is the language of the Devil now: Does
such a man or woman serve God for naught? he is but an Hypocrite, all things go
well with him, he was never yet tempted: but, O Lord, let this man or woman
come under my hand, and let me tempt him a little, and see if he don't
blaspheme. Well Satan, (says God) Job is in thine hand, only spare his lefe:
And Satan did tempt him, and touch him: and in stead of blaspheming, behold
blessing; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; blessed be his Name: Here
now Job gave a Testimony, that he did not serve God for something, that his
heart was sincere and upright. And so, when men can hold out, notwithstanding
all their temptations, they give a Testimony of their uprightness, and
sincerity, and that their souls do cleave unto God in truth. For these, and
many other reasons, the Lord does suffer his own best, and dearest Children to
be tempted by Satan.

I come to Application.
If God does suffer his own people, and dearest children, Applica.
to be exposed to Satan's temptings and winnowings: Why sold any man then doubt
of his Child-ship, doubt of his own everlasting condition, and say, That he is
none of the child of God because he is tempted? Beloved! I have seen a sore
evil under the sun, a vanity even among the Saints, and people of God: Some
doubting of the soundness of their condition, and the love of God, because they
are not tempted; others doubt betause they are tempted. One says, Oh! I am
afraid I am none of the child of God, for I was never tempted, the children of
God, they meet with temptations, but I was never yet buffetted, and therefore I
am none of Gods child: Another on the contrary; I labor under these and these
temptations, and therefore I fear that I am none of Gods child: yea, sometimes
the same person thus: First, he does not observe his own heart, and says he, I
fear I am none of Gods child, for I never was tempted. Afterward, when he meets
with temptation, then he doubts again that he is not Gods Child because he is
tempted: Oh! what Childish dealing is this with God your Father!

But my beloved in the Lord, If this be true, That the Lord does suffer his
own, and best children, to be exposed to Satan's winnowings, and temptings; then
why should thou conclude that thou art not the child of God, because thou art
tempted? Oh! but, I don't conclude (will some say) that I am not the child of
God, I don't conclude that the Lord does not love me because I am tempted, but
because I meet with such and such temptations. Tell me, did not David, Job,
Paul, and Peter meet with such and such, and so great temptations? Yea, did not
Christ himself meet with it? Oh! but, my temptations are such as would make
ones hair stand upright on ones head to think of them; sometimes tempted,
even to lay violent hands upon my self: What think ye of Christ? when Satan
spoke unto him, and tempted him to throw himself down off the pinnacle of the
Temple. Oh! but, I am tempted with such temptations that I am ashamed to name,
and my heart aches, and trembles when I do reflect on them, even with
blasphemous thoughts. What think ye of Christ? was not he tempted to blasphemy?
Says the Devil to him, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: what greater blasphemy than to worship the Devil? to make a God of
the Devil himself, what greater blasphemy? Oh! but, I fear, and doubt my
condition, and the love of God toward me, because my temptations are not as
the temptations of Gods children, but my temptations are such as cannot stand
with grace, there is a spot, that is not the spot of Gods people: and are there
not temptations, that are not the temptations of Gods people? have not wicked
men their peculiar temptations, such as does not fall upon the children of God?
I am afraid that my temptations are of that rank and of that sort, and
therefore I fear and doubt my condition. Mark I pray, This same word Temptation
may be considered two ways: Either in regard of the Formallity, or form of the
temptation; or in regard of the Materiallity, or matter of the temptation.

Take now Temptation according to the propriety of the speech and phrase, and
so wicked men are not said to be tempted by Satan; by their own hearts they
are, but I speak of Satan's temptations, properly the wicked are not said to be
tempted by Satan. He is said to rule in them, in the children of disobedience;
and he is said to lead them captive at his will: but if ye look into the new
Testament, ye will not ordinarily find, that wicked men are said to be tempted
by Satan. A man does not tempt his wife, but when he solicites another woman,
then he is said for to tempt that woman. As the Sains are married to Christ, so
wicked men, they are matched to Satan; and he is not in propriety of phrase
said for to tempt them. Your men stealers, those that steal children, they
don't tempt their own children for to go with them, they naturally go with
their father: but they come and tempt your children, they are other folks
children that they tempt. And so Satan, he is properly said to tempt those that
are none of his children. A Master don't tempt his servant, he is not said
properly to tempt his won servant to dwell with him, or to serve him; but he
goes to another man's servant, and speaks to him to come and dwell with him, and
to serve him. As for wicked men, they are properly the servants of Satan; and
therefore when the Devil solicites them to do that which is evil, or to dwell
with him, and to converse with him, it is not I say in propriety of speech a
proper temptation: but for the servants of Christ, when he solicites them unto
evil, then he is properly said to tempt them. This for the form of a temptation.

But now, take a temptation in the Materiality of it, for the Matter of it,
which is a solicitation to evil; and so wicked men are tempted by Satan; yea,
they are more tempted than the godly are; that is, they are more solicited unto
evil by Satan; and the same temptation that godly men are tempted with, wicked
men are tempted with: and the same temptation that wicked men are tempted with,
a godly man is tempted with. As there is no Duty which a godly man does
perform, but a wicked man may do it, for the Act, and yet remain wicked: So
there is no sin, which a wicked man falls into, but a godly man may be tempted
to it and yet remain godly.

But you will say unto me, This evil that is upon my heart, is not the
temptation of Satan, but indeed it is the corruption of mine own heart, and
therefore I fear my condition. Indeed, if I were sure that it were only the
temptation of Satan, I should never question Gods love, nor mine own condition
because of it; but, Oh! I am afraid it is not a temptation of Satan, but the
corruption of mine own heart, and therefore I fear all is not right with me.

This is no new thing, Adam and Eve, when they were fallen, and had eaten the
forbidden fruit, then they were ungodly, in the state of nature presently upon
the fall before they believed in Christ: and, says Eve, This serpent gave me
to eat; as if she should say, He has done it, it is all his work, it is Satan's
work, and it is none of mine; being in her unregenerate state, she lays all
upon the Devil, and free's her self, as if she had nothing to do with it. On
the other side, David was provoked by Satan to number the people; yet
notwithstanding, see what he says in the 2 Samuel 24. Chapter and the 10. verse.
And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people; and David
said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done; and now I
beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done
very foolishly. He lays it all upon himself: he does not go now and say, Satan
has provoked me to number the people, and it is Satan's work and none of mine;
but he does charge it here upon himself, as if Satan had no hand at all in it.
I have done foolishly (says he) and I have sinned, and forgive this great
iniquity. This is usual; Wicked men excuse their own corruptions, by Satan's
temptations: Godly men aggravate Satan's temptations by their own corruptions.

But in the Second place: Origens mind, to lay all sin upon Satan, not upon
man; but I say, there is no great sin that any of Gods children do fall into,
but Satan has a special hand and a work therein. And therefore if ye look into
the New Testament, you will find, That the sins of the godly, they are very
often called Temptations: in the 1 of Cor. 10. Chap. and the 13. verse. There
has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man; but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able,
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape. Wherefore (at the 14.
verse) my dearly beloved, fly from Idolatry, as if that were temptation too.
And so in that 6. of Galatians, 1. verse. If any man be overtaken in a fault, ye
which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering
thy self, lest thou also be tempted: lest thou also fall into sin. And so the
Apostle says unto the Thessalonians, in the 1 of Thessa. 3. chap. and the 5.
verse. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your
faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labor be in
vain. The meaning is, Lest you are fallen; but it is called temptation to them.

Thirdly, Although this be true, Peter goes out and weeps bitterly when he had
fallen; He might have said thus: The Lord told me that there was a temptation
coming, Satan had desired to winnow me; and now the word of the Lord is
fulfilled, Satan has tempted me, and I am thus fallen: But not a word of
Satan, but he goes out and weeps bitterly, as if it were all his own work. And
let me tell you for your comfort, When as you can mourn over your temptations,
as if they were all your own, and nothing of Satan's, the Lord will pardon them
to you, as if they were all Satan's, and nothing of your own.

In the Fourth place,

When as your heart, and your flesh trembles and quakes under the first rising,
and motion of a sin, this is not your own corruption alone, but there is a
temptation with it. When the corruptions of ones own heart does work up evil, a
man's heart is rather pleased and tickled with it, and consents to it, then any
way ones flesh lie trembling, and quaking under it. That temptation is not much
to be feared, when a man fears himself for his temptation. He is to be feared
most, that does fear least: and he is to be feared least, that does fear most.
A godly, gracious, man or woman, is humbled under nothing more than under his
temptations; he looks upon his temptations as the greatest afflictions in all
the world. As now, take that of Blasphemous Thoughts; Suppose a poor soul
troubled with such evil thoughts, such a poor soul says, I do profess it in
the sight of God, I never met with such an affliction since I was born: I have
lost Children; Oh! but that affliction is not like to this: I have lost
friends; Oh! but that affliction is not like to this: I have lost my Estate;
Oh! but that affliction is not like to this. Man or woman, if it be thy
affliction, it is not thy sin. And I appeal to you now, you that say, ye don't
doubt of Gods love, ye don't fear your own condition because of temptations
only, but because ye are afraid they are the corruptions of your own heart, and
not the temptations of Satan; I appeal to you that say so; Are ye not afraid in
your selves because of your temptations? Don't ye look upon your temptations as
your greatest afflictions? Nay, does not thy flesh quake, and tremble
sometimes, when a temptation dashes, and beats in upon thy soul? does not thy
very outward man, sometimes, lie quaking, and trembling, before a temptation?
Certainly, this is not all the corruption of thine own heart, here is the Devils
hand, here is a temptation in it, and, poor soul, thou may have some comfort
yet; notwithstanding the oppression is so great, yet here is comfort, it is no
other but what may stand with grace.

Oh! but you will say: Suppose it be all the temptation of Satan, and not the
corruption of mine own heart, yet it is a great affliction, and what comfort can
I have in this condition?

What comfort! Is it not much comfort to know,

Is it not a great comfort, for a man to know, that while he is tempted, Christ
is at prayer for him? But I have prayed for thee. In time of temptation you
cannot pray, I but Christ can pray, and he is then at prayer for you: as he
said to Peter, so he says to every Disciple of his now, But I have prayed for
thee: poor soul, though thou can not pray thy self, yet I have prayed for
thee.

Is it not a sweet comfort, for a man to know, that the Enemy is overcome
before he strikes? Satan's temptation is overcome by Christ's Intercession; and
Christ prays before Satan tempts; But I have prayed for thee: before the
temptation came.

Is it not a choice comfort, for a man to know, that Satan the great tempter,
has no more power than my father gives him leave? Thus it is, Satan has
desired etc.

Is it not wonderful comfort, for a man to know, that there is something that
he can never be robbed of? When a man is traveling in his journey,; if he meet
with thieves, they take away the money that he has about him; but when they
have taken away all his money that he has about him, well (says he) though
they have taken away my spending-money, and that which I did wear about me, yet
I have land at home that they cannot rob me of. And so says a child of God (or
at least he may say so) when Satan comes and tempts him, and robs him of some
comfort; yet blessed be the Lord, I have Union with Christ that I can never be
robbed of; and I have an inheritance in Heaven that thieves cannot break
through and steal away. Satan may take away my spending-money, my spending
comforts that I have here in this world; but Oh! blessed be God, I have such
comforts, and such an Estate, such durable riches that I can never be robbed of
Oh! you that are the Saints and people of God, lift up your heads: you that
have been bowed under temptation, these things have I spoken to you, that you
may not be overwhelmed with temptation, you that are tempted, but that in the
midst of all you may breath out your souls in the bosom of Jesus Christ.

Well, It is not comfort that I look for, or that I follow after; but the truth
is, I am sorely tempted, and Satan lies heavy on me, following, and dogging me
at the heels to yield unto his temptations; what shall I say, or what shall I
do, that I may not yield unto his temptations?

What shall thou say: him, and ye must treat, ye must speak; Tell Satan then,
That therefore you believe it, because he denies it: therefore you do not
believe it, because he affirms it; that you believe the contrary, because he
speaks thus. When ye are to deal with a great liar, one that is your Enemy, and
he comes and tells you very ill news, you will say, He is a liar, and he is my
Enemy, and he does it to scare me, and therefore I believe the contrary. Satan
is a great liar, and he is your Enemy, and therefore when he says unto thee,
There is no hope for thee, thou have been a great sinner, a Drunkard for thus
many years, a Swearer thus many years, there is no hope for thee: say, Satan,
therefore I believe the contrary, there is hope for me, because thou say
there is none, for thou art a liar, yea, the father of lies.

Again, If ye must speak with Satan; then speak of Christ, of grace, of the
infinite love of God in Christ: he cannot stand before words of grace, and
before words of love: not a word of grace, or of free love in all his
temptations.

Yea, If you must speak with Satan, tell him, Oh! tell him, what ye find in the
ways of God, and tell him, that you believe beyond what ye find; thus: Satan,
for the present I find nothing but sweetness in the ways of God; thou toldst
me that if I would turn godly I should never have merry day again, but I tell
thee what I now find, I find of a truth, That the sowrest part of godliness, is
sweeter than the sweetest part of wickedness. Satan, I find, that all that ever
thou toldst me is false; Thou said, I should lose all my friends: I have
better. Thou said, I should lose all my comforts if I turned godly; I have
better, Satan. And this I find, Satan; That all that ever Christ spoke unto me,
is true: Oh! I find infinite sweetness in the ways of God, and I believe
beyond what I find: that if the wheels of providence should run never so
cross, yet through grace I would believe. Beloved! ye know what the Apostle
says, Whom resist, steadfast in the faith: and by faith we quench his fiery
darts. Must ye therefore neds speak with Satan; speak to him words of faith;
not of sense (man) not of reason, but speak words of faith; I charge ye in the
Lord, if ye will stand and parley, and speak with Satan, speak words of faith
to him, speak words in a way of believing; and it is only faith that brings
Christ and the soul together in the time of temptation; and when Christ comes
in, Satan goes out.

But you will say, But Oh! that I might not be led into any temptation: what
shall I do that I may prevent it?

Take heed that ye don't stand playing upon the borders, or confines of any
sin. If you stand upon the brink of a sin, Satan comes behind you and thrusts
you into it. Some there are that tempt the tempter, that begin unto Satan, they
drink to Satan the first draught, and Satan pledges them, and drinks unto them
again. Would you (m^ beloved) prevent temptation? Oh! take heed how ye stand
playing upon the borders of any sin, the holes of the Aspes.

Again, Then labor to get your hearts mortified unto the objects of love and
fear. Satan tempts two ways: As a Serpent: And as a Lion. When Satan tempts as
a Serpent; then he does make a tender, and an offer of some comfortable,
profitable, sweet thing: You shall be like God; You shall be as God, says he
unto Adam and Eve, when he tempted as a Serpent, came as a Serpent. And so
dealing as a Serpent with our Savior Christ, All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. Shows him the glory of the world, and all this
will I give thee. So says he unto a poor soul, when he tempts as a Serpent,
Come and yield unto this temptation, and all this comfort will I give thee, and
all this profit will I give thee, and all this repute and honor will I give
thee. Thus as a Serpent. Sometimes he tempts as a Lion: for he goes up and down
as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And when Satan tempts as a Lion,
then he does roar upon a poor soul, and labors to scare him out of his
conscience, and out of the good ways of God. And therefore in the book of the
Revelation, Satan shall cast some of you into prison. Satan shall do it. And
sometimes he does stand and rattle the chains of a prison; Look, do ye hear
these? If you will go on in such and such a way, you will lose al your friends;
and if you will go on in such a way, I will make it too hot for you, and thus
and thus shall you suffer, and it shall cost ye a prison ere I have done with
you. Thus now Satan tempts as a Lion, by holding terrible objects before a man.
It is said, That Satan came to our Savior Christ, and he found nothing in him;
so he prevailed not: But Satan comes to us, and he finds a great deal in us, he
finds a disposition in us to be moved with objects of love, unto comfortable,
and profitable things: He comes to us, and finds in us a disposition to be
moved with Fear by terrible objects. Wherefore now (my beloved) do you desire
to prevent the mischief of a temptation? Oh! labor more and more to die unto
all the objects of your outward Love, and the objects of Fear; Die to the
objects of Love, get your heart mortified to these two objects of Love and
Fear. And be sure of this, if thou would prevent temptation, that ye labor
more and more to walk in the light: Satan is the prince of darkness, and he
walks in darkness: and he tempts in darkness. When night comes the beasts go
forth to their prey, says the Psalmist, And when Satan sees a poor ignorant
soul, that walks in the dark, says he, Here Is a fit prey for me. Oh!
therefore, you that are ignorant, and have sat ignorant under the Ordinances;
for the Lords sake, labor to get more light, and more knowledge, get your
heart opened unto every truth of God, labor to acquaint your selves more with
Gospellight, and set your bosoms open unto every truth of the Lord.

And, beloved! whether you would overcome, or whather you would prevent
temptation; what ever means you use; be sure of this, That you take your
temptation and dip it in the blood of Christ. Take a candle, that is lighted,
and only blow out the candle, the candle is easily lighted again: but when the
candle is out, take it and put it into the water, and then it is not so easily
lighted again: So now a temptation comes, and you blow it out with a
Resolution, and you will not yield to it, alas, it is easily lighted again: but
now, take this candle, take this temptation, and come and dip it in the blood
of Jesus Christ, and it will not be so easily lighted again; so you shall be
able to prevent temptation for the time to come: Never rest alone in resolving,
but, Oh! take your temptation and dip it in the blood of Jesus Christ.

And if that you do overcome your temptation at any time; be thankful to God:
if ye have more than flesh and blood against you, ye shall have more then flesh
and blood with you. And therefore, have you overcome temptation? go away and be
very thankful, and say, Oh! though flesh and blood be against me, yet I have
more than flesh and blood with me, praise the Lord much: And if you have been
overcome with temptation, yet be not discouraged; for ye hear the Doctrine, God
does suffer his own dear children to be tempted, to be buffeted, to be exposed
to Satan's temptings, and to Satan's winnowings. But though ye be tempted, and it
be a temptation of Satan, yet ye hear withal, That it is the property, and
disposition of Gods own people to grieve, and mourn under their temptation as
if it were all their own, and nothing of Satan's. Wherefore now (my beloved)
having heard these things, think on them, and the Lord bless them to you every
day more and more.

SERMON IV. Of TEMPTATION.
LUKE 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Preached at Stepney
Oct. 17 1647.
Satan has desired to have you that he may sift you as wheat: But I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.
YE find that these words hold forth the relation of a great storm of
temptation coming down upon Christ's Disciples: The Danger of it. And the
Remedy against it. Of the Danger somewhat ye heard from the 31. verse. And now
I am to speak unto the 32. verse. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not.

Here is somewhat Implied; and somewhat Expressed: Implied, Satan's Design, and his
great Design upon their faith. Expressed, Christ's love and care, his special love
and care over them, and toward them in this temptation. As if he should say
thus, Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to tempt you; not only thee, but all my
Disciples: the temptation is great, and in this temptation, his great design is
upon your faith: but I have spoken unto my Father, and your Father, that your
faith may not fail. So that hence you may observe thus much: That in the time
of temptation,

He does not say, But I have prayed for thee, that thy Prayer fail not, or
that thy Patience fail not, or that thy Love fail not; but I have prayed that
thy Faith fail not. So that Satan's great design in all his temptations is upon
the faith of the Saints, that he may make their faith to fail them.

For the further clearing, and opening of these words, and of this Truth; I
shall labor to show you.

First, What it is for to fail in our faith: and how far the Saints may fail in
their faith in time of temptation. Secondly, What an evilthing it is for the
Saints to fail in their faith in time of temptation. Thirdly, That Satan's
great design in all his temptations, is upon our faith. Fourthly, How Satan
labors to weaken our faith in the time of temptation: what strokes he gives
unto our faith, and how we shall be able to bare off those blows in the time of
temptation that so our faith fail not?
If ye ask me, What it is for to fail in faith here?

The word in the Original signifies, (...)
an Eclipse, as the Eclipse of the Sun, or of the Moon: and the words may be so
translated, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith be not Eclipsed. But
according to the ordinary acception of that word Eclipse, Peter's faith did
fail, for it was much Eclipsed. The word signifies also, a total defect, such
as Judas made, who of a Disciple became an Enemy, a Traitor; and in stead of
believing, fell to despair: and so Peter's faith did not fail. A man's faith is
said to fail, Either when it falls short of what it has been, or what it
should be; and in both these respects Peter's faith did fail: It fell short of
what it had been, it fell short of what it should be. But there is a Two fold
failing in faith: One in regard of the Acting and Exercise of faith; and
another in regard of the grace of faith it self. In regard of the Acting,
Working, and Exercise of faith, Peter's faith did fail: but in regard of the
grace it self, so it failed not. The Lutherans, they say and contend much for
it, That a regenerate man's faith may fail totally, and finally in time of
temptation: and so they say, that Peter's faith failed here, when he denied his
Lord and Master; because it is said in the next words, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. As if his faith had failed so far, as he should need a
new conversion. But that word translated, When thou art converted, (as diverse
of the learned do well observe) may be translated, (...)
Again, thus: I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: and do thou
strengthen thy brethren again: do thou return to that work again. And so you
have the same word used in the Septuagint, translated in the 58. Psalm, at the
6. verse. Will thou not revive us again? The word in the Hebrew is thus: Will thou not convert, or turn unto us, and revive us? which we translate, Will thou
not revive us again? And so the words here may be translated, (being an
Hebraisme) But do thou strengthen thy brethren again. But suppose that the
words stand according to their present translation, it does not argue, that
Peter did fail totally in this temptation: for, the whole life of a Christian
here, is a continual converting, and turning to God: We repent, and repent
again; turn, and we turn again. Every day we turn unto God yet more and more;
every day brings forth another conversion: yet not so, as if the former
conversion were made void. And if the faith of a believer would fail totally in
the time of a temptation; what should be the meaning of those words, in the 1.
of Joh. 5. Chapter, and the 18. verse. We know, that whosoever is born of God
sins not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one
touches him not: The wicked one: that is Satan, he touches him not. But now,
if Satan could tempt a godly man, and prevail so far in his temptation, as to
make his faith fail totally, then he would touch him to the purpose: but (says
the text) he keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not: and therefore
his faith cannot fail totally, a regenerate man's faith cannot fail totally. And
ye know what is said, in that 7. of Matthew at the 24. and 25. verses.
Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a
wise man, which has built his house upon a rock; and the rain descended, and
the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house; and it fell not,
because it was founded upon a rock. Now every Believer is founded upon a rock,
(Christ) and therefore, though the rain descend, and the floods come, and the
winds blow, and temptations be never so great, he cannot fail totally, because
he is built upon a rock. In the 13. of Matthew, ye know it is made the property
of the false ground, that in the time of temptation it fell away: Now if the
good ground (a regenerate man) should fall away in the time of temptation; what
difference were there between the false ground, and the good ground? Plainly
therefore, the Scripture holds forth this truth unto us, That a regenerate man,
a Believer, though his faith may fail much, yet it does not fail totally in
time of temptation. And thus Peter's faith failed, and thus it failed not: In
regard of the Exercise, and Acting of his faith, it did fail; but in regard of
the grace it self, faith it self, so it failed not: and so it is, and may be
with others of the Saints also.

Secondly: If the faith of a believer do only fail in regard of the Acting,
Exercise, and Working thereof, What great inconvenience is there, or evil in
the failing of his faith?

Much, (my beloved) very much: Abraham, That he believed, and gave glory to
God. Faith gives glory to God: it glorifies his Power, his Mercy, his
Faithfulness, and his Wisdom; not faith in the Habit, but faith in the Exercise
of it glorifies God: and so much as a man's faith does fail, in the Acting,
Working, and Exercise of it, so much he loses an opportunity of glorifying God.

Moreover, He loses his own Comfort. Faith is a Comforting grace. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God. And in the 15. to the Romans, and
the 13. verse, ye find, That Joy and Peace grows upon faith: Now the God of
hope, fill ye with all Joy and Peace in believing. So much as a man does
believe, so much Joy and Peace: if a man fail in the Exercise of his faith, he
does lose his Comfort.

Yea, hereby also, he does lose his present prize. A Christan has a prize in
this life; he has a twofold crown: A crown of glory in the world to come; and
a present crown. And therefore says the Lord unto the Church of Philadelphia,
Hold fast that which thou have, lest another take thy crown. Now if a man do
fail in the Exercise of his faith, he does lose much of his present prize. Ye
know how it was with Moses and Aron, ye read of it in the 20. chapter of
Numbers, and the 12. verse. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye
believe me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel;
therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have
promised them. They were shut out of the land of Canaan for not believing. But
Moses and Araon did not lose the grace of faith, it was only failing in the
Exercise of faith; their failing was not in the grace it self, but only they
failed, in the Exercise of their faith, and they were shut out of Canaan for
it. And Moses besought the Lord earnestly in prayer, that he would reverse this
threatening, and it might not be; he was shut out of Canaan, merely for failing
in the Exercise of his faith. Oh! what an evil thing is it then, for a
Christian to fail in his faith, though it be no more than in the Exercise of
his faith.

Further, In this failing of ones faith, though but in the Exercise of it; A
Christian does lose much of the benefit, and sweetness of the mercy promised.
Look as it is with a wicked man, in regard of the judgment threatened; So with a
godly man in regard of the mercy promised. Now take a wicked man, and let the
threatening of God be fulfilled before him upon others, upon himself; he profits
not by Gods judgments. Why? because that he don't exercise faith concerning the
threatening; and so when the judgment comes, he profits not by Gods dealing, by
Gods judgments, he loses the benefit of Gods dispensations that way. So I say
with a godly man: let the promise be fulfilled, and possibly he does not find
the sweetness, or the benefit of the mercy promised when the promise is
fulfilled: Why? because he don't exercise faith in the promise it self. When as
the Lord gave Manna, Moses had the seetness of it, why? because he exercised
faith about it: But the children of Israel, they make a tush of it, a light
matter of it: why? because they looked upon it in a way of sense, and did not
take it in a way of believing, and so they lost the benefit, and sweetness of
the mercy promised. Beloved! it is no small matter this, for to lose the
benefit, and sweetness of the mercy promised: that a Christian loses by
failing in his faith in regard of the Exercise of it; and therefore certainly
it is a very evil thing: though their faith fail not in regard of the grace it
self, yet if it fail in regard of the work, and the exercise of it, it is a
very evil thing, and much inconvenience comes unto the Saints thereby.

Thirdly, Whereby may it appear, that Satan's great design is upon our faith in
the time of temptation?

He does tempt most unto that sin which is the greatesi: and the sin against
the Gospel is the greatest sin. Adam and Eve, he tempted like a serpent, in
form of a serpent: and so now too, he comes, and he winds about us in his
temptation; but his sting is in the tail, and at the latter end. And thus ye
see it was in the temptation of our Savior Christ: his great design was upon
Christ's faith: in the 4. of mathhew, ye know he has Three temptations there:
and says he, in the two first temptations, If thou be the Son of God? and If
thou be the Son of God? And in the Last temptation: All this will I give thee,
if thou will fall down and worship me. He tempted him to Blasphemy, and
Atheism; and what greater unbeleef? So it is with the Saints also: Satan, he
comes and tempts them to sowrenesse, frowardness, and passion in their
families, but he has a further reach upon that distemper: for (says he) I
will tempt this man or woman to passion, and frowardness, and when he has been
froward, and passionate, then I will tempt him to be doubting whether he be the
child of God or no: first I will tempt this man for to break the Law, and when
he has broken the Law, then will Itempt him to sin against the Gospel, then
will I strike at his faith: his great design still is upon your faith in all
his temptations.

But you will say, Why is Satan's great design upon our faith in time of
temptation?

He is the great Robber, or Thief: and if he can, The work of God in a special
manner: and this is THE Work of God, that ye believe in his Son. Satan knows,
that faith is the most Beneficial grace unto the Saints: The Shield of faith,
it is called; and the Anchor of faith. If ye be in a storm at sea; faith is
your Anchor: If ye be in danger at land, before Enemies, faith is your Shield.
If that a man's Faith fail, his Duties fail, his heart fails, and all fails.
He knows well enough, that he shall soon make us suffer shipwreck, if he can
but weaken faith, and therefore his great design is upon our faith. He knows,
that faith is most prejudicial to Himself: for by faith we overcome the world;
whom resist, steadfast in the faith; And by faith we quench the fiery darts of
the Devil. Now then (says Satan) Does faith quench my fiery darts? then will I
labor to quench faith if I can. The Devil does labor always to present
himself in Christ's clothes unto a soul, as an Angel of light: and he does
labout to rpesent Christ in his own clothes, as an Angel of darkness. When as
he is a liar Himself, he does labor to make the soul put the lie upon Christ,
and upon the Spirit. The Spirit of God, that comes and testifies unto a man or
woman, Thou art the child of God: Satan says, No. When a man therefore does
say, He is not the child of God; the language of his action is, He gives the
lie unto the Spirit, and he says, that Satan speaks true: So here he makes
Christ and the Spirit of Chrhist a liar by his unbelief; and he makes the devil
to speak true. Now this is Satan's great design, and therefore, in all his
temptations, still he strikes at the faith of the Saints, labors to weaken
their faith; his great design is upon their faith.

In the Fourth place, How does Satan weaken our faith in time of temptation?
What are those strokes that Satan gives unto our faith? and how shall we be
able to bare them off?

In the general,

Sometimes again, He raises up Mountains of Difficulties, and Discouragements
in the way of a Christians obedience; and so labors to wound his faith. Throw
water upon the fire it will soon be out.

But that I may speak the more fully unto this great Question, the answer
whereof is of concernment every day amongst you.

Ye know there the Three acts of faith: There is the faith of Reliance; whereby
a soul does rely upon God in Christ. There is the faith of Assurance; Whereby
a man is persuaded of Gods love toward him, and his love to God, and that he
is the child of God, And there is the faith of Acknowledgment; whereby a man
does own, and acknowledge the Cause, and Truth of Christ. I shall now spend
some time, and show ye, How Satan strikes at all these faiths: and withal
labor to show you, How we may bare off his blows, that so we may stand in the
time of temptation, and our faith may not fail.

First, For the faith of Reliance: Satan does sometimes strike at the faith of
Reliance in the Saints, by hiding from them their former Experiences of Gods
gracious dealing with them. So long as a man has the sight, and view of his
Experiences of Gods gracious dealing with him before, he does rely on God, and
he says, I will for ever rest upon God, and rely upon God in Christ, for thus
and thus he has dealt with me heretofore. Now therefore, Satan does labor in
the time of temptation, to hide the Experiences of the Saints from them, and so
does strike at their faith, and labors to make their faith fail.

But then, How should we bare off this blow?

Thus, Take heed that ye never rest upon the promise barely, or only because of
your Experience; but rather deal with your Experience because of the promise.
It is a good thing for a man to come up to the Promise by the ladder of
Experience: but it is better for a man to go down to the promise by his
Experience. And if ye look into the 106. Psalm, ye shall find, that when a man
does rest upon the Promise, barely by reason of his Experience, his faith will
soon fail. The waters covered their enemies (at the 11. verse, it is spoken of
the Israelites when they came through the red sea) there was not one of them
left. Verse the 12. Then believed they his words. (Mark) now because of their
Experience, now they believed Gods word, now they believed his promise by
reason of their Experience; Then believed they his words, they sang his praise.
But what became of this? Read the next words: They soon forgate his works,
they waited not for his counsel. So that I say, take heed that ye don't rest
upon the promise barely, and only because of your Experience, for if your
Experience be but out of the way a little, then your heart will fail, and your
faith fail presently.

Take heed that ye never mourn for any evil, no not for sin it self, so as to
be unthankful for, or unmindful of former mercies. We are very apt to this; and
Satan he comes and tempts, and says unto a poor soul, Are you speaking of
former mercies, or blessings to be thanful for them? That is a good work for
others, but as for you, you have committed such a sin, and it is your duty now
to mourn for your sin committed, look you to that, to be humbled; apply your
self to that work: and so when he has gotten a man's heart fixed upon that work
in opposition to thankfulness for former mercies received, the soul loses the
sight of his Experience and so his faith fails in the time of temptation.
Wherefore my Exhortation is, that you may avoid this blow, and this stroke,
Never mourn, no not for son committed; but still be thankful for grace
received, otherways your Experience will go out of sight, and then your faith
fails ye.

Again, Labors to weaken the faith of the Saints Reliance, By sundering or
severing their souls from the promise. So long as a man has the sight of the
promise, and the promise is by him; a gracious heart says, I will for ever
trust in God, and rely upon God in Christ, for thus and thus has God spoken,
and thus and thus says the promise to me. But now, if the promise be gone,
then a man's reliance fails. Satan therefore, in the into of temptation, labors
to take away the promise; scaring the soul, or cogging the soul from the
promise; this he does many ways, but sometimes he speaks out thus: What! do
you meddle with the promise? the promise don't belong to you, the Threatening
belongs to you; you have finned so and so, and the Threatening belongs to you,
but the Promise don't belong to you: And if he can but get the soul to believe
this, then his faith fails.

Oh! How should we bear off this blow in time of temptation? for I confess
thus, by this temptation does Satan strike at my faith, and labors to make my
faith to fail.

In this case, let a man's heart speak thus:

First: If the Lord do command me to believe, then the promise belongs to me,
for I cannot believe unless I apply the promise: now in this time, at this very
time of my temptation, the Lord does command me to believe, else it were no sin
not to believe; it is a sin for me not to believe, not therefore the Lord
commands me to believe; but believe I cannot unless I apply the promise,
therefore God would have me to apply the promise, therefore the promise does
belong to me, and I may apply it.

Again, Let the heart speak thus: If the Lord does give out a Threatening that
it may not be fulfilled; and he does give out a Promise that it may be
fulfilled: If the very applying of the Threatening, makes the Threatening not to
belong to me; and the very applying of the Promise, makes the Promise to belong
to me; then the Threatening does not belong to me, for I have applied it; and
the Promise does belong to me, for I have applied it; Oh! I remember how my
soul has lien trembling before the Threatening, the Lord knows I have often
applied the Threatening: but now this is true, That the very applying of the
threatening, makes the threatening not to belong to a man; and the very applying
of the Promise, makes the Promise to belong to a man; and therefore Satan, the
Threatening belongs not unto me, but the Promise does.

But then again Thirdly, let him say thus: If I be more godly now, than I was
when Satan told me, that the Threatening did not belong to me; and the Promise
did belong to me, then there is no reason for this temptation. When I went on
in a way of sin, then Satan told me, the Threatening did not belong to me; and
then he told me, the Promise did belong to me: Oh! but now I am more godly than
I was then, I have more of Christ than I had then I am sure, and therefore
Satan, Did thou tell me, that the Promise did belong to me then? 'therefore it
belongs much more to me now. Thon toldst me heretofore, when I went on in a way
of sin, the Threatening did not belong to me: now then the Threatening does less
belong to me, for now I am more godly than I was then.

But above all things, remember that of the Commamnd to believe. Luther was a
man that labored under great temptations: and being once sorely tempted, and
the tears trickling down his cheeks; says he my friend (my spiritual father)
came unto me, and said, O my son! why do thou mourn? do thou not know
that God has commanded thee to believe? When (says Luther) I heard that word,
Command, that God has Commanded me to believe; it prevailed more with my
heart, than all that was said, or thought on before. So say I now unto ye, Does
Satan come with this temptation, and tell thee, the Promise don't belong to
thee? Answer, I but the Lord has Commanded me to believe (Satan) God has
Commanded me to believe, it is my duty now at this time to believe; but I cannot
believe unless I apply the Promise, therefore I may go by commission from God
unto the Promise, and the Promise does belong to me. Thus, give in these
answers, so shall ye be able to stand, and to rely upon God, and your faith of
Reliance shall not fail. This is the first thing, The faith of Reliance.

Secondly, How does Satan strike, or labor to weaken the faith of Assurance,
the Assurance of Gods people?

Much may be said here,

Sometimes Satan does labor to weaken the Assurance of the Saints, Romans: It
is said of Abraham (at the 21. verse) Being fully persuaded, that what God had
promised, he was able also to perform. And therefore (at the 22.) it was
imputed to him for righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone,
that it was imputed to him: but for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. Abraham was
justified by faith, it was imputed to him for righteousness: and says the
Apostle here, it was not written for his sake, but for us also. We are
justisied as Abraham was, by the same faith, what faith is that? is it the
faith of Assurance? Yes! he was Assured indeed, but I pray of what? He was
Assured that God was able to perform: He being fully persuaded, that what he
had promised, he was able also to perform. Abraham believed that God was able,
and so relied upon God, and hereby he was justified. So it shall be with men
and women now: if they be Assured, and Persuaded, that God is able, and so
rely upon God; this is the faith that justifies. When therefore this
temptation comes, Answer unto Satan: Satan, thou say I have no Assurance,
because I have no faith; but I have this Assurance that Abraham had, whereby he
was justified, I believe God is able to help me, and so I rely upon God, and
therefore (Satan) I am now justified, and stand righteous through Jesus Christ
in the sight of God.

Secondly,

Well, But how may we ward, and keep off this blow in the time of temptation,
that our faith of Assurance may not fail?

Truly, this blow is not to be warded off, That ye never were Obedient, never
Fruitful, never profited by the means of grace; this blow falls dead upon the
soul, this blow is not to be warded off, this is no temptation. But now, if ye
have ever been fruitful, if ye have ever been obedient, if ye have ever
profited by the means of grace; though for the present ye may seem dead: yet
remember what Job says, There is hope of a tree, though it be cut down, that
by the scent of waters it will flourish again. And so, there is hope of thy
soul, that by the scent of the Gospel-waters thou may flourish again. But
though there be no obedience in your own eye, though ye don't profit under the
means in your own eye; yet your obedience may be in the eye of others: and in
time of temptation, another man's eye is a better judge than your own.

But suppose there seem to be no obedience, neither in your own, nor another
eye; yet the root of the matter may be in you. Ye know how it is with the fish,
that are in the water, in a windy and a stormy day: ye put many fish into a
pond; and in a fair, sun shiney day, ye see them playing upon the water, upon
the uppermost part of the water; but in a rainy, and stormy day, ye see none of
them there, but yet you say, they are all there, they are in the water, they
are at the bottom, though you see them not. And so, it may be, in this stormy
time of temptation, your obedience, and profiting is not seen, but it may be
there as heretofore. Satan does never more press a child of God, to try
himself by signs of grace drawn from his own conversation, than in the time of
temptation. There is indeed a good use of signs drawn from our own
conversation, but this is agreed upon by all, That there is no use of them in
the time of temptation. And therefore says Luther: In the time of temptation,
I am as if there were no Law, nor no works, but only the righteousness of
Christ in the world, and so I do rest uphim. Does Satan come forth therefore
with this temptation, That you have no obedience, that you don't profit, that
you are Unfruitful? Answer it thus: True Satan, I confess I am very
Unprofitable, and therefore I will learn to profit more; I confess I am very
unfruitful, and therefore I will labor to be more fruitful: But (Satan) I will
not now at this time determine about my Condition; for it may be a time of
temptation: hereafter, at another time, I will come and determine about my
Condition, and I will look after signs; but now at this time, it may be a time
of temptation, and therefore I will forbear to wind, and draw up a conclusion,
but lean my self upon God, and rest upon God at this time.

Thirdly, Assurance of Gods people, the faith of Assurance, to make that to
fail, By telling of them, that they have no faith at all, because they have no
particular faith, no particular promise; for, says Satan thus: faith and
Wavering, faith and Doubting do not agree; He that believes doubts not: but
now, you pray and doubt, you believe and waver, ye have no particular word for
what you believe, therefore ye have no particular faith, so no faith at all,
and therefore your Assurance is naught.

How should we ward off this blow?



First, Tell thy soul this:

Again, Tell thine own soul, Hezekiah had a particular word for his recovery;
but the three children had not a particular word, that they should be delivered
out of the fiery furnace, yet they believed; and whether God deliver, or does
not deliver, (say they) we will not bow our selves to this Idolatry. So that,
though God is pleased sometimes, to give out a particular word or promise, yet
always he does not, and therefore my faith may be right (Satan) though I have
not a particular word now for this business.

Again,

Thirdly, Acknowledgement. Sometimes Satan does labor to weaken the faith of
the Saints Acknowledgement. He does labor either that they should deny the
Truth, or not own it: either that they should deny Christ, or that they should
not own him. So he labored to make Peter's faith to fail, by denying Christ.
And therefore, he comes unto a poor soul and says, If you will go on in this
way, it shall cost you a prison; can you lie, and rot, and die in a prison? he
rattles chains in the ears of a poor believer, and so labors to scare him
away from his conscience, and from his faith, and from the Truth and Cause of
God, and the good ways of Christ.

How should we ward off this blow?

First, for the Cause, Truth, Name, and Way of Christ. To you it is given, not
only to believe, but to suffer; it is a great Gift: A suffering opportunity, and
a suffering heart, is a great Gift from God. Is it not a great mercy to be
conformable to Jesus Christ our head? For this Cause (says Christ) came I into
the world, that I might bear witness unto the truth, Is it not a great mercy,
to be confessed at the last day before all the world, Angels, and men? He that
confesses me before men, (says Christ) Him will I confess before my father
etc. Is it not a great mercy, to live and reign with Christ a thousand years?
ye know that Scripture; I shall not speak of the meaning of it now, but
cerainly, there is a great deal of glory promised there, living and reigning
with Christ a thousand years: and the promise is made unto those that do
acknowledge, and own the Cause, and Truth of God and Jesus Christ. Possess
your heart much, with the privilege, and mercy of bearing witness to the
Truth, the Cause, and the good way of Christ before your temptation comes.

Secondly, come upon you, answer thus: Satan, here thou bring the suffering
before me, and causest that to come before me; but thou do not tell me of
the strength I shall have, and of the consolation I shall receive Satan, I shall
not have the strength I have now, nor the consolation I have now, but I shall
have more strength then, when the suffering comes, and I shall have more
consolation, when as the affliction comes than I had before. Keep these
together, don't look only upon the one side of your suffering, and
witness-bearing; but look upon both sides together, and thus you shall be able
to stand, and ride out the storm of this temptation.

But you will say, But there may be yet some temptation (possibly) that does
not fall within the compass of these temptations: these directions are pointed
against these particular temptations; but I have other temptations that don't
fall within the compass of these, whereby Satan labors to weaken my faith, and
to make my faith to fail: What general Rules and Directions may be given, by
which a man should so walk, as that Satan may not make his faith to fail in the
time of his temptation?

First: Let the Word of the Lord dwell in you richly; that so when a temptation
comes, ye may have a word suitable at hand, and this will help ye to bear off
the strength of the temptation when it comes.

Secondly. Either a particular Word and Promise does come unt ye, or it does
not, in the time of your temptation. If it do come unto ye, Take heed that ye
dont' measure your selves, or your condition, by the warmth, and life, and
inlargment of your heart which ye have at the coming in of the word. And if a
particular word, or Scripture, and promise do not come unto you in the time of
your temptation; don't measure your selves, and your condition, by the
straightness, and deadness of your heart which you have at that time when a
particular word does not come.

Thirdly, If temptaion come, Look much unto the infirmities of Jesus Christ:
not the sinful infirmities, for so he had none, but he had many other
infirmities. And ye know what the Spouse in the time of Desertion says, in the
book of the Canticles, His left hand is under my head, and with his right hand
he does embrace me. The right hand, is a hand of power; and the left hand, is a
hand of weakness: and in the time of Desertion, and Temptation, it is a great
relief to a poor soul, to consider the infirmities of Jesus Christ, his left
hand is under our head then. As when a man is enlarged in heart, it is good to
consider of Christ's Example, that so he may be humbled under his enlargement:
So when a man is in Desertion, or Temptation, it is good for to think of Christ's
Infirmities, that so he may not be overwhelmed, or cast down too much.

Fourthly, If temptation do come, be sure of this, That ye don't conclude it is
no temptation. Satan tempts, and then he tempts a man to think it is no
temptation. So long as a poor soul thinks it is but a temptation, his heart is
borne up with comfort, and he says, It is but a temptation, and it will be
over shortly, and the Lord Jesus Christ will pity me, for it is but a
temptation, and so his heart is borne up with comfort, waiting upon God: But if
the Devil can get a man so far, as to make him think it is no temptation, but
worse than a temptation; then his heart fails, and his faith fails. Therefore,
I beseech ye, If a temptation come, don't conclude it is no temptation, but
say, Oh! it may be it is a temptation, and therefore I will wait on God.

Fifthly, If temptation come, Remember thine own soul of the ways of God with
thee. Gods ways (ye know) are in the deep, and his footsteps are not known:
but as the Heavens are greater than the earth, so are Gods ways of mercy
beyond our ways. Now therefore, if a drak temptation do come upon ye, and ye
see no way to get out, say, O but my soul, remember Gods ways are infinite,
and his ways are beyond our ways; and though I see no way, God has infinite
ways, he walks over mulbery-trees, and his ways have been in the deep; and so
it has been all along with my soul, and therefore now, O my soul, wait on God.

Sixthly, Do you run to Christ; and look how Satan appears to you, so do you
apply the Attributes of Christ to you suitable to his temptation. Does Satan set
a temptation unto your breast? observe what temptation it is, and take an
Attribute of Christ suitable to that temptation, and set it to the breast of
that temptation. For Example: Does Satan come and tempt as a Serpent? Then
remember, that Jesus Christ is the brazen serpent. Does Satan come and present
himself as a roaring Lion? Now remember, that Jesus Christ is the Lion of the
tribe of Judah. Does Satan come and present himself as an Accuser? Now
remember, that the Lord Jesus Christ is an advocate. Beloved! in the time of
temptation, ye are to run to Christ, that is true; but that is not all, but you
are to observe how your temptation lies, and apply that Attribute of Christ to
your soul which is suitable to your temptation: do this, and your faith shall
not fail in time of temptation.

Seventhly, Above all things, take the Shield of faith. Take the Shield of
faith, that your faith may not fail: for, the way to believe is to believe; the
way to pray is to pray; the way to hear, is to hear; the way to receive, is to
receive; the way to perform duty, is to perform duty; the way to exercise
grace, is to exercise grace. When temptation therefore does come upon thee,
that thy faith may not fail, now stir up thy self to this work of faith, and to
believe; and if ye believe that ye shall overcome, ye shall overcome; and if ye
believe that ye shall prevail against your temptations, ye shall prevail
against your temptations. And, poor soul, if thou can rely upon Christ, and
believe that thou shall be justified, thou shall be justified; and if thou
can by faith rely upon the Promise, the Promise shall belong to thee.
Wherefore, stir up your selves now to believe when temptation comes. When ye
have to deal with an Enemy here among men, I don't say, believe ye shall
overcome your enemy, and ye shall overcome: a man may believe he shall overcome
his outward enemy here in the field, and yet fall before him, and not overcome:
but having to deal with this enemy, Gods enemy, your fathers enemy, and your
enemy; believe ye shall overcome him, and ye shall overcome him.

But shall we overcome him Only if we believe?

Only of believing? I tell thee from the Lord, It is an harder thing to
believe, than to keep all the Commandments: for there is something in Nature
toward the keeping of the ten Commandments; but nothing in Nature toward
believing in Christ. And, (poor soul) do thou make an Only of believing?
thou do not know what believing means: but I say unto thee from the Lord,
Believe that thou shall overcome, and thou shall overcome; believe that thou
shall prevail against Satan, and thou shall prevail against him; believe that
thy sins shall be pardoned through Christ and rely upon him, and thy sins shall
be pardoned. Whenever therefore any temptation comes, Oh! run to Christ, cry
unto Christ, and rest upon Christ, and say, Lord I do believe, help thou my
unbelief.

Beloved in the Lord, ye have heard, That in all Satan's temptations, his great
design is upon your faith, to weaken your faith: therefore, let it be all your
design, in all your temptations, to strengthen your faith, and to look to your
faith. Which that ye may do, think on all these things, and the Lord bless them
to you.

SERMON V. Of TEMPTATION.
LUKE 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to
have you that he may sift you as wheat: Preached at Stepney Oct. 24 1647.
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.
THese words (as ye have heard) acquaints us with a great temptation that was
to come down upon Christ's Disciples. Concerning which ye have here, The Danger
of the temptation: And the Remedy against it. For the Danger of the temptation,
I have spoken already: and now come unto this 32. verse, But I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not. Here is something Employed; and something Expressed.
Satan's design employed, which is, and was, to weaken the faith of Christ's
Disciples, to make their faith to fail. And of that ye have heard already.

Now that which is expressed is; Christ's tender care of, and love unto his
Disciples in regard of their temptations. And this love and care of his toward
his Disciples under temptation, is Expressed in many things. First in the
forewarning of them, of a temptation coming upon them: there is his love and
care, in that he told them of the temptation before it came. And then also, He
prayed for them. Yea, He prayed for them before they were tempted. Yea, And he
tells them that he did pray for them that they might have assurance of his help
in the time of their temptation. Great was his love and care, to, and for his
Disciples unders their temptation. And so the Observation is this.

Christ's love and mercy, is never more at work for his Disciples, and people,
then when they are most assaulted by Satan. When Satan is most busy to tempt,
and assault their faith, then is Christ's love and mercy most at work, to keep
and defend both them and their faith. We don't read of such a prayer for Peter
before. We read indeed, that our savior said unto Peter; Unto thee do I give
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church: but we don't read there, that he prayed for Peter. But here
he prays, and for Peter in particular: I have prayed for Thee. Why? because
now his temptations were to be more than Ordinary; and therefore Christ's love
and care was drawn out, and expressed in a more than ordinary way.

For the clearing of this Truth unto ye, I shall labor to discover.

First, Wherein the love, care, and mercy of Christ, is expressed unto his
people under their temptations. Secondly, That this love and care of his, is
most expressed when they are most tempted. Thirdly, What there is in the heart
of Christ, that does thus incline him to this indulgence, or mercy. And so to
the Application.
First, Wherein the love and care of Christ is expressed unto his people under
their temptations?

I answer, In the ordering of their temptations. For there is no temptation
befalls any of His, but he measures out the temptation according to their
abilities. As a wise Phifitian, does not give the same Physic unto every
person, but considers every ones ability; that which he gives to one, is too
strong for another: he considers first the ability of his patient, and
prescribes accordingly. Now, though our Savior Christ don't direct Satan for
to tempt, yet he does order him in tempting; and Satan cannot put the least
dram into any temptation, but as it is measured out by the hand of Christ. And
this is that which the Apostle speaks plainly, in the 1. Cor. 10. Chapter, and
the 13. verse. But God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able etc. that ye may be able to bear it. Psalm. 139
The Psalmist David says, Search me, O Lord, and prove me. That is (says
Gregory) First, O Lord, look upon, my strength, and then, if I must be tempted,
suffer me to be tempted according to mine ability. Christ does measure out all
the temptations of his people according to their abilities.

Secondly, So he does also, mortify their temptations, and weaken them as they
come through his hand. Mortify them before they do come at his Disciples, and
people, before they do come at you. And upon this account (partly) it is said,
That we are more than conquerers, through Christ that gives victory. Because
our enemy is overcome before he strikes, and his blow is broken as he strikes.
And therefore says the Apostle, concerning our Savior, That he has spoiled
principalities, and powers, and made a show of them openly upon the cross. All
your temptations, the power and strength of them were spoiled upon the cross.
There Is no temptation befalls any of Gods people, but it is mortified, and
weakened before it does come it them, the sting, teeth, and the poison being
taken out.

Thirdly, He does not only thus mortify, But he does cause Satan so to lay his
temptations, as that he may be discerned, and so overcome, Satan tempted Adam
and Eve; but he tempted in a serpent, and so Adam might easily have discerned
the hand of Satan in it: for Adam knew all the creatures; he gave them their
Names, and he knew their Natures: and he knew well enough the serpent could not
speak to him; he might easily have known, that the hand of Satan was in the
business. And so now, though God does suffer Satan to tempt his people, yet he
does cause Satan so to lay his temptations, as that the black feet of the
tempter may be discovered: and when a temptation is discovered, it is half
overcome.

Fourthly, Timeing of all our temptationps. Time is a great matter in the point
of temptation. Should a temptation come at such or such a time, possibly Gods
child might be overwhelmed. I praise the Lord (says one) I did resist such a
temptation; but had it fallen out at such a time, I should never have been able
to have stood under it. Satan observes his tempting times: he knows that great
advantage may be made unto him by his time. And therefore when Christ was an
hungry, he tempted him to turn stones into bread: observed his time. And as
Satan does observe his time to tempt: So our Lord and Savior Christ, does set
him his time; and the time of his temptations are in the hand of Christ. And
therefore, if ye look into the 20. chapter of the Revelation, the 1. 2. and 3.
verses, ye shall find to this purpose thus: I saw an Angel come down from
Heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand:
And he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan,
and bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut
him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more
till the thousand years should be fulfilled, and after that, he must be loosed
a little season. (Mark) The Lord Jesus Christ, has not only the tempter in a
chain, that he can go no further than he gives him leave to go; but his hand
also, is in the hand of Christ, and Christ has an eye to the Time of his
temptation, a special eye upon the time of our temptation, and this argues much
of his care and love.

Fifthly. Sanctify our temptations, and does make them blessed means of our
Sanctification. And therefore says Paul, I received the messenger Satan for to
buffet me, that I might not be exalted. Twice he has that, That he might not
be exalted out of measure. But for this I need go no further than the instance
of Peter; before Peter was tempted; what abundance of carnal confidence was
there in Peter? Lord (says he) though all men for sake thee, yet will not I.
But now, I pray look upon him after his temptation, and you shall see how this
carnal confidence was laid down: for, our Savior says unto him, Peter,
love thou me more than these? Lord (says he) thou know I love thee: but
not a word of the comparative, More than these, he had left comparing now,
having been under temptation, and having fallen, his carnal confidence was
gone; and he don't say now, Lord, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I:
the comparison is left out now: he answers to the other part, but not a word to
that. So that I say, If the Lord Jesus Christ do measure out all our temptation
for us: And mortify them before they come at us: And does cause Satan to lay
them, as we may most easily discover them: And if the Lord Christ does Time our
temptations for us: And sanctify them unto us: Then certainly, there is much
of Oh rists love and mercy at work for his people under their temptations.

Secondly, If you ask me yet further, Wherein is the love of Christ expressed, or
drawn out unto his people under their temptations?

I answer, It is seen and expressed in this: In teaching of them, in, and by
their temptations. Tempting times, are teaching times unto Gods people: the
school of temptation is a great school. Luther said, that the temptations of
Satan, were the imbracings of Christ: meaning, that then Christ did embrace his
people most, and discover most of his love unto them. Three things (he said)
there were that made a Preacher: Meditation, Prayer, and Temptation. And
indeed, when, or where does God or Christ reveal himself more fully unto his
people, than in the times of their temptations? It Is said, that at Massab and
Meribah, the waters of strife and of temptation, there the Lord gave Israel his
statutes. How many experiences do Gods people get, in, and by their
temptations? tempting times are teaching: and Christ teaches his people by
their temptations. Satan's Buffetings, are the Saints schoolings.

Yea, bear up, and uphold their hearts with new supplies of his grace, and
Spirit, in the times of their temptations. Christ does not suffer his people to
go into new temptations, with old strength: but as a new temptation does come
from Satan, so new supply of grace and strength does come from Christ. Says
David, in the 94. Psalm, and the 18. verse. When I said, my foot slippeth: thy
mercy, O Lord, held me up. He does not say thus: when my foot slippeth; thy
mercy, O Lord held me up: but when I said, my foot slippeth; when I thought I
was quite rejected, cast off, and forsaken: when I said, my foot slippeth: then
thy mercy, O Lord, held me up. As new temptations do come in, so new strength
comes in.

Yea, and supplies of grease in Proportion to our temptations. My grace is
sufficient for thee (says the Lord to Paul) my grace is Fit for thee.

Yea, he does not only give out Proportionable strength; but an Cverplus of
sirength. As the woman, that had oil given her, not enough barely to pay her
debt, but an Overplus to live on the rest. So Gods people in the time of their
temptations, have not only strength given them to stand out against their
temptations, but an Cverplus to live on the rest.

Yea, and they have not only in-comes of Assisting grace; but of Accepting
grace too; more Accepting grace. God does and will then Accept lesser than at
another time. Though the prayer be weak, and the faith low; yet, says the
Lord, it is the time of temptation with this my poor servant; and therefore I
will take the Duty, though it be never so little, because it is the time of
temptation, it is a time of darkness, and a time of sadness. Ye know what our
savior said unto Thomas: Reach hither thine hand, and put it into my side:
Come Thomas, if thou will not believe without it, I Will take thy faith, even
upon these terms, for I know it is a time of temptation with thee. What grace!
what love and mercy is here!

Yea, Fourthly. Ease, and a Remedy, a breathing time under their temptations,
though they be never so sad, and never so great. Indeed, Job said, That God was
his enemy, and would not suffer him to swallow his spittle, he followed him so
close: but the good man was mistaken much: for at the same time, the time of
his temptation, he could say, I know that my Redeemer lives; and he could
bless the Lord: he had his breathing time in the midst of all. When David was
persecuted by Saul, he was under temptation, for, as the Devil casts some men
into prison; so the Devil persecutes in wicked men: yet David had his breathing
time, now and then, Saul given into his hands, as a pledge of that full
deliverance that David should have afterward. And this is no other than that
which the Apostle speaks of, in that same 1 of the Corinthians, the 10. Chap.
at the 13. verse, Who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able; but will with the temptation also, make a way to escape. Make an Outlet,
(so the word is;) He will make an Outlet. Though the smoke be very offensive,
yet there shall always be some window open for to let it out, or some door
open for a poor tempted soul to go out at: still an outlet, some breathing time
in the midst of these temptations.

Fifthly, and lastly. So he does it especially when his people are under
temptation; then he prays for them, and then especially. I will not determine,
whether Christ now in Heaven does intercede Vocally, or Really: but when Satan
lies hard upon a poor tempted soul, and fetches blood from it, then does the
Lord Jesus step in unto his Father, and present his wounds, and his blood, and
says unto his Father, O Father, I have prayed unto thee, that this poor man or
woman, may not fail in the time of temptation. Thus it was with Peter here; I
have prayed for thee: and yet this was not the time of his full intercession,
when he was here on earth. There are two parts of Christ's Priestly Office:
Satisfaction, and Intercession. The proper place for him to make satisfaction
for sin, was here on earth: and in Heaven, the holy of holiest, he does make
intercession; there he does do it fully, but he could not for bear while he was
here on earth, but he says unto Peter, I have prayed for thee. Though my great
work in Heaven be to intercede, and my special work here on earth be to
satisfy: yet notwithstanding, I have prayed for thee already Peter. And the
Lord Jesus Christ was heard in all that he prayed for. Now then, if the Lord
Christ does intercede here on earth for his poor tempted servants, and was
heard here; how much more, when his Disciples are tempted, does he intercede,
and pray for them in Heaven, and is heard there. Satan may come running in upon
you with his temptation: but when Satan runs in upon you with his temptation,
Christ runs into the presence of God the Father, and spreads his blood, and his
satisfaction for you, and there he says unto the Father, Father, I have prayed
that this man or woman's faith may not fail. Oh! what grace and mercy, and love
is here! Thus, in all these respects, (and many others that I might mention) is
the love of Christ, and his mercy drawn out unto his people in the time of
their temptation.

Well, But how may it appear, that Christ's mercy is most at work, when his
people are most assaulted by Satan? Christ deals by His, The hour of darkness:
so busy was Satan with all his malice against him; yet then was the Fathers
love toward Christ, then especially; for says Christ, Therefore does the
Father love me, because I lay down my life. If the Father did therefore love
him, because he laid down his life, then his love was most at work toward
Christ when this hour of darkness was. And so I say, when you hour of darknese
is, the hour of temptation; Christ's love is then most at work because he deals
by His, as the Father did deal by Him.

The truth is, Christ's dealing with his Disciples, was a pattern and platform
of his dealing with all his people, to the end of the world. Now ye shall
observe, that Christ's love was never more let out toward his Disciples, than
from this time, after he had said these words, Satan has desired to sift you
as wheat. After this time they were all offended because of Christ, and they
all forsook him: Peter denied him; some doubted whether he were the Messiah or
no: and another would not believe his Resurrection; and as sheep, they were all
scattered, and shattered; great was their temptations: yet from this time, do
but observe the love of Christ toward them: after this speech, then Christ
preaches a most excellent, and sweet Sermon to them, in the 14, 15, and 16.
chapters of John. Then he takes water and a towel, and washes and wipes his
Disciples feet. Then he appoints the Lords Supper. Then he spends a whole
chapter (the 17. of John) in prayer for them, makes a most excellent, and sweet
prayer for them. Then he calls them his friends: Ye are no longer my servants,
but my friends: Yea, his Children: Yea, his Little children. Never was his love
more drawn out, or expressed toward them, than after this time. And (I say) this
was a pattern, and a platform of his dealing with all his people unto the end
of the world. And therefore, though Christ do suffer his own people to be
tempted, yet his love and mercy is never more at work than when they are most
assaulted by Satan.

Thirdly, You will say, What is there in the heart of Jesus Christ, that does
incline him to this indulgence toward his people, that his love and mercy is
then most at work when they are most assaulted by Satan?

My beloved, quintescence of all the excellency of loving relations in Jesus
Christ. A Father, a Mother, a Brother, a Friend; He is the everlasting Father.
And his soul was in travel (says the Prophet) He is not ashamed to all you his
brethren. And he is a Friend: I call you my friends. Now though parents be
tender of their children at all times, yet especially when they are sick; then
there is a chair of love stands by the child's bedside. And so, though Christ be
always tender of his people, yet then especially, when their souls are sick;
and labor under temptation. There is the greatest pity in Christ that can be,
the most pitiful disposition in Christ; which is always laid out where he sees
a fit object for it: pray what is the object of pity? The object of pity is,
One whom ye love in misery. If ye see a man in misery, yet if ye don't love
him, ye don't pity him; if ye see a man whom ye love, yet if ye don't see him
in misery, ye don't pity him, ye love him, but ye don't pity him: but a person
whom ye love in misery, is the object of pity. Now all the Saints and people of
God, are the beloved of Christ; and when they are in temptation, that is their
greatest misery; and therefore, when they are most tempted, then is the love
and mercy of Christ drawn out unto them especially.

Besides, The Lord Jesus Christ has a great Interest, and share in every
believer, a share going in every believer. As the member has an interest and a
share in the head; so the head has also in every member. Thine they were
(says Christ) and thou gave them me. Christ has a special and great
interest in all his people, and he will not lose his interest. The truth is,
when Satan does assault a believer, he does rather strike at Christ, than at a
believer. And therefore says Gregory well, The Devil in tempting Job, did not
so much strike at Job, as at God; for the Lord had said, That Job was an
upright man: and now the Devil would go about to make Job an Hypocrite; so that
the Devil would fain have made God a liar; and he did not so much strike at
Job, as at Gods testimony of Job, he did strike at God. And so now in all the
temptations of the Saints, he strikes at Christ, and they bear those
temptations because of Christ. Let a man go on in a wicked, and ungodly way,
Satan will not vex him with temptations; but let a man once become godly, and be
in Christ, and then, how many temptations will Satan vex him with? Now (says
Christ) shall this poor soul endure all this for me? and shall not I help?
shall not I assist? shall not I deliver? If a man break his Arm, or his Leg
before ye, you will pity him: but if he break his Arm, or his leg in your
work, or service, in a work that you set him about, you count your self engaged
then to help him. It Is the work of Christ that the Saints are about, and Christ
sets them on work, and when Satan comes to tempt, it is to disturb them in the
work that Christ sets them about: Now therefore, (says Christ) shall they
endure all this because of me, and because of my work? and shall not I assist,
and defend them, and help them? Surely I will. Oh! my beloved, if ye did but
know what an Interest Jesus Christ has in every believer, you would easily see
the reason of this, so great tenderness in him, that his love and mercy is
never more at work, than when they are most assaulted by Satan.

For Application. Applic.


What abundance of Comfort is here unto all those that are the true Disciples
of Jesus Christ! you are not alone in your temptations, Christ is with you; and
he is in Heaven too, interceding, and praying for you: he has sent his Spirit
into your hearts, to make intercession for you there; and he himself is in
Heaven, making intercession and praying for you there: when you are in
temptation, Christ is at prayer for you. Yea, he does not only pray for you,
but his love and his mercy is most of al at work then, when you are most
assaulted. Oh! what Comfort is this!

But will some say, I fear this comfort belongs not to me, because I am none of
these that are Christ's true Diseiples; Christ prayed for Peter, because be was
his Disciple, and he prayed for therest, because they were his Disciples: but
as for me, though in profession I may be a Disciple, yet really I fear I am no
true Disciple of Jesus Christ, and therefore I fear that he does not pray, and
intercede for me in the time of my temptation.

Two things for answer to this.

First I pray consider that place in the 16. chapter of Matthew, and the 24.
verse. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come after me (or,
if any man will be my Disciple, so some books has it) let him deny himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me. (Mark) Here are Three properties of a
true Disciple. (To open the words a little unto ye, that I may settle this
comfort the more fully upon your hearts.)

First, A true Disciple does deny himself. So long as a man is in the state of
Nature, he is always in the Circle of self, and Satan keeps him in it: but
when Christ comes, he gets out of that Circle, and then he denies himself. Self
says, (whether Natural- self, Civil- self, or Sinful- self) Thou art now
minding Christ, and the ways of Christ: but mind thy Estate more, and thy Name
more, and thy Firends and Relations more, and thy Health more, and thy
Pleasures and Recreations more. Nay, (says a true Disciple) but I must mind
Christ more, I must mind mine own Soul more, I must mind mine Eternity more; so
he denies himself; his sinful- self, and Civil- self, and Religious- self too:
his self-reason, and his self-will, and his self-affection.

Secondly, He does take up his Cross: A true Disciple takes up his cross. It Is
not said, He does bear his cross with patience; there is a great deal of
difference between these; Bearing of a man's cross with patience when it is laid
upon him, and taking up his cross when it is laid before him. Properly a man
is said to take up his cross, when there is Sin laid on one side; and there is
a Cross, and an Affliction laid on the other side: Now, either you must commit
this Sin; or else you must endure this Cross, or Affliction: Nay then, (says
a true Disciple) rather than I will commit that sin, I will endure this
affliciton; and so he takes up his cross.

Thirdly. He does also Follow Christ. Some there are, that having suffered for
the Name, and Cause of Christ; they then grow Proud of their sufferings, and
they fall into foul miscarriages: But a true Disciple of Christ, when he has
taken up the cross, he follows Christ: now properly a man is said to follow
Christ, when he does do those things at Christ's command, wherein Christ does
differ from others. As now, a man is said to follow Luther, when he does follow
him in those things wherein he differs from Calvin: and a man follows Calvin,
when he does follow him in those things wherein he differs from Luther. So a
man is said to follow Christ, when he follows him in those things wherein he
differs from others. There are some things wherein Christ and Nature do agree:
Nature says, That a man must do by another, as he would be dealt by himself;
Herein Christ and nature agree. But Christ says, A new commandment give I
unto ye, That ye love one another, as I have loved you: Here Christ differs
from Nature. Nature teaches a man, That there is a God, and that God is to be
Prayed unto; and that a man is to pray for his friends: But now Christ says,
Pray for your Enemies. I say, a man is properly said for to follow Christ, when
he follows him in that wherein Christ differs from others. Now whosoever thou
art that makes this Objection, That thou art not a Disciple of Jesus Christ,
and therefore he does not pray for thee in the time of thy temptation; I appeal
to ye: Are ye not willing to take up your cross? rather to endure that
affliction, than commit this sin? Do ye not set your self to deny your self,
your Pleasures, Recreations, Relations, and all for Christ? And do ye not
desire to follow Jesus Christ in those things wherein he does differ from
Antichrist, and from Nature, and from Moses? then surely, thou art a Disciple
of Jesus Christ.

But besides this, Our Savior tells us in the 17. John, That he did not only
pray for those his present Disciples; but (says he) I pray for all that shall
believe on me through their word, verse the 20. What is it to believe on
Christ? To rest upon Christ for life and glory in the time of our temptation;
this is to believe on Christ? Now in the time of your temptation, don't ye rest
on Christ? don't ye rely on Christ? then Christ has prayed for ye. And though
thou art in such a temptation, as thou complainest, thou can not pray, yet
the Lord Jesus Christ has prayed for thee: and he is heard in all that he
prayed for.

But I fear (will some say yet) that the Lord Jesus Christ does not pray, or
intercede for me in the time of my temptation, because my faith fails me; Oh!
my faith has failed me in the time of temptation: did Christ pray for me, my
faith would not fail, for he is heard in all that he prays for; but Oh! my
faith fails in time of temptation, and therefore I fear, that this love and
mercy of Christ, is not at work for me in the time of my temptation.

For Answer, Psalm, the 26. verse, and you shall find as much. Says the
Psalmist there, My flesh and my heart fails. I but did not his Faith fail
now? See what he says; his faith stands notwithstanding this; But God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: here is his faith. So that though
his flesh failed, and his heart failed; yet his faith did not fail. There is a
great deal of difference between a recoyling fit of a heart-failing in time of
temptation, and the failing of ones faith.

Secondly, It is one thing for you to fail in your faith in our own opinion;
and another thing for your faith to fail in the opinion of Jesus Christ. When
Peter denied his Lord and Master, in his own opinion he could not but think
that his faith failed; and yet in the opinion of Jesus Christ his faith did not
fail; for Christ prayed that his faith should not fail, and it did not fail,
for Christ was heard in what he prayed for.

Thirdly, There is great deal of difference, between the failing of faith, and
failings that do accompany faith. The poor woman that came to Christ, and
touched the hem of his garment, failed very much, for she came behind him and
thought to have stolen a cure: I but, though there were many failings that did
accompany her faith, yet her faith did not fail; for she came and touched the
hem of his garment, and was cured by her faith. So I say, there is a great deal
of difference between the failing of faith, and the failings that do accompany
faith: there may be many failings that do accompany ones faith, and yet ones
faith may stand, and not fail.

But yet further, Whosoever you are, Peter's; did thou ever deny thy Lord and
Master as Peter did? and yet Christ said, I have prayed that thy faith fail
not, and he was heard in the thing that he prayed for.

Oh! but, that was but one Act in Peter; but my faith does constantly fail;
Peter denied, and his faith failed in the exercise as to one Act, but my faith
does constantly fail in time of temptation: I was heretofore more able to
believe in the time of my temptation than now I am; my faith is failed, and it
constantly fails, and therefore I fear that the Lord Christ will not pray for
me in the time of my temptation.

Well, But if you be more able to rely upon mere free grace, than ye have been
heretofore, then your faith is not less, but increased rather. If you be now
more able to be contented with your condition, than you were heretofore. If you
can let God and Christ alone, to use his own means about you. If you can leave
the Events and successes of things, more unto God than you could heretofore;
then your faith is not failed, but rather increased. Man or woman, if that you
are able now to take those hints of a word which you could not heretofore. If
your judgment be more settled in the Truth. If you be more contented to suffer
now for the Cause, and the way of God than you were heretofore: Then thy faith
is not failed, but thy faith is increased rather, and so thou come within the
compass of the Lord Christ's prayer.

Oh! I have sinned greatly, very much; I have been a great sinner; and
therefore I fear, that the Lord Jesus Christ will let me alone to wrestle with
my temptations all alone, and will not pray and intercede for me in the time
and hour of my temptation.

Well, Have thou sinned more than this Peter did, when he denied his Lord and
Master? Yet Christ prayed for him, and his prayer took and prevailed. Have you
sinned more than Jerusalem did? Oh! Jerusalem, thou that stonest the Prophets,
(says Christ when they put him to death.) And yet if you look into the 1. of
the Acts, you shall find, that Christ after his Resurrection, bids his
Disciples for to stay and wait at Jerusalem, and not stir from thence; and
preach the Gospel, and mercy, and free grace in Jerusalem. Have thou (man or
woman, that make this objection) sinned more than those that did put Christ
to death? that run him into his body with a spear? that nailed him upon the
cross? have thou sinned more than these? Ye know our Lord and Savior when he
was upon the cross, he prayed for them; Oh! Father forgive them, they know not
what they do. But, (Lord) these are thine opposers, these are persecutors, and
they persecute thee to death. Well, be it so, (says Christ) I know what I do,
and I know whom I pray for: Father forgive them, they know not what they do.
Oh! what grace, and mercy, and love is here! Comfort, yea, Comfort unto all the
Disciples of Jesus Christ: when ye are in temptation, the Lord Christ is at
prayer for you. And remember the Doctrine; Never is his love and mercy more at
work for ye, than when Satan is most busy about ye, to tempt ye most. What
comfort is here! This was that (in part) that comforted the Martyrs in the
Primitive times, ye read of very great comforts that the Martyrs had in the
Primitive times, those times next after Christ: I have desired to consider,
what it was especially, that bore up their hearts under all those persecutions.
And Turtullian, pitches upon this as one thing: We consider (says he) the case
of Peter; Satan desired to winnow him; Christ prayed for him. Here were (says
Turtullian) two requests before God the Father: One was the request of Satan:
and another was the request of Christ. Now the Son having more credit with God
the Father than Satan, his request must needs prevail: So (says he) Satan has
desired for to tempt, and to winnow us, and persecute us; but the Lord Jesus
Christ has requested for us: There are two requests before God the Father;
There Is Satan's request to winnow us; and there is the Sons request praying for
us: Now therefore, seeing that the Son has more credit with God the Father
than Satan, therefore are we assured that we shall be upheld, and our faith
shall not fail. And so may you also. This is matter of great comfort unto all
the Saints.

You will say, Indeed it is matter of great comfort: but is there no Duty that
this Truth calls for at our hands? Here is much comfort, but what is that Duty
that this Truth calls for?

Much every way. If I be an Ungodly man; Job, but he must ask leave: But Satan
went to the Sabeans, and brought in them upon Jobs Estate, and he did not ask
leave for that, they were in his power: He rules in the children of
disobedience. Daniel was in the Lyons-den, and they devouered him not, their
mouths were stopped, and they could not hurt him: But when the Enemies were
thrown into the Lions, they cracked, and crushed their bones before they came
to the ground. If a godly man, one that is a true Disciple of Jesus Christ, if
he be in a den with these Lions, Devils, their mouths shall be stopped, they
shall not swallow him. But oh! for wicked men, that are not in Christ, these
Lions, they crush their bones, every day they crush their bones: and a wicked
man may say as Saul did, The Philistims are upon me, and God is departed from
me: So a wicked man, that is not in Christ, he may cry out and say, Oh!
temptations are upon me, and Christ is departed from me, I have none of Christ
to help me: as for the Saints, and those that are true Disciples of Jesus
Christ, they have Christ at hand, though they fall, Christ is by for to help
them up. And Christ himself measures out all their temptations, and Christ
assists them, and helps them, but Oh! as for me, I am all alone in my
temptations, I poor soul, am all alone in my temptations: Ah! who would be a
Drunkard still? who would be a Swearer still? who would be an Unclean wanton
still? who would be a liar, and a Theevish servant still? Let me tell ye, that
while ye go on in these sins, you are out of Christ: Poor soul, a Swearer, a
Drunkard, a common Liar, a Sabbath-breaker, a Wanton, out of Christ, and thy
temptations fall heavily upon thee; the Lord knows, thou art all alone in the
time of thy temptations: Oh! but, get into Jesus Christ, get into Jesus Christ,
to be in the number of Christ's true Disciples; and when thou art tempted, the
Lord prays for thee; yea, and the love and mercy of Christ is never more at
work for thee, than when thou art most tempted, and assaulted by Satan. What a
mighty encouragement is here to all that hear the word of the Lord, to get into
Jesus Christ!

But if I be godly; and all this be true: Why should I question the love of God
toward me in the time of my temptation? Beloved! ye know it in your
Experience, ye are never more apt for to question the love of Christ, than in
temptation; and yet Christ's love is never more at work for you, than in
temptation. Oh! what an unworthy answering of Christ's love is here!

Again, If I be Godly: Why should I not be contented, and quiet under all my
temptations, though they be never so great? Christ prays for me, Christ's love
is most at work now I am most assaulted, his bowels then yern toward me.

Yea, If I be Godly: Why should I not with Paul Triumph over all temptations?
and make my boast of Christ, and say as he did, Now know I, that nothing shall
separate me from the love of God in Christ; not Principalities, nor Powers nor
Devils, nor Temptations; for when I am most tempted Christ is most at work in
love for me.

Yea, (beloved in the Lord) why should we not all warm our hearts with this
love of Jesus Christ? it is a mercy that the Lord Christ will cast but an eye,
or a look upon a poor soul under temptation; that is a mercy: I but, I tell ye
more than so; Christ does not only cast an eye, and a look upon a poor tempted
soul, but his love and mercy is never more at work, than when you are most
assaulted, and tempted by Satan: Ah, what grace, and heart-warming love is here!

If I be Godly: (again) upon this account, why should I give over so soon, and
lay down my weapon in time of temptation? If a City be beleaguered, besieged,
and know that help will come, they will not give over. And though I am thus
besieged, and thus tempted, help will certainly come, for Christ has prayed;
why should I give over then in time of temptation?

And if these things be so, if there be so much love in the heart of Christ
toward poor tempted souls: then (beloved) should we not all run to Christ in
the time, and hour of our temptation, run unto him by prayer?

It may be there are some that will say, If Christ pray for us in time of
temptation, what need we pray?

But I pray look into this chapter, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fall not. At the 46. verse, Why sleep ye? (says he) rise and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation. So that, though he had said, That he prayed for them,
yet he calls upon them also to pray. It Is good praying (my beloved) when mercy
is coming: and mercy is then coming when Christ is praying; and when you are
most tempted, then Christ is at prayer.

But to end all. What ever your temptations therefore be, you that are the
servants of God, still think ye hear Christ saying to ye, Man, Woman, be of
good comfort, I have prayed for you: though thy temptations be very great, I
have prayed for thee: thought thou can not pray for thy self as thou would,
I have prayed for thee: when flesh fails, and eyes fail, and heart fails, and
all fails, yet remember this, Christ prays for you, in the time of your
temptation Christ prays for you: think that ye hear Christ speaking to ye in
the time of your temptation, for certainly he does it as well to his Disciples
now as he did to his Disciples then, he does speak and say, Be of good comfort,
man or woman, though thy temptations be great, yet I have prayed for thee, and
thy faith shall not fail.

FINIS.
THANKFVLNES Required in every CONDITION.
1 THESSALONIANS 5.18. In every thing give thanks: Preached at Margrets Newfish
street March. 23. 1645
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
WHAT is written to the Thessalonians, is written for our instruction. What
they are commanded as Christians, we are commanded as Christians.

In the latter part of this Chapter, several Exhortations were given to them:
among the rest this is one: In which ye have, The Exhortation it self; In every
thing give thanks. And the Reason in forcing that Exhortation: for this is the
will of God in Christ Tesus conerning you.

In every thing give thanks] In Prosperity, and in Adversity; whether things go
well, or whether they go ill: In every thing give thanks. He had said before,
verse 16, 17. Rejoice evermore, Pray continually. Unto those Exhortations he
adds no such Reason as here: Because it may seem strange, that a man should
give thanks in every thing; he adds also: for this is the will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you. So that plainly here lies this Observation, or Truth upon
the words.

It is the will of God, When we are Full, it will be granted that then we are
to give thanks to God. Deuteronomy the 8. and the 10. But ye are not only to
give thanks when ye are Full; but when ye are Empty: not only when ye are
strong, but when ye are weak: not only when you are delivered from the hands of
your Enemy; but when you are delivered into the hands of your Enemy. Job, 1.21
Therefore Job says, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be his
Name. Job was plundered by the Enemy, and yet he does bless the Lord: Job was
emptied of a full Estate, and yet he does bless the Lord: Job had lost his
dear Children, and yet he does bless the Lord: Job in a great measure given up
into the hands of Satan, and yet he blesses the Lord: for which he is commended.

So then, It is our duty, and the will of God our Father that we should not
only be thankful, but we should be thankful in every thing.

For, there is a formal, or notional difference, between Praising God, and
giving thanks to God: Praises respect the excellencies of God himself:
Thankfulness respect the benefits we receive from God. I praise God, when I
honor him for the Excellency that is in him: I am thankful to God, when I
bless him for those benefits I receive from him. But now in Scripture, these
are put one for the other ordinarily: and whatsoever our condition be, whether
high, or low; rich, or poor; full, or empty: there is enough Excellency in
Christ for to draw out our Praises; and therefore in every thing we are to be
Thankful.

There is no condition so sad, is made up of both, it is a twilight: Some good
in every condition, and therefore, in Every thing we are to give Thanks unto
God.

It Is the duty of a Christian to be like unto Jesus Christ: Father, I thank
thee. Matthew. 11.25.
When he was to go to his agony, and sweat drops of blood; they sung an Hymn,
(says the text) a Psalm of Praise. So, when a Christian is to go to his agony:
what ever agony he meets withal, there is rise enough yet for his
Thankfulness: In Every thing be thankful. As the Apostle has it in the 5. to
the Ephesians, and the 20. Giving thanks always, for all things unto God, even
the father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

You will say, Suppose that a Christian meet with some long, heavy, and sharp
Affliction: is he to be Thankful then? to be Thankful in that condition?

Yes, Look I pray into the 24. of Esaias, Wherefore (says he) glorify ye the
Lord in the fires, even the Name of the Lord God of Israel in the Isles of the
Sea. Glorify ye the Lord in the fires; so ye read it. Some rather translate
it thus: Glorify ye the Lord in Doctrines, Vrim, the same word that we
translate, Vrim, for the Urim and Thummim: But I would rather translate it
Valleys; so Calvin: for Doctrines does not suit with that which follows:
Glorify ye the Lord in the Valleys, even the Name of the Lord God of Israel
in the Isles of the Sea. A Valley is a low place, and dark: now (says he)
though ye be in a dark condition, removed from light; Glorify the Lord in the
Valleys, glorify the Lord there. And good reason why the Saints should do so:
as ye will see, if you look into the 1. of Zachary, and the 8. verse. I saw by
night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the
myrtle-trees that were in the bottom, and behind him were there red horses,
speckled and white. This man upon a red horse plainly must be meant Christ: who
is here attended with red horses, speckled and white, to send forth, and
dispatch into the several parts of the world upon his design. These other red
horses, they are behind him, waiting upon him: Now where is Christ? He is among
the myrtle-trees: And where are the Myrtle-trees? They are in the bottom. The
Saints, and people of God for their fruitfulness they are called Myrtle-trees,
and sometimes their condition is as a Valley; they are in the bottom; but yet
they are Myrtle-trees in the bottom, and Jesus Christ is among these
Myrtle-trees though they be in a bottom, though they be in a Valley: and
therefore no wonder that we should praise, and glorify God in this condition.
Beloved! what we may rejoice in, that we may praise God for: Jam. 1.9, 10. Romans
5.3
Now, says the Apostle, Let the brother of low-degree rejoice in that he is
exalted: and let the brother of high degree rejoice in that he is made low:
Rejoice in Tribulation. A man is to rejoice more for the opportunity of
exercising grace, than in all prosperity: there are some graces that cannot be
exercised but in Tribulation, cannot be exercised in Heaven; Patience, and the
like. Now then, when Tribulation comes, a Christian should thus look upon it. I
have hereby an opportunity of exercising that grace, that I had not before, and
then he will bless God, and then he will be thankful in that condition: when
God takes away one mercy, he gives another: if he take away Moses, he will give
a Joshua: if he take away Ely, he will give a Samuel: if he will take away
Christ's personal presence, he will send the holy Ghost. And the truth is, he
does not so much take away, as borrow a mercy; and he pays it again with
usery, and advantage: Onesimus goes away like a thief from Philemon, but he
returns again with profit to him and others. As for these outward things, they
will prove but debts at the great day of Judgment: riches now, and gifts now
but debts then: and the less ye have of these outward things, the less ye
have to reckon for them. In a bad day, men they say, Oh! that I had less, my
reckoning would be less: the less ye have, the less your reckoning will be.
The comfort of a man's life, consists not in Muchness, but fitness to his heart.
If a man have a great Farm, and a small stock, it is the only way to break him:
it is better to have a Farm fit for ones stock, than a great Farm. The Lord he
sees what our stock of grace is, and accordingly he provides a Farm for every
one of his Children; and sometimes it is lessened, but the reason is, because
the stock of grace is no bigger, they have no more grace to stock it withal.
Our Gifts, and our Parts, and our Prosperity they are so strong sometimes, that
God is fain to mingle water therewithal, that we may not be drunk. I appeal to
you: are not the Saints gainers by all their losses? are not they strengthened
by all their weakness? are not they bettered by all their crosses? Surely
then, in all things they are to be thankful: though their affliction be
exceeding long, sharp, and grievous; yet they are to be thankful in that
condition.

But suppose now, that it be Persecution that a man is to be exercised with?
and that is bitter: is a Christian to be Thankful then, even in that condition?

Yes, ye know what the Apostle says; To you it is given, Phil. 1.29. Phil.
1.22. John, 18.37.
not only to believe, but to suffer. Gods gift is worth our thanks. And says
the Apostle, All shall turn to the furtherance of the Gospel. Is it not a great
matter, and worth our praise, thankfulness; that we should be trusted by God
to bear witness to his Truth? For this came I into the world (says Christ)
that I might bear witness to the Truth: It was his design; thereby ye are like
to him, and so honor him. When were the Churches, and people of God more pure
than under Persecution? and is it not a great mercy to be kept pure? The more
you suffer for any Truth, the more that Truth shall be spread by you: you die,
but the Truth lives: your Estate dies, and your Name dies, and your Liberty
dies; but your dying Estate, gives a living testimony unto the Truth. When I am
lift up says Christ, Joh. 12.23
(meaning upon the Cross) I will draw all men after me: And so shall you do,
when you are lift up upon the Cross for any Truth, ye shall draw all men after
that Truth that ye are lift up for. When have ye more communion with Jesus
Christ, than when ye suffer most for his Truth? Is it not a great mercy for a
man to be glorified on this side heaven? pray look upon that expression which
ye have in the 13. of John, the 30. and the 31. verses, It Is said concerning
Christ himself, that when Judas went out, having received the sop Jesus says,
Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. Verse the 30.
Judas, having received the sop, went immediately out, and it was night:
therefore when he was gone out, Jesus says, Now is the son of man glorified.
Judas went out to betray him, to bring him to the Cross, a false brother was
gone out: Now is the son of man glorified (says he) Not only, because the
cross was the way to glory; but the truth is, he was glorified upon the Cross,
there was a glory there. You may observe it, He did many miracles: and when he
had done those miracles, he did not say then, Now is the son of man glorified.
He was Transfigured: and he did not say upon his Transfiguration, Now is the
son of man glorified: But now he comes to suffer, now he comes to the Cross;
now (says he) is the son of man glorified. And indeed, now is his love to poor
sinners glorified. Col. 2.15
The Apostle says, He triumphed over all principalities and powers upon the
Cross; and his love triumphs over all our fins, and our guilt, and our
unworthiness: Oh! then was free grace, and love when Christ was upon the
Cross: Now is the son of man glorified. And so it shall be with you: When a
false brother goes out to persecute you, to betray you, to bring you to the
Cross: you may say so, Now is the servant of the Lord glorified, now is my
love to Christ glorified; never more glorified than now. This makes the Apostle
Peter speak in the 1. Peter, 4.16. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf. It Is matter of Praise,
and Thanksgiving here: says he (at the 13. verse) Rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings. Verse the 14. If ye be reproach't for the name
of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory, and of God rests on you.
That is (says one upon that place) As Noah's Dove hovered over the water, and
found no place for to rest her foot upon, until she returned to the Ark: So
does the Spirit of God, as it were, hover over the souls of men, it wants
rest: and when it sees a soul that suffers for the Truth, there it lights,
there it rests, there the Spirit of God, and of glory rests. I appeal to you:
which will be most comfortable, think ye, at the day of Judgment; that ye have
been persecuted for the Truth: or that ye have been a persecutor of the Truth?
I know your Answer: When a Christian is under persecution, he may lift up his
voice, and say; I might have been engaged against the Truth: Ah! I might have
been a persecutor of the Truth: but blessed be God it is not so. The Apostles
went away rejoicing, that they were accounted worthy to suffer for the Name of
Christ. Surely therefore, there is matter of praise and thanksgiving, even in
this condition also, in this condition a Christian should be thankful: it is the
will of God our Father we should be thankful here.

But suppose that a man's inward, and spiritual condition be overclouded, and
God withdraw, and hide his face from a Christian: shall he? can he be thankful
in this condition? is it his duty to be thankful now?

Yes, For though God do withdraw,

Again, Though Christ does hide his face, though he does withdraw his
Comforting presence, he never withdraws his Supporting presence from a
Christian; sometimes more of that, when least of the other. Christ deals by a
Christian; as God dealt by Christ in his agony, and on the Cross: though God
withdrew his Comforting presence, so as he cried out and said, My God, my God
why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46.
Yet he had never more of Gods Supporting presence: And so it is with a
Christian. Though Christ may withdraw his Comforting presence, yet he never
withdraws his Supporting presence from them.

Besides, Jesus Christ does so withdraw from a Christian as he does draw
withal by his Spirit. He seemed to withdraw from the Canaanitish woman, but he
did draw her to him by his Spirit. When he withdraws in the 5. of the Canticles
from his Spouse, he leaves Myrrh upon the ringles of the door. And so, when he
withdraws from a Christian, he leaves his Myrrh upon the ringles of the heart:
the heart cannot be quiet, cannot rest, takes no contentment without him, he
does draw the soul to him, while he seems to witndraw from the soul.

Lastly, What a man would not lose for all the world, that, you will say, is
worthy of Praise, and Thankfulness. Now take a gracious soul, a godly man when
he is most deserted, forsaken, left, as it were; and he says, now Mercy is
gone, now Christ is gone: Ask him but this Question: If Christ be gone, as you
say, why don't you renounce Christ, and renounce all his ways? He will tell
you, Oh! no, I dare not renounce him for all the world. But if he be quite
gone, Why don't you turn Drunkard? why don't you turn Swearer? and why don't
you cast off all duties? Oh! no, that I dare not: I have yet something left,
that I would not lose for all the world. Is there not then matter of Praise,
and Thanksgiving in this condition? Surely there is, even in this condition
also.

But you will say:

Yes, Job. 16.33.
Be of good comfort (says Christ) I have overcome the world; and so the god of
the world: Satan: your Enemy is overcome before you do strike a stroke.

Besides, Is it not matter of Praise, and Thanksgiving, That Satan can tempt
you no more, than your own Father gives him leave to do? Simon, Simon, Luke,
23.31.
(says Christ) Satan has desired thee, that he may winnow thee as wheat: Mark
the words. He has desired: he was fain to ask leave first, he could not
winnow Peter till he had leave. And he could not winnow Job till he had leave:
he has not power to tempt you further than your own Father gives him leave.

Again, Is it not matter of Praise, and Thanksgiving, That nothing has
befallen you, but what has befallen the best of Gods Children, the greatest
Saints? Men say sometimes, Oh! never any ones condition like to mine: never any
affliction like to mine. The most godly men have been most sorely tempted. In
the old Testament: David, a man after Gods own heart: it is said of him; 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
The Devil stood up, and moved him to number the people. What a report did God
give of Job: and you know his winnowing, and his continuance. In the new
Testament: Two famous Apostles Paul and Peter. Peter, Satan has desired to
winnow thee: Paul, a messenger Satan, sent to buffet him. And our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, In all things tempted, Heb. 2.18
that he might succor those that are tempted. Oh! beloved, how gracious will
Jesus Christ be to tempted ones, that came from heaven on purpose to be
gracious to them!

Further, Is it not matter of Praise, and Thanksgiving, That you have always
one for to run unto, to succor you, to relieve you in your temptations? a
brazen serpent up against you be stung? Paul, therefore, in that 7. of the
Romans: Having said, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? in the next words says: I thank God through Jesus Christ. When
Satan is tempting, Christ is praying, interceding: Luke, 22.31.
Satan has desired to winnow thee, (says he) but I have prayed. You cannot
pray: Truly, sometimes we pray most, when we pray least, for Christ prays for
us.

Again, Is it not matter of Praise, and Thanksgiving, That ye have such an
Estate that these thieves can never rob you of? A Christian is a Traveller: the
Thief meets him, and takes his money that he has about him: But he has an
Inheritance of Land at home, the Theif cannot take away from him. And Satan by
his Temptations possibly may rob you of these Comforts that are about you: But
you have an Inheritance, and Estate (Christian) in heaven, that shall never be
taken away, that you shall never be robbed of.

I Will conclude this, Is it not matter of Praise, and Thanksgiving, That by this
mud you shall be more cleansed? Beloved! this is Christ's way: he suffers men to
be tempted, that they may be freed from more temptations, and he suffers this
dirt to be cast upon them, that they may be the more cleansed. Simon, Simon
(says our Savior) Satan has desired to winnow thee as wheat: How so? Satan
goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. True, that is
his intent in his Temptations; Satan's intent in the temptation, is not to
winnow, that is Christ's intent: Satan's intent in the temptation is to devour,
but Jesus Christ's intent in all those temptations are to winnow. And who more
konwing? who more gracious? who more humble? who more thankful than those that
have been most assaulted with a temptation? Pray observe what is said in the 2
of the Corinths, 12. Chapter 7. verse. Says Paul. Lest I should be exalted
above measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given me a thorn
in the flesh, the messenger Satan, (so it may be read without, of.) The
messenger Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure, again.
See how that goes before and follows: it begins the verse, and ends the verse:
Lest I should be exalted above measure, at the beginning of the verse: Lest I
should be exalted above measure, at the latter end of the verse. As if now,
that these temptations were special preservations against spiritual pride: it is
set down twice, Least I should be exalted above measure; again, and again.
Spiritual pride indeed is very dangerous. It was Mr Fox his speech: As I get
good by my sins, so I get hurt by my graces: in regard of that spiritual pride
he was guilty of upon the receipt of them. By Temptation God uses to keep men
humble. The Hebrew word for Lees, the Lees of wine; comes from the root, that
signifies to Keep, because the wines are kept by the Lees. And so God is
pleased to keep men humble by these Temptations, in these Lees, and in these
dregs God keeps men's graces. Temptations do you no hurt til ye yield to them.
The greater the Temptation, and the more your flesh does tremble at it; the
greater the Affliction, but the lesser the Sin. Temptation is the souls Rape:
it may deflowre your soul, offer violence to your soul; it cannot take away
your innocence. Now, it it not a great mercy to be kept innocent, and chaste
unto Jesus Christ? Austin has a notable speech. If ye praise God under good
things, ye are paid your debt: if ye praise God under evil, ye have made God
your debtor. The truth is, we can never pay our debt to God, neither are we
able to make God our debtor; but God is pleased to call himself so: when men
praise him under Temptations, and under Persecutions, and under Desertions; God
is pleased to call himself our Debtor. Surely therefore, it is good for a
Christian to bless God, and to praise God in every thing, in all things to be
thankful: in Affliction, in Persecution, in Desertion, under Temptation: This
is the will of God our Father, that we should be thankful to him in every
thing, in every condition.

And if so, Applic.
then what great cause have we to be very Thankful to God in these times. Had
the Lord let in the Enemy upon you, ye should have been Thankful: Had ye been
plundered of all your Estates, ye must have been Thankful: Had ye lien at the
mercy of the merciless Enemy crying for quarter; yet you must have been
Thankful: how much more now. Had ye been emptied of all, ye must have been
Thankful. Oh! shall we not be Thankful then unto God now, that has given us
such Deliverance, and such Victories as these?

You will say unto me; What special thing is there that we should be Thankful
unto God for in these times?

Has the Lord done such great things for England, and art thou only a stranger
in Israel? England hear of such a year as this last year has been? Can any
Records tell us of such a year? May I not say, Stand out, O all ye Ancient
Records from your dust, and tell us from the first day of Englands birth, Did
ever England see such a year as this has been? wherein the Power, and Mercy,
and Free Grace of God has rode in Triumph throughout the Kingdom?

Yet that I may not be wanting to you, to your Question: look I pray into the
107. Psalm, the 1, and the 2. verses: ye shall find it written: O Give thanks
unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy indures for ever: Let the redeemed
of the Lord say so; whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy. See who
are to say so: Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has Redeemed from
the hand of the enemy. Beloved! ye know that not long since we were in
Captivity, I mean, a Spriitual Captivity: we sat down by the waters side, and
said, How shall we do to sing a Christian song? The Lord has Redeemed us, he
has Redeemed us out of the hand of our Enemies. And if the Lord has not
Redeemed you out of the hand of your Enemy: don't say so: but if he have, Let
the Redeemed of the Lord say so.

Pesides, Is it not worth our Thankfulness, that we have had so many days of
Thanksgiving together? A day of Fasting and Prayer, is a sweet day: a
Thanksgiving-day sweeter, if I may make compate: For in a day of Fasting and
Prayer, we deal with the anger, and wrath, and displeasure of God: In a day of
Thanksgiving with the love of God, and the mercy of God. In a day of Fasting
and Prayer, we exercise Grief: But in a day of Thanksgiving, we exercise Joy,
and love. In a day of Fasting and Prayer, your eye is upon your sins: In a day
of Thanksgiving, upon your graces, to be Thankful for them. As the fish swims
upon the top of the water when the Sun shines, which in a storm lay at the
bottom: and wood, and sticks tumbled up and down, and those were seen. So in a
day of Thanksgiving, there ye see and take notice of your own graces, to be
thankful for them. In a day of Fasting and Prayer, sometimes, ye are so humbled
for sin committed, as the sense of your Justification is quite shattered: But
in the day of Thanksgiving, your assurance for heaven is sealed: they are sweet
days. And beloved! you have had many of them of late; and surely this is worth
our Praise.

But give me leave a little to Enumerate; for Enumeration is one kind of
Argument: Has not the Lord from heaven, owned his own Cause in the hands of
his servants, our brethren in the field? Has not the Lord heard your Prayers?
Has not the Lord opened many Mines of precious Truths that ye never knew
before? Has not the Lord delivered you from the hand of a savadge Enemy? Those
that lay among the pots, brought forth with doves-wings: Victory after Victory;
one treading upon the heel of another, overtaking another? Does he not daily
load you with his benefits? I cannot say, as David in the 9. Psalm, and the 1.
verse: I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will show forth all
thy marveilous works. The former part, I will praise thee, O Lord, with my
whole heart, you will say: But the latter part, I will show forth all thy
marveilous works; Who can say? they are beyond us.

And now Beloved, if it be our duty to Praise God, to be Thankful to him in
every condition, when we are low: shall we not be thankful to him now, that the
Lord has raised us, and filled us thus?

You will say, There Is one thing that hinders us in the work of Praise and
Thanksgiving in these times: A Reformation is now begun, and things do not
succeed according to our desires in the matter of Reformation: should we? can
we be Thankful now?

Yes, If the Lord give me a Child: built the Temple; did not they shout, and
praise God that the Foundation was laid? When the Israelites had overcome their
enemies, in Samuels time; though the Enemies were round about them, they set up
a stone, and called it Eben-ezer, 1 Samuel 7.12
Hitherto the Lord has helped us. Beloved! in our Thanksgiving we are to be
like unto Jesus Christ: He did not only praise God when he had the mercy, but
before he had it, in the entrance upon it. When he raises up Lazarus from the
dead: John. 11.41, 42.
Father (says he) I Thank thee that thou hear me always: and then he
commands Lazarus to come out. But first he gives Thanks to God. In the
Scripture, the Holy Ghost has commmanded us, Prove. 3.9
To honor the Lord with our substance; and with the first fruits of all our
increase. Either ye have the first fruits of Reformation; or not. If not: what
mean all those precious Ears, and fruits which ye have been gathering in these
latter times? And if ye have the first fruits, though ye have not reap't the
harvest yet: then, honor the Lord with your substance, and with your
first fruits; So shall your barnes be filled with plenty, and your presses with
the new wine of the Gospel. God does give one mercy as a seal unto another: a
First as a seal to the Second: the Second as a seal to the Third: the lesser as
a pledge of the greater. God does give a lesser mercy to try us, whether we
will be Thankful, that he may give a greater. Beloved! these are trying times,
God tries us whether we will be Thankful for what we have. A Reformation is now
on foot: what though things don't succeed according to your desire, shall we
not be Thankful for what we have, because we want something of what we would
have? when then shall we be Thankful?

I but, but many Errors that are risen up among us in these times: and should
we be Thankful now in this condition?

Yes, about with a shell? Luther, in the beginning of the Reformation, met with
many Errors; and he comforted himself with this, When the Corn is grown, the
weeds will die alone. Meaning this: When Reformation is come to greater
strength, Errors would die alone. It Is said of our Lord and Savior Christ,
Isa. 53.12.
He was numbered among transgressors: Should not I love Christ, or own Christ,
or be Thankful for Christ; because he was numbered among transgressors? The
Errors of the time, you say, are the transgressors of the time: Shall I not
love the Truth, and own the Truth, and be thankful for the Truth, because it is
numbered among the transgressors, the transgressors of the time? Blessed is
that man that can see a beauty in Truth, when it has a scratch't face. And
indeed every Truth has a beauty; and the Lord has given you out many Truths
in these times, that ye were ignorant of before. Beloved! I do not say, that ye
should be thankful for any Error: we ought to be grieved for any Error. But
shall we be so mindful against Error, crying out against Error, Error; as
not to be thankful for any Truth we have? If the whole world were spread with
Error; that one Truth living: Jesus Christ died for sinners; there were matter
of Praise. The more Error does prevail, the more mercy it is, that you are
kept. And truly, the only way, or a special way to be kept from Error, is to
be thankful for Truth. As a way to be kept from sin is to be thankful for
grace: So a special way to be kept from Error, is to be thankful for Truth. So
then, Notwithstanding all this; yet you are to be thankful: Thankful even in
this condition, though many Errors yet ye are to be thankful, to be in all
things thankful, in every thing thankful. Thankful when ye are straitened, as
well as when ye are most enlarged. Thankful when ye are Deserted, as well as
when God shines upon you. Thankful when ye are Afflicted, as well as when ye
are Delivered. Thankful when ye have no Victories, as well as when ye have
Victories. Some, it may be, now will Praise the Lord and be Thankful; hearing
of so many Victories; and because there may be some hopes of Peace: But
beloved, it is our duty to be in every thing Thankful: It Is the will of God our
Father, that we should be Thankful in every thing, Thankful in every condition.

Give me leave to propound some few Incouragments hereunto: for it seems a hard
thing to be Thankful in every thing, in every condition.

If you can be thankful in every thing;

Again, Job, greatly afflicted and he blessed God, and his Affliction was a
blessing to him: so shall it be with you. Touch but thy Affliction with a
Thankful heart, it will turn it into gold.

Moreover,

To this purpose consider the 4. to the Philippians: says the Apostle: Be ye
in nothing careful (at the 6. verse) but in every thing, by prayer, and
supplication, with thanksgiving; let your requests be made known unto God. And
the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus. This is the way to get a great, and a full peace:
Be in nothing careful: be in all things Thankful, then the peace of God shall
guard you.

Besides, Hereby ye shall shame the Devil: Job, Do but touch him, Job, 1.11 12
and 21
and he will curse thee to thy face. says the Lord, He is in thy hand, only
save his life: and Satan touched him: what then? The Lord gives, the Lord
takes away; blessed be his Name. The Devil said, he would Curse God, and he
blesses God: See how the Devil is shamed, and confounded here. Some there are
that make the Devils words good: Touch him, and he will curse thee to thy face:
and so do some do, and thereby they are a shame indeed unto the people of God,
and the ways of God. But when people can bless God under Affliction: if ye in
every this be Thankful; the Devil is confounded, God is much honored.
Wherefore (beloved) as ye desire that God may be much honored by you: the
Devil confounded: your own peace settled: all your afflictions turned into
blessings: and the Lord engaged to you, to raise you up when ye are low: learn
out this lesson, not only to be Thankful when ye are full, but to be Thankful
when ye are empty, to be in every thing Thankful, this is the will of God your
Father.

How shall we do this?

Some few things in answer to that, and so I will wind up all.

First, Jam. 5.13.
Is any afflicted? let him pray: is any merry? let him sing Psalms. According
to your disposition (says he) that is the meaning: So let your work be, so let
your grace be. It may be thou can not Pray: by that time thou have been at
another duty that thy disposition lies more unto, next unto, thou will be fit
to pray. It may be thou can not Sing: by that time thou have been at Prayer,
which thy disposition lies next unto, thou will be fit to Sing, Let us not be
more cruel to our souls than God is: he has give us this indulgence: observe
your selves, accommodate your selves; and by this means you shall be able upon
all occasions to bless and praise the Lord.

Again. again, I but, all this is for my good, and all this comes out of love,
and so what ever falls out, you will be thankful in every thing.

Desire not Much: he that desires much, Jacob was a plain-hearted man: he
desired little, he was content with less, he was Thankful for every thing. So
must you be.

And if you do desire much,

Lastly, Be sure of this, David; no man more sensible of his unworthiness than
David: Continually thankful; Continually sensible of his unworthines. There is
a Twofold unworthines: Creature-unworthiness: and Sinful-unworthiness.
Accordingly a Twofold sense of unworthiness: One that arises from the
apprehension of creature-unworthines, of the emptines that is in us as
Creatures: And another that arises from sense of guilt of sin. See them both in
the 8. Psalm: The Psalmist there praises the Lord: O Lord our God, (verse the
1.) how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! when I consider the heavens,
the work of thy fingers, what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son
of man that thou visitest him. He praises the Lord, this Thankfulness was
raised from the sense of unworthiness, it was Creature-unworthiness: Lord, what
is man? O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! Lord, what
is man? Look into the 116. Psalm: and there ye find the Psalmist praising God
upon the sense of unworthiness too: Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea,
our God is merciful. (verse the 12.) What shall I render to the Lord for all
his benefits toward me? here is his Thankfulness; it was raised upon sense of
unworthiness: But what unworthiness? Sinful unworthiness: (verse the 11.) I
said in my have; all men are liars: what shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? He was sensible of his own unworthiness, and it was a
sinful unworthiness: I said in my have; all men are liars: yet God is gracious
to me, What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? So now it will be
with you: if ye can but keep the sense of your own unworthiness, you will say; I
was a wretched, and a great sinner, and though I have but little in the world,
yet any thing is too much for one that was such a great sinner as I was: you
will be Thankful for every thing, in every thing Thankful, maintain but this.
Beloved! ye see how in all these troubles of these times, God has given us our
lives for a prey. As the Lord said concerning Job. Only spare his life: Job,
2.6.
So has the Lord said concerning us, spare their lives. God did not deal so by
our Savior Christ: when our Savior Christ came into the world, he met with
hard dealing from wicked men, and his life went for it; he did not say, Only
spare his life; his life went for it. You have more in this respect than our
dear Savior had: you have your lives given you for a prey in these evil times,
our Savior had not. Shall we not then be Thankful in every thing? having more
than our Savior had in this respect: shall we not be Thankful for any thing?
for any thing that God gives us, shall we not now be Thankful? How many are
there, that walk directly contrary unto this Truth that I have spread before
you? In every thing Thankful, and they in nothing Thankful, in nothing
contented: Husband godly; Children hopeful; Estate comfortable; and yet never
contented: Servants cannot please, Children cannot please, friends cannot
please; never contented: Oh! is this a duty, to be in every thing Thankful? how
do they lie in a sin, and the breach of this commandment, that are in nothing
contented, never pleased? Beloved! I don't now come to call for contentment,
and patience, and quietness under Affliction; but for Thankfulness: and not for
thankfulness only when all goes well with you; but for Thankfulness in every
thing. Oh! therefore, let us return unto our own souls, consider how it has
been with us. If there be ever a discontented man or woman read this Sermon:
consider this Scripture: The Lord says, be in every thing Thankful, and thou
have been in nothing Thankful, in nothing contented in thy condition. Oh! how
will you answer it at the great day? Let me leave this Exhortation with you, in
your bosoms: the Lord knows into what condition we may come; whether into
Affliction, or Persecution, or Desertion, or of Temptation: Remember, here lies
your duty before you; lay it up in your hearts: It Is the will of God, even our
Father, that we should be Thankful to him in every thing: not in some things,
not when things go well only; when we have Victory: but in all things Thankful:
In every thing give Thanks unto God, for this is the will of God our Father
concerning you.

FINIS.
THE TABLE Of the First VOLVMNE
A
Absolution ABsolution of sin, how obtained by Christ Page 90 Ability
Difference between ability of sufficiency and ability of Idoniety Page 119
Acceptance see Duties Affliction Affliction and temptation used promiscuously
in the New Testament Page 103 See Temptation Agreement There was an Agreement
made between God and Christ before the world was made Page 57 Anointed Christ
is anointed to be our High Priest Page 45 Antichrist Antichrist labors to
derogate most from the priestly office of Christ Page 5 Argument The greatest
argument to make us walk closely with God in Christ Page 50 Attributes Those
Attributes of Christ which are most beneficial to the Saints are most opposed
by the world Page 4 The same Attributes are given to the Devil for evil that
are given to God for good Page 244
Avoid see Temptations
B
Bless What Christ does when he blesses men Page 80 Christ blesses as God
blesses Page 82 Christ's willingness to bless men Page 83 How Christ blesses
ibid Christ does not bless as man blesses Page 84 Whom Christ blesses Page
86
Blessing What will make a man to be always blessing God Page 95 Blessings
Blessings of the Gospel what they are Page 77 Gods Blessings are suitable to the
times of the Gospel Page 78
See Comfort Blessed How to know whether Christ has blessed us or no Page 90
Benefits see Temptation Brother see Christ C Childship Man ought not to doubt
of his childship in time of temptation Page 251 Christ Christ called our
father, and why Page 2 Christ called our brother, and why ibid All our comfort
in God comes through Christ Page 3 Why Christ was made like to us Page 2
Christ's satisfaction for man engages man to Christ Page 20 Christ prays and
intercedes for his people Page 25 Christ's willingness to intercede Page 44
Christ was tempted in the same manner the Saints are Page 109 Christ succors
in Temptation Page 220 Christ is troubled when we will not be succored Page
225 How to answer Christ in succouring us Page 237 What causes Christ
indulgence to his people Page 294
See Priestly, Sacrifice, Sins Transcendent, Anointed, High Priest,
Intercession, Temptations, Faithfulness, Duties, Prayers, Blessings, Love,
willingness, Mercy. Church The Church is most pure under Persecution Page 309
Comfort What Comforts arise by Christ's offering up of our duties Page 64 What
Comforts arise by Christ's blessing us Page 89 How to find Comfort in temptation
Page 257
Call The not-minding of our Call leads us into temptation Page 114 Conscience
Why believers have their sins charged on their conscience Page 13 Condition No
condition so bad but there is some good in it Page 306 Corruption see
Temptation Covenant The New Covenant is founded upon the blood of Christ Page
19 Difference between the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace Page 55
Curse Christ was made a curse for sin Page 82 All the Saints curses are turned
into blessings Page 89

D
Damned The reason why men are damned Page 230 Dealing Christ's Dealing with his
Disciples was a pattern of his dealing with all Saints Page 293 Devil see Power
Directions see Faith Disciple Marks of a true Disciple Page 290 Disposition We
have a Disposition in us suitable to the Temptation Page 114 Duty Christ
presents our duties to God Page 52 Christ draws the evil out of our Duties Page
55 The great acceptance our duties have in Christ Page 60 How to know whether
Christ offer up our duties Page 67
See Weak, Comfort
E
Egypt Why the Children of Israel suffered in Egypt Page 106 Enjoyment After
our greatest enjoyment of God follows our greatest temptations Page 241 Errors
Comfort against Errors Page 311
Falings Our Failings are passed by in Christ Page 64 The hurts of failing in
faith Page 260 Difference between failing in faith and failing in heart Page
298 Failing in faith, how it is known ibid
Faith Faith being strengthened strengthens all graces Page 19 Faith is our
Anchor by sea, our Shield by land Page 116 Satan aims at the faith of man Page
264 What it is to fail in faith Page 265 How Satan weakens our faith and how to
resist him Page 271 Directions how to walk that our faith may not fail Page 280
Fall The fall of one Saint is a siumbling block to others Page 246 Father see
Christ
G
God Gods inclination to hear Christ Page 32 God always hears Christ Page 57
Gods people ought not to question Gods love Page 109
See Christ, Promise, love Godly Godly men lay all their sins upon their own
hearts Page 254 Gospel see Blessing Grace Grace is larger under the Gospel than
under the Law Page 68 See Covenant
H
Heart see Faith High Priest Christ as High Priest cannot refuse a poor sinner
Page 20 Difference between Christ and other Highpriests Page 223 See Office
Holy Ghost The holy Ghost dwells in the hearts of believers Page 79 Humility
Spiritual joy causes Humility Page 74
I
Indulgence see Christ Encouragement Encouragements to poor sinners to come to
Christ Page 48 Intercede Christ intercedes for all sins, that against the holy
Ghost excepted Page 39 See Christ Intercession Wherein the intercession of
Christ consists Page 27 The prevalency of Christ's Intercession Page 31 It is no
presumption to bear our selves upon Christ's intercession Page 41
See transcendancy Invite Tempted souls invited to come to Christ Page 230
Invitation Invitations to come to Christ Page 93 Joy see humility
K
Keys The keys of Heaven and Hell are in the hands of Christ Page 58 Kingly
office The Kingly office of Christ is not so full of comfort as his Priestly
Page 5
L
Liberty We have liberty to go to the mercy-seat of God Page 66 Love Christ's
Love described Page 98 Gods Love does not free a man from temptations Page 109
Wherein Christ's Love to his people in temptations does consist Page 286

M
Magazine There is a Magazine of Mercy set open, and how it came to pass Page
16 Mercy When Christ's Mercy is most at work for his Disciples Page 286
Mercy-Seat see Liberty
N
Nakedness Christ clothes our Nakedness Page 60
O
Obedience The Obedience of Christ what it was Page 10 Office The Office of the
High Priest was to bless the people Page 76 See Priestly
P
Power What great power the Devil has Page 242 Praise What matter of praise we
have in Temptation Page 312 Prayer Our duties are mixed with Christ prayer Page
56 Presumption see Intercession Priest The work of the High- Priest was to make
reconciliation Page 6 See Anointed, High, Christ. Priestly The Priestly office
of Christ is the magazine of all our comforts Page 4 The Priestly office of
Christ is extended to none but such as shall be saved Page 5 The Priestly
office of Christ is our only releef against sin Page 6
See Antichrist Prophetical The Prophetical office of Christ is extended to
such as shall not be saved Page 5 Promise Christ's promises run Indefinitely
Page 17 Relying on a Promise makes it our own ibid
Prosperity see Thankfulness
R
Resist see Satan Righteousness see Christ Robbed The Saints have something
they cannot be Robbed of Page 258
S
Sacrifice When Christ died he offered up himself a Sacrifice for man Page 8
Saints The Saints are not alone in temptations Page 295 Sanctify see
temptations Satan Satan tempts Gods dearest children Page 245 Satan is very
envious Page 246 Satan loves to divide between friends Page 247 Satan has
leave from God to tempt, and why he has Page 248 Satan has a hand in all
great sins Page 255 Satan's subtilty described Page 268
See Faith Satisfaction Christ has made full satisfaction for all our sins
Page 9 School The school of temptations is a great school Page 289 Sin All the
sins of believers past present and to come are laid upon Christ Page 9 See
conscience Sour see Sweet Storehouse see Magazine Stumbling see Fall Succor
How Christ succors those that are tempted Page 227 We ought to be succouring
Christians Page 235
See temptations Suffer Why God lets his people suffer Page 105 Suffering see
ability

T
Tempt Tempt the signification of the word Page 99 The best men are worst
tempted Page 103 Comfort for tempted souls Page 233
See Invite, Satan. Temptation The Benefit of Christ's temptations Page 35
Temptations are corroding though they do not prevail Page 101 How to walk under
temptation Page 113 We ought to look up to Christ in temptations Page 237
Temptations considered two ways Page 253 Difference between temptations and
corruptions of our own heart Page 254 Temptations are the greatest Afflictions
of Saints Page 256 How to stand out against temptations Page 258 How to avoid
temptations Page 260 We must be thankful when we overcome temptations Page 262
Temptations are easy to be discerned Page 287 The time of our temptations is
appointed by Christ Page 288 Temptations are sanctified to Believers Page 288
How it may appear that Christ succors most in time of temptations Page 292
Benefits that arise from Christ's Succouring in temtations Page 301
See Call, Disposition, Christ, Enjoyment, Love, School, Saints, Praise,
Comfort Terms The terms Christ was admitted into heaven upon Page 34 Thankful
Special things we should be thankful for Page 316 Means to help us to be
thankful Page 314
Thankfulness Thankfulness is required in every condition Page 305
Encouragements to thankfulness Page 320
Thanks Thanks must be given in adversity as well as in prosperity Page 305
Touching Touching how the word is taken in Scripture Page 108 Transcendency The
Transcendency of Christ's offering Page 14 The Transcendency of Christ's
intercession Page 35
Trust The great trust God reposed in Christ Page 58
U
Victory Christ gives us victory over temptations Page 287
W
Walk see temptation Weak Weak Duties are accepted in Christ Page 62 Wicked
Wicked men lay all their sins upon the Devil Page 254 Willingness The
willingness of Christ to succor tempted souls Page 224 Work What the Work of a
High Priest was Page 6 See grace
Y
Yield We must not yield to little sins Page 13
FINIS.

