Anabaptism, THE TRVE FOVNTAINE OF Independency, Brownisme, Antinomy, Familisme,
And the most of the other Errors, which for the time do trouble the Church
of England, UNSEALED.

ALSO The Questions of Paedobaptisme and Dipping Handled from Scripture.

IN A Second Part of The Disswasive from the Errors of the time.

By ROBERT BAILLIE Minister at Glasgow.

And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of Hosts, that I will
cut off the names of the Idols out of the Land: and they shall no more be
remembered: and also I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to pass
out of the Land, Zach. 13.2.

But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teachers amongst you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen serpent in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Earl of Lauderdail, Viscount Metellan, Lord
Thirleston and Bolton.
YOur Lordships kind acceptance of this mean Treatise in its first part,
brings the rest of it now to your feet, upon hope it may go out with the like
countenance and favor. In these very miserable times, when so many of all
conditions, are given over to believe lies, to be inveigled with the hypocrisy
of seducing spirits, which the Lord in his justice has permitted to go forth
in a great multitude, for the seduction of this present evil world; the truth
is glad of the patrociny and assistance of all who will be on its side; and of
none more then of such as your Lordship: I mean of persons so much eminent in
wisdom, learning, courage, zeal, and other noble qualities, above the most of
their fellows in birth and rank, as these do ordinarily account themselves
elevated by their civil privileges, above the common multitude.

And truly it will be found no less prudence then piety for men of your
Lordships place, to put and hold themselves in these unhappy days, upon the
side of truth, though never so much deserted, disgraced, and trampled upon by a
world of simple or malicious ignorants. For now it is when the Lord with his
axe is going through his garden, and hewing down not only thousands of
brambles and bushes of lower stature, but many of the tallest Cedars, the
highest Palms, the thickest Oaks: and they who yet remain untouched, though
none do know how soon the axe may be applied to their branches, yea their very
root, yet many have reason to fear that their stroke may be sudden.

Among the woeful spectacles of our time, none use to touch a heart wherein is
any humanity, with more compassion, then the ruin of ancient Families: How
many great and potent houses are blown over by these late tempests? How many
this day be tottering and very like to fall before the winds be calmed? and of
those that appear in least danger, being encompassed with the thickest defenses
that policy can invent against all storms above ground, how easily may
subterraneous vapors shake their foundations? and when all fear is past of the
evanished and invisible storm, by an unexpected Earthquake, lay their walls also
level with the ground? There is no security for the greatest and strongest
edifices, but in the rock of truth: what ever is builded upon this, were it
never so brittle, will stand out the greatest blasts: And if any breach be
made, the God of truth will not fail to repair it, till the appointed time for
the change of all things under the Sun, bring that Cottage of clay to its
fatal period: And even then, the house shall fall without any prejudice to the
Inhabitant, whosoever has been a true lover and patron of truth. For how small
is the loss of a translation from a mansion upon earth, to one in the heaven
not made with hands? But here is a loss indeed, and a fall truly lamentable,
which often to our sorrow we may see, and have reason to fear shall yet be more
frequent amongst us, when unhappy Inhabitants by the hands of their errors and
vices, subvert the pillars of their Ancestors habitation, and bury with
themselves their whole family, under the rubbish of a temporal ruin, without
any hope of reparation either in earth or heaven.

In the following writ I point at the danger wherein not only families, but
the whole fabric of our Churches and Kingdoms do for the present stand:
while the Episcopal and Sectarian factions are doing their utmost endeavors
to have all our former sufferings to be but short prologues to new very prolix
if not endless, Tragedies. The one so far demented with a frantic passion
toward the government and service of the Church of Rome, that all the miseries
which they have brought upon themselves and millions of others, have not in the
least degree cured the disease of their corrupted minds, so far are they from
untying the knots that their own hands have made, or essaying to draw any of
their deceived party, out of the perplexities of conscience, wherein their
mis-informations alone have cast them, that rather then to retract their
errors, rather then to advise the lawfulness of joining with all the rest of
the Reformed Churches, in laying aside Episcopacy and Liturgick ceremonies;
they choose to give up the neck of their Country to the sword of bloody and
idolatrous strangers; They are content to draw all again to the hazard of a new
more terrible war: Tell them of the too probable issue of their obstinacy, that
if their designs should prosper, the danger would be greater, then their wit,
or the wisdom of any mortal creature could secure us from, to have a tyranny
planted in our State, and Popery without any more circumlocution, settled in our
Church. But if their renewed war should again miscarry, that then the hazard
is evident, of undoing the royal family, of turning the civil State of England
into a Babell of confusion, and the Church thereof into a fountain of heresies,
for the intoxication with its streams of all the rest of the Reformed. To all
such very rational discourses, this generation of men is deaf, as if all
natural affection to their distressed Country were dead, and sympathy with
any of the true Churches of Christ, altogether extinguished in them.

This is one ground of our present fear, O if it were all, so should we, if
needs must, go out again with great courage against that Squadron of
Malignants: But when we have returned Victors from that field, behold our more
perilous exercises are but yet approaching. The Sectaries of more names and
kinds then ever were known in any Kingdom of the world, tell us with open
mouth, we must be their slaves: They must have liberty to overthrow our
Parliaments; all Kings, all Lords, and this House of Commons; to set up the
individuals, as they love to speak, of the whole multitude, in the Throne of
absolute Sovereignty. From this new Sovereign we are commanded to expect a body
of new Laws, a model of a new Ochlocratorick government. This yoke, much worse
then a Turkish slavery, must be put upon our body, but a worse upon our soul: A
full liberty must be granted to every Seducer, who will in the most public
places, and within the doors of our houses also, persuade our loving consorts,
our dear children, our faithful servants and friends, to deny Christ, to
embrace Mahomets Alcoran, the Jewish Talmud, the fables of the Pagan Poets, in
place of the Old and New Testament, for the everlasting destruction of their
souls. This is the reward which the Sectaries plead for, as due to their labors
in the war against the common Enemy: would they stand to the determination of
the most favorable, if any way equitable Judge, they pleased to choose, glad
would we be to see their merits weighed to the full, and much above all their
deservings attributed unto them; But by any possible deserving, to think of
obtaining a liberty to do a great deal more mischief both to Church and State,
both to the souls and bodies of men, then ever any former enemy did intend,
carries not the face of any justice.

As for their great deservings, which always they are trumpeting out with a
loud noise, we only say that they do not prudently, to bring them so often near
the balance of trial: for if that, which I have heard from many, both wife
and gracious men, be true, their merits will be found to be but of a very
common alloy. Where did the most of them lurk when the heat of the day did
scorch the valiant laborers of both Nations? When Ruthven, New Castle, Rupert,
H^pton did keep the field with Armies of any number or vigor? When noble Essex
at Keinton had the King in the prime vigor of his strength, upon his army?
When Leslie about Bawdoun was compassed for some weeks, in the bare fields with
frost and snow, with wants of all kinds, with the very gallant Army of
New Castle, double in number, and much better provided, then any thing that P.
Rupert could bring to Naisby; when in Marston-Moor, David Leslie and Crawford,
with the flour of the Scots and gracious Manchesters Army, were breaking the
greatest and most formidable strength, that ever the Enemy commanded in all
this War. It is true, when the work was as good as done, by the sweat and blood
of others, when the Enemies were become so low, that they were never more able
to bring ten thousand together, when the danger was well-near all over and
gone, then was it good time for them to come in play, and with their cunning
legerdemain, to shuffle all others, who had managed the Game while it was
hazardous. They were then so wise as in the end of the day, with a great deal
of courage, to fall upon the back of a broken Enemy. It could be no great
miracle of valor and conduct, to take up the forces and treasure almost of all
England, and then at Naisby, with a greater number well paid, armed, and
disciplined, to beat nine thousand of evil led, evil paid, and evil armed
soldiers, the most part raw and new levied Welshes. Had they ever any enemy
after that day in the field, of half either their number or strength? And when
their Adversary had left the field without any hope of a new Army, to take in
place after place, which had neither supplies within, nor any hope of rescue
from abroad, cannot b^^^ very monstrous prowess: What if such a piece of
soldiery had fallen in their hands as Massies defense, and Essex rescue of
Gloucester; As Essex and the Londoners fought at Newbury; As David Leslies
march and medly at Philiphaugh; As Pointz enterprise near Chester? What if in
any of the gallant services of Sir Thomas Fairfax the half of the actors had
been of their feather and livery? Could any ears then have endured the noise of
their miraculous merits? But I hold, Immodesty and impudence do often draw on
reckonings, which else would have been forborne.

With the former troublers of our Church I have dealt in diverse other
Treatises, and by Gods grace, I purpose to have always one eye open for the
observance of all their motions: with the latter I continue to meddle in this
part also of my Disswasive. How candid and fair my dealing with them is, and
how little I intend either to irritate or hurt the person of any of them, in my
Prefaces to both parts, I show at length.

By these poor endeavors of mine, and the more rich and strong Treatises of
others, I wish your Lordship may be advanced in your zeal against error, and
whatsoever else is contrary either to the profession or practice of any part of
true Religion. Thus shall you stand, when others of your rank do fall: and
when they by their ignorance, prophanity, lust, revenge, self-seeking, banish
out of their houses that honor which their noble Progenitors laid up in store,
your Lordship by your perseverance and growth in that integrity and zeal for
the trut^, wherein hitherto by the great mercy of God, you have been exemplary
to many, above your age, shall add new store to the old: and that very ancient
Nobility which you found laid up in your family from many ages, you shall
transmit to posterity, with increase of a new luster from the gracious
endowments, the virtuous and honorable performances of your own person: So
earnestly wishes and heartily prays,

Your much obliged in all Christian duty. TO: BAILLIE.
Worcester House the 28 December. 1646.
The PREFACE.
IT is a matter of grief and regrate, Slothfulness is fatal when most
unseasonable.
that most people are never more careless of duty, then when the neglect of it
is most unseasonable and dangerous; When leaks within, and storms without, have
brought the Vessel to a present hazard to be swallowed up of the waves; it is
then, that the Pilot has greatest difficulty to set himself and his Mariners,
upon the performance, with any cheerfulness of those services, which are
necessary for the Ships safety: The too lively apprehension of the imminent
danger does so distract the heart with grief, fear, and despair, that confusion
dazleth the eyes, and binds up the hands of them who otherwise are not void
either of skill, or courage, or diligence to act for the common preservation.
When an Army is once brangled, shattered, and put in such misorder as it begins
to run, many men, though at other times stout enough, cannot then be moved to
stay, albeit they know standing to be the best remedy, to preserve their life
and liberty, or at least to sell them at some considerable rate; which by
flight are ordinarily betrayed, lost, and sold to the Enemy for no price at
all. When the foundations of a State and Kingdom begin so fast to shake, as a
present ruin is threatened to the building, there be few then that have courage
to set under their shoulder; But the most, to save their own head (become of
the Public what may) are glad to go out and turn their back on a ruinous and
falling aedifice.

Men most careless when their dangers greatest.
The very same is the condition of the Church of Christ; in its greatest
dangers, the dullness, the stupidity, the feneantise of her servants are very
often too palpable: the chief of the Apostles when their Master was to be taken
from off their head, when the Shepherd was to be smitten and the sheep to be
scattered, through very grief and fear, did fall into so deep a sleep, that
with much ado Christ himself got them roused up, though Judas the Traitor was
at hand. Toward the consummation of all things, when the end of the world is
near; when the Lord Christ shall be upon his return, and even at the doors;
when best it beseems his servants to have their lamps burning, and their loins
girded, to be ready upon every call to go out and meet their Master; when the
expectation of the last Trumpet; when the noise of wars, and rumors of more
and worse wars; when the sound of heresies and errors grow louder then ever
before; when such things as these, in reason ought to keep the watchmen on
foot upon their watch Towers: yet behold the unhappiness of these very times,
even then, the wisest Virgins, the faithfullest servants slumber and sleeep,
till the general cry of the Bridegrooms coming make them all awake.

We dare not make so bold as some, with the determinations of the times and
seasons, which the Lord keeps secret from the very Angels in the hollow of his
own hand; yet, it will not be presumption to conjecture the propinquity and
neernesse of the last times, by the evidence of some, at least, of their
symptoms and pr^vious signs, which at the present are visible to any who have
the smallest measure of spiritual understanding. I shall speak but of the two
in hand, the present danger, and yet the present negligence of the people of
God.

The Protestant Churches have not of a long time been so to be devoured by the
teeth of the Beast as at this day: The present danger of the Protestant
Churches. Of France.
What keeps all the faithful in France, Geneva, Sedan, out of the mouth of the
Romish wolf? have the Supposts of Rome (think we) lost all their wonted stomach
toward Protestant blood? The Irish Massacres may free us of that fancy: stay
till the French King get out of his childhood, or before in the intervall of
some peace or truce from forain war, a little leisure be given to that Court to
bring home their Armies; whenever that unhappy day shall dawn, there is no
more expectation of quietness, yea, no more possibility of subsisting to any
of those Churches, but in the mercy of God, who now does divert, and then can
avert and bridle the rage of that powerful State; against which these weak
lambs have no humane force to oppose. How many thousands there are panting for
a morning when once they may re-celebrate S. Bartholomews Matins, and bring the
old Massacres again in fashion, which now may be execute with a great deal of
more safety and ease then ever.

The condition of Holland seems not at all safe to those who know the inside of
their States; Of Holland.
it is like the predominant motive of their reconciliation now in hand, with
their hereditary enemies of Spain, is no other then fear: if their prepotent
neighbor of France can but re-invest his Crown with his ancient fees of
Flanders and Brabant, as he has done with Artois and Lorrain, with Catalaunia
and Alsas, and diverse more Provinces; Holland falls next to be dealt with, for
nothing does then stand betwixt it and the French Arms.

The Protestants of Zuitserland cannot be free of danger so long as the most of
the Cantons are bigotly popish, Of Zuits.
and very strictly allied with the popish States that lie round about them.

The Churches of higher Germany have long lien in Of Germany.
the dust, and in our days oftener then once, have been very near to be devoured
by the bill of the Austrian Eagle, and the paw of the Bavarian Lion: and though
that ravenous bird and cruel beast were both disabled from preying any more
upon their harmless neighbors, whereof the appearance this day is but small;
yet there is a more strong and wicked beast then either of the former, still
ramping at their doors; the Grand Signior is daily upon the German borders, too
ready to fall upon that poor Country, when the Princes and Cities by mutual
wounds have now disabled themselves more then in any by gone age, to resist so
terrible a power.

Of Bri^^in by the M^l^gna^ts.
Britain was wont to be taken for the head and heart, for the strongest Bulwark
of the Protestant strength; how are the present dangers thereof, and in in it,
of the whole Protestant Churches, it is easy to judge. How much of late the
leaders of the Court and Clergy of both Kingdoms had advanced the design of
bringing in well-near the whole body of Popery, at least a full reconciliation
with Rome; And when their counsels were discovered, and begun to be opposed,
how near often of late they have been to force upon the neck of the whole Isle by
violence the yoke of what ever tyranny in State, or errors in Religion they
pleased; the world has seen, and many thousands have felt, to their utter
undoing; whereof long ago we gave some account in the Canterburian
Self-conviction, and parallel of the Service Book with the Missall.

By the Sect^ries.
But behold while we are wrestling to the blood and extreme hazard of all that
is dear, with that tyrannous, superstitious, and profane party: There is now
start up at our back, another enemy, little less dangerous then the former: A
swarm of heresies and sects darkens the sun of truth, fills the air with noxious
vapors, is ready upon a little more increase to fall down on the earth, for
the overwhelming of of the State as well as the Church: betwixt these two
milstones the Orthodoxe Churches of this whole Isle, if the hand of the Lord
prevent it not, are in hazard to be ground to dust and ashes.

It is true, Our dangers from the Malignants are not yet past.
the Malignants by the miraculous power of God are brought so low, that in the
eyes of the most, their force seems now contemptible; yet wiser men do see too
great cause to be afraid of them this day little less then ever. Their
numbers over all the Isle are yet very great, their hearts are nothing changed,
though some bands for the time be put upon their hands. The unexcusable
obstinacy of the Episcopal Divines.
I have often marvailed and much regrated, that many reverend and very learned
Divines of that side, have been to this hour so silent, as to give no glory to
God, nor any assistance at all to the settling of the State and Church: though
it be clear as the noonday that the ways of their party did really tend to the
corrupting and enslaving both of State and Church; that the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms were put to an absolute necessity of defense against their force, to
preserve their own and the posterities necks from an iron yoke both of
Ecclesiastic and Civil bondage; that the continuance of this war has brought
the Kingdoms often to the border, and the King this day to the very doors of
ruin; that the Church is overflowed with a flood of evils; all which by their
timous and cordial conjunction with their brethren, might ^^ppily in some good
measure have been prevented. Shall Episcopacy and a read Service be so
necessary in a Church, that rather then England should join with all the rest
of the reformed, to lay them aside, the King, the Parliament, the State of the
Kingdoms and Churches of the whole Isle, must perish for any help that any of
them will make with the least of their fingers? Posterity cannot take well at
their hands so pervicacious an obstinacy. Suppose so many provocations and
scandals cast in their way by the hand of others, as may be; yet for men of
parts and fame to be touched with no compassion toward the Churches of God and
their dear Country, but to adhere so stiffly to these things, with the best of
their friends in all other Protestant Churches did esteem ever to be but
needless and changeable, and which now the better part of the whole Isle does
believe to be dangerous corruptions, and necessary to be removed: for them to
be so wedded to those toys, that rather then they will advise to lay them
aside, they can be content to behold the whole royal Family, both the Houses
of Parliament, the City, the Country, and all to be destroyed; such prodigious
pertinacy cannot want great guiltiness.

Its great folly to misprize the danger from France.
However, that our dangers from the Malignant party does yet continue, will not
be doubted when their number and quality, and great obstinacy yet over all
England is considered; In Scotland their case is not much unlike; Ireland is
well-near wholly their own; their correspondence with the neighbor States is
great; their hopes from France seem to be but too well grounded. If the peace
of Munster come quickly to an end, as the appearances are great enough, France,
Sueden, and Bavaria being sure of all their desires at the charge of the
Austrians, and our best friends the reformed Electors Palatine and Brandeburg,
what else has the French ado with their great Armies and Navies? Their peace
with Spain is not so impossible as some would m^^e it, they will be glad to
give over their interest in Catalonia and Portugal, for the fair and nearly
adjoining Territories of West-Flanders: In such a bargain they would make the
dishonesty to be but small, for the Catalans shall not be deserted when
reconciled to their own King in such terms as themselves shall like; for the
performance whereof, France will oblige: their alliance with Portugal is not
so strict, but a less bud then the half of West-Flanders will easily break it
in pieces, and that without much hazard to Portugal: for it is easy to France
to send them underhand as many men and money, and to see to their subsistence
as well as when the confederacy was open and avowed. It is the ridiculous
blindness of some to contemn the posture of all the world abroad, as if
England were situated so far above the moon and stars, that the most malign
aspects of all neighbor Nations could have no influence upon it: Be it so,
that vigoro^s and healthful bodies are little sensible of planetary
operations, yet very small changes of the heavens and air are able to vex much
a crazy and valetudinary person.

For many ages Britain has not been in so great a distemper, as this day it is:
Antichrist may be near to swallow down the whole reformed Churches.
the people so broken and exhausted by a heavy war, the land full of open
divisions and heart-burnings, the best and greatest part groaning under heavy
grievances both of Church and State, whereof there is little appearance of any
possibility of redress in haste; the Sectaries growing in numbers, and
insolences of all kinds, and openly inclining to join with the Malignants,
rather then to miss of their hopes and very unreasonable desires. Fools are
blind and unable to comprehend the grounds of just fear, and so they go on in
their rashness till they be plunged in the ditch of remediless calamity; and
then only do they begin to complain of their former inconsideration. What
long has been the opinion and fear of some not unconsiderable Divines, that
Antichrist before his abolition, shall once again overflow the whole face of
the West, and suppress the whole Protestant Churches, I pray God to avert.

If from the Malignant hand there appear not mischief enough to hang this day
over the head of the Churches of Britain, The flood of Errors and Heresies
like to overflow the Church*
let us divert a little our eye to the other side, the n^w generation of
Sectaries* from this quarter so much smoke does arise, as alone is abundantly
able to darken our sky. It is long since all, at least the principal Articles
of Christian Religion, without exception of any that I remember, have been
oppugned; The holy Scriptures, both the Godhead and Manhood of Jesus Christ,
the holy Ghost, the Divinity it self, is now exploded with high and basphemous
scorn: all Churches, all Sacraments, all public Worship and Ordinances, are
made unnecessary, A liberty for all Errors the great aim.
yea unlawful. And if any point of Religion has had the fortune to escape the
blasphemous tongues and pens of these erroneous men, lest it should still go
free from opposition, the most of that party have n^w set up their rest upon a
principle, which makes them sure to gather up their gleanings when ever their
leisure may serve them to make a review of their omissions: A liberty to
believe, to profess, to propagate in matter of Religion, whatever any the most
desperately erroneous soul may conceive to be truth. All these are but things
of the mind and matters of opinion, a toleration in them is miserable and
despicable, but a free and absolute liberty in every such thing, is the due and
natural right of every humane creature in all places of the whole earth. This
monstrous imagination of liberty is not only generally put in practice without
any considerable control now for some years in the midst, and all the corners
of England, but men of prime place, have courage to write the justice of it
under their hand to the High Court of Parliament, yet without any repentance we
hear of.

The Parliament spoiled of all power to reform Religion.
It was a matter of our grief to know men of parts assert, that the Reformation
or defense of Religion, notwithstanding all the Declarations, Protestations,
and Covenants of the Parliament, might not be any part of our apology for our
defensive arms: It has lien heavy upon our spirits, that men of most corrupt
minds should be permitted to hinder year after year, the settling of the Church
of England in any passable condition, when there appeared little difficulty of
a quick, plenary, and satisfactory settlement, except what such evil men did
create, who make the retardment and frustration of every thing which may
advance the truth of God, a matter of their most serious practices in private
and in public, of their daily sport and drollery. But this was to us a cause
of wonder, that the very other day the principal Chaplain of the Army should
be brought to proclaim with all confidence, in a most solemn audience of the
Horse of Commons it self; that all the Reformation of the Parliament was but
Antichristianisme; that the Reformation of the Church by any Christian
Magistrate before them, was no better; that God requires all Magistrates to
lay aside all intentions of reforming the Church; And therefore Honorable and
beloved, I say to you touching this work of Reformation of the spiritual
Temple of the N^w Testament as God once said to David touching the building of
the material temple you did well in that it was in your heart to reform the
Kingdom of God, nevertheless you shall not reform it, for you have been men of
war, and have shed much blood, and therefore you shall not do this work, for
this is not a work of men of war, but of the Prince of peace. Dels Sermon to
the House of Commons, p. 13, 14. Ibid. Object. May not the spiritual Church of
Christ be reformed with worldly and secular power? I ans. by no means. Ib. p.
26. All these things show that worldly power has no place at all in the
Reformation of the Gospel. Ibid p. 26. They that would govern the faithful,
the members of Christ's own body, make themselves the head of these members, and
so Antichrist may as well be found in a combination of men as in one single
perfom
that the only right Reformation was that of the heart, which was to be left
to Christ alone, as he was pleased to work in the breast of every man; that the
new Sectarian Preachers, which are run out without any call, either from God or
man, into every Shire of the Kingdom, are sent out by Christ to be instruments
of this Reformation; that their Ministry is that of the Spirit Ibid. p. 29.
Gods anointed ones are the faithful that are anointed with the Spirit, and
these anointed ones are the Lords Prophets, and the Lord has no Prophets but
such as are anointed with the Spirit; all his brethren are made Prophets, being
fellows with him in his unction. Ib. When I see the generality of the people of
all sorts rise up against the ministration of the Spirit which God has now an
these days of ours set up even in every County for salvation to his people,
but for a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to the rest; it does grieve
me to see how the City, Country, Country Towns, Villages, do all rise up for
the most part against the ministration of the Spirit, for this is a certain
sign of the undoing of them all.
; that their followers are the Saints, which shall prevail, maugre all
opposition When you read what you have heard, you must needs acknowledge it to
be the mind of God if you received the anointing of the spirit. In the Epistle,
ib. this truth shall carry all opposition and opposers before it, and none
shall be able to stand against it; and of this both your selves and this
generation shall be witnesses.
; that all the other Ministers of England, who dance not after their pipe,
especially such as M^ Love, who opposed this man immediately to his face, are
but lims of Antichrist, whom the Parliament is obliged to suppress without any
toleration Ib. p. 41. Truly sir, when God shall make you a new creature you
will be glad of new light, the old light will serve the old man well enough,
your Sermon savours as ill to the faithful as mine to the world. In the
Epistle, If the Assembly, which I hope they will not, should condemn that
doctrine of the Gospel for the substance of it, delivered then by M. Dell, it
will be no blasphemy to say they are the enemies of the truth of Christ, and I
hope the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom. Ib. The Prelates successors
in the Kingdom of Antichrist still cry, No Minister, no Magistrate. Ib. To the
Reader, This light was since obscured by the new darkness of Antichrist, which
these men love better then that old light, and will by no means exchange the
one for the other, and these as well as their Fathers of the same race and
lineage, in whose stead they are new risen up, shall in due time become a
reproach and a shame, and their name shall be for a curse to all Gods chosen.
In the Epistle, I shall desire this in the behalf of the faithful Gods
peculiar portion in the land, that you would not suffer us to be oppressed by
our adversaries, neither would suffer them thus publicly and shamelesly to
call as Sectaries and Heretics. P. 38. The Magistrate may deter you and the
rest of the Kingdom that are of the like mind, from resisting and hindering
this work which has its authority from heaven, that so the Saints my pray for
the Magistrate.
.

Who now are the persecuters.
Hitherto are these men come already, notwithstanding all their declamations
against persecution, though no man has molested them now for some years, nor
laid in their way the least impediment to think, speak, write, act whatever
they thought expedient for the propagation of any blasphemy, they have been
pleased to entertain, nor called them to any account, when by the force of
arms, they have beaten out of their Pulpits and Houses, the faithful Ministers
of God, themselves usurping their places in very many parts where the Army has
gone, and setting out to the people by all the skill they had, whatever heresy
the times has produced. Yet now their fears to be persecuted are come to this,
that they dare preach the House of Commons to their face, Antichristian
oppressors, for assaying to reform the evident corruptions of the Church,
within their own jurisdiction: And exhort them to lay aside that sinful and
impertinent work, permitting every man to follow in Religion, whatever his own
heart dictates to be best. Yet by no means to tolerate any Preacher who shall
oppose that their liberty. To this height of presumptuous malice are those
declamers against persecution publicly proceeded, and in all this are
countenanced and pleaded for by too many, and too eminent Patrons.

If those men's counsel might be followed, The monster of Libertinism.
what at once should be the condition of the Church of England? It could not
but by and by become the most hideous and woeful monster, that ever any pious
eye did beheld: every two or three making up an Independent-Congregation, for
the setting up of what ever tenets and worship themselves please to invent,
albeit for no longer a time then every single person amongst them do think
fit. They stick not to profess the lawfulness to erect, at least the
unlawfulness to disturb when erected in the most public places, Schools and
Professions, for the persuading of all the idolatries and blasphemies, which
either of old or this day, have been among the Pagans, Turks, Jews, or the most
infamous heretical Christians, that so from England as an open fountain the
streams of all those, and if they be any more, imaginable errors may be sent
out to every other part of the Christian world: adding, That whoever is against
this happy liberty, is without all doubt a corrupt, fleshly, and unregenerate
man, ignorant of the grace of God, whom the Magistrate is obliged to punish,
though by duty he is to protect all other in the free enjoyment and practice of
all the dictates of their own mind.

The devil had never a more clear and downright way, not only to evert all
Churches, but to explode as a ridiculous scorn, whatever looks like truth, or
has the least savor of any Religion.

The Sectaries having done with the Church, proceed to the ov^rthrow of the
State.
For all this, there might be some hope of subsistence for Religion if those
men, when they have done their worst against the Church, would be content to
hold their hands off the State; for it cannot be, but where ever a truly
Christian State does stand, it will shelter the Church, and by no art, no
force, so long as it has any being for its self, will it exterminate the
Lords inheritance: The spirit that leads the Sectaries, knowing this in all his
long experience, lets them not rest in their designs against Religion, but
presses them on, for doing their endeavor to pull down the State likewise.
We need not speak of their declared rage against Universities and all
Societies of Learning, against the profession and person of all Lawyers,
against the Society of Merchant-adventurers, against the Common Council and
Court of Aldermen in the City of London: all these things to them are
corruptions, and grievances to be extirpate. But that which we are most afraid
for, is, that with their whole strength they attach the known foundation of the
whole State, the High Court of Parliament.

The Parliament must be abolished.
It Is not only the King who must be cut in pieces with Agag, and for his
faults the whole royal race, yea, the very state and condition of Royalty and
Monarchy must be razed and abolished for ever: but also the House of Lords and
the whole Peerage of England must follow the fortune of the King, and with him
fall under a perpetual abolition: yea, the House of Commons it self, the only
remainder of our hope, must walk in that same way, their House likewise must be
pulled down about their ears: The common people, every individual of the whole
multitude must be set on the Throne of Sovereignty, to mould themselves in a
new fashion of State, and frame to themselves a body of new laws, by the hands
of such persons, as they may be pleased to set up for their Deputies in a new
House of Commons.

When such dictates are put in print, and under the eye of Authority, daily in
Pamphlet after Pamphlet, sent out over the whole Land, to open the eyes of the
blind with this new glorious light of the Kinghood (as they call it) of every
individual of the people, as well beggars, fools, and rogues, as the most
virtuous, wise, noble, and wealthy persons; When such maxims are sweetly
hugged in the arms not only of the multitude, but others of the best quality;
when the authors and abettors of so good and wise Positions are caressed, cried
up, rewarded with preferment in the State, in the Army, in the Country; When
their opposers receive hard measure, are discountenanced, rebuked, deprived of
favors by men in place, and sometimes spoiled of their goods, and knocked down
by the professors, indeed, of a catholic liberty; but truly the practisers of
tyranny and persecution: This being our known and felt condition, upon how weak
and tottering props, the house of our Church and State does stand, may easily
be conceived.

What I have said of our dangers needs no other proof then the sense of that
which the eye and ear brings daily before every observing mind; but the
remedies of so eminent and imminent dangers, require a pate of a much larger
size then mine, or any other such of mean and vulgar capacity.

Only for curing of the first very dangerous evil, The return of the King in
equitable terms is the best remedy of the one half of our fears.
I wish the continuance of the prayers of all the godly, and of the endeavors
of those in place, to hasten the reconciliation of the King: For this, to my
weak judgment seems the most hopeful remedy of all our fears, which flow from
the former fountain: the reduction of his mind to our sense (which I am not
desperate, but some more of our supplications to God, and endeavors with men,
may bring to pass) would in a moment bring to us with him, the most
considerable of that side: and if any thereafter should delay to take from us
what laws should be given them, their obstinate folly did then put in our hand
a fair opportunity, to bring on their head the day of recompenses, and of ^ust
vengeance for all their former misdemeanors. By the blessing of God the return
of the King, upon equitable and just terms, for no other must be imagined,
might quickly sheath the sword in all the Dominions, might give us a settled
peace, and put us in a fair way to repair in time the great vastations which
this unhappy war has made in all the three Kingdoms; and to recover our
reputation in the world abroad, which of a long time htah been buried through
our domestic jealousies and distractions. Our credit once set on foot, we
might quickly become so considerable, as to attain to our wonted influence, in
all the great affairs of Europe, for the reviving of our dead or dying friends,
and the bounding of the late excessive overflowings of our very high and lofty
neighbors.

I grant the Lord is not tied to any one channel, when out of the fountain of
his goodness he is pleased to send out the stream of any blessing, whether to
a Nation or a man only; Yet when I cast mine eye upon the ordinary course of
his carrying humane affairs, if you remove this mean, and make the
reconciliation of the King with his Parliament impossible; I confess I am cast
into so thick a mist, that all appearance of peace, for a very long time, to
any of the Kingdoms, The zealous diligence of Ministers might do much to
remove the other h^lf.
does quite evanish and flee out of the reach of my weak apprehension.

For curing of the miseries, and preventing of the dangers on the other hand: I
could wish as I was speaking at the beginning, that all whom God has called to
any employment in his house, would shake off sluggish negligence, and keep
stricter watch in their stations, giving loud warning to the people of God of
the dangers about them, being very careful that neither fear, nor despair, nor
any other sinistrous affection keep them from the duties which the extremely
bad times do cry for, from the hand of every child of God.

I have often been witness with much joy, to the abundant zeal of diverse the
Lords faithful Ministers, both in the Assembly and City, who in their Writings
and Sermons, and private sedulity, have endeavored to their power the
awakening of all about them, for the defense of that truth which Christ had
committed to their trust; So that I am sure, that when ever they shall come to
their accounts, their Master will accept and bless their fidelity. I wish no
more of them but to run on as they have begun, without fainting, that no man
take their crown; Nor of others, but to follow with the like zeal in their
footsteps.

And for the encouraging of all toward this active diligence, we may call to
remembrance but two vulgar motives, The sedulous activity of the Sectaries does
shame our slothfulness.
example, and success; the one of our adversaries, the other in our own and
our brethrens experience: How many of the Sectaries make bold, without any
fear, any fainting, any ceasing, in season, and out of season, by preaching,
printing, disputing in all places, all companies, toward all relations, to
propagate their erroneous ways? How shall their heat and activity in evil,
stand up against us for our frigidity, for our unequal care and labor in good.

Also, Zealous diligence is ordinarily successful.
our own experience of very great success from small endeavors when cordially
put on, may animate us to a greater diligence: How often have the prayers and
consultations of a few gracious and wise brethren, set on foot, advanced, and
brought to an issue, many happy purposes, the fruits whereof this age do begin
to enjoy, for which the posterity shall bless the authors, though they never
heard of their names? How many most dangerous designs, which were in a
readiness to have much increased the miseries both of Church and State, by the
labors of a few unseen men, have been timeously prevented, countermined, and
totally defeated? How often have the City, yea, both the Houses of Parliament,
upon the zealous and prudent motion of one only man, been stirred up to very
notable performances? I do not remember, when I have been witness to any
gracious Ministers powerful exhortation to the honorable House of Commons,
that has not presently been blessed with some good fruit: Our grief for what
yet lies behind, must not cast out of our memory the great things that are
done already: I verily believe, that much more long before this had been done
both in City and Country, both by Lords and Commons, if some Divines whom the
Lord has anointed with grace, learning, wisdom, eloquence, and credit above
their fellows, had been more instant and industrious, about those things which
nearly concern Divines, wherewith Christ their Master has trusted them above
all others, and which Churchmen every where else, to very good purpose, use to
mind, with all the care and industry they are able.

The caveats of zeal. The least degree of true piety must be tenderly h^ndled.
The zealous diligence of the Lords servants about their masters work, can
neither hurt nor justly offend any, if it be tempered with the mixture of three
needful ingredients, Piety, Charity, and a love to order. In all our combats
against error, or whatever evil else of the time, we must be very attentive
that we give not the least discouragement to true Piety, for this is so sweet
and tender a plant of Gods own hand, that who ever is acquainted with it, will
be extremely loath to do it the least hurt, were it by their very breath, much
less by their words and actions: It must be a gross mistake, or a grievous
calumny, which the Sectaries so much inculcate, that Orthodoxe Ministers in
their zeal against errors, fall a beating and wounding the Saints of God, and
troubling the godly party: the Lord forbid it were so. The ground of this
mis-assertion I take to be a twofold mis-apprehension: 1. That all pretenders
to piety, though they be found really impious hypocrites, yet for their s^^ws
of Religion ought not to be dealt with according to their visible hypocrisy.
2. That those who are truly pious and really the children of God, may not be
compassed about with many sinful infirmities: It ought to offend none, when
the mask is pulled off the face of those who scorn God and the world, by the
fair pretenses of that, which their very rough hands, and the hellish vapors
of their mouth do demonstrate was never near their heart: When such are hewn
by the Prophets, when by the sword of the Word they are slain, when the fire
and salt of God is cast upon such, why should any gracious soul take it self to
be touched? Again, when the most true Saints are rebuked most sharply for their
errors, or other sins whereby they offend God, they become instruments of his
dis-service, and of the advancement of Satan's Kingdom, so much the more, as
their known grace makes the readier passage for the communication and
propagation to others, of their ungracious and sinful corruptions; if here a
gracious Physician endeavor to cut off from them their cancerous excrescences,
though it be with some pain; yet here there is not the least intention of hurt
to any of their sound members.

I dare say in the name of my brethren, Presbyterians are far from suppressing
the least measure of piety.
that when ever they are blowing away with the greatest earnestness, the
noisome smoke that fills the house, to the offense of all within; they shall be
as loath to put out the smallest spark of grace in the smoking flax, as to
choke the natural heat of their own heart. I confidently avow, that no
Presbyterian has any question at all with any dissenter, about any thing which
in the least degree touches upon piety and grace: for every part of this they
take to proceed from the heart of God, and where ever they find it, they are
willing to embrace it, were it in the bosom of their greatest enemies, as that
which they profess is their own greatest aim to follow and study to attain. If
at any time they are miscarried to practice against this profession, they
acknowledge their error, and duty to endeavor amendment and satisfaction: I
wish all our controversies were so near an end, as this quickly may be: I hope
the Saints will not be so unreasonable, as to make the beating of their
unsanctified errors, reflect upon any part of their sanctity, especially when
they who deal with them are so careful as they can, when they break their
shells, to remember what is within, that they spoil not their pearl: and for all
which may offend in the cask and shard, that the jewel and treasure which God
has enclosed be not trod under foot.

Ch^rity and compassion to b^ extended to our enemies
This is almost all I have to say of the second caution also, That in the
greatest pangs of our zeal we never forget charity. It Is true, in this dead
age, where zeal against error or vice is so rare, and where it is found, of so
low a degree, that we need not draw it down by the mixture of any allaying
adjunct; yet because in some it has, and in more it may exceed, that charity
which the Lord will have joined with it, we shall be loath to separate. When
ever we have to do, not only with them in whom we evidently see some rays of
the image of God, but with very hypocrites, whom we have but too good ground to
suspect of counterfaiting; yet, for charities sake, let us give them (so far as
evident verity will admit) a good construction: leaving the full account and
certain search of them to the Lords f^rther discovery, whether here or in his
own day. In the mean time, for the sake of that grace and truth they carry in
their face and mouth, let us deal so gently with them as may be; yea, when we
have to do with the grossest sinners, let us never put off the bowels of pity
and humanity to the worst of them. Who has made us of a better metal? What
sometimes have we been? What before all our trials be over, may yet escape us,
or our children, or our dearest friends? Who knows how soon these wicked
persons may receive mercy, and be rescued out of Satan's bands? And though their
wickedness should continue, yet they are not without abundant misery: If it be
not unhappiness enough to be slaves to error, to vice, to the Devil while
they live, to be isntrumental in the advancing of Satan's Kingdom, and active
in destroying the precious souls of men; yet their torments which abides them
in hell are lamentable, and a matter of great compassion to all who believe
them. What ever indignation we are obliged to carry against the sin, yet we
must pity the man; and if any censure spiritual or temporal, be inflicted
upon him, this justice must flow from the fountain of love and desire, by that
ordinary means to recover the person, or else the execution will be no less
heavy to the inflicter, then to him on whom it is inflicted.

The clamours and invectives against the Presbyterians charity, may well be
neglected, being so evidently caustesse; Presbyteri^n^ are far from persecuting
any.
They are called persecutors, when to this hour no power at all, so much as of
admonition, is put in their hand, and for this fault are cried out upon, by
them who practice persecution to their power, before the Sun; If most bitter
and injurious contumelies in word and print, if crushing of a man in his credit
and estate, if threatening and beating by swords and staves only for
righteousness sake, may come within the lines of any persecution. As for the
Presbyterians elsewhere, why should their faults be charged upon the English,
before they be put in a condition to fall into them? And yet I pray you how
highly does this humor of persecution reign in the worst of Presbyterians any
where? Do they at all meddle with any man's goods, liberty, or life? This has
often been objected, by some either ignorant or malicious men, but as often it
has been rejected, as a very injurious falsehood. Scotland, which uses most to
be burdened with this charge, is sufficiently cleared of it in the Historical
Vindication: All the Church censures there, are merely spiritual:
Excommunication in that Church is more rare, and when it must be exercised, is
performed with much more leisure and caution, then amongst any of the Sects, if
so be they approve of any Discipline; I am sure the principles either of the
Independents, or Brownists, or Anabaptists, permit them not to draw out so
rarely, and when it must be drawn, to unsheath that sword any thing so
leisurely and deliberately, as the principles of the Presbyterians force them
to do.

If the State and Kingdom where the Presbytery does dwell, he pleased by the
Acts of their Parliament to inflict any civil censure on excommunicate
Papists, or such, who for obstinacy in a flagicious crime, such as adultery,
murder, or fornication, or something worse, what is that to the Church? But
this p^ssibly may be the matter, the Church exhorts the State to the making and
execution of Laws, which may control those whom Satan has inspired to destroy
themselves, and all others they are able, by their detestable errors, for the
punishment of them who make it their work to impugn, and mock all the truths
of God: if this be the crime, we will confess our guiltiness, but withal
that we esteem it a duty which the Parliaments of both Kingdoms have solemnly
sworn to perform to their power. If the chief framers and commenders of that
Covenant at the beginning, have since either discovered their hypocrisy, or
apostatized from their former sense, or feigned a sense of their own to that
solemn Covenant, which is clearly destructive both to its plain words and known
intention, we can but pity and desire to be free of so grievous guiltiness.

The third Caveat I spoke of, was a true love to order: The dignity and power
of the Magistrate would be carefully preserved.
this is the season when the Prince of mis-rule, Satan, with all his power is
building his Babell both in Church and State. If ever order was necessary in
the Church, it is now more; when every person, man or woman, young or old,
whose fancy is up, must be at public preaching; and if in this they would
square their words to any good rule, it were the less evil: But the most of
their doctrines are mere conceits contrary to the truth of God. Unhappy
Independents, who opened at first, and keep open to this day the door of the
Church for these Satyrs, and Vultures, these Iim, and Ziim, the great Owls
and shriek Owls, the wild beasts of the Desert, and the wild beasts of the
Island, the Dragons, and all the doleful creatures, to come in and defile, to
make havoc of all that is most precious in the House of God.

But the order I mean here is chiefly in the State, it will not satisfy the
Masters of our mis-order to keep the Church in confusion: Since the State will
take no notice of them, but lets them increase at their pleasure, and grow up
above the strength of any their Ancestors, they are making bold to go visit
the State, and try their strength upon her, if possibly they may find as great
a facility, to set up the Trophee of their triumph upon her ruin, as of that
of her weak sister the Church. It is the certain, and now often printed design
of some, to overthrow from the very foundation the whole edifice of our Civil
government; No King, no Lord, must be heard of hereafter; This House of Commons
must be cast down, the Imperial and absolute Sovereignty must be put in the
hands of the multitude of the basest people. They are once every year to choose
for their servants, a new House of Commons, which all this time shall draw up a
new frame of laws, and a new model of government. Since this is the h mour
that now beats highest in the veins of that people, we had so much the more
need with all our strength to fortify the house of the State; for believe it,
if that by any hand should be undermined, its fall cannot fail to crush the
most, if not all, who are under the roof thereof. So long as the State does
stand, there is always some hope of subsistence for every honest man, and of
obtaining in time a great part, and possibly all their just desires, were their
Petition never so often laid aside: But if the State be overthrown, then all is
desperate and gone, every particular person with all his designs how gracious
soever, is ready to be overwhelmed in the rubbish of the Common wealth. It
would be remembered that members of the best state are but men and not Angels;
It Is not to be expected but sinful infirmities will cleave to the back of the
best reformed government; the perfect and spotless Republic of Plato, may
well have some place in Vtopia or in the Region of the Moon, but upon the earth
it never yet did dwell, nor in haste is like to do. Let prayers to God, let
petitions, Protestations, Remonstrances, representations to men, be used and
repeated from time to time, without any fainting or giving over, till all be
obtained that is necessary for the good of Church and State. But great caution
must be used, that nothing be either done or said, that may labefactate the
just honor or power of them whom God and the Laws have entrusted with the
Sovereignty; what ever touches that, cannot but touch the apple of the eye of
every good and wise man: especily at this time, when the project of the Devil
is declared to lay Monarchy and both the Houses of Parliament level with the
ground; and to set on the Throne the beast with many heads, the multitude,
which with difficulty enough, could ever yet be ruled, but to this day was
never found to have any skill or dexterity at all in the great art of ruling.

But to break off prefacing, The scope of the Treatise.
my intention in the subsequent writ is, to proceed in my Disswasive, and that
with so great observance of the three mentioned Caveats, as I am able. The men
whom I deal with in this part are Anabaptists, albeit they bring in with
themselves both Antinomians, Socinians, Familists, and the most of all the
Heretics of the time. I desire no more from them, as a reward of all my
labor for their weall, (for the least hurt to any of their persons I never
minded) but in the fear of God, to consider the beginning, progress, and issue
of their way, as I set it before them in a short view out of their own Authors,
or at least from such writs, as in that subject are of unquestionable faith. If
I make it appear, that the spirit which from the beginning to this day, did
reign in their leaders, cannot be that of grace and truth, ought they not in
conscience to make a serious review of their way, lest securely going on, the
justice of God give them over to be miscarried to such opinions and practices
which their soul for the present abhors; but as I demonstrate, has exceeding
often been the issue of Anabaptisme in many of its followers both of old and
late? If this my service be a means to reclaim some of them, and to deter
others from the evil of their doings, I have the desired fruit of my labor.
If I miss this, yet my testimony to the truth in so needful a time, will, I
hope, be acceptable to God, and the conscience of it will ease and refresh my
spirit, remembering that the hours of my leisure were not altogether misspent,
but many of them so diligently as I was able, employed for the service of Him
to whom I owe all, and the good of his people.

CHAP. I. The Original and Progress of the ANABAPTISTS.
THE late patrons of Anabaptism among us would make the world believe that this
Sect had for its Author the famous Berengarius, Berengarius no Anabaptist.
and for its fomenters four hundred years ago, the old predecessors of
Protestants, commonly called Albigenses: but who will be pleased to consult the
fountain of this alledgance shall find Berengarius absolved from this crime by
that very mouth whence alone the sclander did proceed. M. Tombs examine. p. 20,
21.
Bishop Guitmund lays on the back of Deacon Berengarius the load of so many
contumelies as he is able to invent, only for his boldness to oppose the
common Doctrine of that time, the corporal presence of Christ's body in the
bread of the Sacrament: among other things he challenges him for the denying
baptism to infants, but if any should require a proof of this heavy charge,
Guitmund professes that none can be given, avowing that Berengarius did never
bring any such Doctrine in public, knowing that no Scripture could be alleged
for it, and that no creature would take such an absurdity from his hand (A);
Justice therefore does require that Berengarius be freed of that crime, since
his very adversary confesses that it was never made appear by any known
profession; for crimes that appear not are reputed by just men as not existing.

Concerning the Albigenses, The Albigenses knew not Anabaptisme.
the man that lays the sclander of Anabaptism upon them is Petrus Cluniacensis,
but how unjustly I offer to be considered not only from this general very true
and confessed ground, that the Popish Writers of that time do charge these
honest and pious men of Albi with many both errors and crimes, whereof all
equitable men believe them to have been most innocent; but also from three
particular observations: First, they are not challenged by Cluniacensis as
direct and express denyers of paedobaptisme, but for their affirming the
impossibility of infants believing, and of their impossible salvation without
faith, he alleges upon them by way of consequence, that they did also maintain
the Baptism of infants to be unprofitable and null (B). The learned know how
much uses to be said against the burdening of men with all the consequents of
their tenets, especially when the party rejects them, and the things themselves
have no necessary dependence. Secondly, the antecedent whereupon this
consequent is builded, we much doubt if ever it came in the thoughts of the
Albigenses. That these gracious and orthodoxe men should have been so absurd as
to damn absolutely all infants dying in their infancy, which never any of the
grossest Heretics to this day did affirm; we must be pardoned to deny our
belief to ten witnesses of much better faith then the Abbot of Cluny. Thirdly,
that which Cassander avows in that same place helps to evidence the sclander of
Cluniacensis: the Valdenses were the children and immediate successors of the
Albigenses, many of their writs yet extant show how rigid and punctual
observers the children were of their Fathers ways: now it is Cassanders remark
verified by the writs and known practice to this day of all the Valdenses that
they have been constant paedobaptists (C). He must therefore be a man of
greater authority then any Friar or Monk of these dark times, who shall be able
to persuade that their Fathers the Albigenses were against infants baptism.

Wherefore notwithstanding of all which is misalledged from Cassander we may
safely with all Protestant Writers affirm that the first known Fathers of
Anabaptism were Nicholas Stock and Thomas Muncer, who in the year 1622. began
to sow the tares of that sect in Saxony with too great success. Neither
Melancthon nor Carolostadius did ever favor antipaedobaptism.
What some allege of Melancthon and Carolostadius their favor toward these
men, of Melancthon it is most false as many of his writs declare (D), unless
it be understood of his good and extraordinary meek nature, whereby he was ever
inclined to pity the worst of men so long as there was any hope by loving
dealing to do them good. Carolostadius indeed was a rash hot headed man, and at
the beginning did give too much countenance to the Anabaptists, albeit not in
the point of Antipaedobaptisme (E), so far as we can find; but wherein soever
he favored these fanatic men, he did quickly repent and made his public
retractations to the satisfaction of Luthers own mind (F).

M. Tombs by all his diligence to search for ancient and renowned friends to
his Clients the Anabaptists, does but raise dust to darken the air about
himself: all who will be at the pains to consider these very testimonies which
he alleges, shall find that no Divine of good fame did ever join with that
sect: for the spirit that did reign therein was so evidently malignant, that a
small measure of discretion did ever serve to discover and avoid him.

When the light of the Gospel from the Lamp of Luther did begin to shine in all
the corners of Germany high and low, The true original of the Anabaptists.
the forementioned unhappy men Stock and Muncer, did begin also to breath out a
pestiferous vapor for to overcloud that Golden candlestick. Satan and
Antichrist his child got no so powerful assistance against the Spirit of God
in Luther from the Emperor Charles, The malignity of their spirit.
although the far greatest Prince who these five hundred years did sway the
Imperial Scepter, nor from all the Bishops of Germany, though the most potent
Clergy that is or ever has been in Christendom, as from these two obscure and
ignorant creatures: for so strong and perverse a Devil did enter into them, as
did put them into a very fair way not only to have extinguished the candle of
Reformation so soon as ever it began to shine, but also to have turned the
remainder of light that was in all Christendom into palpable darkness (G).
The spirit of Mahomet was no more hellish in setting afoot most gross errors,
and countenancing abominable lusts; nor was it any thing so much hellish in
making an open trade of bloodshed, robbery, confusion and Catholic oppression
through the whole earth, as the spirit of Anabaptisme. This great and severe
sentence will be made good enough in the following Narrative by such abundance
of satisfactory Testimonies, as may convince the greatest favorers of these
men among us.

At the beginning the Anabaptists put on the visorn of a great deal more then
ordinary piety, zeal, and honesty: Their singular hypocrisy.
in prayer and meditation they were very frequent and long, their discourses
were only of matters Divine, the errors and superstitions of the time were to
them abominations; for life and conversation, they seemed to be composed of all
virtue; in their apparel poor and base; in their behavior and speech
exceeding humble and grave; for charity toward all in want, singularly
liberal (H). The errors they had, seemed to be very harmless and innocent;
they urged not only a reformation of corruptions, but the building of a Church
wholly new; they pressed that what ever had been in Popery might all be cast
away; that new Churches might be gathered consisting only of Saints. Besides
the Scripture they professed new revelations; they required all their followers
to renounce their former Baptism, and of new to be baptized; they spoke much of
patient suffering the Cross, of the unlawfulness to resist injuries, or to
punish by the sword any crime; they cried down all Wars, yea all Magistracy,
all Judicatories as unjust; they preached much for the Liberty of the People,
and against the grievous burdens wherewith the great ones did load the backs of
the poor Commons; they cried up an equality among all the sons of Adam, that
none might Lord it over his Brethren; also that all goods ought to be common
among Christians, that none might want, and none be tempted with superfluity.

The preposterous pity and charity of good men toward them was the cause of
their strength.
So long as they kept themselves within these bounds, orthodoxe Preachers were
content to deal with them lovingly by conferences and disputations, to keep the
sword of the Magistrate off them (l), and none was a more diligent solicitor of
their indemnity then Luther with all the Princes of his acquaintance (K). But
behold the fruits of this indulgence, Stock and Muncer are encouraged thereby
to go on, in the space of three years they did disperse their cockle and tares
over all Germany, the people every where fell in passionate love with their
Doctrine (L): the Masters beholding the unexpected number and zeal of their
Disciples, without further delay did bring out all their mysteries, and what
before they had delivered in corners, and in the night time to handfuls of
people apart, being then confident of their strength, they brought it out to
the world before the Sun, and boldly did begin to put all their speculations in
practice.

Their wicked Doctrines and practices.
They declared that they were Prophets sent by God to teach the world the way to
heaven, that after fasting and prayer they were inspired with revelations no
less sure then Scripture, which all were to believe and follow under the pain
of damnation: that Luther and all the orthodox Preachers were false Prophets,
worse then the Pope and his Clergy; that all Princes and Magistrates must needs
lay down their Charges, and become equal with the meanest; that all rich
persons behoved to give in their wealth, that all goods might be equally
distributed; that the time of the Saints reign upon earth was come; that
whosoever refused to enter into their society, to be rebaptized and to become
members of their Churches, were without all pity to be killed. That God had
reveal^d all this to them, and much more of this kind; that he had given them
a commission to execute presently this his will. Hereupon they did arm and
began very nimbly to rob and kill all about them as cursed Canaanites. This
Leaven did quickly run along many Provinces: many thousands, especially of the
Gentry were massacred and their houses burnt over their heads before they could
get themselves in a posture of defense. (M)

Luther perceiving the horrible and unexpected malignity of that Devil who led
this people, began at last to bestirre himself, Luther justly did stir up the
Magistrate against them.
and to paint out unto the world the abominations of that way which before he
had too much neglected; he did then exhort all Magistrates and people to defend
the Gospel, their lives and goods against these wicked hypocrites (N).
Incontinent the Princes and Cities did arm and every where run upon these
enraged furies, they recompensed their ways upon their own heads, Great numbers
of them were slain.
killing them where ever they could be found. In Suabland, Lorraine, and
Francony, there were in one Summer slain at least 50000 yeomen (O), and as some
Authors relate it, a hundred thousand (P), yea some report 150000. (Q), who
corrupted with the seditious principles of their false Teachers, made
insurrection every where against the Magistrate. At that same time Muncer
gathered together 8000 of the common people in Thuringia, against whom the
gracious Princes Joh: Frederick Elector of Saxe, and Philip of Hesse ddi march:
Muncer persuaded his followers of a most certain victory, The unhappy end of
their Author Muncer
assuring that he would intercept in his cloak all the bullets of the enemies
Cannon; but when it came to action the vanity of his promises did appear, 5000
of that misled multitude were killed on the place, the rest fled, Muncer was
taken Prisoner, and having confessed his error did suffer death, but in a
faithless, faint, and discouraged way (R).

Zuing^^us ^id oppo^^ their gathering of Churches in S^^tze^land.
This great execution upon them together with the diligence of Luther and other
Divines to inform their minds did for some time much compesce that evil
spirit and so much fright him out of all the bounds of upper Germany, that he
did never since that time stir much in these Quarters: but behold his
behavior elsewhere. Being rejected of Luther and his Disciples, he went to try
Zuinglius and his friends: unawares, and upon a sudden great numbers of
Anabaptists did arise in Zurick, Berne, Basil, and many other parts of
Suitzerland: at the beginning they dissembled the worst of their tenets, they
dealt earnestly with Zuinglius to gather out of the Churches he had reformed
new separate Congregations: many remonstrances did they make unto him against
the prophanity of the common multitude, and for the holiness that ought to be
in every Church member; they alleged a necessity for the Saints to put
themselves in new distinct Churches (S). The same things did they press upon
Oecolampadius at Basil, but when these grave men had rejected their motion, and
demonstrated the iniquity of their Schismatic way: then without more ado
having seduced multitudes by their corner and night Sermons, they did
themselves erect without any permission either of the Magistrates or Ministers,
their separate Congregations (T), and for a visible distinguishing Character of
their way they publicly anabaptized all who did enter into their Society (V).
For these insolences the Magistrate was offended and put some of them in
Prison, presently they cried out loud of persecution for conscience (X), and of
unjust condemnation before their cause was tried: hereupon many public
disputations were institute, Zuinglius and others in Zurick many days from
morning till evening did debate with them in presence of the Magistrate and all
who pleased at great length upon all their Tenets; this same did Oecolampadius
in Basil, and others in Bern, the arguments and answers with the consent of
both sides were written and published, by this means many received
satisfaction, many also remained obstinate in their error and became
tumultuous in their practices, which caused the most of them to be banished out
of these States. The reason of their banishment thence.
Unto this severity the Magistrate was forced by the danger of their
principles, and their usual walking accordingly, where fear kept them not in
order: in Christian Commonwealths they counted Magistrates unlawful, they
took their Enthusiasms and revelations for Gods express commandments, and it
was one of their Prophets ordinary revelations to cut off by the sword all
Magistrates, and whosoever opposed their way, though Father, Mother, Brother,
or dearest friend, yea so powerfully did Satan insinuate himself in their
ordinary raptures, that no man could be secure from their cruelty, as by this
example is visible.

At Saint gall in Zwitzerland in the year 1526. Feb. 8. Their intolerable
practices.
Thomas Skyker having spent the whole night with a company of Anabaptists in
their religious exercises, in the morning he was filled with an Enthusiasme,
and before his Father, Mother, and whole company, he commanded in the name of
God his germane brother Leonard Skyker to kneel before him, and having gotten
obedience thus far, his next prank was before them all to cut off his brothers
head, avowing he had an express warrant from God so to do (Y).

Many such private murders and diverse public uproars, made the Magistrate
every where to keep a severe hand over them; yet for all that could be done,
they got into their hands the Town of Munster; here the wisdom and patience of
God permitted them to act to the full, all their speculations. A Story recorded
by many, and needful to be remembered to the worlds end, for a Memento unto all
men to be very wary of an erroneous spirit, though he do appear at the first in
the habit of the greatest piety and innocence; the matter was thus:

In the year 1533. and 1534. The Tragedy of Munster.
by the labors of Bernard Rotman and some Hessian Preachers, Munster the
greatest and strongest Town of Westphalie was persuaded to cast out the Popish
corruptions; while the work of Reformation was there going on apace, the
Anabaptists came in and immixed themselves according to their custom; for this
has ever been the way of Schismatics, The ordinary custom of Heretics is not
to labor, but to spoil the labors of others.
like drones and wasps to fall upon the labors of others; they use not any
where to be the instruments of any Reformation or conversion, but when that
work by the labor of others is done, then they come in to spoil all, pressing
upon a reformed and a converted people their fancies (Z).

When the Gospel was flourishing in Munster, King Becold enters Munster.
a certain Tailor of Leyden in Holland, one John Becold did come to Town, who
at home in his own Country, had drunk in all the Anabaptistick ravery: the man
was of a quick and subtle wit, a great dissembler, insinuating himself in the
favor of the Ministers, he did propone at first only by way of scruple his
arguments against infants baptism (AA): but in the mean time in his secret
conventicles over all the City, he did instill the whole mystery of
Anabaptisme: The chief Minister Rotman did at the beginning preach zealously
against that way (BB), Some of the prime Ministers are gained to Anabaptisme.
but after that one Stapreda, a violent Anabaptist had eropen in to be his
colleague, Rotman was gained to that party, and at a public disputation
declared himself for them, notwithstanding the other Ministers did confute so
clearly the Anabaptists grounds, that the Town Senate remained satisfied, and
by that Edict commanded all the Anabaptists to depart the City (CC). The
slacknesse of the Magistrate though orthodoxe did ruin the City.
But this Statute was so slackly executed, that the most remained still in
Town, and did in their night meetings so diligently advance their cause, that a
great many more were conquered; upon which strength waxing confident they
defied their opposites, and came to a public insurrection (DD).

The Sectaries though fewer and weaker, yet by wit and industry did master
their opposites.
As yet the orthodox were the greater part, but the Schismatics were the more
witty and industrious, they managed so well their smaller strength, that they
became not only considerable, but so formidable, that their adversaries were
glad to indulge them their liberty and toleration which they had long desired
(EE); but behold the issue of that indulgence. They who of a long time had made
it their great work to cry down persecution and up toleration, when they had
obtained that desire, they did not stand there, By the stirrup of toleration
the Sectaries ascended to the saddle of Sovereignty.
but went on every day to add new members to their society, till at last
finding the great increase of their strength within the City, they did invite
by Messengers and Letters their associates abroad from all quarters to join
with them. These summons made many strangers to slock to the Town, upon whose
appearance without farther delay a public Proclamation was issued for all to
be rebaptized, or else immediately to depart the City under the pain of death
(FF). Many of the best did flee, whose houses and goods were seized upon, yet
many good people were forced to stay, for the Bishop of Munster had then
blocked up the City, whereby diverse of those who offered to get out were
killed and spoiled, and the rest were frighted from attempting any escape to
the Country.

The Anabaptists becoming absolute Masters of the Town, Being once Masters of
the City they presently changed the Government.
made it their first care to discharge all the former Magistrates, and to
substitute in their place a new Senate of their own faction (GG), over which
they did set two Consuls, Knipperdolling and Kippenburgh, two of their most
forward friends. They seized on the goods of all and killed whom they would.
About that time a certain Baker of Harleim, John Mathie did make himself a
great Prophet among them, this man one day did deliver as a revelation from
heaven, that every one should bring together all his books and papers, the
Bible only excepted, of all these he made a fair bonfire (HH). His next
command was, that every one should bring forth all his money and goods under
the pain of death, that all might be common (II): none durst be bold to
disobey, Justice was so quick and severe amongst them. One Truteling a Smith
for a merry word against the Prophets was brought forth before the people and
shot dead by the Prophet Mathies own hands (KK); after this Mathie pretending a
Commission from God went out his alone, with confidence to overthrow the whole
camp of them who besieged the City, but by the first of the Enemies Soldiers
the false Prophet was killed (LL).

For all this so strong was the delusion, The peoples minds being ensnared by
their errors, their tyranny became irremediable.
the blinded people did not open their eyes, Becold and Knipperdolling did
daily preach new visions, Becold having lien in a trance three days, when he
awakened he appeared to be dumb, but by writing Tables he signified it was the
command of God to change yet further the Government of the City, he set down
the names of twelve of his greatest confidents to be Governors and Princes over
the twelve Tribes of Israel (MM): This was no sooner proponed then executed. So
soon as the holy Prophet got his mouth opened, the first motion he makes, They
proclaimed Polygamy.
was that the Preachers would consider if it were not the will of God for the
increase of the holy seed, that every one of the Saints should have more wives:
at the first, the Preachers opposed this abomination, but thereafter by threats
and flatteries they were brought to yield. Becold began, and at one time
married three, but at once he came to the number of fifteen together (NN). The
great Prophets example was followed by many, and by all that would: many honest
Matrons were forced to marry with any of these villains who liked them. This
unheard of wickedness did so imbitter the spirits of the remainder of
ingenuous men, that they rose up in a conspiracy, and laid hold on Becold,
Knipperdolling and the rest of their false Prophets: but behold, the common
people got up in a tumult, rescued the Prophets, and killed forty nine of the
honestest Citizens for their assaying to put some end to their intolerable
misorders (OO). A faint and unsuccessefull resistance did hasten and confirm
Becolds Kingdom.


Nothing more advances the affairs of Tyrants, then a faint imprudent and
unsuccesseful resistance: Becold by this unhappy attempt of his Enemies having
confirmed his authority, suborned one of the Prophets to preach to the people,
that it was the Command of God to make Becold the King of the whole Earth,
promising that all the Kings and Potentates of the world should certainly be
subdued by his Sword, for he was the man that should rule all Nations with a
rod of Iron (PP). Becold at the hearing of these news humbled himself to the
ground, adored the truth of that prophecy, declared his information thereof by
God ten days before, but the matter concerning his own person he had hitherto
been silent, yet all now being made public by the mouth of another Prophet,
The splendor of Becolds Court.
he did submit himself to the will of God. No minute of time was delayed, the
twelve Princes were cashiered, the Catholic Monarch did choose his Chancellor,
Treasurer, Secretary, and other Officers of State and Court, a fair high throne
was set up in the Marketplace, and covered all over with cloth of gold; Becold
made for himself, being a Tailor by his Trade, very royal suits of most
gorgeous apparel of the Priests vestments, which he had robbed in the
Cathedral: a stately Crown, Scepter and Sword were prepared for him, his
Courtiers were all put in most sumptuous raiment, no greater magnificence was
to be seen at any Princes Court in the world (QQ).

Thus Becold attained the top of his ambition and lust, but the great skill was
how to keep what was gotten: for this end twenty eight Apostles were sent
abroad to preach over the world obedience to the King of Munster the new
Jerusalem; but here was the misluck, all of them but one who returned with the
tidings were killed in the places where first they offered to preach.

His barbarous cruelty and hypocrisy.
In the mean time the Town begun to be pinched with famine, one of the Kings
Wives being delated for a word of compassion upon the starving multitude, was
brought forth to the Marketplace, and by Becolds own hand had her head struck
off (RR). All the rest of his wives did sing a Psalm to God for this so
excellent an act of Justice, the King himself led all the fourteen in a dance
through the streets of the Town; it were long to recite all the acts of their
villainous hypocrisy, at last the patience of God broke out upon them.

One of the Kings Secretaries undertook to bring into the Town a supply of men
and victuals, when he was gone, His unhappy end.
his way was straight to the Enemy, he guided his Treason so cunningly, that on
a certain night he brought a party within the Town, many were put to the edge
of the sword, the King and the principal mis-leaders of the people were taken
alive; the King was brought to acknowledge the most of his Errors (SS), he
offered upon condition of his life to make all the Anabaptists in Holland,
Freezland, and England to be quiet and give over their way: but these vain
promises were not trusted, and so after some cruel torture, he and
Knipperdolling were killed, and hung up in a cage of Iron upon the highest
pinnacle of the Cathedral Steeple (TT).

That same very year 1535. Amsterdam in hazard to be a second Munster.
the Anabaptists had a mighty design upon Amsterdam, and very narrowly did
miss of their intention, to surprise that City to be a seat of as glorious a
Kingdom as had been at Munster, but God assisted the Citizens to prevent such a
mischief, albeit not without great loss, for some hundreds were killed on both
sides in these bloody uproars (VV). A woman Messiah.


All this did not teach the Anabaptists wisdom, still they did expect a new
Jerusalem, and an earthly Kingdom, their Prophets filled. the fancies of their
people with this notion more then any other. One of their women at Apezell in
Suitzerland gave her self out for the Queen of the world and Messiah for all
women, sending out her twelve she-Apostles for their conversion to her way
(XX). I read also after the death of Becold of a second King in Vtrick, who was
no less infamous for crimes then his predecessors, by open robberies he became
rich, with his own hands he killed his poor wife that he might marry her
daughter (YY). Division and schisms were the Anabaptists ruin.


However the grievous absurdities of the Anabaptists both in their doctrine and
practice, as also the evident judgments which God and man did pour upon them,
and the very great industry which all the great and heroic Divines of that
happy time of Reformation did use to reclaim them, much retarded their
progress: yet it is mavelous to consider their incredible increase in many
parts of Germany and elsewhere, till God of his mercy did divide them among
themselves, and confound their Languages: their divisions and subdivisions was
that which most of all did weaken them and stop their course.

The difference betwixt the Monasterians and Battenburgicks.
After the taking of Munster one John Battenburg a bastard of a good Family born
at Leyden, made himself head of a strong party, and pretended a Divine mission
to propagate that earthly Kingdom (ZZ), which by the fatal calamity of his
Townsman Becold, and his friends at Munster had been a little interrupted:
betwixt the followers of this Battenburg, and the remainder of the Monasterian
Anabaptists arose the first discord. Their sufferings and disappointments made
them more sober and wary then the zeal of Battenburg could approve of; for he
professed that since the Gospel preached by Becold had been rejected by the
world, the time of mercy was now expired, and nothing but wrath remained: So
that his commission from God was to kill all the world, only those who did
yield to his way, and were rebaptized, he might admit to be slaves as Israel
did the Gibeonites (AAA). Upon those grounds his followers where ever they
durst be bold, did kill all whom they met with in the fields, did rob and steal
what ever came to their hand, in Country villages broke in upon sleeping
people, pulled sundry out of their beds and drowned them in the first waters,
or hanged them upon the first trees (BBB). They of Munster did not approve of
all these practices, therefore they were condemned as coldrife lukewarm
hinderers of the Kingdom of Christ (CCC). This discord lasted for diverse years,
till the Monasterians expired, and the Battenburgicks were also rooted out as
Robbers and murderers by the sword of the Magistrate.

The second division was greater, one Melchior Hophman a Skinner or Glover in
Suabland before the Tragedy of Munster, The sect of the Hophmanists.
was a prime Leader of the Anabaptists: In Strasburg about the year 1529 he
seduced many, he leaned much upon Enthusiasms and dreams (DDD); he fancied that
Strasburg was appointed of God to be the new Jerusalem; that himself and some
others were quickly to get from heaven an extraordinary calling to an
Apostleship (EEE), that so from that Town they might preach the Gospel to all
the world, which they were assured would in a short time be subdued to Christ
by the power of the Spirit in their Ministry without any outward force (FFF).
The violent tumults of Munster, Hophman did not approve, these were the
inventions of his Scholar Mathie of Harleim which he did always mislike (GGG),
albeit whilst that Doctrine of his scholar did prosper in Munster, he durst not
much contradict it; but so soon as Munster was taken, and the chief Authors of
these violent tenets were executed, he took then the boldness openly to cry
down much of the way of the Monasterians, he preached for the office and power
of the Magistrate, and did exibilate Polygamy (HHH); these were the grounds of
the deadly feud betwixt Hophman and Battenburg, and both their followers, which
were many thousands of poor seduced souls.

These of Hophmans party did not long agree among themselves, Who were the
Mennonists.
one Menno the son of Simon a secular Priest (III) in West-freezland turning
Anabaptist, began to tax sundry things in Hophmans Doctrine: he did reject all
extraordinary and Apostolic calling (KKK), also the dreams of the Saints
Kingdom upon earth (LLL), and all Enthusiasms (MMM), but in other things did
follow the worst of the Anabaptists errors: denying the truth of Christ's
humanity, setting up Pelagianism in man's freewill, maintaining a perfect
inherent righteousness without sin, and such like conceits (NNN). A Synod for
union did divide them amongst themselves more then ever.
While the pestiferous vapor of this evil spirit was sensibly evanishing by
domestic divisions, some of the wisest of the sect found ways to draw together
the chief of all the four mentioned factions to a conference at Buckholt in
Westphalie. A great Synod of prime men from all Countries where the Anabaptists
lived did meet there; from the most places of lower Germany, from Freezland,
from Saxony, from England also some did come (OOO). Great debates were among
them, especially betwixt the Battenburgicks and the Hophmanists, the one
defending Polygamy and their use of the sword against the world, the other
oppugning both: John Mathie of Middleburg a great Doctor of the Anabaptists in
England, was the chief Champion of of the Hophmanists (PPP).

Here it was where David George, a Citizen of Delph, David Georgius labors for
union.
did first become famous, this man had been a zealous oppugner of Popery, he
had openly in the streets upbraided both the Priests and Magistrates of Delph,
in the very act of their idolatrous procession: for which bold zeal he was cast
in Prison, and had his tongue bored through, hardly escaping with his life
(QQQ); these sufferings brought to him great respect among the Protestants at
home, but thereafter turning Anabaptist he became the greatest and worst
Heretic to my mind that ever trod upon the earth. At the Synod of Buckholt he
labored exceeding much to draw his Brethren to concord; the Battenburgicks and
Hophmanists had so sharp debates about the magistrate, the earthly Kingdom of
the Saints and Polygamy, that hardly they could be kept from handy blows (RRR):
David George did mediate betwixt them, and drew it to this issue, that a
mutual toleration being granted in the points controverted, in all other
things they should hold one another for Brethren, and promote jointly the
common cause of Anabaptism (SSS). This Syncretism did not long stand, neither
did David get thanks from either side for his mediation, for all did esteem him
a colluder with both sides only for his own interests, driving a design of his
own apart, differing from them all, which then was scarce visible above the
ground, but quickly thereafter was apparent.

Diverse sects of the Anabaptists evanished.
A little after that Synod all the parties did separate more then ever one from
another as Antichristian and false believers (TTT), till the most of their
sects did evanish: the Monasterians in a short time were drowned; of the
Battenburgicks none does remain, except it be a handful in Moravia: for after
the imprisonment and execution of their Leader for his manifold robberies and
murders, his followers were altogether broken. The Hophmanists by the diligence
of Bucer and Calvin at Strasburg being convinced received satisfaction and
recanted their errors, joining themselves again to the Protestant Churches
(VVV).

David George had a great show of zeal and piety.
The Georgians for a time did flourish, their Leader David was a man very
pragmatick, of a vehement and persuasive eloquence in the acts of devotion, for
show singular, ardent and frequent in prayer (XXX), in fastings excessive,
abstaining from all meat and drink sometimes four whole days and nights together
(YYY): wonderfully confident of the absolute truth of his tenets, so
marvellously bold that he did write and professed his hope by his letters and
Books to persuade the undeniable certainty of his dictates to the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and to all the Estates of the Empire (ZZZ), especially to
the good Lantgrave of Hesse, Philip; Yet his absurdities were horrible.
also to Melancthon, to Bucer, to Alasco, and many more: yet his tenets are so
horribly absurd that Mahomet in his worst abominations was far below him, for
he taught that in the Godhead was no Trinity of Persons, but only three ways of
manifestation, one in Moses, another in Jesus, a third in himself; that his
person was as far above the person of Jesus, as Jesus was above Moses; That the
writs of the Prophets and Apostles, that the Doctrine of the Law and Gospel was
all to be laid aside (AAAA) as childish and imperfect rudiments, to be
dispelled as the twilight, by the beams of his far more perfect Doctrine. One
of the greatest perfections and singularities I mark in his Doctrine is that
which he much insists upon, the mortification of the flesh; to this he leads by
a singular method, he looses the bands of Matrimony, and all other natural and
civil relations as things old and antiquate, which did oblige only during the
time of Moses and of Jesus, but not under the clear light which his Ministry
had brought to the world; Adulteries, fornications, incests, and most
unspeakable villainies were so far from being any sins to him, that he did
recommend them to his most perfect scholars as acts of grace and mortification:
he was given over to be possessed with so beastly a spirit in the justice of
God for a recompense of his hypocrisy and blasphemous errors against the
truth of God (BBBB).

Notwithstanding of the unutterable absurdity of his way, The extraordinary
zeal of his followers.
yet this beast was confident that the whole world would submit to him, and in
a short time would put into his hands without any violence all their power and
wealth; and indeed at the beginning he got many families of good note to follow
him with incredible zeal: for all of them were willing to dispose unto him
their whole estates (CCCC), and were glad to seal his Doctrine with their
blood. In Delph when first they were put to a trial, seven and thirty most
cheerfully did offer themselves to the Executioners hands, some to be hanged,
some drowned, some burnt (DDDD). Yet lest this zeal if too much tempted should
at last succumb, the hypocritical Heretic did alter one of his principles,
and taught his scholars the lawfulness of dissimulation, permitting them for
the safety of their life to deny and abjure what ever he had taught them, and
giving them free liberty to join in the public worship with any of what ever
Religion among whom they lived (EEEE): by this means they got peace, and were
no more any where persecuted. He himself retiring from Delph to Basil, His
strange end
did live there for diverse years unto his death in great wealth and case
(FFFF), as a fugitive for the true reformed Religion; he did so perfectly
dissemble, that he had the favor and good opinion both of the Magistrates and
Ministers, without the least suspicion of any wickedness in him (GGGG); but
three years after his death all his abominations were found out: and his
diligence by Letters, by secret conferences and messengers to propagate his
mishant way with his whole strength, whereupon his bones were dug up, and
the remainder of his body burnt, as the relics of an unexpressibly scelerate
villain (HHHH).

The increase of the Mennonists.
While all the other factions of the Anabaptists did decrease, the followers of
the Priest Menno did much increase: they did reject the earthly Kingdom and
Polygamy of the Monasterians and Battenburgicks, also the revelations and
extraordinary calling of the Hophmanists, with the most of the blasphemies of
David George; against all these Menno did write with passion (IIII): But to the
point of Anabaptism and separation from all other reformed Churches to
independency, and to a number more of the Anabaptists tenets he did firmly
adhere, alluring many thousands to his way, who continue to this day
propagating their Error to many Countries.

The errors of the Mennonists.
The wickedness of that spirit which reigned in Menno, and yet rages in his
followers, notwithstanding of all their profession of great piety, of singular
modesty and extreme detestation of all the other sects of Anabaptists, is
apparent in the manifold grievous heresies and gross schisms, whereinto they
themselves have of old broken out and persevere therein to this day.

Who are pleased to read the late little accurate and learned Treatise of
Clopenburgh, may perceive that the Mennonist dippers do oppose the truth of
Christ's humane nature (KKKK), that they were Masters to Vorstius in his denial
of the omnipresence and simplicity of the Divine Essence and of the
unchangeablenesse of the Divine Decrees (LLLL): also that Arminius was their
scholar in all his errors concerning predestination, redemption, grace,
free will, and perseverance: Lastly, that Swenkfeldius, Servetus and Socinus
did learn from them not only their Anabaptism, but their denial of the
Trinity, their abnegation of the Godhead, both of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost. (MMMM).

Their schisms.
The Mennonists schisms are no less palpable then their heresies, for however
their harmony in the most of their errors be great enough, as in that
confession of faith which in the year 1624. they set out in common it appears,
wherein with many ambiguous and deceitful words they cover many of these
tenets which in other writs they expressly maintain (NNNN), yet they are not
able to cover their manifold schisms: for it has ever been their custom upon
the smallest matters to fall into so vehement discords, as have made them
excommunicate one another, and remain in separations refusing communion one to
annother unto this day.

Behold how small an occasion did bring them to no less then four irremediable
fractions (OOOO): For a light cause four late separations among them.
one of the Mennonists at Franeker in a public roping did seem to use some
couzenage in buying of an house, preventing by some sleight of hand another man
who before him had a mind to the bargain; this did so much displease some that
they excommunicated the couzener; others defended the honesty of the man and
did excommunicate them who for no cause as they conceived had put a censure
upon him; hence two sects condemning one another to this day. To reconcile
both, a third party did arise, avowing that however the man in his bargain had
used some piece of fraud, yet that it was not so gross as did deserve
excommunication. In this accommodation these mid men proceeded so far, that
they were excommunicated by both the dissenting parties, whereupon their
passion was so stirred, that they did excommunicate them both also; and lest
the number of their schisms should be too small, there arose a fourth party,
who being displeased with the frequency of their Brethrens censures, did open
the doors of their charity for all whom the rigor of others had excommunicated
and cast out; by this overlashing of their charity they did acquire from their
companions the infamous title of Hamaxarii and Borboritae, as men who were
content to take into their society Cart loads full of polluted professors
(PPPP).

We will say no more of the Anabaptists over Sea, The state of the Anabaptists
in England.
their number in England till of late was not great; and the most of these were
not English but Dutch strangers: for beside the hand of the State that ever lay
heavy upon them, the labors of their children the Separatists were always
great for their reclaiming. Notwithstanding of all the contentions of the
Separatists among themselves, yet all of them did ever join to write sharp and
large Treatises against the Anabaptists; In this Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson,
Clifton did study who should be most zealous.

Independency the cause of their increase and boldness.
Hence it was that the Anabaptists made little noise in England, till of late
the Independents have corrupted and made worse the principles of the old
Separatists, proclaiming for errors a liberty both in Church and State; under
this shelter the Anabaptists have lift up their head, and increased their
numbers, much above all other sects of the Land. Their ways as yet are not well
known, but a little time it seems will discover them, for their singular zeal
to propagate their way will not permit them long to lurk: only the Confession
of faith which the other year seven of their Congregations did put forth, Their
late confession is neither a full nor a clear declaration of their tenets.
and of late again in a second corrected Edition have set out with a bold
preface to both the Houses of Parl. may no more be taken for the measure of
their faith, then that Confession which their elder Brethren in Holland did
print not long ago in the name of all their company (QQQQ). For as the Dutch
confession did dissemble a number of the gross heresies which some of the very
subscribers in their public Writs both before and after did hold out, it is
even so with the English, for Hobson, Richardson, and others of the subscribers
have already printed diverse Errors which in that Confession do not appear.
Moreover these seven congregations cannot prescribe, and are no ways Leaders to
a great number of Anabaptistick Churches over all the Land; however I shall set
down so many of their tenets as for the time comes to my thoughts from some
little acquaintance with a few of their writs that have fallen into my hands.

The Testimonies of the first Chapter.
(A) Cassander p. 670. Guitmund Bishop of Aversa, ascribes to Berengarius
Deacon of Angiers, that among other errors he overthrew the baptism of
infants, which error notwithstanding he did not bring forth in public,
because he knew that blasphemy, as Guitmund speaks, would not be endured by the
ears of the worst of men, and he did not see any place in the holy Scriptures
for the maintenance of such an Error.

(B). Ibid. These were their words, as by Peter Abbot of Cluny they are
reported, Who believes and is baptized shall be saved, from these words of
Christ it is openly showed that none can be safe except he believe and be
baptized, that is have Christian faith and receive baptism; for it is not one
of these, but both together that saves; whence it comes to pass that infants
although they be baptized by you, yet because through age they cannot believe,
they shall not be saved.

(C) Ibid. The Valdenses do both approve and practice the baptism of infants
as agreeable to the Gospel.

(D) Sleidan p. 274. These Doctrines of the Anabaptists were impugned chiefly
by Melancthon, Justus Menius, Urbanus Regius, whose large Treatises of that
subject are extant.

(E) Ibid. p. 139. Carolostadius dissenting from Luther became very familiar
with these secret Doctors, who did fain visions and conferences with God, in
printed Pamphlets he did censure Luther and his colleagues as flatterers of the
Pope, and erring in the point of the Mass, of images, and confession of sins.

(F) Ibid. Carolostadius being put in great straits, writes a book wherein very
carefully he purges himself and demonstrates the wrong he got by these who put
him among the authors of sedition, and with the book he wrote Letters to Luther
entreating him to publish his book and to defend his innocence, whereupon
Luther publishes an Epistle, etc.

(G) Heresbachius p. 141. Their Emissaries did creep into Liege, Utrecht,
Amsterdam, and Cullen, the chief Cities of the lower Germany, any one whereof
if they had taken, all Germany had been lost, yea all Europe: the common people
every where having their eyes bent upon the success of that party. Sleidan
lib. 5. p. 117. Unto this so great and so terrible a War of the Commons
commotion in Germany, some busy Preachers did give occasion, especially Thomas
Muncer. Idem p 279. lib. 10. When the wrath of God is kindled, there is no
error so absurd but Satan can persuade it, as we may see in the Doctrine of
Mahomet; for albeit it be altogether foolish, yet having put out the light of
the word of God it got strength, and has grown to such power as we see; and if
God had not suppressed the design of Muncer, the same had befallen in Germany,
for the least sparkle by Gods permission Satan can augment to an infinite
greatness.

(H) Guy du-brez p. 4. Their show before men was exceeding beautiful, for they
had always in their mouth charity, faith, the fear of God, mortification of
the flesh, the Cross, these were the colors by which they were painted and
adorned before the eyes of the simple. Idem p. 16. They did speak of nothing
but of mortifying the old man, and of the renovation of the spirit, and of a
life wholly dedicated to God, they did contemn altogether the world and the
things thereof.

(I) Cassander p. 672. Such are more worthy of pity and instruction, then of
reproof and destruction.

(K) Sleidan lib. 5. p. 118. So long as Muncer did speak of matters of that
kind Frederick and Duke of Sax did suffer him, especially since Luther by his
Letters did intercede for that favor.

(L) Guy du-breze p. 4. Their Doctrine on a sudden did spread it self over all
the Country, and they gathered in a short time a great people after them and
rebaptized many thousands.

(M) Sleidan lib. 5. p. 118. in Suabland and Francony there was of the Commons
40000 in Arms, they routed a great part of the Nobility, a number of whose
Castles and houses they did spoil and burn.

(N) Sleidan lib. 4. p. 116. All have not the same opinion concerning the
number of the slain in this War which in one Summer was ended, they that
speak least say that 50000 were killed.

(O) Heresbachius p. 15. The War of the yeomens was infamous by the slaughter
of welnear 100000 of the Commons.

(P) Pagets Heresiography p. 39. Pontanus writes of the destruction of 150000
persons.

(R) Sleidan lib. 5. p. 124. Muncer going to dye did acknowledge his errors,
and openly professed his fault, his mind was exceedingly troubled and casten
down, so that he was not able to give account of his faith.

(S) Bulinger l. 1. p. 10. The chief of the Anabaptists did press Zuinglius
that the reformation might be carried on with greater zeal, that Peter did say
to the faithful, Deliver your selves from this untoward generation: that the
Apostles had separated themselves from the wicked, and deserted the common
Churches, that the faithful in Jerusalem did conveen by themselves apart:
wherefore a separation among us is required, to the end a pure Church may be
gathered, consisting of the true children of God, who are endued by Gods
Spirit, and ruled thereby. To them Zuinglius answers, that their separation and
division did altogether displease him, that they should never have him to go
along with that separation which they intended, for before God he could not
go.

(T) Ib. Perceiving that they could not perform their desires with Zuinglius
help, they assay another way to promote their separation, and to set up their
own separate Congregations.

(V) Ibid. They begin to cry down the baptism of infants as institute not of
God, but the Devil and Pope Nicholas: now since infants baptism is unlawful
and all our baptism null, it behooves all men to be baptized again. Zuinglius
easily perceived whence Anabaptisme had flowed, and what use they purposed to
make of it, to wit, for separation: whereupon he gravely admonished them, that
they should not make holy baptism the badge and mark of their own faction and
schism.

(X) Ibid. p. 11. Some of them being put in prison, the rest both in the City
and Country did complain heavily of violence, as if the truth were suppressed,
and innocent holy men who maintained nothing but what was contained in the word
of God, were refused hearing.

(Y) Bulinger l. 2. p. 36. In the Town of Saintgall the year 1526. Feb. 7.
Thomas and Leonard Skyker meeting at night in their Fathers house with a
multitude of their Anabaptistick companions, did spend the whole night in
Sermons, discourses, prayers, Enthusiasms, and other works of their sect: about
the Sunrising Thomas lays hold upon Leonard, commanding him in the presence of
his Parents and the whole company to kneel down upon his knees: having gotten
this far obedience, at the next bout he drew out his sword, and as it were at
the command of God did strike off his brothers head.

(Z) Bulinger l. 3. p. 88. Since the Anabaptistick spirits so singularly
illuminate must needs preach and set up Churches, how comes it that they do not
go unto the places where the Gospel yet has not been preached? only they
insinuate themselves in these places where the Gospel with great labor has
been preached and Churches reformed; only in these places where godly men are
in peace and quietness the Anabaptists come and make trouble, stirring up
their dissentions and factions; so that thereafter many, especially weak ones,
know not whither to turn themselves: But tell me I pray you, O Anabaptists,
from what Scriptures you have learned that it is lawful for you to fall upon
other men's Churches, and without any calling Divine or humane, of your own
proper accord, secretly and craftily begin to teach, to seduce and cause
trouble?

(AA) Sleidan l. 10. p. 269. John of Leyden a forward Anabaptist, when he had
familiarly insinuated himself with the preachers of the Gospel, did enquire of
them privately how they thought that infants Baptism could be defended.

(BB) Bernard Rotman did publicly exhort the people to pray that their
Religion might be kept pure and incorrupt from fantastic men, especially from
Anabaptists, who then did lurk among them: whose opinion if it should prevail,
the Estate not only of the Republique but also of Religion would be miserable.

(CC) Sleidan ibid. By a public Statute the Anabaptists were commanded to
depart the Town.

(DD) Ibid. p. 270. The Anabaptists running together into the Market place, did
cry out that all who were not rebaptized might be slain: they possessed
themselves of the Town Cannon, and offered violence to many.

(EE) Ibid. This broyl ended in a composition, whereby it was provided that
every one should go home in peace, and live quietly in his own Religion.

(FF) Lambertus Hortensius p. 17. After that in strength the Anabaptists saw
themselves equal unto their opposites, and in boldness much above them, they
took in hand a malapert design: they did run together in many parts of the
Town, and with terrible cries they frighted the people, the words of all were,
Get you hence you wicked ones if you desire not to be destroyed, for we will
presently kill all who refuse to be rebaptized.

(GG) Hortensius ibid. By this means the Anabaptists becoming Masters of the
Town, do frame the State according to their own pleasure. Sleidan l. 10. p.
271. They choose a new Senate all of their own faction.

(HH) Ibid. Thereafter the Prophet commanded that no man should keep any book
but the Bible, he commanded all other books to be brought forth and destroyed,
he said he had this commandment from God: so a great number were brought
together and all burnt with fire.

(II) Ibid. The Prophet Jo: Mathy commanded that what ever gold, silver, or
movable goods any had, they should bring it to the public under the pain of
death.

(KK) Ibid. 272. The Prophet Mathy lays hold upon the poor man, casts him down
upon the ground, and strikes him through with a spear, and thereafter shoots
him through with a musket.

(LL) Ibid. So soon as he came near the camp of the Enemy he was sticked by a
soldier.

(MM) Hortensius p. 26. He said he had a command from God to appoint twelve
Judges in Israel, who in place of the former Magistrates and Senate should have
absolute power to rule the State, he did choose out twelve of his own friends.

(NN) Guy du Breze p. 30. The great Prophet Jo: Becold of Leyden having
persuaded the lawfulness of marrying more wives together, he played his part
pretty well, for he did marry fifteen, and kept them all together.

(OO) Hortensius p. 29. One and fifty were presently cast in prison, and for
two days were cruelly put to death, some were shot at a post, others were cut
in two pieces, the rest were beheaded, Knipperdolling was executioner to them
all.

(PP) Ibid. p. 31. The Prophet Tuiscoscurerius did proclaim in the Market
place, The Lord calls thee Becold to be King, that not only thou may reign
here in Sion, but also that thou may command over the whole world, and
subject to thy Scepter all men in the whole earth.

(QQ) Ibid. p. 33. He carried upon his head a triple crown of pure gold adorned
with rich stones and jewels, about his neck he had a golden chain, in his hand
a golden globe, etc.

(RR) Ibid. p. 46. The King publicly with his own hand did kill one of his
wives, not being condemned in any Judicatory, avowing that the people ought to
rest satisfied that the King did approve his cause to God.

(SS) Sleidan l. 10. p. 283. The Hassian Divines did so dispute with Becold,
that he did grant them the most part of the things in question, and did promise
if his life might be safe, to make all the Anabaptists of Holland, England and
Freezland to be quiet and in all things obedient to the Magistrate.

(TT) Ibid. Being executed they were put every one in Iron-grates, and hung up
upon the highest Steeple of the Town.

(VV) Hortensius p. 7. By the conspiracy of the Anabaptists two very famous
Towns at one time were much endangered, Munster and Amsterdam; the one through
the default of the Governors was wracked, the other with the wisdom and
diligence of the Magistrate was preserved.

(XX) Guy du Breze p. 60. A certain woman one of your sisters at Apezel in
Suitzerland did teach and persuade a number of your brethren, that she was
Christ the Messiah of the women who did choose twelve Apostles.

(YY) Hortensius p. 74. Ten year after the taking of Munster one was taken in
Utrecht who was appointed to be King, but not yet crowned: among other of his
crimes he led aside his wife into a wood, and there struck off her head, that
thereafter the more quietly and peaceably he might continue his incest with her
daughter, but it was not long while he killed the damsel also, lest he should
be betrayed.

(ZZ) Historia Davidis Georgii p. 12. John Battenburg affirmed himself to be
sent by God to set up the Kingdom of Christ that was fallen at Munster.

(AAA) Ibid. p. 11. He did say that the grace of the Gospel had long enough
been offered, that from thenceforth all who had rejected it were to be killed
with the sword, that they who of their own accord thereafter did join
themselves to the Battenburgick sect, however they might not be received in the
number of children yet after the example of the Gibeonites, their life might be
spared and they might be taken in as servants.

(BBB) Ibid. p. 12. Whatever they found in the fields or the villages they
carried it away and destroyed it, they did creep in quietly, or broke in by
force into the houses of the adversaries, and there they killed people in their
beds, or closing the doors did burn them to death, or leading them out of
their houses did hang them upon trees.

(CCC) Battenburg did slander the Monasterians as slack, and Apostates, who
quickly were to be killed with the rest of the profane world.

(DDD) Ibid. p. 3. Hophman did lean upon the authority of Prophecies and
revelations.

(EEE) He did believe and profess that Strasburg was chosen of God, that as of
old out of Jerusalem the Gospel was propagated unto all the parts of the world,
so it should be restored again from that Town by his Ministry and the labors
of other new Apostles.

(FFF) Ibid. p. 5. He judged that no reformation was to be attempted but
according to the example of the Apostles in the day of the Pentecost.

(GGG) Ibid. He did not approve Jo: Mathies Anabaptisme, he was neither an
author nor approver of tumults, but both by word and writ he did testify his
grief therefore, and did forewarn that the end of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
would follow that way.

(HHH) Historia Davidis Georgii. p. 14. The Doctrine of the Monasterians about
Polygamy, and the corporal reign of Christ was mightily impugned by the
Hophmanists, especially by John Mathy of Middleburg who had come out of
England, and thereafter for Hophmans tenets was burnt at London.

(III) Ibid. Menno the son of Simon had lately cast away the Priestly habit in
the village Witmars near the Town of Bolswerp.

(KKK) The Mennonists did teach that no extraordinary calling of Apostolic
authority was to be expected.

(LLL) They taught also that no other estate of Christ's Kingdom upon earth was
to be expected, then such as this day did appear, to wit, a State subject to
the Cross.

(MMM) Ibid. p. 8. The Mennonists avowed that the Hophmanick expectation of an
Apostolic Spirit was fanatic, and the Monasterian hopes of restoring all
things by violence, was seditious and to be condemned.

(NNN) Vide infra cap. 2.

(OOO) Historia Davidis p. 13. Some of the wiser of the Anabaptists being vexed
with their inward divisions did labor much, and at last obtained that the
chief Doctors of all sides might meet at Buckhold a village in Westphalie for a
friendly conference upon the chief questions.

(PPP) Vide supra HHH.

(QQQ) Historia Dav. Georgii p. 16. His tongue for a punishment of his
boldness was bored through by the Hangman.

(RRR) Ibid. p. 14. So sharp was the dispute that the Monasterians were likely
to have fallen upon the Hophmanists and killed them.

(SSS) David George, a quiet man and not tumultuous, carried himself as a mid
man, assaying all things to draw the parties to some agreement, and he became
the author and writer of the friendly transaction.

(TTT) Ibid. p. 10. The Battenburgicks and Monasterians condemn their
opposites as Antichrists, on the other side the Hophmamanists and Mennonists do
condemn the former as furious and seditious robbers, with whom they refused to
eat.

(VVV) Ibid. p. 102. Martin Bucer gave not over to press them with courtesy
and arguments, while he had brought them back to the union of the Church.

(XXX) Ibid. p. 178. In prayer he was earnest and ardent. Ibid. p. 171. Diverse
were astonished with admiration at the show of his humility, chastity, and
holiness.

(YYY) Ibid. p. 18. He would not be inferior unto the Monasterians and
Battenburgicks, who sometimes for three whole days and sometimes for four
whole days did fast from meat and drink.

(ZZZ) Ib. At last he did require that the Langrave would deliver the other
Letters unto the Emperor Charles assuring that his Doctrine was not from
himself, but from God: he confidently avowed both to the Langrave and to the
rest of the Princes, that God had revealed unto him, and had fully set before
his eyes, yea put him in possession of life eternal. Ibid. p. 97. The title of
the writ which he sent to Charles the Emperor and the rest of the States was a
humble and serious admonition written by the command of the omnipotent God,
diligently to be obeyed, because it contained those things whereupon life
eternal did depend.

(AAAA) Historia Dav. p. As Moses is not disgraced when he is said to be
obscured and overcome by Jesus according to the flesh, so there is no injury or
contumely offered to Christ according to the flesh, when he is said to be
overcome or obscured by Christ according to the spirit. The Doctrine of the
Apostles was lame, childish, and ineffectuall for the full and solid
understanding of the things of God.

(BBBB) Vide infra.

(CCCC) Historia Dav. p. 111. Some noble and wealthy families did put
themselves and all their goods in the hand of this deceiver, acknowledging and
confessing him to be the lawful heir and just possessor of them all.

(DDDD) Ibid. p. 78. None of all the followers of David were found, who did not
willingly at the first interrogation offer and profess themselves Anabaptists,
for all of them were prepared for Martyrdom, as if they had been going unto a
marriage feast. Their show of holiness in their conversation, together with
their readiness and cheerfulness to suffer death did ravish many with
admiration, the men were beheaded, the women were drowned to the number of 35.
among whom there was none who did not pant with an earnest desire for death, so
far were they from acknowledging or craving pardon for any of their Errors.

(EEEE) Ibid. p. 171. He commanded both by word and writ that none of his
followers should communicate their tenets to others, because the time was
evil, in the which it behoved a wise man to keep silence, and Jacob was to put
on the garments of Esau that he might be safe from the danger of the wicked.
Bulinger l. 2. p. 43. they taught that it was free to make confession of faith,
or not, according to the times: that when great dangers did press, it was
lawful for the faithful to dissemble and be silent, for it was enough before
God if a man in his heart did stick to the truth, albeit outwardly before men
he did deny it, for men ought not for Religions cause to cast themselves open
to death and torments, for no profit does come to God by our death, therefore
for peace and quietness sake every one in the matter of Religion may conform
himself to them among whom he lives.

(FFFF) Apocalypsis Haeresiarcharum, in Davide Georgio, coming into Basil, he
did buy a house in the City, and another in the Country, he obliged many by
gifts, he was so much in alms-deeds and actions of religion, as saved him from
the least suspicion, his wealth was great and his household stuff rich.

(GGGG) Gangrena Clopenburgy p. 425. The crafty man by giving his oath to the
Magistrate, and haunting Church meetings, and doing good offices to his
neighbors, keeping a good house, his whole family going in a good fashion, he
purchased the favor not only of the people, but of those that were in place,
and did live in quietness and splendor.

(HHHH) Ibid. Three years after his death the blasphemous errors of the man
being revealed, by an act of the Senate his papers and books were burnt by the
hand of the Hangman, also his Coffin and bones were burnt to ashes.

(IIII) Historia Davidis p. 139. Menno avowed that David was to be taken for
Antichrist, the Man of sin, the Child of perdition, a false Prophet, a Robber
and a Deceiver.

(KKKK) Clopenburg p. 63. All the Mennonists agree in their denial that Christ
is the true son of Mary, and Mary the true Mother of Christ.

(LLLL) Ibid. p. 18. That gross errors of the Anabaptists is to be
considered, whereby with Socinus and Vorstius they deny the immediate
omnipresence of the Divine essence, and so, the attribute of Gods infiniteness.

(MMMM) Ibid. p. 10. The Mennonists in the mystery of the Trinity reject the
word Person. Ibid. p. 12. Their niceness about the word Person is from this,
that they do not unanimously nor constantly believe that Christ is a divine
Person different from the Fathers, begotten from eternity, before his birth of
the Virgin Mary. And p. 17, We see the orthodoxe faith of the Trinity corrupted
by the Mennonists.

(NNNN) Clopenburg in his preface, in that harmonious discord of the confession
of all the Anabaptists, I labored to take off the deceitful faird of their
Syncretisme which does consist only in the ambiguity of words.

(OOOO) Ibid. p. 132. A few years ago among the Flemish Anabaptists three new
sects were added to the former, who excommunicate one another: The occasion of
this division was Thomas Benks the Bishop of the Anabaptists at Franeker, who
at the rouping of a certain house did elude the design of a friend who first
intended to buy it: this merchandise many of the Anabaptists did approve as
honest, but others of them did not only disallow it as deceitful, but also
pronounced that deceit worthy of excommunication. Upon this occasion a rent was
made, but while these two parties are at variance there arises a third party
of mid men and neutrals, who did disallow the bargain as fraudulent, yet did
not judge that fraud so heinous as to deserve the rigorous censure of
excommunication: in the mean time these three sects howsoever unanimous in the
chief heads of their doctrine, yet they bolted out fearful excommunications
one against another, and refused all mutual communion.

(PPPP) Ibid. p. 431. the Hamaxarii and Borboritae were these Anabaptists, who
separating themselves from the old Mennonists, because of their rigidity in
censuring, received in their Communion any that were excommunicated by the
other Sects and so did heap up together all filthiness.

(QQQQ) Master Marshals Defense against Tombs p. 76. The London Anabaptists
Confession is such a one as I believe thousands of our new Anabaptists will be
far from owning, as any man may be able to say without a spirit of divination,
knowing that their usual and received doctrines do much more agree with the
Anabaptists in Germany, then with that handful who made this confession.

CHAP. II. The Tenets of the old ANABAPTISTS.
THE errors of the Anabaptists and their divisions amongst themselves are so
many, The most applauded Tenets of our modern Anabaptists, are the self-same
with what the old Anabaptists did invent.
that to set them down distinctly in any good order, is a task which I dare not
undertake: much less can I give assurance what is common to them all and what
proper to their several sects: only that I may demonstrate the same very
spirit to breath this day in the Anabaptists of Britain, which inspired their
Fathers of former times in Germany, I will remark what tenets Authors of good
credit ascribe to both; hoping that this discovery may be a means to bring many
simple wel-meaning people who are not yet plunged in the deeps of obstinacy to
a more accurate trial and greater suspicion of their ways: when they shall see
it made visible and palpable upon undeniable evidence, that their most beloved
tenets and practices which they believe to be full of truth and holiness, are
no other but the same very singularities which the known event does now
convince all who without prejudice can but read unquestionable Histories, to
have been the inventions and dictates of the false and unclean spirit which
acted and moved in Muncer, Becold, David George, and such like abominable
monsters of mankind. Their first and prime Tenet was a necessity of gathering
Churches out of Churches, and of separation from the best reformed in their
time, because of mixed communion.


The first and leading tenet of the old Anabaptists was a necessity to gather
new Churches out of these which Luther and Zuinglius and their followers had
reformed from Popery (A). It is remarkable that these men had never a stomach
to trouble themselves with any labor to make converts from Popery or
profaneness, only so soon as gracious persons had drawn any Cities or
Countries out of the kingdom of Antichrist, then they fell on and every where
did much disturb the work of the new Reformation (B).

At the beginning they dissembled the grossest of their errors, and their
intention to quarrel infants baptism: they did only press a greater measure
of holiness and mortification then was ordinary (C), in this all good men went
along with them: but when they began to teach that the Church behoved to
consist of no other members but such as were not in profession and aim alone,
but also visibly and really holy and elect, and therefore that new Churches
behoved to be gathered, and that all the old any where extant behoved to be
separate from as mixed, and so corrupted societies; then Luther and Zuinglius
did oppose themselves to this schismatic humor (D).

When they found themselves disappointed of the assistance of Luther and
Zuinglius, and all the rest of the orthodox Preachers, without more delay they
fell upon their intended work themselves alone, first by private conventicles
(E), then by preaching in the open streets they gathered and set up Churches
after their own mind (F), consisting merely of Saints (G), who did forbear
communion in religious exercises with all other Churches (H), whom they avowed
to be for the most part but worldly, carnal, and profane Gospellers (I), and
their best Preachers, especially Luther and Zuinglius, to be but Scribes and
Pharisees, false Prophets, large as evil as the Pope and his Antichristian
Priests (K).

Antipaedobaptisme became at last their greatest darling.
For the stricter engagement of the Saints and godly party their adherents, and
for the clearer distinction of them from the profane multitude of all other
Congregations, they thought meet to put upon them the mark and character of a
new Baptism, making them renounce their old as null, because received in their
infancy, and in a false Church. At the beginning this rebaptization was but a
secondary and less principal Doctrine among them, for Muncer himself was
never rebaptized, neither in his own person did he rebaptize any (L), yet
thereafter it became a more essential note of a member of their Church, and
the crying down of infants baptism came to be a most principal and distinctive
Doctrine of all in their way (M). They the authors of the prophesying and
questioning of private men in the face of the Church.


Unto their new gathered Churches of rebaptized and dipped Saints, they did
ascribe very ample privileges, for first they gave to every one of them a
power of questioning in public before the whole Congregation any part of their
Preachers Doctrine (N). Secondly, to every one of their members they gave a
power of public preaching (O).

Women preachers are from them.
This liberty they gave no less to women then men: for they had among them not
only preaching and prophesying women, but also some who took so much upon them,
as to profess themselves to be the Christ and Messiah to all of their own sex
(P).

Thirdly, Their Pastors must renounce all former ordination, and take their
full call of new, must come from the hands of their people.
to their particular Churches they gave power of electing and ordaining such of
their own Prophets whom they thought fittest to be Pastors to the rest: whoever
was not elected and ordained, whoever had not their full calling from the
people alone, and did not renounce what ever ordination they had from any
other, to them were no Pastors at all. Upon this ground among others they
refused to hear any of the Ministers of the reformed Churches, because they did
not renounce their former ordination and calling to the Ministry, that they
might take it again from the hands of their new gathered and separate
Congregations (Q). They required no letters in their Preachers.


Fourthly, in their Pastors they required no secular learning (R), yea to them
all secular learning was abominable, they did burn all books but the Bible as
impediments and hurtful instruments to the Ministry of the Gospel (S).

Fifthly, they required their illiterate Pastors to work with their own hands
for their livings (T). Merchandise or any other Calling wherein there was no
personal and handy labor to them was unlawful (V).

Sixthly, they cried down all tithes (X), The crying down of tithes, and all set
stipends is from them.
yea all set stipends for any Church Officer (Y). But it would be considered
that they did avow it was as unlawful to pay any set rent, or yearly duty to
any Landlord as a stipend to a Minister (Z).

Seventhly, Independency of congregations and the peoples power in Church
censures is their invention.
unto their single Congregations they gave a supreme and independent power to
judge in all Ecclesiastical causes; not only judicially to pronounce all
questions about their Pastors Doctrine, but also to proceed to the highest
censure of excommunication, as well against their Pastors as others when they
found cause (AA). Their excommunications of one another were so frequent and
for so light causes, The Seekers who deny all Churches are their disciples.
that sundry of them fell to the opinion and practice of those whom we call
Seekers, they served God single and alone, without the society of any Church,
finding no Churches on earth with whom they could agree (BB).

The Anabaptists usurpation upon the authority of the Church, did quickly lead
them to the same practice upon the State: as they took upon them to deprive
their Pastors, and exempt themselves from all Ecclesiastic jurisdiction of
Church Synods, so likewise they broke in pieces the yoke of all civil
subjection to Magistrates, Princes, Parliaments, or any temporal judicatories.
At first they denied the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion alone,
First they cried down the Magistrates power in matters of Religion.
asserting a liberty only for their conscience, that it might be free from the
control of all superior power; they esteemed every Law of the Magistrate in
matters of Religion to be unlawful, Next in all matters even civil.
and the smallest penalty to be a Mosaicall compulsion of the conscience, and a
true persecution (CC). But forthwith they went on to deny the Magistrates power
absolutely in all things whether Ecclesiastic or civil, crying down his very
calling and office, how well so ever regulate, as an unjust tyranny. Together
with the Magistrate they condemn all Judicatories, all wars, Yet they took to
themselves an absolute civil power, first over all them in their own Churches.
all defense, all oaths (DD).

For all this they permitted not that sword which they had stricken out of the
hand of others to ly long upon the ground, but immediately they plucked it up
themselves. At first they exercised their usurped Magistracy only upon the
persons within their own Congregations, judging all their causes as well Civil
as Ecclesiastic, proceeding herein to capital sentences and executions as
they found the crimes of their members to require (EE). Next over all Princes
and people in the whole world.


This exercise of justice was so agreeable to their humor, that quickly they
thought meet to extend it much beyond the limits of their own Congregations,
they did anon proclaim their right not only to deny but to take away with their
sword all the Princes and Magistrates of the earth as Tyrants (FF). And because
these few persons who were Magistrates had not blood enough to quench the
thirst of that cruel spirit which led them, they went one step further,
proclaiming a Commission they had from heaven to kill not only all the
Magistrates, but also all the wicked people of the whole earth (GG): And how
many Nations and Languages came within this compass you may judge by the
narrow circle within which they enclosed all the godly; no more were Saints and
to be saved, then joined to their Churches and received their Anabaptisme, all
the rest to them were wicked and to be cut off (HH). The were strong
millenaries.


To this very dangerous practice they were led by another principle, Muncer
among his other Enthusiasms did bring forth to his followers the dream of
Christ's visible and ovtward Kingdom upon earth (II), confirming it by the same
Scriptures which our late Chiliasts bring for the same fancy, albeit a little
refined. Upon this ground he built many of his grossest practices, for he gave
out that then the time of that kingdom was come (KK): that the Saints, the
members of the Anabaptistick Churches were the members thereof; that it was the
will of God they should take and kill all who were opposite thereto, that they
had a just right to enter in possession of the spoil of Christ's Enemies, and to
enjoy all their lands and goods as the Israelites did those of the cursed
Canaanites (LL). They made adulteries and murders lawful.


To these dreams of Muncer, John Becold and his fellow Prophets at Munster made
some Additions; That in this visible kingdom there behoved to be a King over
the Saints (MM); That this King was to rule according to the revelations of the
Spirit; That all disobedience to his voice was to be vindicate by present death
(NN). Among the rest of King Becolds commands this was one, That the Polygamy
of the old Testament should be renewed, that every man might marry so many
wives as he pleased (OO): Also the Law of Divorce was brought back, giving
leave to a man upon his mere will without any fault alleged, and without the
cognizance of any Judge to put away his wife (PP); yea to kill any of his
wives, whether publicly, as himself did in the open Market place (QQ), or
privately, as their next King did in a wood of Freezland (RR).

This also was a Law of that Kingdom, Robberies also.
that beside the falling upon all the goods of all the wicked world as a most
lawful spoil, there behoved to be a liberty to make use of all that belonged
to any of the Saints; That all things among them behoved to be common (SS), yet
so that the King and his Courtiers might lawfully live in plenty, while all the
other Saints in that their new Jerusalem were starving with excessive penury
(TT).

It is visible whither Satan intends to lead proud hypocrites; Their hypocrisy
ended in the open practice of crimes extremely contrary to their professions.
these men who in their own eyes were so holy Saints as they behoved in the
tenderness of their conscience to separate from the best reformed Churches,
these men who talked of nothing but mortification of the flesh, who counted it
unlawful to defend their life by the sword, or to exercise the meanest
Magistracy, or to have any propriety in the smallest portion of goods, or to
know their own wives after they were conceived (VV); in a short time they came
to preach and practice as very lawful and warrantable, to make themselves
absolute Kings and Monarchs of the whole earth, to live and die in as many
adulteries and incests as they pleased, in as great plenty of wealth as by any
secret theft or open robbery they were able to catch.

Their abominable unclearnesse.
It could hardly be imagined that the Devil himself had been able to lead any
reasonable creatures into so grievous errors, did we not know to how much
grosser these same horrible hypocrites who upon the profession of their own
holiness refused communion with all other men, had been led away by that evil
spirit; diverse of them not being content with the adulteries of Polygamy, have
loosed the bonds of all matrimony, yea of all natural relations (XX); telling
us, as in the former Chapter was remarked, that among the Saints there ought to
be no difference of husband and wife, Father and daughter, brother and sister,
that such differences were only for imperfect worldlings: So soon as a woman
turned Anabaptist, they made her company with her own husband unlawful, but
with all men of her own Religion lawful upon diverse wicked grounds ( XX 2).
Farther, that the shame which nature has imprinted in the heart of the most
barbarous Pagans to cover their nakedness must be cast away (YY), and
thereafter that all kind of incestuous commixtions are not only lawful, but
also that they are the very acts of holiness and mortification (ZZ). These be
the profound mysteries which the Anabaptists have brought into the world, this
is the fruit of their quatriduall fastings, of their extatick prayers, of their
heavenly raptures and revelations.

They deny both old and new Testament
These might have seemed the very quintessence of all imaginable absurdities, if
the enemy of all truth had not given us in the same miserable hypocrites a
further experiment of his skill in seducing: they tell us therefore yet of
rarer novelties, of new more excellent lights which they have brought out of
heaven (AAA). Having cast away first the old Testament as removed by the
Gospel, and then the Gospel it self as a shadow, put away by the greater light
of their new Prophets (BBB); these impediments of holy Scripture being fully
removed, the new perfect Doctrine which they bring us is first that there is
not any created spirit; They deny angels, and devils, and souls.
that Angels and Devils are not substances, but mere qualities (CCC); that the
spirits of men are but terrestrial vapor, like the life of beasts perishing
with the body (DDD). They deny heaven and hell, and eternal life.


Secondly, that there is no such thing as heaven or hell, as life or death
eternal (EEE), that all the resurrection and glory to be expected are in this
life (FFF).

Thirdly, They cast away all the ordinances of God.
that the greatest happiness possible is to cast away and give over all such
services as the Scripture prescribes, to put away Baptism, the Lords Supper,
and Preaching of the word, (GGG), to follow the directions of the new great
Prophet David George.

Fourthly, that this David George was the only spiritual Christ, David George
to them was spiritual Christ much more excellent then Christ crucified.
that Jesus and his Apostles and all their Doctrine were but carnal (HHH);
that David George was to judge the world (III); that the irremissible
transgression was only a wrong against him; that whoever would maintain Jesus
Christ to be equal with him, or the Gospel of the Apostles to be like unto his
Doctrine, did sin against the holy Ghost and was certainly damned (KKK). The
absurdities of the worst Heretics of old, the calumnies invented by Pagans
against the ancient Christians were nothing so horrible, though all had been
true, as these Doctrines and practices whereof the unquestionable testimonies
of grave Writers make many of the old Anabaptists most certainly guilty.

But that which herein I most admire is, Many people were ready to seal with
their blood all these abominations.
that ever poor people could be brought to believe so firmly the former
absurdities as to suffer most willingly all extremities and exceeding
cheerfully to offer their very life for the worst of them (LLL); so long as
their Master David did require such seals and testimonies to his Doctrine.
Thereafter indeed he changed that principle of suffering for the truth, and
permitted his followers not only to dissemble their own Religion, but also to
join without any scruple in any profession, in any religious exercise of any
people among whom they lived: for he taught them that God was content with the
heart alone, and gave liberty for all men to employ their body and the whole
outward man in the service of the falsest Religion, rather then he should
suffer the smallest inconvenience. The monster David George did live and die in
plenty and peace.


The other object of my admiration is, the infinite patience of God who
suffered the Father of such monsters to lead his life in ease and security, to
go on in peace and plenty with a great show both of Religion and virtue, and
the good opinion of his neighbors to his old age and dying day (MMM). Such
snares does the Lord in his wisdom rain down on the wicked world, that they
who never loved the truth may be entangled irrecoverably in the bonds of error.

The best of the Anabaptists have very gross errors.
I grant many of the old Anabaptists were far from embracing diverse of the
forementioned abominations, yet it cannot be denied but the best of them did
cast open their heart to more foul errors, then any Protestant Church could
ever allow of; Take me the Mennonists themselves (the ill best of all who have
carried the name of Anabaptists) although they anathematize the Georgian
Heresy, yet they approve so far of the Monasterians that they do much excuse
all their wicked practices, and put no doubt of their Saintship and acceptance
with God, notwithstanding of all the crimes which the world charges upon them
(NNN).

The Mennonists deny original sin.
Generally they deny original sin, for all of them dispute so passionately
against the baptism of infants, that many before they be aware do drive
themselves into the gulf of Pelagianisme, denying all original corruption, and
making infants without all iniquity, that so to them baptism may be in vain;
for to what purpose is washing to those who are not defiled (OOO)?

In the points of election, redemption, grace free will, perseverance,
justification, perfection they are groster then either the Arminians or Jesuits.
From hence they are carried not only to the possibility, but the facility of
fulfilling all Gods Commandments, avowing that among them diverse men become
perfect without all sin, who ought not to crave from God a remission of any
transgression, because there is none (PPP): this brings on justification by
inherent righteousness (QQQ): Also the Doctrine of freewill, of the great
power of nature without special grace to act much toward salvation, and of
the absolute power of the will to reject the most efficacious grace, and to
apostatize totally and finally from all grace received (RRR); being come this
length they step easily over to the universality of Christ's redemption (SSS),
and so to the intention of God to save all and every one without any previous,
eternal, immutable Decree of election or reprobation (TTT). In all these
conceits of Pelagius, the most sober of the old English Anabaptists were much
grosser then the absurdest either of the Jesuits or Arminians, as may be seen
in the late Tractates of Robinson and Ainsworth against them.

They are yet more absurd.
This Pelagianism brings them on to the late Atheism of Vorstius, and the
madness of Manes against the Divine essence and nature: also to the old and
late Antitrinitarian Heresy of Photinus, Arius, Socinus, Swenckfeldius and
others, against the three Persons of the Godhead, against both the natures of
Christ and his Priestly Office.

They make God to be of a mutable nature, They deny the omnipresence of God.
and so not of an absolute simplicity, but to have some composition, yea
something of a body also: in his essence not to be infinite nor omnipresent
(VVV).

For the three Persons, They deny the Trinity,
they deny the truth of Christ's Divinity (XXX), and all the subsistence of the
holy Ghost (YYY). As for the price of Christ's death, they count it not of an
infinite value, nor his blood, being but of a mere creature, to be properly
satisfactory to the Divine Justice (ZZZ): They make him a Savior not by way of
any proper redemption, And the truth of Christ's humanity.
but by the example of his holiness and the impetration of his prayers.
Neither do they permit him to enjoy without injury his humane nature: they deny
that he took any flesh of the Virgin Mary, but they make his body to be created
without all consanguinity with the first Adam, denying really that he was
either the seed of Abraham, or the son of David, or the son of Mary (AAAA).
They refuse all consequences from Scripture.


When in their debates against the baptism of infants they are straited with
consequences from the circumcision of infants, and the promises of the Covenant
made with Abraham, and his children; many of them do run out so far as to deny
all scripturall consequences: refusing with the Jesuit Veron in their
reasonings all deductions though never so necessary and clear, requiring for
every thing they will admit, express and syllabicall Scriptures (BBBB). They
refuse reasoning from the old Testament.


When they find that this poor shift does not the deed, they arise a little
higher, and deny that any thing from circumcision can conclude us, the Books of
the old Testament being now cut off from being any more a rule of faith or
manners to Christians (CCCC): I do not speak of those who proceed to reject all
Scripture, and in place both of Law and Gospel set up their own dreams and
revelations for divine and infallible verities. The Covenant with Abraham they
make carnal.


Upon the same argument they come to two other absurdities, for first they
change the nature of the new Covenant of grace with Abraham and his seed,
making all the promises thereof to be of things carnal and temporal (DDDD);
and when this shift is not sufficient to elude our arguments, they come to a
second, They exclude all infants from the covenant of grace.
whereby they exclude all infants from the Covenant of grace, and any interest
in Christ or his promises: making no difference between the children of Pagans
and Christians of godly and ungodly, taking from both all the ordinances and
means of salvation, and yet putting both in the state of salvation without
Christ, by virtue of their own natural inherent original righteousness.

The Testimonies of the second Chapter.
(A) Bullinger p. 17. At the first they aimed chiefly at separation, to have a
separate Church of their own: wherefore who ever assented unto that separation
and who did leave the Popish, the Protestant and all other Churches, that they
might live in the new society of the Anabaptists, which they did call the true
and acceptable Christian Church, those the chief leaders of the Sect did
receive into their Church by Anabaptisme in sign of their separation.

(B) Vide supra Cap. 1. Also Clopenburgs Preface p. 5. However after the
trouble of Munster, the Anabaptists have casten away corporal arms, and by
them troubles not Commonwealths, yet they do not permit the purer reformed
Churches to be builded without daily combats.

(C) Bullinger lib. 1. p. 11. In their separate Congregations they did cry
mightily against pride, against gluttony and drunkenness, blasphemy and other
crimes: they led a life in appearance spiritual, they sighed often and did not
laugh; in reproofs they were vehement, they spoke excellently; by this means
they purchased admiration and authority to themselves among simple and pious
people who did speak thus. Let other men say of the Anabaptists what they
please, I do see nothing in them but gravity, I do hear nothing but that we
should not swear nor do wrong to any, but live piously and soberly: so I see no
evil in them. Ibid. p. 52. The most part of the Anabaptists and at the
beginning these of Munster themselves were lowly and humble, far from all
greatness and splendor: for they did inveigh against all pride and
magnificence, also against the power and sword of the Magistrate, riches and
honor were to them dross and dung; they did speak nothing but of
mortification of the old man, and renewing of the spirit, of a life separate
and dedicated to God, the world and all things therein they did altogether
contemn.

(D) Vide supra Cap. 1. Also Hortensius p. 13. The Anabaptists avowed that in
their Church all were Saints and now wicked. Also Sleidan lib. 10. p. 274. they
say that none must be tolerate in the Church who is not truly a good Christian.

(E) Sleidan l. 10. p. 269. At first the Anabaptists did do their business
privately and secretly in the City, none was admitted to their meetings who was
not of their sect, neither did their Leaders profess openly their opinions but
taught them in the night, when others were sleeping then were they about their
mysteries.

(F) Bullinger l. 1. p. 11. They began boldly to plead their cause, they
professed openly and distinctly that they would maintain their cause not only
by words but by their blood, so every where in the City they began boldly to
rebaptize.

(G) Vide supra Cap. 1. also Bullinger p. 26. The fourth sect of the
Anabaptists consists of the holy Brethren who are pure and free from sin, with
whom all the Anabaptists in general do some way partake, they say that the
Church is holy and without blemish, that they are members of the Church who
abide in Christ, and are pure without sin; some of this sect do omit that
Petition of the Lords prayer, Forgive us our sins, conceiving themselves to be
pure and to have no more need of remission of sins. ibid. p. 2. All that are of
their Church are to be accounted elect and the children of God, and all who
follow not their way are to be accounted wicked.

(H) Vide supra.

(I) Bullinger p. 18. They esteem themselves the only true Church which is
accepted by Christ, they teach that whoever by Anabaptism is received into
their Church must have no communion with any Protestant Church or with any
other Christians whosoever: because the Protestant Churches are no more true
Churches then the Popish, which they prove thus. In their Churches there is
evident and clear amendment of life, but in these Churches that are called
Protestant, though something be preached out of the Gospel, yet no man's life is
amended, and the whole people remain impenitent and subject to sins and
vices, now it is not lawful to have any communion with so impure a people.

(K) Ibid. They say that since the times of Christ and his Apostles the word of
God has not been purely preached, but that now they were two true Prophets
arisen by whom the truth was to be restored to the world, John Becold of Leyden
King of the new Jerusalem, and David George of Delph; that there were also two
wicked and false Prophets, the Pope of Rome, and Luther, who was many ways more
pestiferous then (...) Pope.

(L) Bullinger p. 2. At that time Muncer himself as they say did not rebaptize,
his Disciples began to rebaptize before himself, he himself was first
rebaptized with his own blood.

(N) Bullinger p. 109. We are compelled say they to stand beside and hold our
peace whether the Preacher speak right or wrong, thus the Doctrine depends not
from Christ and his Spirit; if any man come into a Protestant Church and hear
but one speak this is so far contrary to Paul's Doctrine, that such a company
may not be taken for a true and spiritual Church.

(O) Ib. p. 108. They say that Paul by the Spirit of God has ordained that all
Christians, not Ministers alone should prophecy, that is, preach.

(P) Vide supra. ^lso Clopenburg. p. 342. If we behold their practice they do
not exclude women, which may be seen in the Books set out by their Churches:
for example, in that Book they published the year 1570. this Treatise say they
is published by the Brethren and Sisters of the Church of Ziricksea who have
not meddled with the controversy, for the procuring of love, peace, and concord
among all who are so marvellously divided, whether Fleimes, or Frizons, or
neutrals.

(Q) Bullinger p. 87. The Anabaptists in defense of their separation allege
against the persons of the Ministers, that they are not lawfully called, the
calling of their own Ministers they count lawful, because they are called and
sent by their own Churches, but our Ministers calling they count unlawful
because by the Magistrate, so they say that themselves are sent of God, but
that we are sent by men, that is, by the world.

(R) Hortensius p. 12. In so great a multitude of men it was thought there was
not so much as one who had any letters, the most part could neither read nor
write. Ibid. p. 31. Let the Preachers lay down their offices and set in their
places twelve simple men that never learned any letters, command them to recite
unto my people my word, thereafter trusting in my spirit, let them expone my
word without the help or Lecture of any other writs.

(S) Vide supra.

(T) Bullinger p. 103. They say that the Ministers are idle, this is common to
them with many others who think that there is no labor but that which is done
with the hands by a spade, axe, or such instruments. Ibid. p. 18. They
challenge the Ministers that they work not, but are servants to their body.

(V) Heresbachius p. 43. Let none be exercised in Merchandise or Trade.

(X) Bullinger p. 39. Since the Magistrate has decreed that the tithes and
yearly rents are justly due, such debts by Divine right ought to be paid
sincerely and honestly: some of the Anabaptists convinced by clear testimonies
of Scripture grant that every one who is obliged ought to pay tithes, yearly
rent, and other debts.

(Y) Bullinger p. 108. They profess openly that Preachers who take any stipend
are not the true Ministers of God, nor can teach the truth.

(Z) Heresbachius p. 42. The fourth of King Becolds Laws was that no man should
either crave or pay any yearly rent.

(AA) Clopenburg p. 341. They do believe that Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction is in
the body of the whole Church, they do exagitate and scorn the practice of our
Churches as Judaicall, and they will have gone to be excluded from the Church
in judging, but only the sinner that is to be judged. This is Anabaptistick
Anarchy, whereby they command all persons, even women not excluded, to sit in
the seat of the Ecclesiastic Judicatory; except only the sinner who is to be
judged.

(BB) Historia Davidis Georgii p. 109. Some of the Hophmanists d^d separate
themselves from the communion of all Churches, and lived themselves alone as
neutrals.

(CC) Bullinger p. 19. That Magistrates ought not to meddle with any causes of
Religion or faith, that no man ought to be compelled by force or authority unto
the faith. Ibid. p. 242. They stir up the Magistrate that in cases that
belong to the soul they may compel men by their Laws and Edicts to come unto
Ecclesiastic meetings; it cannot be denied but by this means faith and the
conscience are forced, Christian liberty is taken away and a Mosaic compulsion
is put in its place.

(DD) Bullinger p. 18. That a Christian ought not to be a Magistrate, that
Christians ought not to resist them that offer violence, and so have no use of
any Judicatories. Hortensius p. 13. All Magistrates are to be put down, it is
necessary to oppose Magistracy with all our might.

(EE) Hortensius p. 13. The Anabaptists increasing much every where did
exercise Jurisdiction among themselves in private houses, they punished their
own members even unto death.

(FF) Hortensius p 13. Though the Apostles had not the right of the sword, yet
unto their followers now, God has given power to take away the profane
Magistrate by the sword as they thought meet. Bullinger p. 3. They taught that
God had revealed to them that all Princes and Nobles were to be cast down, that
God had given to them the sword of Gedeon against all Tyrants to set at liberty
the people of God, and to set up the new Kingdom of Christ upon earth.

(GG) Historia Davidis Georgii p. 11. The Battenburgicks avowed that peace and
grace was removed from the earth after the time that the gracious offer made by
Becold was refused, henceforth the refusers were to be killed with the sword.

(HH) Bullinger p. 2. all of their society were to be counted elect and
children of God, all others were to be counted wicked and to be killed.

(III) Hortensius p. 13. Before the last day Christ was to have a temporal
Kingdom upon the earth, here only the Saints should bear rule, all Princes
being cut off by the sword, and that now this Kingdom was begun in the
Anabaptists. Guy du Brez p. 5. They preached their dreams as divine oracles, to
wit, that there should come a new world wherein dwelled righteousness, and for
this cause it was necessary to root out of the earth all the wicked, with all
Princes and infidel Magistrates, all that was not of their sect and faction
they called infidels.

(KK) Historia Davidis p. 9. The Monasterians did affirm that the time wherein
the Saints were to be afflicted was come to an end, that the time of the
Harvest was now come wherein God would revenge and deliver his people, and put
their enemies under their feet.

(LL) Hortensius p. 14. To spoil the Temples they counted it lawful, saying,
that the Jews of old had done the like, when under the command of Moses they
went away l^aden with the spoils of the Egyptians. Also Bullinger p. 61. At
this time some lofty spirits promise great things to themselves before the last
day, as the Jews of old did abuse the fair promises of the Prophets, all which
they understood carnally and according to the letter.

(MM) Hortensius p. 31. O Becold, the Father gives to thee the sword, and calls
thee to be King, that thou may reign in Sion, etc.

(NN) Hortensius p. 30. The King said that he was appointed of God to be King
to take ^^ay (...) men by the sword, that he was to go throrow the world, and
to execute with death all that did not believe.

(OO) Hortensius p. 37. Commonly the men had five wives, many six, some seven
or eight.

(PP) Sleidan l. 10. p. 274. The complaints that were brought to the King for
the most part concerned Divorces, these were most frequent, so that some who
had lived together till old age, were put asunder.

(QQ) Vide supra Cap. 1.

(RR) Vide supra Cap. 1.

(SS) Heresbachius p. 43. Let no man have any proper goods, but let all be
brought and laid down at the feet of the Preachers, after the example of the
ancient Christians.

(TT) Heresbachius p. 152. The Famine in Munster was equal to that of
Jerusalem, for the Soldiers searching the houses for prey, did find the legs
and arms of the young children salted for food, yet the King, and Rotman, and
Knipperdolling, had good enough provision.

(VV) Hortensius p. 37. Their Law was to accompany with their wives while they
had conceived.

(XX) Historia Davidis p. 28. These Saints were exempted from all laws of
Matrimony, of blood and affinity: the difference of Father, Mother, Brother,
Sister among them does cease and evanish.

(XX 2) Bullinger p. 37. They did persuade the women that they did sin
grievously if they kept company with their own husbands who remained Pagans and
were not yet rebaptized, but that they sinned not in keeping company with any
Anabaptists, because among all them was a spiritual matrimony.

(YY) Historia Davidis Georgii p. 43. Shame was contracted through sin, and now
is to be laid aside, so by faith in Christ all that shame for the secrets of
nature is to be cast away.

(ZZ) Ibid. p. 28, 29. The words are so abominable that I cannot translate them.

(AAA) Historia Davidis p. 36. David Georgius went to glory of his mysteries as
if they had never entered in the mind either of men or Angels, but had been
reserved to the last times: that with their new light the old Doctrines of the
Prophets and the Apostles were to be darkened, as the stars are put out by the
brightness of the rising Sun.

(BBB) Vide supra AAA.

(CCC) Historia Dav. p. 52. The tenet of the Catholic Church concerning Angels
and Devils, that they are invisible spirits created of God in their own
distinct substances separate from men, is nugatorious: that the Angels are only
qualities and motions which God inspires into men, that the Devils are nothing
but only boggles in the night to terrify men arising from men's imaginations.

(DDD) Bullinger as I remember ascribes this to some of the Anabaptists.

(EEE) Historia Dav. p. 52. That heaven and hell, Christ's last coming and
Judgment, life eternal, etc. are no where to be expected, but within a man.
Ibid. p. 51. The place of eternal happiness shall not be above us in the
heaven, but upon the earth. Ibid. p. 50. In the last judgment there shall be
no other change in the heaven and in the earth then we see daily; what the
Apostle speaks of such a change, is to be referred to the manners and minds of
men, not unto the outward elements.

(FFF) Historia Dav. p. 50. The second coming of Christ shall not be seen with
bodily eyes, but spiritually it is even now performed within in the mind.

(GGG) Historia Dav. p. 44. In this time of perfection all outward worship, all
rites and Sacraments must cease and evanish.

(HHH) Historia Dav. p. 43. Many of these things were exhibit in Christ Jesus
and his Apostolic Church, but only according to the letter and the body, not
according to the spirit who at that time was not exhibit.

(III) Apocalypsis in Davide Georgio. He avowed that he had absolute authority
to condemn and to quicken, and that in the last day he was to judge the twelve
Tribes of Israel.

(KKK) Historia Dav. p. 45. Whosoever will reject so clear a light of truth, so
powerfully manifesting it self in the ministry of David George, by adhering
too much unto the imperfect state of the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, shall
sin as much as they of old who preferred Abraham to Christ, and the Law to the
Gospel, and properly this is the sin against the holy Ghost, which could not be
committed in former ages, when this so great light was not yet revealed.

(LLL) Vide supra.

(MMM) Vide supra.

(NNN) Heresbachius Preface. Menno in his Book of fundamentalls speaking of the
Anabaptists of Munster, I doubt not, says he, but these our beloved Brethren,
who lately did sin a little against God by defending their faith with Arms, are
in the favor of God.

(OOO) Clopenburg p. 123. The Anabaptists contradict this truth, and do ascribe
unto infants in their first birth without any regeneration the purity of
innocence wherein they do please their Creator; affirming also that only by
actual sin men become sinners. p. 131. They say that Adam did obtain not
only to himself but to his whole posterity propitiation and remission of sins,
so that none of Adams posterity is born in sin or guiltiness of eternal
death, but all men are born partakers of the grace of God in Christ. Also
Bullinger p. 26. These men did not acknowledge original sin and affirmed that
infants were born pure from sin.

(PPP) Vide supra.

(QQQ) Bullinger p. 117. In the great article of justification by faith and not
by works, the Anabaptists do grossly err. Also Clopenburg p, 158. The
Anabaptists say that in the matter of justification faith and works are so
strictly joined that the one without the other is nothing; so that good works
are necessary means of obtaining justification.

(RRR) Clopenburg p. 124. Concerning free will the Anabaptists teach that Adam
in the state of corruption was not so evil, but that he was able by the use of
reason left to him by God, to hear and to receive the promise of redemption
offered to him in Christ; yea, that Adam did really make use of that liberty
and power for the use of his restitution; that the posterity of Adam did keep
that same free will which is placed in the use of reason, not only for the
discerning, but for the free choosing of good and evil. Ibid. p. 198. Unto
this Tenet another Heterodoxy is conjoined concerning the uncertainty of the
Saints perseverance: for the Anabaptists affirm plainly, that the truly
faithful children of God may become the unfaithful children of the Devil,
and lose their salvation.

(SSS) Clopenburg p. 131. cited before.

(TTT) Ibid. p. 155. They do destroy the eternal election of single persons to
salvation, which they say is only done when the faithful embrace the benefits
of Christ, and do faithfully keep them; that there is no eternal election or
decree to give salvation unto certain persons, but that which is made with
consideration of faith, and chiefly of perseverance in faith.

(VVV) Clopenburg p. 18. cited before. Ibid. p. 37. They deny the immutable
immortal Deity of Christ.

(XXX) Clopenburg p. 56. Their Tenet here in blasphemous, that while Christ did
die in the flesh the very Deity of Christ did suffer end die.

(YYY) Clopenburg p. 10. cited before. Also p. 12. cited before, Also
Bullinger. p. 62. Among the abominable Anabaptists, Michael Servetus has the
first place, his blasphemies against the holy Trinity were abominable.

(ZZZ) Clopenburg p. 145. I will not in this place refute their latent
Socinianisme, whereby they make Christ only an exemplary Savior.

(AAAA) Clopenburg p. 83. cited before.

(BBBB) Bullinger l. 3. p. 119. They say that they will hear the word of God,
but the interpretation and the words of the Ministers upon it they cannot take
for the word of God, neither will they hear or receive it.

(CCCC) Bullinger p. 74. Among the abominable. Anabaptists we place these who
reject the old Testament, and who receive me the Testimonies that are brought
thence for the clearing and confirming of the Doctrines of our Christian faith,
or for the refuting of Errors, saying that the old Testament is now abrogate.

(DDDD) Clopenburg p. 235. The Anabaptists covered that the Covenant made with
Abraham sealed by Circumcision does not belong any thing to the Church in the
new Testament, for they make the Covenant it self as carnal as circumcision.

CHAP. III. The modern Tenets of the Anabaptists in ENGLAND.
WHAT is set down in the former Chapters of the old Anabaptists over Sea, The
spirit of Anabaptisme clearly devilish
was in relation to their present offspring in England: with them chiefly it
is that I intend to deal, desiring if possible to draw some of them from their
evil way, or at least to hold off others who yet are free, from running too
rashly into their error, before they have a little considered it. I hope I
have made it so clear that no ingenuous knowing reader will hereafter call it
in question, that the spirit which was the author of Anabaptisme in Germany,
and carried on all its principal leaders along their whole course, could be no
better Angel then Satan, who under the color of a more then ordinary zeal to
the smallest truths, and of a vehement affection to the highest degrees of all
holiness, was palpably found to set on foot the most gross and damnable
Errors, the most abominable obscenities, cruelties, robberies, that ever the
Sun from its first creation to this day did shine upon in any part of the earth.

How much of his nature that spirit has laid down since his late appearance in
England, it cannot yet with confidence be pronounced: He was an Angel of light
in Germany for a longer time then yet he has dwelt among us in any considerable
visibility; for till of late he did but lurk it this Land in the habit of an
Incognito. Since the time he began to appear in public there is nothing which
he would more gladly disclaim then these crimes, and that face wherewith he did
walk over Sea, when he took the boldness to lay aside his mask, and to show
his true visage as it was without any disguise.

Tell the English Anabaptists now of the Doctrine and practices of their
fathers in Munster and elsewhere, The fair profession of many English
Anabaptists not to be trusted.
they are ready with passion to deny all affinity all consanguinity with such
monstrous Heretics: They will be nothing less then Anabaptists, the furthest
they will profess to maintain is but a simple Antipaedobaptisme. How ever this
will be found a very gross and dangerous error, yet we wish that all our
questions with that generation of men were come to so narrow an issue; we are
loath to force upon any man the errors which he is willing to disallow; the
fewer the differences be, a full agreeance is the more easy and near, the
multiplication of controversies makes peace the more difficult and desperate:
yet for many reasons I conceive it very convenient, in all solid debates to
have before the eye all the real and material points in controversy, without
the concealment of any.

I did ever esteem the right understanding of the parties true and full sense
worth the half of the whole dispute. I hope therefore it will not be evil
taken that I lay together what I find lately printed here by them who carry
the name of Anabaptists, or what by grave and religious Divines is in print
laid upon them, and is not as yet by any rational answer so far as I know
taken off.

What errors may be charged upon all, what only upon some of them.
It is true, it fares with them as with diverse of their name over Sea, all of
them are not of one mind, the opinions of some may not be charged upon all:
yet it seems but justice to impute to them all such Tenets of their fellows as
they are not pleased to refuse, when they are told over and over publicly in
print, that such is the Doctrine of some prime members of their Congregation,
and after those public admonitions they are neither pleased to call the men to
an account, nor to declare against the Doctrine. What other construction can
the world make of this connivence and silence, but that either they join all in
the challenged errors, or else that they count them of so small an importance
that no man needs to contradict them, but that safely they may be entertained
by any of their Church who are pleased to embrace them? Such indeed has been
the ingenuity of the Transmarin Anabaptists to this day, that what ever they
conceived to be wrong in any of their Brethren, they were ever as ready to
disclaim and contradict it, as if it had come from their greatest adversaries.
It were much to be wished that such honest simplicity were so familiar to their
brethren among us this day.

The Confession of the seven Churches, is a very imperfect ambiguous
declaration of their judgment
How ever the tenets which the most of them are likely to acknowledge, be these
which seven of their best Churches did offer in print to the Parliament, as
their common sense: We wish that all these who go under the name of Anabaptists
in England, were resolved to stand to the articles of that confession without
any further progress in error: but how far the very prime Subscribers are
from any such resolution, it will appear anon. As for the Members whether of
these seven, or of their other thirty nine Congregations (for before the
penning of that Confession, this sect was said to be grown unto no less then
forty six Churches (A), and that as I take it within and about London) the
most of them are exceeding far from making these Articles the rule of their
belief; if we trust M. Marshall (B), and M. Black (C), two very faithful
Divines who have had more dealing with the Anabaptists then any other on this
side the Sea. Let no error be charged upon any man, which he truly disclaims.


They are a people very zealous of Liberty, and most unwilling to be under the
bondage of the judgment of any other: This selfish singularity makes them much
to differ, not only from others, but among themselves also: It is hard
therefore to fasten any tenets upon them more then they please to accept; But
in this, my dealing with them shall be fair, what I ascribe to them I shall
bring along my authority for i^; if I know the unwillingnesse of any of them to
concur with my Author, I shall be loath to dissemble it, and if through
unacquaintance with the mind of the most I shall happen to make the particular
Tenets of some to be general to all, whenever any of them shall declare
against the Tenet of their fellows, for my part I shall wish all such true and
ingenuous declarations whether from few or more, to be accepted with
thankfulness: for I profess my gladness to see any who are supposed
erroneous to clear themselves, were it but in some part from any of the faults
which usually are charged upon them.

For a more distinct proceeding we do refer their Tenets to three heads;
first, rigid Brownism; secondly, Antipaedobaptism; A brief sum of all the
Anabaptists errors.
thirdly, Arminianism, Antinomianism, Arianism, Familism, and other gross
heresies toward which too many of them are now declined.

For the first, Every Anabaptist is at least a rigid Separatist.
the soberest Anabaptists do embrace the whole way of the rigid separation. The
Brownish did borrow all their Tenets from the Anabaptists of old, it is but
equal that the Anabaptists this day should seek back again their Fathers debt
from the Brownists. The chief singularities of Brownism are about the
constitution and government of the Church, they say the Church is made up only
of members who are really and convincingly holy, of such who do evidence the
truth of their regeneration to the satisfaction of the whole or the greater
part of the Church. Hereupon do they ground their separation from all the rest
of the reformed. It is true, they did separate from the Church of England upon
another ground also, complaining not only of her mixing a profane multitude
with the gracious professors, but also for her entertaining a great many Popish
relics in discipline and worship, for these like ways did they un-church her
and pronounce her an Antichristian Synagogue (D). But their separation from
other reformed Churches was grounded on the first consideration only: for they
did not cry down the truth of other Churches, as of the English; yea when a fit
of benignity came upon them they did not stick to give to the English it self,
the honor of a true Church (E); but from the English and all other of the
world they did separate for the impurity and mixture of their members. Though
the Independents offer to collude with the Anabaptists, yet they separate from
the Independents no less then from the Brownists as Antichristian.


The first of these pleas the Independents hold fast with both their hands, and
upon it are as rigid. Separatists as any we know (F): but the Anabaptists take
possession of both the grounds, that the walls of their separation may the more
firmly be established. They will have all their members to be real Saints, and
they separate from all other Churches who neglect to press the necessity of
such a qualification (G), but to strengthen the right of their separation, they
go on to pronounce all these Churches from whom they separate Antichristian;
and this their charity they extend to their otherways very dear friends the
Independents and Brownists, for all even of them are such who by their doctrine
and practice of paedobaptisme, deny that Christ is yet come in the flesh (H).
The Brownists in their honest simplicity are loath to be long in the Anabaptists
debt, they quickly un-Church and excommunicate them also for denying baptism to
infants (I); but the Independents will be wiser then their Fathers, Anabaptism
no there is so small a pe^c^di^^^ that it deserves no censure at all (K), they
are most willing to retain the Anabaptism in their bosom (L), but here the
p^y, no caresses can keep the most of Anabaptism in the Independent
Congregations, so (...) as they begin to weigh their own principles they ^in^e
their infant baptism a (...), and so a (...) upon th^^ to be (...) (M); The
Independent (...) to (...) this Sacrament, they cannot choose (...) go (...)
(...) Anabaptism, (...) by the (...) in their Churches, where alone they can
partake of baptism^ for as yet I never heard that either Independent or
Brownist was willing to rebaptize any who in their infancy had received that
Sacrament of initiation.

But for the more clear and distinct demonstration of these things; consider
yet further, They avow all their members to be holy and elect, and some of them
are for their perfection
first that in the qualification of members, the Anabaptists go as far as
either the Independents or Brownists: the Confession of the seven Churches do
clearly bear this much (N), but others go further, avowing with their Fathers
the Dutch perfectists that all of their society are so perfectly holy as they
may not pray for the remission of any the least sin (O).

That those of them who are for gross Antinomy and Familism should maintain so
great a perfection on earth in their Society as can be obtained in heaven (P),
and that M. Saltmursh after his renunciation of all baptism as well as of
infants (Q), should be permitted by Divine Justice thus far to wander (R), I do
not so much wonder, as when I behold the Confessionists the most modest and
orthodox of all in this way to stumble upon the conceit of perfection (S),
though after deliberation they become so well advised, as in the second Edition
to ^est content with the true hollinesse of their fellows, scraping out what
before they had put in of their perfection (T).

As for the second, the natural result of the former, After they have separate
from all other Churches, they run next away from them their own selves.
a separation from all other reformed Churches an impure, it is clear by their
constant uniform practice which M. Kiffen one of their prime Confessionists
does justify at length against his opposite M. Ricraft (V). In this separation
they run on so rashly that themselves know not where to stop it, for first with
the Separatists they divide from all other Protestants, thereafter they shake
off the Separatists: for the most intelligent and zealous among them refuse to
remain in any Congregation either of the Independents or Brownists (X); Lastly,
they break among themselves in many pieces.

However their way as yet lies much in the dark, yet so much of it does appear
to the world as d^monstrates their small concord amongst themselves; what else
was the cause that to the very second Edition of their Confession no more hands
could be obtained then of seven Churches, when of that way there are some
hundreds of Congregations, for of all the Sects they are incomparably the most
numerous? why does M. Spilbery complain in Print of the unstablenesse of many
their dear friends who separate from these seven Churches as Antichristian (Y)?
Also my charity permits me not to believe that many of them can keep communion
with the professors of so gross Heresies and horrible blasphemies as diverse of
those who impugn the baptism of infants are guilty of.

They charge one another with Antichristianisme.
For the third, their laying of Antichristianism to the charge of all other
Churches we need not doubt of it, though it did not appear in their writs:
since they impute that crime not only to all paedobaptists, without exception
either of Brownists or Independents, but also to the best of their own number,
the flower of their own flock, the Confessionists themselves, as M. Spilbery
the first of the Subscribers informs us (Z).

They are Independents.
Concerning the government of the Church, what ever their Fathers of old did
teach the Brownists, they are perfect disciples therein to the Brownists this
day: for they acknowledge no National Church, nor any Church visible, but a
Congregationall (AA), which they make absolutely Independent and uncontrollable
by any superior Synod (BB). Though they should break out in never so many the
grossest heresies and schisms, yet they have no remedy against them, none on
earth must pretend any Jurisdiction, any power to inflict the least
Ecclesiastic censure upon their Congregation or any member thereof, though
guilty of all imaginable blasphemies.

They put all Church power in the hand of the people.
But the worst of it is, that this supreme, absolute and Independent
Jurisdiction of every one of their Congregations, must be placed not in the
officers nor any company of them, but in the whole multitude (CC); they are for
an absolute Ochlocracy and popular Government, giving to every member of their
Congregation a decisive voice in all Ecclesiastic causes, and a power as to
elect, They give the power of preaching and celebrating the Sacraments to any
of their gifted members out of all office.
so to ordain, and when they find cause, to depose, exauctorate, and
excommunicate their Pastor and all their Officers together.

With the power of censure they join the power of preaching, all their members
who find themselves gifted are permitted to prophecy in the face of the
Congregation (DD): this privilege of men out of office is by them so highly
esteemed, that they proclaim the want of it to be a just ground of separation
(EE): but herewith they rest not content, for unto their members out of office
they ascribe not only the power of censure and of preaching the word, but also
of celebrating the Sacraments: this is clear of baptism, for they require in a
baptizer not only no office, but not so much as baptism it self, all of them
avowing the lawfulness for a person not baptized to baptize (FF), and as it
seems to celebrate the Lords Supper; for these two Sacraments ordinarily they
conjoyn, admitting all upon their baptism immediately to the Lords Supper (GG);
and some of their greatest Doctors hold it no wise incongruous to admit persons
to the Lords Table before they be baptized (HH). However all of them do place
the power of all the ordinances in the whole multitude, and the exercise of
that power in any to whom the people thinks meet to give their commission (II),
and sometimes they do give their commission to exercise any of the ordinances
unto persons whom they think not fit afterward to elect or ordain for Officers
(KK).

Only in this they are more distinct then the Brownists, Even unto women.
many more of their women do venture to preach then of the other; Attaway the
Mistress of all the She-preachers in Colemanstreet was a disciple in Lambs
Congregation, and made Antipaedobaptism oftentimes a part of her public
exercises (LL): the other feminine Preachers in Kent, Norfolk, and the rest of
the Shires had their breeding, as I take it, in the same or the like school.

The most of all the particulars which in our first Part we ascribed either to
the Independents or Brownists, They must not preach in a Steeple-house.
the Anabaptists do practice: they are so averse from all that the Church in
the time of Popery did use, that they can keep very little of it; all Churches
must be demolished: they are glad of so large and public a preaching place as
they can purchase, but of a Steeple: house they must not hear (MM). All tithes,
and all set stipends are unlawful, their preachers must work with their own
hands, and may not go in black clothes.


All tithes to them are an abomination (NN), they will allow to their Pastors
no set stipend at all (OO); they admit of an cleemosynary contribution, but it
must be a small one; for they will have their Preachers to provide for the most
of their own necessities by their handy labor (PP). They are so averse from
all that has been, that their Preachers for their satisfaction must change the
very color of their habit: a blackcoat to them is no small reproach.

They celebrate the Lords Supper in any common Innes after another feast. All
the new light of the Independents and Brownists is borrowed from the
Anabaptists.
The Lords Supper is brought by them almost to a civil Table, in any Innes when
they have made a public feast, in the end of their banquet they fall in a very
homely way to the Lords Supper (QQ).

In their ordinary practices we behold the fountain almost of all the
singularities of the Independents and Brownists, these men are no wise so good
at invention as the vulgar esteems them, the most of all the light which they
hold out as new, did shine long ago in the lamps of their fathers and brethren
our Anabaptists in hand.

The anointing of the sick with oil, the rejecting of the Lords Prayer, of all
set Psalms, of Universities, and humane learning, are the Anabaptists
inventions.
The half miraculous cure of their sick members by the prayer of the Elders, and
their anointing with oil, is the Anabaptists practice (RR), the casting away of
the Lords Prayer (SS), and of all set Psalms (TT), the exibilating of all songs
out of the congregation (VV) is their invention; the bitter invectives against
humane learning, Arts, Sciences, Universities, are all from them (XX); but
leaving these we will touch only one point more of their Brownism, to wit,
their Tenets about the Magistrate, and so proceed.

M. Brown did take from the Magistrate all power about matters of Religion,
these he did remit absolutely to the conscience of every particular person,
declaring himself while he stood in his infamous way for a full liberty of
conscience uncontrollable by the Laws of any mortal man (YY): but in this all
the disciples till of late did leave the Master. The elder Brownists and
Independents of New England do make it a chief duty of the Christian Magistrate
to restrain and punish false Teachers and enemies to the truth of God (ZZ); in
so much that Antipaedobaptists have no toleration among them ( ZZ 2). The
Independent Apologists are for liberty to most of the Sects.


The Authors of the Apologetick narration do boast of giving to the Magistrate
more then any other Protestants by their principles can do (AAA), yet now it
seems they have changed this note and are returning to M. Browns first
profession of liberty from the Magistrates sword in all matters of conscience,
for they tell us that no Magistrate may punish for what the Church may not
censure (BBB), and they assume that the Church may not censure for any error
which is not fundamental, and wherein the erroneous person is not obstinate
and self-condemned (CCC): Such at least must be all Brownists, all
Antipaedobaptists, most Antinomians and Arminians, many Papists who embrace not
all the errors of the Church of Rome, and in these errors which they do
maintain have never had the means of self-conviction: against none of all
these, or any the like may the Parliament make any Law, but to all such they
are obliged, if they will not transgress the limits of power which God and
right reason have set unto them, to proclaim a full liberty without the least
restraint. And some of their prime friends for a general liberty to all.


This will conclude the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion in a
pretty narrow compass, yet it leaves him some power to punish for fundamental
errors and gross blasphemies. Therefore the Independents, at least some of
their prime Teachers, without any public reproof from their fellows, (so far
as we know) are gone a step further, to cut off here all idle and curious
debates concerning fundamentals, the disputes about praeter, super and contra
fundamentalia are exceeding subtle and intricate, yea unextricable, they are
more wise then to involve themselves and others therein, so once for all they
jump over that ditch and avow, that for Magistrates to control any man in his
grossest errors, for them to make or execute any Law to restrain any man's
conscience and practice according to conscience, is but to sight against God
and to commit the monstrous practice of the old Giants against the heavens
which they call a Theomachy (DDD).

All this Independent Doctrine is brought from the Anabaptists schools, The
Anabaptists deny all power to Magistrates in any thing that concerns Religion.
it is one of the articles of their faith offered to the present Parliament,
that no Laws ought to be made by any men upon earth about any things which
concern the worship of God; That who ever makes any rules for the service of
God does charge Christ with want of wisdom or faithfulness, or both, in not
making Laws anew for his own house (EEE); That the great Law for matters of
Religion is this, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind of the
truth of what he believes without any control from any upon earth (FFF); That
it is the Magistrates duty to protect every man in his just liberty of
conscience, Turcisme, Popery, Atheisms, the greatest blasphemies they would not
have punished with so much as a discountenance
without which all other liberties are unworthy the naming (GGG).

Now to put us out of all doubt what kind of consciences they desire to be
protected by the Magistrate in their liberty, they are content to come down to
specifications. At the beginning they had not the courage to require a general
liberty for all erroneous consciences; as diverse of the Independents to this
day profess their averseness fom an unlimited toleration of all errors; so
M. Blackwood who first came out to storm the Antichristian baptizers of
children, does stick a little at Papists, and more at blasphemers and Atheists:
and their great Patrons in their debates for liberty, except errors against
the light of nature, albeit none which never so evidently cross the holy
Scriptures (HHH): but M. Williams an Anabaptist long before Blackwood makes it
a bloody Tenet (III); and others of them proclaim it an unjust persecution to
deny a full liberty not only to Turks, Jews, and most of heretics, but to
idolatrous Papists and any others that can be named (KKK). They will not only
have all these free from any considerable punishments, but also from the least
discountenance (LLL), or resentment of their wickedness; and left the grossest
blasphemies might have been conceived capable of any civil censure, behold,
they name Atheism it self, and exempt it expressly from the hazard of all pain
or shame (MMM).

They press a liberty for preaching and propagating openly all errors
imaginable
This liberty they extend not only to errors locked up in the breast, but also
when they are openly by word and writ professed, yea solemnly preached; for
they tell us that the necessary and just liberty of conscience is violate, and
a persecution is brought in, if a Jesuit, or a Turk, or a Jew, or a blasphemous
Atheist be hindered to go to the most solemn places, where the greatest
multitudes of weak and easily seduced spirits do converse, and there to
proclaim what ever in conscience they think convenient for the propagation of
that error which they conceive to be truth (NNN).

Yet they grant that error is a soul murder, and a greater crime then the
destruction of a King, of a Parliament, of a whole Nation.
For all this the same men do fully and freely grant unto us, that error is a
greater wickedness then any man can easily conceive, That a false Teacher by
seducing of one soul, does more real hurt, then if he should murder a King,
blow up a Parliament, destroy the lives of a whole Nation, yea of the whole
world (OOO). Yet do they plead for so great a liberty to all errors as
possibly can be, for they spoil the Magistrate of all power in any thing which
concerns Religion, that he may not with a look of his eye discourage, much
less with his hand restrain the most horrible blasphemer, the most ravenous
wolf, to destroy the souls of all his Subjects (PPP).

This immoderate love of licentiousness, They hate the Covenant.
of a liberty to destroy their own souls by what ever error they please to
embrace, puts them upon a high degree of hatred and indignation against the
solemn league and Covenant, against the Scottish Nation whence it came; as two
great impediments to their quiet enjoying of that self-destroying and
God-provoking liberty, which so passionately they lust after; though for fear
and other base respects many of them have swallowed down the Covenant in such
equivocall senses, as are evidently contrary both to the express words and
known intentions of the States which enjoin it: yet since the time their
strength and hopes are increased, these of them who pretend to ingenuity and
courage, do not only with bitterness reject it, but it is now become the
object of their public invectives, as the most unhappy plague that did ever
come into England, which they press the State to recall, as an act much to be
repented of ( PPP 2).

The Scots they were wont to account as Demigods, They are injurious to the
Scots.
embracing them as their very Saviors upon earth, so long as the Episcopal
party kept them in any fear: that terror now being past, and the Scots
beginning to urge, though with all meekness and courtesy, some performance of
Covenants and Treaties; they cry out upon them with all bitterness and spleen:
they censure the Parliament for ever calling them in, they load them with
injurious calumnies for their very first contests in Scotland with the
malignant and Episcopal party there, the defensive arms of their Parliament
and Nation, they defame; as an insurrection against the King, of a few
malcontents for the obtaining of their private ambitious designs; neither do
they make any better construction of the present Arms of the English
Parliament ( PPP 3).

The great sufferings of the Scots at home from the Irish Rebels and their own
apostate brethren, they proclaim to be the just deservings of their labors in
England (PPP 4): which they are pleased to vilify and disgrace with the basest
and most false slanders which the father of lies and malice is able to invent (
PPP 5): wherein they rest not till they have made the Scots open enemies and
Traitors to England, proclaiming a great deal of desire to have the next
expedition of their glorious and invincible Army to kill, destroy and subjugate
those base Traitors ( PPP 6), that so they may be altogether free for their
other much higher designs, were it as in Sober-Sadnesse it was professed in a
very solemn audience, to go to the walls of Constantinople for the pulling of
the grand Seignior out of his Seraglio; to this height of dangerous fancy has
their lust of Liberty already arisen. All punishing of error with them is
persecution.


It is not a toleration, a forbearance, a dispensation which is sought for; all
this imports some power in the Magistrate about the object in the which the
forbearance and toleration is craved: but a just liberty to think, speak, and
do in all matters of Religion whatever conscience, howsoever informed, dictates
to be expedient; the least restraint of so plenary a liberty they count the sin
and injury of persecution.

The reasons whereby the Independents themselves in their very last papers do
plead for this liberty, to my ear sounds but harshly: they tell us that those
things which are cried out upon for errors, are in matters obscure and
disputable: instancing expressly in the Trinity, the union of Christ's two
natures, the fruits of Christ's death, the power of free will, the state of the
soul after death (QQQ), and lest any error should stand without the compass of
their liberty, they tell us farther that no error is in any justice punishable,
because now there is not on earth any Apostle or Prophet or infallible Judge
who can determine any question without possibility of erring (RRR).

It may be scrupled whether mere conscience does enforce the Anabaptists and
others to scrue up the point of their conscience-liberty to so high a pin: They
press liberty of conscience much out of policy.
whether in their inmost sense they can maintain so catholic a liberty to all
persons in matters of Religion; or if happily some piece of policy may not induce
them to strike so much upon this string at the present, when they have but
small hopes of attaining a liberty for themselves without the assistance of
many others, from whom they differ in many particulars of Religion. It may be
justly doubted if once they were come to be possessed of their own desires,
whether then they would be so careful as now they profess, for the freedom of
all others: for it has been seen when ever the sword of power has fallen into
their hands, that they have been as severe and cruel oppressors of all who did
not absolutely without exception submit to their Laws, as any Tyrants who yet
have appeared upon the earth (SSS). But presupponing that their old principles
b^ now altered, and their present Tenets about liberty of conscience be most
conscientious and sincere which they upon no occasion will any more change, the
Magistrate had need to know whether the granting of all this liberty, whereof
we have been speaking, wilfully content them.

When the State has denuded it self of the care and cognizance of the matters
of the soul, The granting of all this liberty will not assure the Magistrate of
the Sectaries civil obedience.
and put these absolutely in the power of every man's own free will, may it then
expect obedience to its other Laws in things civil and temporal? The
Confessionists in this seem to be clear, and freely to grant to the Magistrate
in things civil, all due obedience: but that this is the general sense of all
the rest of that sect, M. Marshall permits us not to believe: for he tells us
that the most of the Anabaptists are in their conscience against all
Magistracy, as well in matters civil as Ecclesiastic (TTT). In the time of
their weakness, for fear of trouble they can be silent and g^ve obedience to
their commands, without any question; but when the days of their power shall
come, when the righteous shall inherit the Land, which they long have been
looking for and believes to be now at the doors; the Magistrate must then lay
down his rule, give up his Government, and be content to be ruled by the
two-edged sword of their Saints, which Germany did feel to be very sharp, and
ready to shed much innocent blood. The Tenets and practice of the Sectaries
destroy Magistracy.


The troublers of New England did not only plead for a freedom and immunity
from all civil Laws, the reasons whereof did not convince their consciences
both of their lawfulness and expediency ( TTT 2), but were also ready if they
had not been prevented by force of Arms, in a very unjust and seditious manner
to have risen against the State, and to have cut the throats of their opposites
(VVV): when after their banishment, they were set down by themselves, they
could not endure Magistracy; but put it down as a condition unlawful for a
Christian to undergo (XXX).

But that which concerns this State now most to take heed of, They profess
their design to overturn from the ground the government of our State as now it
stands.
is that growing Tenet of all the Sects among us, wherein diverse Anabaptists
are with the first; a declared averseness from all obedience to the present
Magistrates and Laws, and frequent motions to have the very fundamentals of the
State government new molded to their own fancies: they do no more dissemble
their detestation of Monarchy; the King and all of his blood must be destroyed,
King Charles for his mis-government must lose his life; this execution does not
satisfy Justice (YYY): But for no time to come, either the name, or the King
of royalty must be more heard of in England (ZZZ).

Kings and Lords are no more tolerable.
When thus far we have gratified the new moulders of our State, will they then
be content to be under the government of a Parliament without a King? they
assure us this is far from their purpose.

The Parliament as it stands is as rotten a body as the King an head: at the
first bout they pull down one of the two Houses, and smother all the Lords: the
Peers are a pestiferous excrement of Kings, and with them they must go packing
(AAAA). The ground of all their dignity is wickedness (BBBB); Their personal
carriage has been corrupt (CCCC); The best of them are false Traitors (DDDD).

Neither is the House of Commons any longer to be endured.
When that Paganish invention (EEEE) of King and Lords is abolished, can we have
assurance to get the House of Commons for our Governors? if so, our case were
somewhat safe and comfortable; but the new framers of our State tell us, that
the House of Commons when they are deprived of the society of their very
ancient companions, their old fellow Governors the King and Lords, and
themselves alone are become the whole and full Parliament of England, they must
not then expect to be rulers: for they also have exceedingly abused their
trust, they have many ways abused the people. Upon diverse of their most eminent
Members they cry out as Traitors (FFFF), upon the most as covetous self-seeking
men (GGGG), upon all the Lawyers as pestiferous Members, no less then the
Bishops were in the House of Lords ( GGGG 2); upon many other of the Members as
a faction adhering to the Lords in all their wicked designs ( GGGG 3); upon the
whole House as the authors of greater evil to the people then either King, or
Lords, or Bishops, or any former oppressors did ever bring upon England (HHHH).

They insist especially upon one of their ordinary Acts of insupportable
Tyranny: they have for many ages bound taxes by Law upon the back of the
freeborn people of England, this is no longer to be endured (IIII): what the
people thinks meet voluntarily to offer, it may be received; but to lay a
necessity upon any, to give for any use, private or public, any more of his
goods, then himself the just owner is willing, is an oppression too long
connived at (KKKK). Of this great grievance the House of Commons has been the
great instrument, wherefore they also must be taught to know their place, and
to remember their condition, that they hereafter may be content to be humble
servants to their Sovereign Lords and Masters the freeborn people of England
(LLLL), to them they must be accountable, and by them punishable, toties
quoties these their new Masters find them delinquents (MMMM).

Our Masters are not here speaking what in some extraordinary cases, The
poorest beggar in the Land has a share of the Sovereignty above the King and
Parliament.
an intolerably oppressed people by the Laws of an unavoidable necessity are
forced to do before they perish; but of that which they affirm ought to be the
ordinary perpetual just and necessary case of England: Kings and Lords must
for ever be abolished, a Parliament of Commons must for ever sit at the feet of
their supreme and absolute Lords, the multitude of the people; this present
House of Commons must be dissolved (NNNN), and another presently put in its
place which may sit no longer then one year (OOOO). A Trienniall Parliament is
worth nothing (PPPP); A perpetual Parliament, a Parliament of longer
continuance then one year is unsupportable (QQQQ). As in the Church, all and
every one of the Officers are to be under the jurisdiction and censure of the
whole and every one of the members of a Congregation, so the whole House of
Commons, and every Member thereof, are punishable in their life, limbs, and
estate, by the whole people, and every freeborn man in England (RRRR), even
the poorest beggar; for as I take it, there is not, nor has not for many ages
any person been born a slave in any part of Christendom.

I will not here interrogate where or how these Sovereign Lords, the people,
can meet to hear an account, All former Laws and Acts of Parliament must be
abolished.
and to give out judgment upon their faulty servants, the new Parliament of
Commons; only I would be resolved, by what Law this very grand Jury of the
whole people are like to proceed; Shall the King and Lords, and the ancient way
of Parliaments take away with themselves all former Laws which have been their
creatures? we thought it might have been loss enough to have destroyed with
the King and Lords such Laws as did concern their two abolished States in
particular; but we are taught a more deep lesson, all the Laws which these six
hundred years have produced, must be cast into the bottom of the Sea for ever:
for since the Norman Conquest, the great work of all Parliaments has been how
to contrive evil Laws for the oppression of the people (SSSS). Now I doubt if
there be any authentic registers of English Laws before the Conquest this day
extant, or if any such be, whether it shall be found expedient to keep them on
foot when all the other are cassed and annulled.

The will of the multitude must stand for the Sovereign Law hereafter.
It seems our new Sovereigns, the people, the sole creators of all Kings and
Parliaments, when once they are established in their Supremacy, will be loath to
have their hands bound by the fetters of any humane Laws; much less of those
old forgotten worm-eaten Statutes, which the Danish, Saxon, or British Tyrants
in the time of their domination did obtrude: as in Religion there must be no
Law, but what every man in his conscience thinks to be the sense of the word of
God, that is the supreme rule to him, so it must be in the State (TTTT).

We know who has printed the unlawfulness to make any Laws for the State,
Scripture being alike well furnished in Laws for the State as for the Church
(VVVV). But I conceive it will be a great deal more easy for a few persons in
the general Court of New England to agree in their applications of the word of
God to every civil emergent, then for that many headed Sovereign, the whole
people of old England: the one may much more safely be troubled to rule
according to their gift of Government without any written, institute, and
humane Law (XXXX), then the other: for I believe if the whole freeborn people
of England were set on the Bench to judge of all causes according as every one
did conceive, without any written Law, all bypast constitutions being
cancelled, the government of our State would quickly become more arbitrary and
confused then long could be endured; and those inconveniences which they
profess to be the only cause, why as yet they do not totally abolish both the
name and thing of a very House of Commons (YYYY), by a little experience should
be found to be more and greater then now are imaginable.

But that we may proceed, I do propone one only scruple more about the point in
hand: By what means so great changes in Church and State are like to be
compassed, for not only King Charles and all our living Lords, but also Royalty
and Lordship it self must be cast down: The present House of Commons for their
manifold misdemeanors must be dissolved, and so the whole fabric of our old
corrupted State totally abolished, and a frame wholly new put in its place,
wherein no footstep either of Monarchy or of Aristocracy may appear (ZZZZ), but
the Sovereignty must rest in each individual of the people as they speak
(AAAAA): the most poor, base, weak, foolish creatures, possessing a like share
of the Supremacy, both civil and Ecclesiastic, the Kinghood and the
Priesthood, as they call it (BBBBB); with the most noble, wise, able, wealthy
of the land (CCCCC): having it at their option to execute the Sovereign power
by themselves, or when they find it for their ease to nominate so many Deputies
(DDDDD), every November (EEEEE) to be a Parliament of Commons, to cognosce upon
extraordinary incidents as their Sovereign the people shall prescribe them
rules; though in ordinary cases they declare their purpose to set up twelve men
with a President in every Hundred, who upon their oath of fidelity shall be
entrusted to determine absolutely all causes belonging to that Hundred, without
appeal to any Judge except the Aniversary meeting of the whole peoples
deputies (FFFFF).

This new Ochlocratorick republic where every individual participates of the
Sovereignty, The three fundamental Laws of our new Utopian Republic.
not as in Democracies where the better sort only of the people have voice in
Government; whether they will be pleased to make to themselves a body of new
Laws, they have not, so far as I observe, as yet declared; only they seem to
set up three fundamental rules; First, that in matter of Religion every man
must be absolutely at his own disposition, to believe, speak, write, do, what
ever he thinks sit (GGGGG). Secondly, that men in public place, either of
Church or State, must serve freely if they have any means of their own, or
otherwise if they be poor, their greatest gages in the most eminent places
shall not exceed the sum of 50 or at most 60 pounds a year (HHHHH). Thirdly,
that all men ^n all places shall be accountable and punishable in their life
and estate, by their Sovereign Lords the individuals of the people, without all
control, or appeal (IIIII).

According to reason and experience the present distemper of the Sectaries is
posting on fast to a Dictatorship and absolute Tyranny in the hand of one.
Since all these things must be, as our new Statists give the world assurance of
their resolution to have them; is it not like that before so great changes can
be brought, about much resistance will be made? a strange confusion and
bloodshed, multitudes of difficulties cannot but fall in the way: shall it not
therefore be absolutely necessary, that some men of known valor and courage,
whose wisdom, faithfulness, and success, long experience makes
unquestionable; be set up to command in name of the people for some time, till
these high and mighty designs may be gotten accomplished, and the people once
be set down in peace upon the high places, whence the King, Lords and Commons
wont to pronounce these unjust Laws which now with their authors must be laid
aside?

In such cases of extraordinary difficulty, the wise people of Rome did
oftentimes name a Dictator, in whose hand for a certain time they placed all
their power: the Senate, the Armies, the Magistrates both of the City and
Provinces, the whole Commonwealth was absolutely at his disposition: only for
his own assistance in the discharge of so incomparable a trust, he did name for
a helper and a second, almost an equal, a Master of Horse.

If we should come to this excellent expedient it were not hard for the people
of the Sectarian party to fall without much deliberation, upon a Dictator; to
whose valor and untainted fidelity they might without fear or the least
suspicion commit the common safety: and if merit may be regarded, if boldness
and diligence in pulling down old Tyrants, whether Kings or Lords or Commons,
for the advancement of the people to their due place may be valued, a
Lieutenant, a Master of Horse without difficulty might presently be found.

This much of their mind already they have declared, that all good people of
their own accord without any authority may arise in Arms as one man, and when
they are up, they may choose for their Governor whom they please (LLLLL), and
mould the State in what fashion they conceive to be most for their own good
(MMMMM), and thereafter put the Militia during their pleasure in the hands of
these to whom they dare trust the common safety, providing they be known to be
firm for absolute liberty of conscience (NNNNN): And among these he who runs
may read in their Books one glorious name, in whose bosom the Dictatorian
patent could not but fall: only here is the hazard; when Caesar was once
possessed of the Dictators place, he had the skill and the will also to keep in
his own hand that highest command for ever. And although the perpetual
Dictatorship was a little interrupted by his violent death in the midst of the
Senate, yet never did the command return any more to the people, but in place
of their expected liberty their government was changed into a most Tyrannick
Empire.

As in nature, so in State there is a constant vicissitude, the corruption of
one is the generation of another, and that which arises does post to its fall
and corruption, that a new plant may come in its stead. The rash and heady
overturners of States pull down the possessors that themselves may sit in their
rooms, but they are not well hot in their new places, till the judgment of God
and the unavoidable circulation which is and ever has been in all sublunary
affairs, casts them likewise out that their seats may be void to their pressing
successors.

I confess at my first sight of this Anabaptistick root, The State in danger
by the Sectaries principles.
the peoples supremacy, at its first appearance above ground, I was more afraid
for it then for any other error of the time: for I apprehended, if it did
grow, it might overturn the whole State from the very foundation, and bring
upon all the Land such a confusion as was unexpressible. This apprehension as
yet seems to me not altogether groundless, for if this principle be driven on
but a little further, if the unwise and unjust multitude be flattered into a
Supremacy of power, and persuaded of a necessity, were it but of a convenience,
or of a mere lawfulness to put down Kings, Lords, and Commons, and to set up
what ever other Government they think meetest for their own safety and welfare,
I am in the opinion that some very mean born Gentlemen (if they have but the
skill and constancy for some little time to play the Cards right that now are
in their hands) are in as fair a possibility to attain the Dictatorship of
England, as Julius Caesar was to attain that of Rome some few years before the
civil War. But though they should attain all and much more then for the time
themselves do intend or dare as yet desire, The greatest purchase which the
overturners of States usually make, is a late repentance.
their reward may prove unworthy their labor. It had been much better for
Caesar and his Army that they had permitted the Senate to govern according to
the former Laws: the change indeed which he made in the State did advance him
for a time to the highest degree of command, and his friends to the most of
their private desires: yet ere long it brought upon him an untimous and cruel
death, and upon all the Romans a perpetual slavery. When the whole account is
cast up, the changers of State use not to be so great gainers; but had they
foreseen the end and taken it into their reckoning, they could easily have
been content never to have begun their enterprise.

The Testimonies of the third Chapter.
(A) Fratlies Dipper Dipped in the Epistle to Downame; these above all others
have bestirred themselves, since the waters were troubled, and they boast in
secret of their great draughts of fish, the Papists of 20000 proselytes, the
Anabaptists of 47 Churches.

(B) M. Marshals Defense p. 76. The Confession is such a one as I believe
thousands of our new Anabaptists will be far from owning, at any man may be
able to say without a spirit of divination, knowing that their received and
usual doctrines do much more agree with the Anabaptists in Germany, then with
this handful who made this Confession here in London.

(C) M. Black against Tombs Apology p. 14. I doubt lest that the community of
these of that opinion in London will not be concluded by the subscription of
these 15 persons; many witnesses will affirm, that such Doctrines are
frequently broached in their congregations, which stand in full contradiction
to several articles in that confession which you mention.

(D) Barrows Discovery p. 26. What communion is to be held with the Church of
England? can the name of a Church without blasphemy unto Christ be given unto
them in these sins? I have often wondered how any man of sound judgment could
give them the name of a Church. Ibid. in the Preface. Let them save their soul
out of this accursed false Church.

(E) Robinsons Apology p. 78. Convenit nobis quatenus reformatis Ecclesiia
Belgicis, and aliis cum Ecclesia Anglicana in Articulis fidei hujus Ecclesiae
nomine scriptis. Vide Disswasive, first Part, p. 20, 21.

(F) Vide Disswasive first Part. p. 103, 104.

(G) William Kiffins Answer in Ricrafts Looking glass for the Anabaptists p.
9. So long as you deny to follow the rule of Christ for the separation of the
wicked from the godly, and separating the precious from the vile, we are bound
in obedience to Jesus Christ to leave you whilst you remain obstinate to him;
England has at this time in her as hateful birds as any Nation whatsoever:
when these things do so appear, is it not high time to hearken to the voice of
the Apostle Acts 2.40. to save your self from such a generation, and to come
out from them, Rev. 18.4?

(H) Declaration concerning the public dispute by Benjamin Cocks, etc. p. 13.
The baptism of Infants does deny Christ to be come in the flesh. Cornwels
Vindication of the Royal Commission, p. 13. I am assured if I whose eyes God
has opened to discern this Popish corruption, if I should hold my peace, and
so justly perish with the Antichristian Synagogue that denies Jesus is the
Christ.

(I) Turners heavenly Conference, p. 41. Question. What if any deny children of
believers in a Church estate, baptism of water? Answer; They make void the
promise of God (made to children of believers) by that their Tradition. Q. May
such as deny children baptism be permitted members of a true Church? A. No,
they ought to be cut off from all Christ's congregations.

(K) Apologeticall Narration, p. 9. Excommunication should be put in execution
for no other kind of sins then may evidently be presumed to be perpetrated
against the parties known light; as whether it be a sin in manners and
conversation, such as is committed against the light of nature, or the common
received practices of Christianity professed in all the Churches of Christ; or
if in opinions, then such, as are likewise contrary to the received principles
of Christianity, and the power of godliness professed by the party himself,
and universally acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches; and no other sins
to be the subject of that dreadful sentence.

(L) Gangrena part 2. p. 13. For the present the best Independent Churches are
mixed assemblies consisting of persons, whereof some are Anabaptists, some
Antinomians, some Libertines, others hold Arminian and Socinian Tenets. M.
Symonds Independent Church at Roterdam is overgrown with Anabaptisme, and he
has written into England that he is so postered with Anabaptists, that he know
not what to do.

(M) Tombs Apology p. 66. I confess they that hold that members are added to
the Church by Baptism and not otherwise, and hold a nullity of paedobaptism,
must needs say the Churches that have no other then infant Baptism are no true
Churches, nor their members Church members. Cornwels Vindication p. 15. They
who enter not into their Church fellowship by teaching the Gospel and dipping
as Jesus and his Disciples entered, are thieves and robbers.

(N) The confession of faith, Artic. 29. All believers are a holy and
sanctified people, the believer is in truth and really separate both in soul
and body from all sin and dead works, whereby he also presses after a heavenly
and Evangelicall perfection in obedience to all the commands. Storming of
Antichrist page 3. There has been a mistake in the matter of the Church for
many hundred years, men taking mixed multitudes for the matter thereof, when the
Scripture makes Saints in profession the matter thereof. Also p. 8. Believe it,
we are beholden for the recovery of this truth to our Brethren (nicknamed
Independents) which is as precious a truth about Church order as ever was
recovered from the spoils of Antichrist, for if the matter of Churches be
wrong, let the wisest and holiest do what they can, they shall never bring
things into a comfortable order.

(O) Gangrena second Part p. 126. Being urged in point of prayer for
forgiveness of sins, with the Lords Prayer, the Lieutenant said that the Lords
prayer when Christ gave it to his Disciples was spiritual unto them, but is
not so to us. The same Lieutenant being urged with David's practice of bewailing
sin, and craving pardon, answered, David was under a double Covenant, of the
Law, and of grace, we only under that of grace: and though a believer should
commit as great sins as David, murder, and adultery, there was no need for him
to repent, and that sin was no sin to him, but a failing. Also p. 120. One of
the followers of M. Sympson the Antinomian said it in the hearing and presence
of diverse (M. Sympson being then also present) that if a child of God should
commit murder he ought not to repent of it, and M. Sympson never reproved him
for it, though by one present in the company he was spoken unto to do it.

(P) Benjamin Bourns description and confutation p. 53. The seventh error is
divided into two branches, the first handled in this chapter by way of
question, whether perfection in the highest degree both of grace and glory be
attainable in this life, yea or no.

(Q) Saltmarsh Smoke, p. 15, 16, 17, 18. These places commonly taken for the
commission for Christ's Baptism, as Matthew. 28.18. have no such thing in them,
baptizing in Mat. 28. cannot properly be understood of baptizing by water, but
far more probably of the Spirits Baptism, or Baptism of the holy Ghost.
Christ's institution of water as his own Baptism in his own person cannot be
made appear out of all the New Testament; none ought to give Baptism now,
because there is none can give the gift of the holy Ghost with it: Baptism by
water and by the holy Ghost, being joined together both in institution,
doctrine and practice, are not to be separated nor given in such a time wherein
that of the holy Ghost is not given, for what God has joined together let no
man put asunder; That the fullness of time is not yet come for ordinances, for
as there were several seasons for the givings out of truths before, so now.

(R) Saltmarsh Free grace, p. 140. A believers glorious freedom; the Spirit of
Christ sets a believer as free from hell, the Law and bondage here on earth, as
if he were in heaven, nor wants he any thing to make him so, but to make him
believe that he is so.

(S) The Confession. Vide supra N.

(T) Confession, second Edition Artic. 29. The believer presses after a
heavenly and Evangelicall obedience.

(V) Kiffins Answer to Ricraft, p. 18. If your eyes were opened to peruse your
own ways, you would than see that we could better free our selves from the
guilt of schism from these reformed Churches, then you your selves from the
notorious guilt of schisming from Rome.

(X) Tombs Apology. Vide supra M.

(Y) Spilsberry in his Preface to the Saints interest. I intended not the title
of adversaries to all that do not fully close with us in judgment, but to
those that so oppose us as that they deny us to preach any Gospel, to hold
forth any true faith, or to administer any true Baptism, who have openly
called us the gates of hell, their open enemy, etc.

(Z) Vide supra Y.

(AA) The Confession Artic. 47. And although the particular congregations be
distinct and several bodies, every one as a compact and knit City in it self,
yet are they all to walk by one and the same rule, and by all means convenient
to have the counsel and help one of another.

(BB) Declaration concerning the public dispute, p. 12. We dare affirm that
the Presbyters have nothing else whereby to persuade the people to subject
their consciences unto their Synodicall and Classical authority, etc.

(CC) Confession Artic. 42, 43. Christ has also given power to his (whole)
Church to receive in and cast out by way of excommunication any member, and
this power is given to every particular Congregation, and not one particular
person, either member or officer, but the (whole,) and every particular member
of each Church, how excellent great or learned soever, ought to be subject to
this censure. Also Saltmarsh Smoke in the Temple, p. 14. The Anabaptists hold
that the Church though but of two or three, yet may enjoy the word and
ordinances by way of an administrator or one deputed to administer though no
Pastor: that these commonly called Church Officers, as Pastors, etc. are such
as the Church or body may be without.

(DD) Confession Artic. 45. Such to whom God has given gifts being tried in
the Church, may and ought by the appointment of the Congregation to Prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, and so teach publicly the word of God
for the edification, exhortation and comfort of the Church.

(EE) Kiffins answer to Ricraft. Among the causes of their separation he sets
down this as one, The quenching of the Spirit, and despising prophecy, that no
man may speak in our public exercises but one.

(FF) Confession Artic. 41. The persons designed by Christ to dispense this
ordinance, the Scriptures hold forth to be a Preaching Disciple, it being no
where tied to a particular Church officer or person extraordinarily sent, the
commission enjoining the administration being given to them under no other
consideration but as Disciples. Also the Treatise of Baptism, p. 407. It
cannot reasonably be objected, that he that baptizeth should necessarily be
himself a baptized person, though ordinarily it will be so, yet it is not
necessary to the Ordinance no more then it is simply necessary to a Church
State that the members be baptized: for not the personal baptism of him that
administers, but the due commission he has for baptizing, is alone
considerable to make him a true Minister of Baptism.

(GG) Gangren second Part p. 3. Oats has dipped many in Bocking River, and
when that is done he has a feast in the night, and at the end thereof, the
Lords Supper. Also Gangrena the first part, p. 44. The 12. of November last
there met the matter of 80 Anabaptists in a great house, and had a Love-feast,
their Supper was dressed for them by a Cook; when Supper was ended, before the
cloth was taken away, they administered the Lords Supper.

(HH) Tombs Apology p. 54. Nor do I think the thing either such a new opinion
or practice, for besides that it may be doubted whether all the Apostles were
baptized, as suppose Matthew, (which is as probable for the negative as the
affirmative) yet were they all admitted to the Lords Supper by Christ himself.
When Constantine the great and others did defer their Baptism so long, it is
not likely they never received the Lords Supper before their Baptism.

(II) Storming of Antichrist p. 6. Suppose the power of all ordinances and the
keys in a time of universal defection should resolve it self radically in the
Church, yet there being no Church right for the matter which is part of the
essence, this power could not resolve it self into a Church, and therefore if
it be any where on earth, as doubtless it is, it must be in believers, who
joining themselves together in Assemblies may stir up and take again that
power which was committed to the Churches, and after cheated away by
Antichrist. The Treatise of Baptism p. 389. The power of the keys originarily
and primarily is given to the Church, where the power of admitting, receiving,
and casting out is, there is the power of administering and communicating all
ordinances to the edification of the same body, and they which have power of
administering the Kingly office of Christ, consisting in casting out and
receiving in, have also power of administering his Prophetical office, of which
the Sacraments are a part, and therefore to the Christian Churches as to the
Jews of old pertains the public dispensations and services of God, Romans 9.

(KK) Confession Article 41. The dispensation of Baptism is no where tied to a
particular officer, the commission to administer it being given to them under
no other consideration but considered as Disciples. Treatise of Baptism p. 391.
A man becomes a Prophet by virtue of a gift, but no gift renders a Baptizer but
a call, as being a thing of public commission: teaching out of a gift has its
foundation in nature, which arises from a personal gift and grace of the
spirit, but Baptism, Censures, Ordination, and the like, depend not upon a
special gift, but are acts of power conferred authoritatively upon a special
person.

(LL) Gangren first Part, p. 32. Mistress Attaway gave an answer to the men
present, who brought an argument for Infants Baptism.

(MM) Confession second Edition in the preface to the Reader. Some are offended
at us for meeting in houses to preach: So we are blamed because we frequent not
their Temples. Kiffens Answer to Ricraft p. 10. You are enraged against these
who worship any where save in your high places.

(NN) Ibid. You continue tithes and offerings of people, as if Christ were not
yet come in the flesh.

(OO) John the Baptist p. 1. The claiming tithes, or any thing in stead
thereof, appears to be contrary to the Gospel; through the whole Gospel there
is not one word to countenance a forcing of the people to contribute unto the
poor, or unto the Minister any thing, but what they please themselves.

(PP) The vanity of childish Baptism second Part, p. 27. There is no more hope
to see that Tribe stoop so low as to bear witness to this truth, then there is
to see them allow the doctrine and practice of blessed Saint Paul working with
his own hands, Acts 20.34. to be now of use and imitation in our times. John
the Baptist page 7. It were far more Apostolic and Christian-like for
Ministers to work with their own hands then to force or require a subsistence
in such a manner.

(PP 2) The power and office of the Ministry by which it is there administered
is received from the Bishops who received their power from the Antichrist. The
vanity of childish Baptism p. 12. Ib. p. 15. The unlawfulness of the calling
of the Ministry of the Church of England is acknowledged by many of
themselves, who have therefore forsaken and cast off their Ministry they
received of the Bishops and departed the Land, and became as Laymen until
they were authorized anew by the election and appointment of such a
Congregation as they conceived to be a true Church. Ibid. p. 31. The worth or
honesty of a man in a false office cannot make the office any truer or
lawfuller then it is in it self; the better the man the worse the Bishop: the
very same is the case of the Ministry and Priesthood here.

(QQ) Vide supra GG.

(RR) Gangren first Part p. 6. I had it from eye and ear-witnesses who were
present at Kiffen and Patience Visitation of one of their Members whose name is
Palmer living in Smithfield, who laid hands upon her and anointed her with
oil; the woman recovering came unto their Coventicle house, and there before
many people said that Brother Kiffen and Patience anointing her she suddenly
recovered.

(SS) Vide supra O.

(TT) Gangren first Part p. 27. That all singing of Psalms, as David's or any
other holy songs of Scripture, is unlawful and not to be joined with: that the
singing which Christians should use, is that of hymns and spiritual songs,
framed by themselves, composed by their own gifts, and that upon special
occasions, as deliverances, etc. sung in the Congregation by one of the
assembly, all the rest being silent.

(VV) Gangren first Part, p. 23. This Den preaches much against tithes, he
has put down all singing of Psalms in his Church.

(XX) The compassionate Samaritane p. 31, 33. And hereby is maintained the
necessity and excellency of Learning and the Languages, and so of Universities,
and a supposall that the Arts likewise are necessary to a Divine. As Diana was,
so is learning the crafts-mens living and the peoples Goddess, the people may
if they please dote upon that which has been their destruction, they ought to
account better of them that having no by-ends or respects have studied the
Scriptures for their own and others information, and do impart the same to the
people out of a desire of their good, for nothing, as the Anabaptists do to
their Congregations. See also Bloody Tenet p. 173.

(YY) Vide Disswasive p. 48. Browns life and manners of all true Christians p.
8. Know ye not that they which have their full and sufficient authority and
calling, are not to care for a further authority? Has not every lawful Pastor
his full authority? Ibid. p. 8. The Lord did not only show them the Tabernacle,
but bade them make it: but these men will not make it at all, because they will
tarry for the Magistrate. Ibid. page 10. They could not force Religion, as you
would have the Magistrate to do: and it was forbidden to the Apostles to preach
to the unworthy, or to force a planting or government in the Church: the Lords
kingdom is not by force, neither durst Moses, or any of the Kings of Judah
force the people by Law or by power, to receive the Church government; but
after they received it, if then they fell away and sought not the Lord, they
might put them to death. They do cry Discipline, discipline, that is, for a
civil forcing to imprison the people, or otherwise by violence to handle and
beat them, if they would not obey them. Ibid. p. 11. The Lords people is of the
willing sort, they shall come unto Sion, and enquire the way unto Jerusalem,
not by force, nor compulsion, but with their faces thitherward. And p. 12.
Because the Church is in a Commonwealth, it is of the Magistrates charge, that
is, concerning the outward provision, and outward justice they are to look, but
to compel Religion, to plant Churches by power, and to force a submission to
Ecclesiastical government by Laws and penalties, belongs not to them neither
yet to the Church.

(ZZ) Disswasive p. 49. EEEEE. FFFFF. Also the model of Church and civil
power composed by M. Cotton in the bloody Tenet p. 156. The Magistrate has
power to forbid all idolatrous and corrupt assemblies, who offer to put
themselves under their patronage, and shall attempt to join themselves into a
Church estate, and if they shall not hearken, to force them therefrom by the
power of the sword. Ib. 101. Tolerating many Religions in a State, in several
Churches, beside the provoking of God, may in time not only corrupt, leaven,
divide, and so destroy the peace of the Churches, but also dissolve the
Continuity of the State, especially ours whose walls are made of the stones of
the Churches. He has also power to compel all men within his grant to hear
the Word.

(ZZ 2) Tombs Apology p. 13. Being acquainted with a Law made in New England,
and proceedings against those that denied baptizing of Infants, I yielded to
the sending of my examen thither, and therewith I sent this short Epistle;
Reverend Brethren, understanding that there is some disquiet in your Churches
about paedobaptism, etc.

(AAA) Apologetick narration p. 19. To the Magistrates power we give as much,
and as we think more, then the principles of the Presbyteriall government will
suffer them to yield.

(BBB) Burrows Irenicon at length.

(CCC) Apologeticall narration p. 9. We judge that excommunication should be
put in execution for no other kind of sins then may evidently be presumed to
be perpetrated against the parties known light, as whether it be a sin in
manners and conversation, such as is committed against the light of nature, or
the common received practices of Christianity professed in all the Churches of
Christ; or if an opinions, then such as are likewise contrary to the received
principles of Christianity and the power of godliness professed by the party
himself, and universally acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches, and no
other sins to be the subject of that most dreadful sentence.

(DDD) John Goodwins Theomachia p. 37. Concerning other civil means for the
suppression and restraint of these spiritual evils, errors, heresies, etc. as
imprisonment, banishment, interdictions, finings, etc. both reason and
experience concur in this demonstration, that such fetters as these put upon
the feet of errors and heresies to secure and keep them under, still have
proved wings whereby they raise themselves the higher in the thoughts and
minds of men, and gain an opportunity of farther propagation.

Ibid. To hold that the persons so elected (the Members of the House of Commons
chosen by men unworthy, and strangers to the power of godliness) have a power
by virtue of such nomination or election to enact Laws and Statutes in matters
of Religion, and to order under mulcts and penalties, how men shall worship and
serve God, as it is a means to awaken the eye of jealousy upon them, and so is
seven times more destructive unto the undermining not only of their power, but
of their honor, peace, and safety also, then any thing that is found in the
way so ill entreated, so is it the settling upon the electors of such persons, I
mean upon the promiscuous multitude of the Land, a greater power then ever
Jesus Christ himself had, at least then ever he exercised.

(EEE) Anabaptists Confession, Edition second, Article 48. in the margin.
Concerning the worship of God there is but one Lawgiver Jesus Christ, who has
given Laws and rules sufficient in his word for his worship, and for any to
make more, were to charge Christ for want of wisdom, or faithfulness, or
both, in not making Laws enough, or not good enough for his house. Surely it is
our wisdom, duty and privilege to observe Christ's Laws only.

(FFF) Ibid. It is our duty to do, and we believe it is our express duty,
especially in matters of Religion, to be fully persuaded in our minds of the
lawfulness of what we do, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and as we
cannot do any thing contrary to our understandings and consciences, so neither
can we forbear the doing of that, which our understandings and consciences bind
us to do.

(GGG) Ibid. It is the Magistrates duty to tender the liberty of men's
consciences, which is the tenderest thing unto all conscientious men, and most
dear unto them, and without which all other liberties will not be worth the
naming, much less enjoying, and to protect all under them from all wrong,
injury, oppression, and molestation.

(HHH) Blackwoods Storming of Antichrist p. 23. Evil works committed against
the light of nature and reason, as the setting up of Mahomet or any other God
beside the Creator of heaven and earth: Atheism, when any man shall boldly
affirm there is no God: Polytheism, when men affirm many Gods; blasphemy,
murder, these and such like, the Magistrate whether Heathen or Christian, is to
be a terror unto. 2. These evil works which are against the light of Nations,
there is no Nation in the world but in it the Magistrate will punish those that
speak against the God that they profess, and against that which they think is
Scripture; so if any rail against Christ, or deny the Scriptures to be his Word
or no rule for us, and so unsettle our faith, this as I take it, may be
punished by the Magistrate.

(III) Williams Bloody Tenet of persecution for the cause of Conscience in the
Preface to the Parliament p. 2. It is the will and command of God, that since
the coming of his Son the Lord Jesus, a permission of the most Paganish,
Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian consciences and worships be granted to all
men in all Nations and Countries.

(KKK) Ibid. p. 19. I acknowledge that to molest any person, Jew or Gentile,
for either professing Doctrine, or practicing worship, merely religious or
spiritual, it is to persecute him, and such a person (what ever his doctrine
or practice be, true or false) suffers persecution for conscience. The
compassionate Samaritane p. 16. The Anabaptists or Brownists or whatever Sect
there is or may be.

(LLL) Liberty of Conscience p. 22. Such fines, imprisonments, or lesser
punishments whatsoever, are justly to be accounted force, and that in the
highest nature. Ibid. p. 17. How incongruous and dangerous a way of proceeding
it is, to join profit or preferment, hopes or fears, threats or force, to work
upon the conscience. Ibid. p. 23. In such Countries where the Inquisition
rules, or people are forced to go to Church upon penalties how small soever.
Compassionate Samaritane p. 5. Little can be done in their behalf, unless
liberty of conscience be allowed for every man, or sort of men to worship God
in that way, and perform Christ's ordinances in that manner as shall appear to
them most agreeable to Gods word, and no man punished or discountenanced by
authority for his opinion, unless it be dangerous to the State.

(MMM) Toleration justified p. 8, 9. All Sectaries, whether Presbyters,
Independents, Brownists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, etc. have a like title and
right to freedom or a toleration, the title thereof being not of any
particular opinion, but the equity of every man's being free in the State he
lives in, and is obedient to matters of opinion being not properly to be taken
into cognizance any further, then they break out into some disturbance or
disquiet to the State. But you will say, that by such a toleration blasphemy
will be broached, and such strange and horrid opinions, as would make the ears
of every godly man to tingle; what must this also be tolerated? I answer, it
cannot be just to set bounds or limitations to toleration, any further then the
safety of the people requires, the more horrid and blasphemous the opinion is,
the easier it will be suppressed by reason and argument.

(NNN) Liberty of Conscience p. 16. And what command find we in the word of
God which warrants us to imprison, fine, banish, or put to death any one,
especially amongst Christians for difference of opinion in Religion? many I
know are so indulgent as to be contented that every man might enjoy his own
conscience quietly, but would not suffer them to have the free exercise of it,
to discourse or publish their opinions unto others, but hereof I find no
ground in Scripture, Saint Paul says 1 Cor. 9.16. A command is laid upon me,
and woe is me if I preach not the Gospel; and our Savior said unto S. Peter,
Acts 22.32. When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren; so that the same
God which commands me to try the spirits, requires of me also that when I have
found the truth I should not withold it, like a candle under a Bushel. Yea,
but some will say, God requires you to teach the truth, but you teach heresy
in stead thereof, and therefore you ought to be persecuted; My answer is, that
I apprehend it to be the truth, and do but discharge my conscience, though it
be erroneous, desiring to see the warrant for persecuting such as teach or
publish erroneous Doctrines, which they in their own opinion thought had been
sound.

(OOO) Bloody Tenet p. 56, 57. Of these that fall into this dreadful ditch,
both Leader and followers, how deplorable in more especial manner is the
Leaders case, upon whose neck the followers tumble, the ruin not only of his
own soul being horrible, but also the ruin of the followers souls eternally
galling and tormenting? Soul-killing is the chiefest murder; it is a truth, the
mischief of a blind Pharisees blind guidance, is greater then if he acted
Treasons, murders, etc. and the loss of one soul by his seduction, is a
greater mischief then if he blew up Parliaments, and cut the throats of Kings
and Emperors: so precious is that invaluable jewel of a soul above all the
present lives and bodies of all the men in the world.

(PPP) Vide supra III. KKK. LLL. Also Bloody Tenet p. 54. Civil Magistrates
were never appointed by God, defenders of the faith of Jesus.

(PPP 2) Innocence and truth justified p. 46. I told him I could not take the
Covenant. Englands Birthright p. 12. The Covenant was first ordained to beget
unity between the Nations, but as sad experience teaches in its effects, it
produces nothing less amongst us, setting us at as bitter a War and
contestation amongst our selves almost as we have with our professed Enemies,
who before this unhappy makebate came amongst us, were knit together in love.
Ibid. p. 29, 30. O that the Parliament would give leave to some of their honest
fellow-Commoners to remonstrate the inconveniency and mischievousnesse of this
Covenant, and I am confident it would easily and clearly be made appear to
themselves so vile, that they would never enforce it any more, but rather
recall it. The last Warning p. 5, 6. Such as only personate Religion to bring
their ends about, whose Religion indeed is prudentially and zealously to
dissemble, these are they that frame oaths and Covenants for you in such
ambiguous expressions like Delphian Oracles, you will find that all their zeal
and Covenanting with the high God, is for no other end then to bring this
easily deluded Nation under bondage to Presbyteriall Lords and Taskmasters. The
interest of England p. 16. Quaere 6. Whether the solemn League and Covenant
may not prove the greatest mischief and snare unto the Kingdom in case its
interpretation be wrested from the Parliament to the Presbyters new proselyte
and his confederates, that ever yet was invented since the Wars. See also
Dels scruples against the Covenant through the whole.

(PPP 3) Remonstrance of many thousands p. 8, 10, 13, 14, 18. Also the interest
of England p. 13.

(PPP 4) I spare to name the worshipful and reverend instruments of this high
contumely most unworthy of them.

(PPP 5) Conscience cautioned p. 5. If the Scots stay and keep our Towns and
Garrisons after voted out, is it not Invasion? Is it not the same to enter in
hostility, or in confluent numbers after voted out, if they deliver not up the
King when demanded without capitulation? for they are our Army, our servants,
and is not the king our States, Prisoner? Ibid. p. 12. All this is but to King
the Scots under the color of the Kings name to make them Kings of England, and
the English their slaves. Quaeries. Who is it that holds out, etc? p. 1. Also
black cloud in the North, through it all.

(PPP 6) Gangren third Part.

(QQQ) The modest Queries concerning a printed paper p. 6. Abstruse and
disputable points of Religion, as that of free will, of the Trinity, of the
Hypostaticall union, concerning the death of Christ, concerning the state of
the soul after death, etc.

(RRR) Ibid. p. 1. Whether it be agreeable to the mind of Christ for men to
inflict the heavy censure of death upon their Brethren for holding forth such
Doctrines or opinions in Religion, suppose contrary to admonition, which for
ought the said inflicters know, except they make themselves infallible, may be
the sacred truths of God.

(SSS) Vide supra in the Histories of Becold and Muncer.

(TTT) M. Marshals Defense p. 75. It is most apparent that their Books even to
this day do constantly defend, that though Magistracy be an Ordinance of God,
as to them who are not under the dominion and kingdom of Christ, yet Christ
has put an end to it among his own people, taken away all Magistracy from
among them, that no Christian can be a Magistrate with a good conscience, and
that if Christians do live under any such, they are to bear them but as other
plagues and judgments are to be born.

(TTT 2) Disswasive first Part p. 152. MMMMMM 3.

(VVV) Ibid. p. 72. VV.

(XXX) M. Williams informed me, that Mistress Hutchison in the first place she
settled with her company after her banishment, did persuade her husband to lay
down the office of the Magistrate, as that which was unlawful for Christians
to bear.

(YYY) The just man's justification p. 10. That you would think upon the grand
murderer of England: for by this impartial Law of God there is no exemption of
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Judges, or Gentlemen, more then of
Fishermen, Cobblers, Tinkers and Chimney-sweepers, upon his shoulders all the
innocent blood that has in such abundance been shed in this Kingdom does lie.
Numb. 35.31. God says plainly that there shall no satisfaction be taken for
the life of a murderer, but he shall surely be put to death, because Saul
(though a King) slew some Gibeonites contrary to the Covenant made with them,
God sent a famine upon all Israel for three years, for that very innocent
bloodshed by the King. And there was no expiation or satisfaction to be made
therefore but by the blood of him that had shed it; and therefore because he
himself was dead, and his blood could not be had, seven of his sons (of his own
blood) must and was hanged up to make satisfaction therefore, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2,
3, 4. to the 9. See also Arguments proving that we ought not to part with the
Militia. Argument 10. According to protestations, oaths and Covenants, he
ought to be brought to exemplary and condign punishment, he being the greatest
and most notorious delinquent in the whole Kingdom, yea the original fountain
and wel-spring of all the Delinquents in the Kingdom, giving Commissions to all
the rest to kill, murder, and slay the innocent people. Also Queries to find
out who it is that holds out in Arms against the State of England. How can it
be properly said that the English Creator, the State of England, can commit
Treason against its own mee^ creature the King, their rebellious servant who
has stood it out in open hostility as long as possibly he could against his
earthly Sovereign, Lord, King and Creator, the State universal, whose legal
and formal representative the Parliament is.

(ZZZ) The Remonstrance of many thousands p. 6. Your Preachers must pray for
him as if he had not deserved to be excommunicated all Christian society, or as
if ye or they thought God were a respecter of the persons of Kings in
judgment; we do expect according to reason that ye should in the first place
declare and set forth King Charles his wickedness openly before the world, and
withal to show the intolerable inconveniences of having a Kingly Government
from the constant evil practices of those of this Nation, and so to declare
King Charles an enemy, and to publish your resolution never to have any more,
but to acquit us of so great a charge and trouble for ever, and to convert the
great revenue of the Crown to the public Treasure. The last Warning p. 1, and
2. None can show one good Act that ever any King did voluntarily for the good
of the people; If ye will examine Stories, or your own experience your self may
produce thousands of oppressions, murders, and other Tyrannies, though no
condition of mankind ever did so many, so intolerable mischiefs, though it
cannot be said to what use they serve, or that there is any use of them except
to debauch and vex a people; you hate those that would show a more just and
rational way of Government then that of Kings. Remostrance p. 16. If ye would
in many things follow the Hollanders good example, and make this Nation a State
free from the oppression of Kings, and the corruption of the Court, etc.

(AAAA) The just man in bonds p. 1. The Lords are but painted puppies and
Dagons, that our superstition and ignorance, their own craft and impudence have
erected; no natural issues of Laws, but the extuberances and mushromes of
Prerogative; the wens of just government, putting the body of the people to
pain, as well as occasioning deformity: Sons of conquest they are and
usurpation, not of choice and election; intruded upon us by power, not
constituted by consent, not made by the people from whom all power, place, and
office that is just in this Kingdom ought only to arise.

(BBBB) Alarm to the House of Lords p. 4. This is certain that most of you
gained no part of it your selves: and the common ways your ancestors gained it
for you, was generally by adhering to Kings in subduing and oppressing the
Commons, or by pleasing their lusts, malice, revenge, or covetousness, for so
Histories manifest, and those that have been made Lords in our times, have been
advanced by the same occasions.

(CCCC) Pearl in a Dunghill p. 3 Why presume ye thus, oh ye Lords? set forth
your merit before the people, and say for this good it is that we will reign
over ye, remember your selves, or shall we remember ye? which of ye before this
Parliament minded any thing so much as your pleasures, plays, masks, feastings,
huntings, gamings, dancings, with the appurtenances? for what other have they
been but a mere clogge to the House of Commons in all their proceedings? how
many necessary things have they obstructed? how many evil things promoted?

(DDDD) Englands Birthright p. 17. Lieutenant General Cromwell according to
his duty long since revealed the Earl of Manchesters treachery and baseness
at Dennington Castle and other places, and proved it punctually by
unquestionable witnesses, before a Committee of the House of Commons. Mistress
Lilburns petition to the House of Commons, without any regard to the Earl of
Manchesters Impeachment (in your House) of Treachery to the Country by
Lieutenant General Cromwell which is commonly reported to be punctually and
fully proved, and a charge of a higher nature then the Earl of Straffords for
which he lost his head, and which also renders him (so long as he stands so
impeached) incapable in any sense of being a Judge, and a great wrong and
injustice it is unto the Kingdom to permit him, and to himself, if innocent,
not to have had a legal trial ere this to his justification or condemnation.

These are most base and calumnious slanders against a Noble Lord, whose equal
in piety, meekness, and innocence, England for many years has not enjoyed.

(EEEE) Alarm p. 1. We may be bold to style them marks of Gentiles, we have
our Saviors own warrant for it, who says, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, etc. but it shall not be so among you; whosoever will be
chief among you (Christians) let him be your servant, gracious Lords, or
favorable Lords, titles that coald not be proper amongst Christians with whom
there was no ruler nor government, but by common election and consent,
agreeable to our House of Commons.

(FFFF) Birthright p. 19. Some Gentlemen of the Bishopric of Durham long
since complained to diverse Parliament men of old Sir Harry Vanes wilful losing
and betraying their Country, being their Lord Lieutenant, but by reason of his
greatness could never be heard. Ibid. p. 26. The Speaker turning himself to
his brother said, Sir John, if this be true, here is enough to hang you: Well
Sir, says Sir John, whereas he charge me of letting Violet go twice to
Oxford, during the time that he and Sir Bazil Brook were contriving their plot
against the City, you know I never let him go but once, and then I had your
warrant for it. Ibid. p. 46. It is enacted to be death unto any whosoever
holds intelligence and correspondency with the Enemy; all which Sir John
Lenthall and the Speaker his Brother have done, and yet it must neither be
proved against them, nor they tried nor arraigned, but altogether excused,
cleared and freed, even by Vote of Parliament.

(GGGG) Lilburns Letter to a friend p. 16. Many of them take to themselves 3 l.
10. s. a week, and some of them more, and others of them great places worth
500. l. 1000. l. 1500. l. 2000. l. and more per annum; and live in as great
pomp, superfluity, and bravery as ever they did in their days, by the ruins of
the people. Ibid. p. 30. The Commonwealth has just cause to fear that they
will make this present Parliament an everlasting Parliament, and the War a
never ending War, seeing it tends so much to the enriching of Parliament men
and their Officers, who have already wisely, as they think, fenced themselves
with an Ordinance made the 26 of June 1645. that they shall not be called to
account for their M^ the Commonwealths money nor plate that once comes into
their fingers.

(GGGG 2.) There is as little use of Lawyers to be in the House of Commons, as
there is of a plague or pestilence, or of the Bishops and Popish Lords in the
honorable House of Peers. Just man's justification p. 15. And then farewell
jangling Lawyers, the wildfire destroyers and bane of all just, rational, etc.
right governed Commonwealths. Innocence and truth p. 35. Which way would rid
the Kingdom of one of the unprofitable kind of Cattle remaining in it, namely
William Prinne and his jangling associates, who at the best are but an useless
rabble, an appropriating, lying and milk-sucking Generation.

(GGGG 3) Pearl in a Dunghill p. 4. It is easy to discern who are the Lords
creatures in the House of Commons, and how they were made theirs, constantly
manifesting themselves by their evil and pernicious partakings against the
freedom of the people by those united endeavors, monopolies in trades of
merchandise, oppressions of Committees, corruptions in Courts of Justice,
gross abuses in our Laws and Lawyers are maintained, and the reformation
intended in all things, performed by halves, nay quite perverted, and a mere
shadow given for a substance. Remonstrance p. 18. Others there are, and those a
great number, that are newly chosen into your House, and we trust are such as
will exceedingly strengthen the good part, that hitherto has been too weak to
steer an eaven course amidst so many oppositions and cross ways.

(HHHH) Birthright p. 43. As the Watermen at Queen-hive do usually cry Westward
hough, hough, so according to the present current of the times most honest men
have more then cause to cry in the Watermens language, Egypt hough, hough, the
House of bondage, slavery, oppression, taxation, heavy and cruel; we cannot
longer bear it, we cannot longer bear it, we are as much provoked and forced to
cast off all your yokes and crosses from our shoulders, except only that of
persecution, as ever any people or Nation. Ibid. p. 44. Few of our great and
mighty men do either work the clay or make the bricks, but they lay either all,
or most part of the burden upon the poor, by heavy labor and sweat of their
brows in the heat of the day, not only in working of the clay and making of the
bricks, but if they do complain to higher powers upon their cruel and
tyrannous taskmasters, they are so far from getting any kind of Justice,
that because they moaned or complained, and groaned under such heavy and
grievous burdens that they were not able any longer to bear or endure, they are
further ordained, even for their complaining, to gather stubble too, because
they are so idle. Lilburns Letter p. 2. Then truly I have been a long time
mistaken, and so indeed I have, for had I thought that the Parliament had had
no rule but their own will, to have walked by, I should never have drawn my
sword for them: and for my part I know no difference betwixt Tyranny and such
proceedings. Ib. p. 3. Since the first of May last, I have by authority from
the House of Commons been three times imprisoned, before ever I knew mine
accuser or my accusation, or ever was suffered to speak one word in mine own
defense. Ib. p. 14. Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth, and thou righteous
God that love Justice, and judgment, and hate and abhorrest oppression and
cruelty, which make wise men mad, put forth thy hand and do justice thy self
upon the unjust and unrighteous Judges of this age, whom the people have set up
for their good, namely to preserve their lives, liberties and estates as their
faithful Stewards and servants, and yet destroy what they would seem to
maintain. p. 17. Amongst those that would be thought their friends they are
robbed, plundered, spoiled, oppressed, undone, and destroyed by all sides, and no
remedy left for redress, but the little ones to be eaten up of the great ones
in every place, which makes poor men's lives a burden to them, that they are
ready to wish themselves back again in Egypt in their bondage, and rather to
have one Tyrant then many. Alarm p. 11. These deceivable snares leading to
worse then Egyptian slavery, wherein we, our poor infants on their mothers
breasts, and others who know not the right hand from the left, yea, and our
whole posterity are most pitifully catched and involved, even as Gods own
particular people the Jews were in the days of Haman, except there come such a
happy and speedy remedy as it pleased him in mercy then to send beyond the
expectation of man.

(IIII) Gangren second Part p. 117. They teach that the people of God are a
free people, and what they do they should do freely and voluntarily, and not to
be assessed and rated by the Parliament, compelled to pay rate upon rate,
assessement upon assessement.

(KKKK) Gangren second Part p. 122. It was laid to M. Oats charge then, that he
had preached against the assessements of Parliament, and the taxes laid upon
the people, teaching them that the Saints were a free people, and should do
what they did voluntarily and not be compelled; but now contrary to this, they
had assessement upon assessement, and rate upon rate.

(LLLL) Remonstrance p. 1. Calling those their Commissioners in Parliament to
an account how they have discharged their duties to the universality of the
people their Sovereign Lord from whom their power and strength is derived, and
by whom, ad been placitum it is continued.

(MMMM) Ib. p. 3. We are your principals, and you our agents to preserve the
splendour and glory of that underived Majesty and Kingship that inherently
resides in the people or the State universal, the representation or derivation
of which is formally and legally in the State elect or representative, and none
else, whose actions ought all to tend to that end, against encroachments,
usurpations, and violences of all its creatures, officers, and Ministers, (in
the number of which are Kings themselves) from whom and for whom they have all
their power and authority, as the execution of their will and mind for their
good and benefit, to whom they are acountable for the faithful discharge of
that trust reposed in them.

(NNNN) Birthright p. 32, 33. Whether is it not agreeable to Law, justice,
equity and conscience, that there should be a Parliament once every year, and
more often if need require; that seeing this present Parliament (by reason of
the extraordinary necessities of the Kingdom) have sat four years, and many of
the Members betrayed their trust, and those that remain ingrosse Law-making,
and also Law-executing into their own hands, contrary both to reason and to the
meaning of the Law, by which manifest abusing, negligent, and not true using
the Laws; oppressions, mischiefs, and grievances are no less, (if not far
more) increased then they were before the Parliament began, and many times by
the powerful interest of a faction in the Parliament, to save some one, two or
three of their Members undeserving credits, they so violate the known,
unrepealed and declared Law of the Land, yea and their own Votes, Ordinances,
Declarations, and Protestations, as if they had never made them: I say all
these things considered, ought not the free men of England not only to choose
new Members where they are wanting once every year, but also to renew and
enquire once a year after the carriage and behavior of those they have chosen?

(OOOO) Vide supra NNN.

(PPPP) Remonst. p. 20. Nor do we value a Trienniall Parl. before 3 years come
to an end grievances and mischiefs may be past remedy.

(QQQQ) Birthright p. 30. We have just cause to fear they will set up an
interest of their own destructive to the common freedom, and so make this
present Parl. an everlasting Parl. and the War a never dying War, seeing it
tends so much to the enriching of Parliament men and their Officers.

(RRRR) Vide supra, also Conscience cautioned p. 12. If neither Law nor Lords
will allow the people to be saved, then may they not be saved any way, and both
Laws and Lords fall before their Sovereign the people, as Dagon did before the
Ark, rather then the people perish. Birthright p. 32. I have heard it reported
that self-denying Cromwell was about a design of getting a Committee set apart,
and an order made and published to the whole Kingdom, that if any man were
unjustly oppressed by any Member of Parl. Committee-man, or any other Officers
or Ministers, let him bring his complaint and he shall have a just and fair
hearing, and justice done, not in words but in acti^ns, upon the transgressor.
Interest p. 10. We know it is not Gods way to have respect of persons in
judgment, and that the doing thereof has frequently lost Gods favor and made
States miserable. Englands lamentable slavery p. 6. What became of that common
and thredbare doctrine that Kings were accountable only to God? what good
effects did it produce? No, they are but corrupt and dangerous flatterers that
maintain any such fond opinions concerning either Kings or Parliaments.

(SSSS) The Conqueror robbed England of Edward the Confessors Laws, and in stead
of them set up the Dictates of his own will, whose Norman rules and practices
to this day yet remain in the administrations of the Common Law at Westminster
Hall. By reason of their tediousness, ambiguities, uncertainties, the entries
in Latin as bad as the French, because it is not our own tongue; their forcing
men to plead by Lawyers, and not permitting themselves to plead their own
cause, their compelling of persons to come from all places of the Kingdom to
seek for justice at Westminster, which is such an iron Norman yoke, with fangs
and teeth in it, that if we were free in every particular else, that our heart
can think of, yet were we slaves by this alone: the burden of which singly,
will pierce and gall our shoulders, and make us bow and stoop to the ground,
ready to be made a prey not only by great men, but even by every cunning
sharking knave. Remonst. p. 4. The History of our forefathers, since they were
conquered by the Normans, does manifest, that this Nation has been held in
bondage all along ever since by the policies and force of the Officers of trust
in the Commonwealth. p. 15. Ye know the Laws of this Nation are unworthy a free
people, and deserve from first to last to be considered and seriously debated,
and reduced to an agreement with common equity and right reason, which ought to
be the form and life of every government. Magna Carta it self being but a
beggarly thing containing many marks of intolerable bondage; and the Laws that
have been made since by Parliaments have in very many particulars made our
government much more oppressive, and intolerable. Ib. He erected a trade of
Judges and Lawyers to sell justice and injustice at his own unconscionable
rate, and in what time he pleased, the corruption whereof is yet remaining upon
us to our continual empoverishing and molestation, from which we thought you
should have delivered us; ye know also, imprisonment for debt, is not from the
beginning.

(TTTT) Modest Queries p. 10. (at least in sensu composito) to believe the
deepest or highest mystery in Religion any further, or any otherwise, then as,
and as far as he has reason to judge it to be a truth.

(VVVV) Vide Disswasive first Part, p. 127. and 152. also p. 31. and 49. IIIII.
KKKKK.

(XXXX) I am credibly informed that this is the great and troublesome
controversy for the time among the Governors of New England, whether it be
their duty to rule according to their gifts of Government according to some
written Laws, or without all humane Statutes. Vid. Gang. 3 Part.

(YYYY) Remonst. p. 3. The free born people to their own House of Commons, the
cause of our choosing you to be Parliament men was to deliver us from all kind
of bondage, we possessed you with the same power that was in our selves to have
done the same, for we might justly have done it our selves without you if we
had thought it convenient: choosing you (as persons whom we thought fitly
qualified and faithful) for avoiding some inconveniences: but ye are to
remember, this was only of us but a power of trust (which is ever revocable and
cannot be otherwise) and to be employed to no other end then our own well-being.

(AAAAA) Vide supra. also Warning p 2. You hate and abhor those that would
purge this corrupt humor out of you and show you a more just and rational way
of Government then that of Kings. Also Remonst. p. 16. If ye would follow the
good ex^mple of the Hollanders, and make this Nation a State free from the
oppression of Kings. Also p. 12. As if ye had discovered and digested that
without a powerful compulsive Presbytery in the Church, a compulsive
Mastership, or Aristocraticall government over the people in the State, could
never long be maintained.

(BBBBB) Conscience cautioned p. 9. Know ye not the State of the State? is it
not the whole Kingdom, each individual? I can prove it is; O heavens, will you
Lord it over your Lords! I profess if you make head against your heads any
longer, I know what it is, and your self shall know, for I say you deserve
beheading.

(CCCCC) Conscience cautioned p. 6. Keep we humbly beseech you our right of
Kinghood and Priesthood. Just man's justification p. 14. The splendour and glory
of that undivided Majesty and Kingship that inherently resides in the people or
in the State universal.

(DDDDD) Remonst. p. 7. Let the Lords stand to be chosen for Knights and
Burgesses by the people as other the freemen and Gentry of this nation do.

(EEEEE) Vide supra YYYY.

(FFFFF) Remonst. p. 20. That a Parl. chosen in November. succeeding year by
year, may come in stead of the preceding Parliament.

(GGGGG) Just man's justify. p. 15. Reduce us back to that part of the ancient
frame of government in this Kingdom, before the Conquerors days, that we may
have all causes and differences decided in the County or Hundred where they are
committed or do arise without any appeal but to a Parl. and that they may
m^nthly be judged by 12. men of free and honest condition c^ sen by themselves
with their Grave or chief Officer amongst them, and that they may swear to
judge every man's cause aright, without fear, favor or affection, and then
farewell jangling Lawyers, the wildfire destroyers and ba^e of all just,
rational, and right governed Commonwealths.

(HHHHH) Remonst. p. 12. Ye vex and molest honest men for matters of Religion
and difference with you and your Synod, take upon you to determine of doctrine
and discipline; approving this, and reproaching that, just like unto former,
ignorant, politic, and superstitious Parliaments and Convocations: and thereby
have divided honest people among themselves by countenancing only those of the
Presbytery and discountenancing all the separation, Anabaptists and
Independents. Ib. We are well assured that neither you nor none else can have
any power at all to conclude the people in matters that concern the worship of
God, for therein every one of us ought to be fully assured in our minds, and to
be sure to worship him according to our consciences.

(IIIII) The Birthright p. 48, 49. in the Postscript. It would be excellent and
needful if the Parl. would ordain that every free man of Eng. who is able,
would bestow his service one year at least, freely for the good of the civil
State, in any place or office of trust, whereof his skill and breeding a^ fit
him t^ be most capable, according as they shall be chosen, and those that are
not able to serve freely for a year, to have competent maintenance allowed to
them to the value of 50 or 60 l. a year according to their charge. If such be
chosen for their skill and diligence, though they want outward means, for which
allowance those that are conscientious will do as good service at least, as some
others who have 1000 or 2000 a year. The like rule is no less, but far more
excellent and needful to be observed and established i^ matters concerning the
Church state, wherein her servants are to perform their duties freely, they
being able to maintain themselves and those with them, whether by means
obtained formerly or industry used daily, otherwise to have the like allowance
of 50 or 60 l. a year acording to their charge.

(KKKKK) Vide supra.

CHAP. IV. Their Antipaedobaptisme, Arminianisme, Arianisme, Familisme, and
other wicked Errors.
THIS much for the first head of the Anabaptists, All Anabaptists are for
Antipaedobaptisme.
Brownistick Tenets (so to call them) being such as the Brownists of old did
learn from the Anabaptists, and which this day the Anabaptists take back again
from the Brownists: But beside all which the Brownists can like of, the
Anabaptists proceed to a further reformation as they account it; they become
Antipaedobaptists.

Hereby they engage themselves in these practices and Tenets, They avow the
nullity of our Baptism.
first they refuse to Baptize any infant, they refuse to admit to the first
Sacrament any who gives not a confession of their own faith, they esteem
paedobaptism a great sin, which according to their temper they express in
harder or softer terms, the meekest of them count it a nullity and will worship
(A).

Secondly, They press on us a rebaptization.
they make it necessary to baptize over again all who in their infancy were
baptized, and from this they carry the name of rebaptizers. It is true, they
deny with passion all rebaptizing, for infant baptism they call a nullity, so
when they baptize in riper age them who before were baptized in their infancy,
they esteem this their action to be but the first baptism which they repeat no
more (B). But we who know paedobaptism to be no nullity, but a true and valid
Sacrament, cannot but call their action a second Baptism and repetition of the
first: So with great reason the name of rebaptizers is given unto them. But to
put the equity of this reproach out of doubt, their great patrons now are come
to defend the lawfulness of baptism not only twice, but if ye will ten times,
yea so often as you repent for sin; which ought to be oftener then once a day; so
of Anabap^^^ts they become Hemerobaptists and more (C).

Thirdly, they exclude all infants from any interest at all in the Covenant of
grace (D); They exclude all infants from the Covenant of grace, and make
circumcision a seal only of carnal promises.
they grant that the Jewish infants had interest in some earthly privileges,
which Circumcision did seal unto them; but they deny that any children whether
of Jews or Gentiles have any promise of grace made to them till they come to
age and believe: so they will not have Circumcision a seal of the Covenant of
grace (E) to any of the children of Abraham, while they are infants, but only
of temporal benefits (F): By this means they make the infants of faithful
Christians, and of the Turks and Pagans all equal (G); some of both to belong
to eternal election, but none of either to have any interest in the Covenant
of grace till they become actual believers. This makes them uncertain what to
say of infants dying before conversion, some save them all (H), others incline
to the damnation of them all (I), others profess the uncertainty of the thing,
whether infants before their conversion be within the kingdom of Satan, or that
of God (K).

Many of them deny original sin, and assert all the articles of Arminius.
Fourthly, many of them stumble upon original sin; some deny it altogether, as
if infants were not born with any sinful corruption (L), or what ever sin they
are born in, they will have it taken away by virtue of Christ's universal
redemption, in all mankind, as well Pagans as Christians (M); making baptism
no more needful in the one nor in the other, for the removing or sealing of
the removal of that which is removed without the means either of Word or
Sacraments, by virtue of a general Covenant made with all mankind in Adam,
after the fall: From this ground they are drawn away to all the Tenets of
Arminius. Others of them fly out to the contrary extremity, avowing that Adam
before the fall in his very creation was corrupted with sin (N), and by a huge
blasphemy make the very humane nature of Christ to be sinful (O), and God to
be the Creator of sin both in the first and second Adam (P).

They separate from all who renounce not paedobaptisme.
Fifthly, by their rejecting of infant Baptism they fall into the error of rigid
Separation; they baptize none but actual believers, such as give them
satisfaction of their actual faith and holiness; thus far going along with
the rigid Separatists (Q). But hence they proceed to another ground, whereupon
they leave the Separatists and (...) who follow them not to Anabaptism (R);
they take Baptism f^^ a Sacrament of initiation, for a door and mean of entering
into the Church; these who are not baptized they count not Church members,
infant Baptism they pronounce a nullity, and such a disobedience to the Gospel
as infers Antichristianism, and a real denial that Christ is yet come in the
flesh (S): So the Separatists who are all baptized in their infancy, and refuse
to be rebaptized, to them are no better then unbaptized and Antichristian
rebels, not capable of Church membership, or of any Church communion. Upon this
ground (as their great Patron acknowledges) they are forced to declare the
Independent and Brownistick Congregations, how dear otherwise soever, to be but
Antichristian Synagogues, and no true Churches (T).

But here self-love does much blind them, Yet they admit into their Churches
many much worse then these from whom they separate.
for they who are so precise as to separate with the Brownists from all the
reformed Churches, because of their impure admissions; and from the Brownists
also, because of their infant Baptism, are notwithstanding ready to receive
into their Churches, those who for life and doctrine are much more impure, then
many from whom they separate, if so be they are willing to renounce their
paedobaptism, as they call it, and to receive of them a new true Baptism (V).
In this they stick not to their own principles, nor to the practice of their
fathers; for so strict were they, that a small scandal in life, or a little
difference in doctrine, would have quickly procured a cutting off from the
Church by the censure of excommunication; but now the world abroad may hear
both of adulteries and thefts, and the grossest heresies of their members,
without any ejection from their Churches.

Sixthly, they esteem sprinkling no Baptism at all, Sprinkling to them nullifies
baptism.
they will have the whole body to be plunged over head and ears in the water
(X); this circumstance of plunging, they account so necessary and essential to
Baptism, that the change thereof into sprinkling makes the Baptism to be null.
That such a plunging draws upon some sickness and death, and upon women great
shame and scandal, while they are stripped and must stand altogether naked in
the presence of men, and of the whole Congregation; these and other
inconveniences they do not much regard (Y).

Seventhly, M. Tombs new way.
of those who impugn paedobaptism some go a new way of their own, wherein as
yet they have very few followers if any at all, for to this day I have heard of
^one. M. Tombs a learned and very bold man, at this time when so many new ways
are in hand, has thought meet to make a hotch-potch of many of them together:
first, He is a rigid Antipaedobaptist, yet not against sprinkling.
with all his strength and greater diligence then any before him, he impugnes
paedobaptism (Z): Secondly, though as yet I have marked nothing to fall from
his pen, neither from any of the old Anabaptists, for the rite of dipping, or
against our custom of sprinkling, yet in spoiling of Christian infants not
only of Baptism but of all interest in the Covenant of grace, He spoils all
infants of all interest in the Covenant of grace.
as much as the children of Turks and Pagans; in making Circumcision a seal to
the Jews only of earthly and temporal privileges; in denying to Jewish
infants all right to the new Covenant (AA), He is a friend to the worst
Anabaptists, and injurious to all who oppose them.
till in their riper years they became actual believers; in giving a power to
persons unbaptized to baptize others (BB); in making apologies for the worst of
the Anabaptists even those of Munster (CC), and invectives against the best
that oppose them; the first reformers (DD), the Assembly at Westminster (EE)
the Church of Scotland (FF), M. Marshall (GG), M. Goodwin (HH), and others ( HH
2); he flies as high as any civil and discreet Anabaptist I have met with: but
in those things he goes far beyond all the Anabaptists I have heard of.

He makes baptism a rite needless either to young or old.
First, he esteems Baptism so unnecessary a rite, that men who are meet to
receive it, may very well be without it; as Constantine, Ambrose, and others,
did delay to their old age that Sacrament (II); and as it seems, himself is
careless to this day to be baptized; for his infant Baptism according to his
arguments must be null, and another Baptism as yet it seems he has not
received; for he professes an unwillingnesse to join himself as a member to
any of the Anabaptists Churches (KK), and I suppose they are unwilling to
baptize any who will not join in communion with them.

Secondly, when a man is baptized according to his own mind he allows him to
be often thereafter rebaptized; He allows of a frequent rebaptization.
even so often as he repents for sin, which by the godly is done, at least ought
to be done, every day oftener then once (LL).

He admits unbaptized persons to the Lords Table.
Thirdly, he makes it lawful for persons before they be baptized to partake of
the Lords Supper (MM).

Fourthly, to show how little inclinable he is to join with the Anabaptists, he
declares himself a complete Erastian; He is a gross Erastian.
avowing that no scandalous professor ought to be kept from the Lords Table
(NN); also that there is no such thing as any censure of excommunication (OO);
further that Christ in Scripture has not appointed any particular government
for his Church (PP), but that the governing of the Church belongs to the
Magistrate only, and to such whom he appoints to that service by virtue of a
commission flowing from himself (QQ).

The third head we proposed to speak of is the Tenets which too many of the
Anabaptists are pleased to borrow from the Arminians, Antinomians,
Antitrinitarians, Familists, The most of the Anabaptists are Arminians.
Antiscripturists, and blasphemous Atheists.

For their Arminianism M. Marshall gives abundant testimony (RR): Some years
ago when Anabaptism did begin under M. Mortons Ministry to spread at London,
the most of them did turn gross Arminians (SS), and published that heretical
Dialogue, against which M. Ainsworth a little before his death did print an
answer, and after him M. Robinson another.

It is true, The second Edition of their Confession is not so free of
Arminianisme as the first.
the late Confession of the seven Churches seem to reject clearly enough all
the five Articles of the Arminians; but as our former witnesses testify,
thousands of them care not for that Confession; yea, I profess I cannot
conjecture at the reason, why the second Edition of this Confession which alone
was offered to the Parliament, does change so many material passages of the
first, which point blank did militate against Arminianisme, unless it be their
farther declination to Arminianism at the penning of their second Edition.

For instance, the seventeenth Article in the first Edition stood thus, He has
fully performed all these things by which God might reconcile his elect only;
In the second the word only is put away; as if Christ by his sacrifice had
reconciled to God all mankind as well as the elect. This our suspicion is
increased by finding the same alteration acted over again in the Article twenty
first, where the first Edition reads it thus, Christ by his death did bring
forth salvation and reconciliation only for the elect; in the second Edition
the words reconciliation only are omitted. Also in the nineteenth Article these
words, which are the reprobate, in the second Edition are scraped out: and in
that same Article, The execution of Gods determinate counsel whereby he
delivers up his enemies to a reprobate mind to be kept unto judgment, are
scraped out in the second Edition.

Likewise in that same Article I find two more alterations; In the first among
the fruits which the elect have of Christ's Priesthood are set down their
justification, adoption, regeneration, and sanctification; all those are
omitted in the latter Edition. In the first Edition it is said of the Spirit
that he is never taken away when once given, but does still abide begetting and
nourishing faith unto immortality; this is omitted in the latter Edition. I
grant it is put in the 23 Article, which is clear enough against the Arminian
error of perseverance, had not the addition of one little word cast it all
loose: for in the former Edition the 23 Article did run thus, Those that have
this precious faith can never totally nor finally fall away; but in the latter,
all, is added, all these cannot fall away, etc. which is very true, if some few
persevere, albeit many and the most part of these who have justifying faith
should fall away totally and finally.

If the ground of these and many more alterations in the second Edition of that
Confession, proceed from any farther inclination to Arminianism in any of the
prime Leaders of these seven Churches, at the time of the second subscription
more then appeared at the first, I cannot affirm, only M. Spilsberry, the chief
penner as it seems of that writ, does now find the Arminian errors so
troublesome among his friends, that he is forced to publish a particular
Treatise against them (VV).

The chief Churches of the Anabaptists are gross Arminians.
But what ever be the condition of the seven Churches, certainly M. Lambs
Congregation, the greatest, as they say, and most fruitful of all their
Societies without comparison, is pestered with this gangren; the great
Preachers in that flock, M. Oats and M. Den make it their ordinary Theme, that
Christ died for all, for Judas as well as for Peter (XX); That all the sins of
the first Covenant are actually taken away from all mankind; That the common
doctrine of election and predestination is false (YY); That the Sun, Moon, and
other creatures do sufficiently preach Christ to all the world (ZZ); That the
will of man has power to reject the most efficacious grace (AAA); That our
Doctrine of perseverance is false (BBB). These men be the chief Apostles and
Evangelists of the Anabaptistick Churches, who are sent out by the rest to the
adjacent Counties to preach and baptize (CCC). For this their false Doctrine
laid to their charge long ago in Print, we never heard that either of them has
been so much as rebuked by any of their Churches, or that M. Spilsberry, though
he writ against the Tenets, did ever yet refuse communion, and the right hand
of fellowship unto any person whom he knew to profess them.

Unto the Arminian many of them do join the Antinomian Errors, these are the
chief charms whereby multitudes of people are drawn to their company, as M.
Weld does well remark (DDD): Nothing is more attractive of people then the
Doctrine of licentiousness gilded over with the pretenses of the most eminent
piety: It is not only Oats, Den, Lamb, Clarkson, and the like, who preach
against the Law and all duties; telling us that the moral Law does not bind
any Christian to obedience (EEE); That Magistrates may not punish murderers if
they be Church members, for the sixth command, Thou shall not kill, does not
concern Christians (FFF), they have naught to do with Moses nor any of his Laws
(GGG); That all the sins of the Saints that either they have or shall commit,
are so taken away by Christ that they ought not to be grieved for any of them
(HHH); That all Preachers who press repentance and sorrow for sin are Legal
(III); That God is not displeased with any sins of the Saints, and will not
have them be displeased with any of their own iniquities (KKK); That God
requires no duty from those whom he will save, not so much as faith; That faith
it self is a work and a Legal condition (LLL); That all our duties are done
for us by Christ; That he has repented for us and believed for us (MMM); That
no more under the Gospel is required of any but to be mere patients (NNN).

This is the new glorious light wherein not only the common Antinomians do
glory, but their most precious and spiritual men have too many strains of the
same kind; M. Hobson proclaims all his wonted religious exercises to be but
legal duties which he professes to give over (OOO): He avows that Christ has
satisfied Gods Justice for no man's sin, nor done any thing for the reconciling
of God to men with whom he was never offended, and to whom if once he had been
offended he could never again have been reconciled (PPP); he makes it Christ's
only labor to reconcile man to God, and to manifest not to procure Gods love
to man (QQQ).

M. Saltmarsh so great a Champion for the Antipaedobaptists that he rests not
till he have exploded the Baptism as well of old as of young, makes it now his
greatest work to write against our orthodoxe Divines in favor of the
Antinomians (SSS).

The Author of that neatly printed Treatise of Baptism from whom I should have
as little expected as from any other an apostasy from the Independents to the
Anabaptists, and a transition from Anabaptism to any point of Antinomianism,
does tell us that all anxious laboring about sins and the pardoning of them is
a great impediment to holiness of life (TTT).

The Confession of their seven Churches does not so flatly contradict these
errors as the former of Arminianisme, but rather countenances them; it sets
down such a justification as acquits us before God of all sin past, present,
and to come (VVV): The second Edition omits that sentence of past, present, and
to come, (I wish this correction did proceed from a dislike of the conclusions
which the Antinomians draw from the words omitted) but in both Editions they
expressly exclude the necessity of the Laws Ministry to bring the soul to any
repentance before or in the time of its calling and conversion to Christ (XXX).

The Antinomian controversies are not as the prime Independents do make them
only about words and methods of Preaching.
I should be glad that all the question here were only about words and phrases,
or methods of preaching, as some would make it: but exp^rience proves the
difference to be too too real; for we see that their words, phrases and method
of preaching does carry their hearers to the grossest crimes, without any
remorse of conscience or thought of repentance. When some of them are catched
in theft they scorn either to be grieved or ashamed for it (YYY); others
encourage themselves to commit adultery upon their Doctrine (ZZZ); some of them
do constantly work in their handy-trade every Sabbath day (AAAA); others make
all repentance and prayer for pardon of the grossest sins to be sinful, and a
fruit of misbeleef (BBBB): finally, if the report of those who pretend to be
acquainted with their carriage hold good, too many who have been noted for
strictness of life, have fallen evidently after the embracing of these Tenets
into a looseness of conversation (CCCC).

Many of the Anabaptists are become Seekers denying all Churches, all Officers,
all Ordinances.
We have already demonstrated a far enough progress of this Sect into the
ways of error, yet the spirit that reigns in Anabaptism carries many of his
followers beyond all we have spoken: Their injury not only against infants but
all the Churches in the world that dissent from them, in spoiling the first of
all interest in the Covenant of God and comfort from the holy Sacrament; in
depriving the other of all the privileges of true Churches, closing up all
these blessings within the narrow bounds of their own seduced companies, this
their unjustice is recompensed by God upon many of their spirits, giving them
over to stronger delusions. Very many of the Anabaptists are now turned
Seekers, denying the truth of any Church upon earth for many ages past, denying
that there are any Pastors now on the earth, that there may be any preaching of
the word, any joining in prayer, any celebration either of Baptism or of the
Lords Supper, any Church discipline at all, or any Church Act, Church state, or
Church ordinance whatsoever; while God from heaven send new Apostles to work
miracles and set up Churches which for the space of fourteen hundred years at
least have totally failed in the whole world. Hitherto M. Williams (DDDD), M.
Clarkson (EEEE), Mr. Attaway (FFFF), are come from their Antipaedobaptism:
Hitherto also it seems M. Saltmarsh does drive while he not only defends the
Seekers as well as the Independents and Anabaptists; but himself also
positively avows that there is no lawful Baptism this day in the whole earth,
and that there has been none rightly baptized since the days of the Apostles:
also that to lawful Baptism and the right gathering of a Church an Apostolic
calling and a Baptism with the holy Ghost is always necessary (GGGG). This is
the issue of Anabaptism in many, and is likely to be daily in more, as we are
taught not only by the zealous and diligent observer of the Sectaries motions
M. Edwards (HHHH), but also from that great Patriarch of the Anabaptists
Confession M. Spilsberry, who in his Treatise against the Seekers is forced to
acknowledge the apostasy of too too many of those who once had been cordial
for his way of Anabaptism (IIII).

We are not yet come toward any period of the journey of these wanderers, for
the spirit that is in them is restless, Many of the Anabaptists are become
Antitrinitarians.
and keeps them in a perpetual motion: these who are only Seekers
notwithstanding of all their enmity against the setting up of Churches or use
of ordinances, till Elias and new Apostles come to kill the Antichrist, and
reform these Antichristian abuses, that have destroyed for so long a time, the
true being of all Churches; yet are they content in a private and personal way
to embrace the Scriptures, and the most substantial truths therein contained:
but many Anabaptists are now begun to make havoc of all. The Trinity they
abominate, they will not only have Paul Beasts blasphemy to go without any
censure, but they do also join with him to preach down the Divinity of Jesus
Christ and the Person of the holy Ghost (KKKK), as their old Father the
Anabaptist Servetus does lead them the way. It is very suspicious that their
seven Churches in their Confession make no mention at all of the Trinity, The
Confession of their seven Churches is here unsound
nor express any thing of the Person either of Christ or of the holy Ghost,
when they have pregnant occasion so to do. What they speak in their second
Article of the Father, Word, and Spirit, as being all three one God, is
expounded by some of their followers not of the Trinity of Persons, but of
three offices only of one and the same Person (LLLL).

It cannot but give offense that in their twenty second Article where they
speak of that which Scripture holds out, and we accordingly are to believe of
Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost, they mention in both their Editions only the
nature and offices of Christ, the power and fullness of the Spirit in his works
and operations, but speak not a syllable of the Persons either of the Son, or
of the Spirit; and to Christ they give but one nature, while as all Divines
since his Incarnation give him two.

Richardson one of their prime Leaders, a blasphemer of the Trinity.
But that which most clearly evidences their Heterodoxy in this point is, that
having set down rightly in the end of their second Article the personal
relations and properties, the Fathers being of himself, the Sons generation of
the Father from everlasting, the holy Spirits procession from the Father and
the Son, yet in their second Edition they scrape out all this, and in the
margin of its Preface they refer those who desire to know farther of their
mind to their Brother M. Richardsons Treatise; now this man tells us that what
ever is written against the Anabaptists is all from the Devil (MMMM), and if we
understand him right he pronounces our Doctrine of the Trinity, of Christ's
eternal generation, and of the Spirits procession from the Father and the Son,
to be no less a crime then very blasphemy (NNNN). That the seven Churches will
own such horrible assertions, though they refer us to them, I cannot obtain
of my self to believe, albeit too many of their friends go all this length and
much farther.

Diverse of them are abominable blasphemers of Christ's Person.
Paul Beasts blasphemies against the Divinity of Christ and the holy Ghost are
no more his singularities, but are now become a part of the new light which
shines in Lambs Congregation (OOOO), and openly in Westminster Hall is defended
without all fear either of God or man (PPPP), yea so great is the despite of
diverse Anabaptists at the Person of Jesus Christ, that they rail most
abominably against his holy name; they not only spoil him of his Godhead, but
will have his Manhood defiled with sin, (QQQQ), yea they come to renounce him
and his Cross (RRRR). Though some of them with a great deal of confidence avow
themselves to be the very Christ (SSSS).

And if any worse can be, Others of them are become perfect Atheists
some of tbis generation are gone yet higher, from the Trinity of the Persons
they fall on the very nature and essence of God, giving to him a humane shape,
and bodily form of three men, wherein when he pleases he makes himself visible
(TTTT).

And which yet is worse, some of them deny all being to God, as if he had no
existence neither in the heaven nor the earth, or any where else (VVVV). Thus
far Boggis M. Hobsons man, and M. Oats dear companion did openly avow, and
Web confessed that as once himself, so many of his companions were turned
express Atheists (XXXX).

The holy Scripture, the only ground of faith, They evert and reject the whole
Scripture.
which once being overturned, all the building of our belief must fall, is most
lamentably blasphemed by them, not only the old Testament, but the new also is
set aside, the letter of the most plain Texts is turned into allegories (YYYY),
the Scripture is denied to be the word of God (ZZZZ), and is avowed to be full
of lies and errors (AAAAA), men are sent from the word to seek revelations
above and contrary to it (BBBBB).

The Familistick Anabaptists do cleave fast to the most of David George his
abominations and add more of their own thereto. Many of them are turned
Familists denying the immortality of the soul.
They deny that any man's soul is a living spirit, affirming it to be only a
bodily vapor like the life of beasts, which at death does perish. They are not
only for the sleeping of the soul at death, but for its annihilation, and for
this they have published whole Books (CCCCC): At first these mortallists did
grant a resurrection of the body, and for that end a new creation of a corporal
soul, but now they speak out their mind more boldly, they deny all resurrection
after death, all life either of body or soul: what Scripture speaks of the day
of judgment, of the burning of the elements, and of life eternal, they turn
it into allegories, and make it all to be performed in this life, but after a
man's death they admit not of any return to life or to any more being (DDDDD).

A heaven for the joy of the Saints, Denying heaven and hell, angels and devils.
a hell for the torment of the wicked after this life they utterly deny
(EEEEE): That ever there was either Angel or Devil they also deny; what
Scripture speaks of these creatures they allegorize it all into fancies
(FFFFF): Some of them make the world eternal, others all creatures to perish.
They make God personally to subsist in every creature, they make him the life
of all the living, and his essence the proper form of all things (GGGGG): Some
of them make the world eternal going on in a continual generation and
succession of things as now we see them (HHHHH); others make all to be
destroyed, Some deny all resurrection, others makes the bests rise to glory
heaven and earth and what ever is therein, for ever to perish, and nothing of
any creature to remain, but that portion of the Divine essence which was in
them, and gave them their being (IIIII): Some of them that admit of a
resurrection after this life make it general of all creatures that ever have
been, even of beasts, birds, and fishes to a new life of glory (KKKKK).

They teach abominable obscenities.
I read not that their Doctrine is yet so extremely obscene as that of David
George, yet here also they are come pretty near him; for two of their Teachers,
M. Gorting and Mistress Attaway with their Disciples have declared themselves
for the dissolution of all unequal Marriages, and such are all those with
persons of a different mind from themselves (LLLLL): That which we have heard
of their practicing of incest is now publicly avowed in print, they do not
with David George lay aside all natural relations, in matter of marriage they
will not pass the consideration of Father and Mother, Brother and Sister, but
which is worse they will have these relations to be grounds of a Matrimonial
conjunction, as if these marriages were most laudable which are betwixt persons
nearest in blood, Brother and Sister, Father and Daughter, Mother and Son,
Uncle and Niece; this spirit of abominable villainy does now walk in public
among us (MMMMM); whereunto if you will add M. Miltons doctrine of dismissing
wives so often as men please ( MMMMM 2) you shall make it lawful for every man
once a month to marry if they were thirty of his nearest kinswomen, a
wickedness which David George himself did never think of.

They follow David George in his greatest absurdities.
But that which was David George his chief wickedness in debasing the
administrations of God and advancing himself above all that is called God,
making the dispensation of the Law the Kingdom of the Father, the preaching of
the Gospel the carnal Kingdom of the Son, but his own Ministry to be above
both, the Ministry of the holy Ghost in a new world of love, whereof himself
was the great Prophet, far more excellent then all before him; this madness
is also in the midst of us.

Attaway made it the subject of diverse of her Sermons, that the Kingdom of the
holy Ghost, and of love more excellent then that of Christ's was now at the
doors (NNNNN); That Jerusalem was quickly to be builded, and from thence
extraordinary Prophets to be sent for the preaching of the eternal Gospel
(OOOOO).

And now much sooner then we expected before one stone is laid in Jerusalem,
behold the great Prophet is come and has printed his Divine light, The Divine
light of their new great Prophet.
proclaiming himself the anointed of the Lord for this great service of
preaching the eternal Gospel (PPPPP), assuring that all who opposes him are
not only apostates Arians, Antichrists, The fall of Adam and the clearest
Scriptures are but allegories.
but also very incarnate Devils (QQQQQ) The rare mysteries which this great
Prophet brings to the world from heaven are these Doctrines: That the eating of
the forbidden tree, the burning of the world with fire, and such other
Scriptures are but mere allegories (RRRRR); That the humane nature of Christ is
a Person; The whole Trinity suffered in the person of Christ's humanity.
That there is no union of the second Person of the Godhead therewith, but that
all the three Persons in the time of the Passion did come down and subsist in
his humane Person; That all the three Persons did truly suffer in the humane
Person of Christ, and that by the Passion of the Godhead of all the three
Persons alike, the world was redeemed (SSSSS); That the Passion of the Trinity
in the humane Person of Christ was nothing but the conflict of the two Divine
Attributes, Mercy and Justice, the one with the other (TTTTT); That the former
days of the Gospel were Christ's private Kingdom, and the world of Esaus curse
wherein Christ did sit as a Judge to torment and condemn the reprobate
(VVVVV): But now since he the great Prophet, The great light which this Prophet
brings from heaven, is, that all the Devils and all the reprobates shall be
saved by his Gospel.
the Lords anointed began to Preach, the new and the last world is come, the
world of Jacobs blessing, the time of the Spirits Ministry, of Christ's public
Kingdom, wherein the eternal Gospel is preached (XXXXX). That the sum of
this Gospel is, the salvation of all without exception, even of the Devils and
of those who were damned by Christ in the world of Esaus curse (YYYYY); That
saving faith is nothing but the belief of this universal salvation (ZZZZZ);
That whoever believes it not shall be damned, that is, they shall undergo for
some time hels torment, though at last with the Devils they be delivered
therefrom; That by this faith any three or four persons may become so strong
sons of God, as to save not only themselves but a world of misbelievers
(AAAAAA).

Randals gross Familisme.
It were long to enumerate all the abominations that are among many of these who
go under the name of Anabaptists, it will be hard to name any of the conceits
of their Fathers in Germany which is not here entertained by some one or other;
I am sure the incomparably worst of the Sects over Sea, was that of the
Georgians, and among us the Familists are their natural brood. what they have
learned from Henry Nicholas, and he from David George, we may see it yet more
distinctly in two late Writs, The discovery of Familisme; The description and
confutation of Familisme. We read in the first that a great many who have been
counted zealous and gracious are now of that Sect (BBBBBB); That a great man, a
Peer of the Land, and diverse Doctors of Divinity are of that number (CCCCCC);
That M. Randall for some years has preached peaceably at the Spittle, to as
great a multitude of people as follows any Sectary about the City: That the
learned Author of the Discovery did hear him preach the following positions,
who wrote them down with a refutation and before many witnesses sent them to
him to be answered.

No resurrection, no heaven, no hell after this life.
To wit, first, that all the resurrection and glory which Scripture promises, is
past already, and no other coming of Christ to judgment, or life eternal is
to be expected then what presently in this earth the Saints do enjoy; nor any
more hell and condemnation to be feared then what in this life before death is
endured (DDDDDD).

The Saints in this life become as perfect as God.
Secondly, that all the Saints in this world are fully perfect, that they become
omniscient as God, that they are Godded, Deified, and become God (EEEEEE).

Thirdly, that the most clear Historick passages of Scripture in matters of the
greatest moment are but mere allegories, untrue in any proper literal sense
(FFFFFF). The clearest Scriptures are false in a literal sense.
This writ Randall received, but was never pleased to return one word of
answer, yet to this day he goes on to preach these and the rest of the
Familists errors. And to show his boldness, he has lately printed two very
dangerous Books, and set his Preface before each of them, composed as he
professes long ago by Popish Priests, the one by a Dutch Friar, and the other
by an English Capuchine; both of them pretending to the highest degree of holy,
very high and hardly intelligible contemplations; the fittest morsel that
could have been prepared for the giddy multitude, who is most ready to be
catched with any new sublime and subtle notions, were they never so full of
deadly poison, whereof M. Benjamin Bourn has found in these two Treatises no
small store: to wit, first,

That in all things, Angels, Devils, Men, Women, That God is formally the life
and subsistence of all creatures.
there is but one spirit and life, which absolutely, and essentially is God;
That there is no more but one Spirit in the world; That the life and being of
God is every thing, and every thing is the life and being of God (GGGGGG).

Secondly, that Jesus Christ had not a particular soul and body that was
created in the womb of the Virgin, That Christ had not a particular soul, nor a
particular body.
but the flesh and blood of the whole world (HHHHHH).

Thirdly, every creature in all its actions is acted and ruled by the Spirit of
God (IIIIII); Creature in their very sins are acted only by the Spirit of God.
upon this ground God is made the Author and only Actor of all sins; and hence
some deny that there is any sin at all, affirming that the Devils never sinned
nor can sin (KKKKKK); others tell us that none are cast in hell for sin, but
for Gods mere pleasure (LLLLLL).

Fourthly, that the spirits which we call good and evil angels, There is no
such spirits as angels, devils, or souls.
are nothing but the good and evil motions of the mind of man (MMMMMM).

Fifthly, Nothing remains for ever but God.
that nothing is everlasting but the life and essence of God, which now is in
all creatures, that no created thing whatsoever does continue for ever (NNNNNN).

Sixthly, that the Scriptures are a confused allegory, a mere shadow, Scripture
is but a false shadow and no ground of faith.
a false History, and ought not to be the foundation of any man's faith more
then other Books, or then the Apocrypha (OOOOOO).

Seventhly, they deny the coming, dying, resurrection, ascension,
intercession, and return of our Lord Jesus Christ; They deny both the first
and second coming of Christ.
they avow that there shall be no resurrection and last judgment for the world
(PPPPPP).

Eighthly, they make all ordinances to be but meat for babes, They cast away
all ordinances.
and that men ought to live above them without the use thereof (QQQQQQ).

Ninthly, they teach that the highest degree of perfection both of grace and
glory is attained in this life (RRRRRR).

These and many more such blasphemous and horrible Heresies are entertained as
fine, The certain truth of these imputations.
excellent, rare, profound, mysterious truths, by these Anabaptists who are
admitted to the highest class of the Family of Love, if we may trust M. Bourn
who professes his certain knowledge thereof not only from their Books, but
from their preachings, conferences, disputations, at which often he was present
(SSSSSS). By all the former discourse I conceive it is apparent that as evil
and wicked a Devil does rage in the way of Anabaptism this day in England, as
of old in Germany or in any other Heresy of any time in any place; which I
wish were well considered as a ground of fear and trembling by many a simple
soul, who is carried down headlong toward these errors proceeding from one
degree to another without any certainty where their unconstant motions may have
any period.

I observe but one thing more wherein the English Anabaptists seem much worse
then the Dutch: The English Anabaptists are generally more erroneous then the
Dutch.
however the Dutch have been much divided and exceedingly erroneous, yet every
Sect among them have had some zeal for that which they apprehended to be truth,
and some care to save their company from all which they esteemed error, and
this without respect of persons; who ever of their number did fall into any
thing which they conceived heretical, had he been their Father, brother, or
dearest companion, they did cast him out of their Society, and reputed him
thereafter as a person excommunicate. Amongst the English Sectaries there is no
zeal at all against any error.
The carriage of the Mennonists toward the Georgians, and of the Georgians
toward them, and of every one of their Sects toward their dissenting Brethren
is known: But among the English Sectaries there appears no zeal at all for any
thing they call truth; a man now among them may run through the whole circle of
errors, from Independency to Antipaedobaptism, from hence to Arminianism, from
this to Antinomianism, thereafter to the Seekers, thence to the
Antitrinitarians, the Antiscripturists, the Familists, the Atheists, or whither
he will, and no Church censure at all be executed against him, nor any of his
fellows abstain from his company as an excommunicate Heretic, but if he make a
profession of piety notwithstanding of all his opinions he shall be entertained
as a Saint, and the generality of the Sectaries shall be very unwilling to have
him in the least measure troubled by any censure either of Church or State
(TTTTTT).

I do not so much wonder at this more then ordinary want of zeal against any
error in Sectaries whom God has stricken with this among other spiritual
plagues, for their apostasy from his truth, whereof themselves sometime have
made a fair profession: but it is often to me a matter both of marvel and grief
to behold the very sons of truth, who in their hearts are opposite to every
error, to be so languid and faint now for so long a time in promoting any
real course for the restraint of that deluge of all manner of heretical and
blasphemous errors, which with their eyes they see overflowing the Land much
more then any place of Christendom in any bygone time. I doubt not but diverse
make it a good part of their work both with God and man to have remedies
provided for this monstrous evil: but it is a pity to see the strange
stupidity and feneantise of the most, even of them, whose interest in God ought
to make them upon all hazards, much more diligent agents for the relief of his
strangely contemned and pitifully trod down truth.

I speak not of temporal punishments, if the Magistrate will employ none of
his power for the honor of that God who has set him in his place, and preserves
him therein, nor for the relieving of the perishing souls of the people over
which he rules; let him prepare to answer for it as he may, for it will be the
principal Item of his great account: only let him be content to want the
compassion of all beholders, when God little to his honor shall vindicate his
own glory, and when Divine Justice lets the seduced multitude fully loose to
pull out of his hand all power no less about civil, then spiritual objects,
which easily might have kept the people in order and obedience both to God and
him, if it had been in any season, or even yet were in any wisdom or courage
employed toward them.

But that which I most regrate is, to see sundry unto whom God has committed
the keeping of his truth, and whom he has endued with very notable parts above
many, so sparing and coldriffe, so sober and temperate, so calm and wise in
managing the Battles of their Master against the Enemies of his dearly beloved
truth, as if all their zeal were no more mixed, but totally overmastered, and
well-near drowned in their moderation and prudence.

It is the opinion of many, that the enemies of the truth have been assisted in
their evil work of seducing millions of the Sheep of Christ by no one means
more then the tepidity of some gracious and orthodoxe, yet too wise, and
somewhat fearful and faint-hearted Divines.

How desperate soever the faults as well of good as of evil men have made the
disease of the Church this day, yet it must never be altogether too late and
unseasonable for the servants of Christ to get up from their sleep, and with
some piece of more zeal toward their Masters honor, and of pity toward their
perishing Brethren, to set upon their too too long neglected duties.

The Testimonies of the fourth Chapter.
(A) Treatise of Baptism p. 356. There may be many great fails in an action
which may not make it null or nothing but these essential fails which may be
said to nullify it can never be repaired by any act afterward; such are the
fails of infant Baptism, as enter into the very essence of it, namely the
formal and material causes; so as if you ask what I lay to the charge of
infant Baptism, I say that it is nothing, as the Scripture says, an idol is
nothing; of what act soever ye may justly say this is a nullity, no act can
repair that to give it a being; I may affirm with more equity and reason, that
infant Baptism is not a Sacrament, but a rash mockery for deceiving, by no
means to be endured in the Church.

The vanity of childish Baptism, second Part, p. 30. That administration of
Baptism which overthrows the very nature of the Covenant of grace and whole
Gospel of Christ, is Antichristian and abominable. It is most certain that the
Baptism of infants is the greatest delusion, and a thing of as dangerous a
consequence as ever the Man of Sin brought into the world, and therefore the
greatest maintainers thereof are justly to be esteemed the greatest deluders.
page 30.

(B) Treatise of Baptism p. 36. If this be not to be repeated, because neither
in precept nor example you find it so, then must this be the first, because in
precept and example you find it so, and never otherwise: In a word, Baptism of
old has been called and not without reason, Sacramentorum Janua.

(C) Tombs examen. p. 23. Because it goes so current that rebaptization is not
only an error, but also an heresy; let me beg of you one good argument to
prove it unlawful in se, or intrinsecally; I mean without respect to scandal,
or in the like cause by accident for a man that has been baptized rightly to
be baptized again. We are regenerated by Baptism, and a man is born but once;
but are we not born again by the word? and must that be but once preached? is
not sin mortified, the Church sanctified by Baptism? and are not these often?
and for example, if there were as good for paedobaptism as that Acts 19.5, 6.
for rebaptizing, the controversy were at an end with me. M. Marshall
challenges him upon this new error, but he still defends it. p. 53. As for M.
Marshals arguments they are not convincing to me, nor is the holding
rebaptization such a new opinion as he would make it.

(D) Richardson against Featly p. 6. Paedobaptism tends to make Gods holy
Ordinance a lying sign, to confirm that which visibly is not; secret things
belong to God, and revealed things to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. And seeing such infants
appear not to have any right in the Covenant, they are not to have the seal of
the Covenant, it being against the light of nature, to set a seal to a blank;
and that any should have a visible right to the seals, etc. and yet not godly,
is strange Doctrine.

(E) Declaration concerning the public dispute by Knols, etc. p. 16. Believers
only themselves, and not their infants are accounted the spiritual seed of
Abraham, or his seed according to faith. Vanity of childish Baptism p. 18. None
of Abraham's children, nor the natural seed of any other in the world, are to
be accounted the seed, unto whom the promise and Covenant is made until they
believe. Ibid. p. 21. Circumcision was not by God ordained, nor by Abraham
understood, to be to the persons circumcised, a seal of their being in the
Covenant, and much less of their being regenerated.

(F) Cornwels Vindication p. 5. This Popish consequence of Baptizing the
infants of believers, does instate all the infants of the believing Gentiles to
be born in a Covenant of grace, and to have a right of a promise of life in
Christ Jesus. The vanity of childish Baptism second Part p. 4. The children of
believers are not in the Covenant of grace.

(G) Ibid. But here they object and say, Has the children of believers no more
privilege then the children of Heathens, Turks, and Infidels? Answ. In respect
of the Covenant of grace and salvation none at all. Ibid. p. 19. Believers are
Fathers of their own children no otherwise then they are Fathers of Jews and
Turks children, which is when they believe, and not before. Declaration by
Cocks p. 17. But some may think that this will put the children of believers
into as bad a condition as the children of Turks, Heathens, and any other
wicked men, and this they are persuaded is a horrible thing and a dangerous
opinion: we put not the children of believers into as bad a condition as the
children of Turks, etc. It was Adams disobedience in eating the forbidden
fruit, that put all his posterity equally into a sinful and miserable
condition.

(H) Storming of Antichrist, p. 53. This opinion puts all infants of believers
into the same condition with Turks and Indians. Answ. As the infants of Turks
and Christians, dying infants, are all alike, free from actual sin, being
only guilty of original; why may they not partake of the same benefit of free
grace? why may we not have charitable thoughts concerning the salvation of
Turkish infants? seeing we know nothing of their damnation, and we read not of
any one in Scripture damned merely for original sin, the innocence of all
infants so dying is the same in respect of actual sin.

(I) Bakwels Answer p. 2. Here I doubt they exclude all infants that die in
their infancy from salvation, because they are not capable of such knowledge of
God and Christ; you answer, saying, you know not what is this knowledge,
neither has the Scripture revealed any such that were saved.

(K) Tombs Apology p. 64. The truth is, I neither leave infants in the Devils
nor Gods visible Kingdom, for I conceive they are in neither Kingdom visibly
till they declare by their profession to whom they belong visibly. Ibid. p. 66.
I suppose in reference to the present point this is the truth, that however
every infant is either in the invisible Kingdom of God or Satan, that is elect
or reprobate: yet no child till he make profession does visibly belong either
to the one or to the other. I acknowledge that in the visible Church of the
Jews the infants were reckoned to the Church, and the reason was from the
peculiar Church State of the Jews.

(L) Gangren first Part, p. 20. There is no original sin in us, only Adams
first sin was original sin.

(M) Ibid. p. 1. of the second division. Henry Den in a conference with M.
Strong delivered that Christ did satisfy for the sins committed against the
first Covenant. Being urged that the Heathen then must all be saved, because
their sins against the first Covenant were pardoned, and they had never sinned
against the second which was never revealed to them; he answered, the Heathen
had Christ preached to them in the creatures, Sun, Moon, and Stars.

(N) Ibid. p. 110. The Independent Churches in Somersetshire deliver, that a
Minister baptizing Infants is a false Prophet, also that Adam was created in
sin, and that he was as sinful before his fall, as after, and that Christ was
a sinner, his nature being defiled with sin as well as the nature of other men
is.

(O) Vide supra N.

(P) Gangren first Part, second division p. 24. Nichols in Moorefields
maintained that God was the Author of all sin.

(Q) Treatise of Baptism p. 148. It is not a hope you must go upon for the
giving of Ordinances, and holy seals, but a judgment: Paul called the Saints
positively faithful and elect: when we come to admit members, if they give but
only ground of hopes, we let them stay for their own profit, and the discharge
of our duty till they can give us the ground of a judgment: the Apostle says
positively they are holy, you ought to assure your self they are so. Ibid. p.
252. A male infant is the subject of circumcision, but a believer is the
subject of Baptism.

(R) The vanity of childish Baptism, first Part p. 29. They of the separation
grant that no children save only believers children are in the Covenant, or
have right to Baptism, their Parents (by their own acknowlegement) being
ungodly; whence it will follow, that they themselves being baptized in their
infancy, had not the baptism of Christ, and so by consequence are yet
unbaptized persons. Garner of Baptism p. 14, 15. Believers by Baptism do
orderly enter into the body or congregation of Christ; hence I may take
occasion to satisfy such (if the Lord please) as are opposite unto believers
baptism, and their entrance into the Church by baptism, and contend much for
their entrance into a Church estate by Covenant or contract without baptism.

(S) Declaration by Cocks, etc. p. 13. The baptizing of infants does deny
Christ to be come in the flesh.

(T) Tombs Apology p. 66. I confess that they who hold that members are added
to the Church by baptism, and not otherwise, and hold a nullity of
paedobaptism, must needs say the Churches that have no other then infant
baptism are no true Churches, nor their members Church members; but those
points of the necessity of right baptism, not only to the right order, but
also to the being of a visible Church and Church member, and so voluntary
separation barely for the defect of it I have ever disclaimed.

(V) Gangren second Part, p. 8. A godly Minister related that Oats an
Anabaptisticall Emissary was followed in Essex by many loose persons, he spoke
it upon his knowledge, that notorious whoremongers and drunkards follow him,
such as have been convicted by witnesses and taken notice of by the Country,
and are such still, yet go after him where he preaches from place to place.

(X) Vanity of childish Baptism p. 8. The institution of Christ requires that
the whole man be dipped all over in water, whosoever is not dipped is not
baptized, and he that is only sprinkled, or has water only imposed upon him
is not dipped, whence this consequence clearly results, That all those that
have the administration of Baptism either by sprinkling or by any washing
without dipping, have not the Baptism of the New Testament, and by consequence
are unbaptized persons.

(Y) Vide Gangren first Part, second division p. 5.

(Z) M. Tombs exercitation presented to the Chairman of a Committee of the
Assembly of Divines, and an Apology for the two Treatises, against the unjust
censures of Doctor Homes, M. Geere, M. Marshall, M. Lee, M. Hussy, M. Black,
M. Calamy, M. Vines.

(AA) Tombs Apology p. 64. Why does he make my opinion odious, as if I put all
the children of the whole Church out of the Covenant of grace, as I do the
children of the Turks, and acknowledge no more promise for the one then for the
other; whereas when he has said as much as he can for them, he can bring no
more promise for them, then I do, nor dares reject the limitations I restrain
them by? M. Marshals defense page 85. To my understanding you here clearly
yield the infants of believers to be in the same condition in reference to the
Covenant of grace, which the infants of Turks and Indians are in, no more
promise for the one then for the other, which so often as you consider, me thinks
your Fatherly bowels to your own children should be moved within you. Ibid. p.
98. I confess I suspect you have a further meaning, not only because you here
mention the temporal blessings before the spiritual, and call the land of
Canaan the Covenant made with Abraham, but especially that expression which you
own from Cameron, that circumcision did primarily seal the temporal promise,
and signified sanctification but secondarily. I know the Anabaptists in Germany
shame not to say that the Covenant made with Abraham was a mere carnal thing,
and had nothing to do with eternal life; as for the expression of learned
Cameron, if by primarily, he meaned immediately, that it sealed these things
first in order as they were types of spiritual things, it may then pass cum
grano salis; but if by primarily he intended principally, that circumcision did
chiefly seal earthly blessings, the opinion is too unsavory to be received.

(BB) M. Marshals Defense 245. For my own part I seriously profess, that
supposing infant Baptism a nullity, I cannot understand, how any in the world
should this day be lawfully baptized, unless it can be made good that a person
unbaptized himself may be a lawful Minister of baptism to others. Tombs
Apology p. 54. That none be admitted to the Lords Supper till he be rightly
baptized, I profess is to be stood upon in point of prudence for right order,
yet if it be stood upon in point of conscience, so as in no case the contrary
is to be permitted, it will of necessity make many superstitious perplexities;
for besides that it may be doubted whether all the Apostles were baptized, who
yet were admitted to the Lords Supper by Christ himself: when Constantine the
Great and others did defer their Baptism so long, it is not likely they never
received the Lords Supper before their Baptism.

(CC) Tombs Apology p. 31. I do count the story of the Anabaptists to contain
in it many things, the true reasons of which, and the true knowledge of the
circumstances concerning them will not appear till the day of the revelation of
the righteous judgment of God.

(DD) Ibid. p. 32. How far the Anabaptists sought reformation I cannot tell,
it is plain that Carolostadius and Pelargus, and some say Melancthon, would
have reformed it in Saxony, had not Luthers pertinacy in that as well as
Consubstantiation and Images withstood it: and Baltazar Hubmer sought it at
Zurick and was denied, it is known; I think the reformed Churches have been to
blame, and so may be our present reformers, that they have never yielded to
reform it in a regular way.

(EE) Ibid. p. 106. M. Marshals Book it appears was contrived by diverse, I
believe the ablest of the Assembly, I wish it were declared whether the
paedobaptists would stick to that work or any other.

(FF) Ibid. p. 93. And though many magnify the virtue and benefit of their
juridicall excommunication; yet the best intelligence I have makes me question
whether it has not b en rather an engine of much harm, as being used rather
against dissenters in opinion, and opposers of profit, then men openly vicious;
managers of that censure generally, showing themselves irreconciliable to them
that dissent from them, but favorable enough to vicious living.

(GG) Ibid. p. 57. I was told there was a very intelligent man that said he was
sorry that I had M. Marshall for my Antagonist, as knowing him to be apt to
mistake, which he conceived would be a vexation to me; and indeed I find his
words true. p. 69. I must confess I find M. Marshall still so confused a
Disputer, that I know not to what purpose his manner of writing in this point
should tend, but to puzzle his Reader and weary his respondent.

(HH) Ibid. p. 19. M. Marshall says that I vilify M. Thomas Goodwin as a man
who by spinning out similitudes and conjectures, deceives his auditors; I say
still that I expected from M. Goodwin arguments, but counted my self deluded
with his conjectures; finding nothing to his purpose in any of these Texts,
which were the main he alleged.

(HH 2) Ibid. p. 3. I saw few or none regarded for clearing the truth but
popular Orators, such as relate to great men or are useful to uphold a party,
are the men esteemed; And p. 95. I may rather say that by my two Treatises
there is such a wound given already to infant baptism, that however men may
play the Mountebanks and skin it over, it will never be cured at the bottom.

(II) Vide supra BB.

(KK) Ibid. p. 10. I durst not justify such a practice as to gather a
separated Church.

(LL) Vide supra C.

(MM) Vide supra BB.

(NN) Tombs Apology p. 92. I doubt much how hence may be concluded any power of
suspension from the Lords Supper, for every emergent scandal so judged by a
congregation, or congregationall Presbytery.

(OO) Ibid. p 91. I have said that I doubted whether ever excommunication a
sacris, or the Presbyterian, or the Independent Ecclesiastical Government
would be proved to be Jure Divino by Christ's appointment; and I doubt whether
the power of the Keys, Matthew. 16. be any other then doctrinall; and whether
Matthew. 18. contain any other direction then about particular injuries betwixt
brother and brother, or, Let him be to thee a Heathen and Publican, be any
other then shunning familiar converse.

(PP) Ibid. I confess that I take it to be but a matter of prudence whether
each congregation have its complete power within it self, or that it be ordered
in some things by an Assembly of select persons out of diverse congregations,
and whether congregations and Pastors be fixed or unfixed. p. 93. I suppose in
the manner of doing these things, we have not certain precise direction from
Gods word, but that we are left free by God to order such things, though
pertaining to Christians as Christians, by alterable rules of prudence.

(QQ) Ibid. p. 93. Nor does the Church lose by having a Christian Magistrate,
if that jurisdiction be wanting, since I suppose it is better provided for by
the constant care of a Christian Magistrate, if conscientious in executing
judgment, if not, such censures have been seldom executed with conscience, or
good effect.

(RR) M. Marshals Defense p. 73. Have not multitudes of our Anabaptists
swallowed down all Arminianisme?

(SS) A Defense of the lawfulness of infants baptism, in answer to M.
Spilsberry.

(VV) M. Spilsberry peculiar interest of the elect in Christ and his saving
grace.

(XX) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 23. M. Den exercises in Lambs
Church, the usual theme that he is upon, is Christ's dying for all, for Judas
as well as Peter, he often preaches this Doctrine (as those who have heard him
do report) this is the everlasting Gospel, to believe that Jesus Christ has
dyed for all men, Turks, Pagans, and that all the sins of men committed against
the moral Law, were actually forgiven and pardoned when Jesus Christ shed his
blood, and none of them that ever men had committed, or should, were imputed to
them, but men were only damned for not believing in Christ, and for nothing
else.

(YY) Ibid. p. 36. Oats who is a great Dipper and Preacher amongst them
delivered in Bell-Alley, in Colemanstreet, not long ago, that the Doctrine of
Gods eternal election and predestination was a damnable Doctrine and error.

(ZZ) Ibid. p. 1. M. Den answered, the Heathen had the Gospel preached to them
in the creatures, and in them was revealed the knowledge of Christ crucified,
if they had eyes to see it.

(AAA) Ibid. He said there was a power in a man to resist grace, and that the
grace that would convert one man would not convert another.

(BBB) Gangren first Part, p. 21. They teach that regenerate men who have true
grace may fall totally and finally away from the state of grace.

(CCC) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 22. This M. Den was sent forth
by Lambs Church into Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, and those parts, to preach
universal grace, and to rebaptize.

(DDD) M. Wels preface to the short story of the rise, reign, etc. This kind
of Doctrine takes so well here in London and other parts of the Kingdom, and
you see so many dance after this Pipe, running after such and such, crowding
the Churches and filling the doors and windows, even such carnal and vile
persons (many of them) as care not to hear any other godly Ministers but only
their Leaders.

(EEE) M. Gatakers shadows without substance, p. 25. You or these you maintain
affirm that the moral Law is of no use at all to a believer, no rule for him
to walk, nor to examine his life by, and that Christians are free from the
mandatory power of it; yea in Pulpits they cry out, Away with the Law. Gangren
second Part, p. 126. The Preacher observed that the handwriting of Ordinances,
the ten precepts fair written by the finger of God, was altogether taken away.

(FFF) Ibid. p. 133. Hereupon Oats peremptorily affirmed and stood to maintain,
that there was no power in any Christian Magistrate to inflict a capital
punishment upon any member of a Church, unless first he was cast out of the
Church, and so delivered to the secular power, what ever his offense was,
though murder or Treason.

(GGG) Ibid. Being pressed with the authority of that Text, He that sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, he and the rest cried out, What had
they to do with Moses? they were Christ's Disciples, not Moses Disciples.

(HHH) Gangren second Part, p. 120. One of the followers of M. Simpson the
Antinomian said it in the hearing and presence of diverse, (M. Simpson being
then also present) that if a child of God should commit murder he ought not to
repent of it; and M. Simpson never reproved him for it, though by one present
in the company he was spoken unto to do it.

(III) Christ's counsel to the Angel of Laodicea, p. 41, 42. cited in Gatakers
shadows p. 11. Nothing at all is required in any respect of him for whom Christ
died (they are deceivers that teach otherwise) neither faith, nor repentance,
nor self-denial, nor hearing, nor use of Ordinances, nor observation of
Sabbath, nor doing as we would be done to, and the rest: They are false
Teachers that make these duties, and teach that we must exercise our selves in
these things, or we shall have no part in Christ.

(KKK) Gatakers shadows p. 2. M. Saltmarsh encourages Christians not to be
troubled for any sin, nor to imagine that God is displeased with them, or that
any afflictions do befall them for their sins, or that they shall ever be
called to any account for them. Ibid. p. 9. You infuse such principles as these
that God sees no sin in them, live they never so ill, nor like them any whit
the less when they do sin, nor is at all displeased with them, or will ever
call them to account for ought they do.

(LLL) Ibid. p. 49. What you subjoyn is scandalous. Place, say you, salvation
upon a free-bottome, or else you make the Covenant but an old Covenant in new
terms, in stead of, Do this and live, Believe this and live, repent and live,
obey and live, and all this is for want of revealing the mystery more fully.

(MMM) Ibid. p. 2. M. Saltmarsh preaches that Christ has perfectly believed
for us, and perfectly repented for us. Ibid. p. 36. He expounds all the
places he quoted, wherein any duty was required, not as to be done by us, but
as done by Christ for us, and so to be believed of us.

(NNN) Vide supra III. also Gatakers shadows p. 11. It is the way that you your
self, and others of the Antinomian Party propound, to wit, that there is
nothing required to be done by any for the obtaining of a share in the
redemption and salvation procured and purchased by Christ, or for the
application of Christ's merits unto any, and they may therefore be saved by
Christ, without faith, or repentance, or new obedience, though they continue in
infidelity, impenitency, and the worst sins that are.

(OOO) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 33. Hobson preaching against
holy duties spoke thus; I was once as legal as any of you can be, I durst not
eat a bit of bread but I gave thanks; I daily prayed and wept for my sins, so
that I had almost wept out my eyes with sorrow for sin, but I am persuaded when
I used all these duties I had not one jot of God in me. Gatakers shadows p. 5.
Your strains of a more glorious spirit are like your vaunting elsewhere, of a
more glorious light.

(PPP) Gangren first Part, second division, p. 8. A great Sectary writes from
Bathe, that Christ came to witness and declare Gods love to us, not to procure
it for us, for if God take at any time any displeasure to us he had been
changeable, seeing before the world began he saw us lovely in his Son, he came
not to procure the love of God to us, or to satisfy him, as some say, but he
was as I may say, a most glorious publisher of the Gospel. Ibid. p. 34. Hobson
has printed that Christ did not by his death purchase life and salvation for
all, no not for the elect, for it was not the end of God, in the coming of
Christ, to purchase love and life, but Christ himself was purchased by love
that he might make out love, and purchase us to love, for Christ came not to
reconcile God to man, but man to God.

(QQQ) Vide supra PPP.

(SSS) Saltmarsh Treatises against M. Gataker.

(TTT) The Treatise of Baptism p. 32. Therefore know the mind of God, and
labor not anxiously about sins and the pardon of them, which is a great
impediment to the comfort and holiness of our life.

(VVV) The Confession of the seven Churches, first Edition, Article 28. Those
which have union with Christ are justified from all their sins, past, present,
and to come.

(XXX) Ibid. Article 25. The tender of the Gospel to the conversion of sinners,
is absolutely free, no way requiring as absolutely necessary qualifications,
preparations, terrors of the Law, or preceding Ministry of the Law, but only
and alone the naked soul, a sinner and ungodly to receive Christ.

(YYY) Gangren second Part, p. 20. Some speaking to the Antinomian Tailor,
deprehended in the acts of his theft, told him how sorry they were, that such a
man as he should do these things: he replied, That he was troubled for them to
see them sorry, but as for himself he was not troubled.

(ZZZ) Ibid. The Maid said unto the Gentleman tempting her, How dare you offer
to do this wickedness and sin against God? He replied, that God saw no sin
in his children, that these were but sins of the flesh, which Christ had
satisfied for; with other words to that purpose.

(AAAA) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 116. Three women of Lambs
Church makes it their ordinary to work on the Lords day, and being spoken to
about it, they said, They knew no Sabbath nor no such day, every day was alike
to them, and one as good as another.

(BBBB) Gangren second Part, p. 126. The Lieutenant Preacher being urged with
David's practice of bewailing sin, and craving pardon, answered, David was under
a double Covenant, of the Law, and of Grace, we only under that of Grace: and
though a believer should commit as great sins as David's murder and adultery,
there was no need for him to repent, and that sin was no sin to him but a
failing.

(CCCC) Gatakers shadows p. 62. Nor have we any cause to wonder that all sorts
of loose people do by whole shoals flock to and run after these that teach it,
in many of whom what dreadful and dismal effects it has had, though I could
give hideous instances, yet I forbear to relate.

(DDDD) Bloody Tenet p. 20. Concerning Baptismes and laying on of hands, Gods
people will be found to be ignorant for many hundred years, and I yet cannot
see it proved that light is risen, I mean the light of the first institution in
practice. Ibid. p. 166. But as there seems yet to be desired such constitution
of the Christian Church as the first constitution and pattern calls us for, so
also such a c^lling and converting of Gods people from Antichristian Idols to
the Christian worship, and therefore such a Ministry (according to the first
pattern) sent from Christ Jesus to renew and restore the worship and Ordinances
of God in Christ. M. Williams concerning the name Heathen p. 18. Having not
been without (through the mercy of God) abundant and constant thoughts about a
true commission for such an embassy and Ministry, I must ingenuously confess
the restless unsatisfiednesse of my soul in diverse main particulars, as first,
whether (since the Law must go forth from Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem) I say, whether Gods great business between Christ Jesus the holy
Son of God, and Antichrist the Man of Sin, and son of perdition, must not first
be over, and Sion and Jerusalem be rebuilt and re-established before the Law
and word of life be set forth to the rest of the Nations of the world, who have
not heard of Christ: the Prophets are deep concerning this.

(EEEE) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 20. Laurence Clarkson of an
Anabaptist turning a Seeker has put out a Pamphlet called, The Pilgrimage of
the Saints, wherein he endeavors to free himself from the reports divulged on
him in the Anabaptists assemblies; concerning his laying down the ordinance of
dipping as erroneously practiced.

(FFFF) Ibid. p. 31. Mistress Attaway disclaimed that she took upon her to
preach, but only to exercise her gifts, for she could not be evinced that any
in the world this day living had any commission to preach.

(GGGG) Saltmarsh smoke p. 17, 18. None ought to give the Baptism of water now,
because there is none that can give the gift of the holy Ghost with it; Baptism
by water and by the holy Ghost being joined together both in institution,
doctrine, and practice, are not to be separated nor given in such a time
wherein that of the holy Ghost is not given; what God has joined together, let
no man put asunder, the fullness of time is not yet come for ordinances, for as
there was several seasons for the giving out of truth before, so now.

(HHHH) Gangren second Part, p. 11. The Sect of Seekers grows very much, and
all sort of Sectaries turn Seekers, many leave the congregations of
Independents, Anabaptists, and fall to be Seekers, and not only people but
Ministers also, and whosoever lives but few years (if the Sects be suffered to
go on) will see that all the other Sects of Independents, Brownists,
Antinomians, Anabaptists, will be swallowed up in the Seekers, alias
Libertines; many are gone already, and multitudes are going that way, and the
issues of these Sects and Schisms will be, that all will end in a looseness
and licentiousness of living.

(IIII) Spilsberries Saints Interest, to the Reader. Under pretense of seeking
the truth by cunning and crafty enquiries they undermine the same, they deny
unto such as believe in Christ, Church Fellowship and communion with Christ and
his ordinances of the New Testament, for want as they say of a Ministry with
power from God to call, and fit a people for ordinances, and to administer the
same: this opinion much oppresses and disturbs the godly, for whose sakes I
have endeavored to hold forth my portion of light.

(KKKK) Gangren first Part, division first, p. 33. See there a number of
horrible blasphemies against the Trinity. Ibid. division second, p. 26. In one
of the Churches of Bell-alley in Colemanstreet, the Divinity of Christ was
openly disclaimed. M. Nie said that to his knowledge the denying of the
Divinity of Christ was a growing opinion, and that there was a company of them
met about Colemanstreet, a Welchman being their chief, who held this opinion.
Ibid p. 111. The Anabaptists in Somersetshire denied the Trinity of Persons in
the Deity, and affirm that there is but one Person in the Godhead, for if there
be three Persons, there must needs be three Gods, and that Athanasius in his
Creed does blaspheme.

(LLLLL) Gang. second Part, p. 5. The Lieutenant being asked about the third
Person of the Trinity, denied there was such a thing as a Trinity of Persons,
but affirmed them to be three offices.

(MMMM) Richardsons considerations against Featly, p. 16. The name Anabaptist
came first from the Devil, and he will own whatsoever is written against them.

(NNNN) Ibid. p. 2. How can Christ as he is God, be the Son of God, in respect
of his eternal generation, any more then the Father is his Son by eternal
generation? Secondly, if the Spirit of God be God (as he is) equal with the
Father and the Son, all three infinite without beginning, each having the whole
Divine essence, and yet there is but one essence, how can the Spirit proceed
from the Father originally any more then the Father from the Spirit? and how
can the Spirit of God have any more dependence upon the Father and the Son then
they have upon him, seeing whatsoever is infinite can have no dependence upon
any thing? Therefore the Doctors words contain in them the nature of blasphemy;
and to define how one can be three, and three but one, and always so remain, is
above the reach of any man, I may say to him as Mat. 7.3. Luke 6.41, 42.

(OOOO) Vide supra KKKK.

(PPPP) Gangren second Part, p. 123. A person of quality told me, that in
Westminster Hall near the House of Commons door, a great Sectary had been
discoursing with him, that he would be loath the Parliament should bring Paul
Bests blood upon them, for denying the Trinity.

(QQQQ) Vide supra. Also in Gangren first Part, second division, p. 105. See
Cousins of Rochesters horrible blasphemies against the Manhood of Christ; Den
and Lamb do preach in this man's House.

(RRRR) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 5. M. Web, a man that
pretends a new light, said to me, That he blessed God he never trusted in a
crucified Christ, nor did he believe him to be the Son of God, nor the
Scriptures divine, but humane inventions.

(SSSS) Gangren second Part, p. 142. A Sectary in Lambs Church affirmed that he
was Jesus Cbrist, and maintained it stiffely; the man was in his wits, for he
spoke sensibly and to the things that were spoken of, though in this
blasphemous abominable way.

(TTTT) Little Non-such p. 3, 4. Some seeing the shape and form that man bears
in his personal appearance, do conceive that God the Creator bears the same
form. Man was made according to the likeness of God in personal shape; it is
said, God showed unto Moses his back parts, but his face should not be seen;
therefore if he has back parts and a face, he has a shape, which when he
pleases he can make visible, as then he did; What were the three men that
appeared to Abraham as he sat in the Tent, if not the Trinity?

(VVVV) Gangren second Part p. 134. John Boggis coming down to Yarmouth with
Captain Hobson as his Surgeon, and in M. Oats company, he went from
Anabaptism to the desperate height of Atheism, being spoken to at Table to
give thanks, he said, To whom should he give thanks, whether to the Butcher, or
to the Bull, or to the Cow? when it was told him, to God, he replied, Where is
your God, in heaven, or in earth, aloft, or below, etc. going on in unspeakable
blasphemies.

(XXXX) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 22. M. Web confessed that he
was in the ready way to Atheism, and many of his companions in these opinions
were turned Atheists.

(YYYY) Ibid. p. 111. The Anabaptists of Somersetshire teach, that the whole
Scripture does hold forth nothing else but a Covenant of works: thus vilifying
the whole word of God by the name Letter, and making their interpretation to be
the Spirit. Little Non-such, p. 4. Some would have the whole matter of eating
the forbidden tree, to be an allegory, and understand by the Serpent in this
place no other then concupiscence, and by the fruit of the tree in the midst of
the Garden, some other thing then the eating of a material Apple.

(ZZZZ) Web affirmed, that the Scriptures were only a humane invention, and
not fit for a rule of life and conversation for any to walk by; and in
confirmation of this he said, The Scriptures were that golden Calf, and Brazen
Serpent, that set at variance King and Parliament, and Kingdom against
Kingdom, and things would never be well until the golden Calf and Brazen
Serpent were beaten to pieces.

(AAAAA) Gangren third Part, p. 34. It was witnessed before the Magistrates of
Norwich, that Priscilla Miles had said, None would speak against Anabaptists
but drunkards and liers; she avowed there was in the Scriptures a number of
lies.

(BBBBB) The Anabaptists of Somersetshire say that the Scriptures are not the
word of God, but the conceits of men, and that we are not to adhere unto them
but to revelations. Gangren second Part, p. 136. Clarkson in Colchester in his
Sermon did vilify the Scriptures, all Ordinances, Duties, Ministers, and
Churchstate.

(CCCCC) Man's mortality, or a Treatise wherein is proved both Theologically and
Philosophically that whole man as a rational creature is a compound wholly
mortal, contrary to that common distinction of soul and body, and that the
present going of the soul into heaven or hell is a mere fiction. Ibid. The
hell-hatched doctrine of the immortal soul discovered; the heavens triumph in
the wain of the world, to see such light break out on its posterity. Page 3.
Death returns man to what he was before he was, that is, not to be, whence
appears p. 8. that none ever entered into heaven since the Creation; during
death, man is void of actual being, and has no present actual being in
glory. p. 24. I prove it from the nonentity of hell, that there can be no
casting into hell, before hell be. p. 28. Christ's humanity was three days and
three nights in the grave after his death. Ibid. p. 29. I may possibly affirm
that the place of glory for the dead Saints is not yet. p. 34. Christ's
ascension was into the Sun: according to famous Copernicus, it is in the
highest station of the whole Creation, it may be fitly called the right hand
of God.

(DDDDD) Gangren first Part, p. 112. The Anabaptists of Somersetshire affirm
that the Divine essence, which subsists in the persons of men, shall be reduced
unto God again: but the persons shall be annihilated, for the soul is mortal,
and the body shall never rise from the dead, that even the body of Christ did
never rise from the dead, but was annihilated; the world shall ever endure by
generation from time to time without an end. Ibid. p. 5. I asked Web of his
opinion concerning the resurrection, and he affirmed that there was no more
resurrection of a man then of a beast, nor had he any more soul then the body.

(EEEEE) Ibid. Web a great Ringleader of the seduced Sect of Anabaptists,
acknowledged no differen^e between the godly and the wicked for local torment
more then is upon earth; he denies any local hell. Ibid. p. 26. Marshall a
great follower of Randall, maintained that there was no hell, that all the hell
that is, is in this life, which is nothing else but the legal terrors and fear
men had in their consciences.

(FFFFF) Ibid. p. 5. Web denies that there are any devils more then men are
devils in themselves. Gangren second Part p. 6. A woman came to the Minister of
S. Martins to question him about his Sermon, and affirmed to him that there was
not any such thing as sin, or hell, or the devil, or tentation, or the holy
Ghost, or Scriptures; she said all the hell that was, was the darkness of the
night.

(GGGGG) Gangren first Part, p. 112. The Anabaptists of Somersetshire do teach
that God in the beginning did give forth of his divine essence, a variety of
forms, and several substances, which we call creatures, so that God does
subsist in the creatures.

(HHHHH) Ibid. They teach that the world shall ever endure by way of generation
from time to time without an end.

(IIIII) Ibid. Others of them teach that the whole Creation shall be
annihilated and reduced into the Divine essence again.

(KKKKK) Man's mortality p. 49. The resurrection of the beasts: all other
creatures as well as man shall be raised and delivered from death at the
resurrection; the death of the beasts was a part of the curse, and is to be
taken away by Christ.

(LLLLL) Vide Disswasive, first Part, p. 116. also 145. Letter NNNN. Also
Gangrens second Part, p. 117. Dear friends, as you have cast off many
Antichristian yokes so proceed to cast off all, a chief whereof are unequal
marriages.

(MMMMM) Little Non-such p. 5. God took one of Adams ribs, made a woman, and
brought her to him, how comes it then that there are forbidden degrees in
marriage? or is it not so in truth, but a Popish injunction for their profit?
The woman is of the man's own proper substance, then in regard there can be no
more matches in this nature, the very next of kin were to join in marriage, and
that both by custom and command. For example, we find that Sarah was Abraham's
Sister, whom he took to wife, a better president we cannot have. Ibid. p. 6. So
naturally confident were the servants of God in propagating by the next of kin,
that Lots daughters did not doubt to raise up seed to their Father. Lot might
justly be blamed for drinking so liberally that he perceived not what he did,
yet we find no reproof upon the daughters, because what they did was according
to the institution. Ibid. p. 7. The next place that seems to fortify this
opinion against all opposition, is that of Juda and Tamar his daughter in Law,
the sincerity and integrity of Tamar was sublime. Ibid. The prohibition of
degrees in Leviticus is to be understood of fornication, not of marriage. Tamar
did not doubt to be her brother Ammons wife, but detested the act of
fornication. But for the holy institution of marriage with the next of kindred,
we see it has not only been permitted but commanded. If mutual
correspondency happen betwixt the nearest of kindred, their marriage is most
natural, most lawful, and according to the Primitive purity and practice.

(MMMMM 2) Gangren second Part, p. 9. Mistress Attaway among other passages
spoke to them of M. Miltons Doctrine of Divorce, and asked them what they
thought of it, saying, It was a point to be considered of.

(NNNNN) Gangren first Part, second Division, p. 31. Mistress Attaway in her
exercise delivered that God the Father did reign under the Law, God the Son
under the Gospel, and now God the Father and God the Son are making over the
Kingdom unto God the holy Ghost.

(OOOOO) Ibid. 113. It is given out that Mistress Attaway met with (...)
Prophet here in London, who has revealed to her and others, that they must go
to Jerusalem and repair Jerusalem, and for that end Mistress Attaway has
gotten money from some persons; ten pounds of one young maid, and other money
of others toward the building up of Jerusalem. Gangrens second Part, p. 145.
There is a Prophet arisen who is shut up for a time, but at the end of this
Summer is to come forth with power to preach the general restoration of all
things: which Prophet has given a roll forth already into some hands, in which
roll many things are written; and who ever has that roll, has the spirit of
Prophecy; he has appointed some to be publishers and Prophets, and to go to
Jerusalem to build it up, where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall meet them from
heaven: and these persons thus sent unto Jerusalem, are assured they shall
never die; with many other of this kind.

(PPPPP) Divine light, sent forth by the Minister of the Lord Jesus whom he
has anointed his servant for the good of all in bringing glad tidings of good
things unto the whole Creation.

(QQQQQ) Ibid. These are the Antichristi-apostat-Arians in chief, that deny the
holy Covenant of general redemption, by those the spirit discovers the
Antichristi-apostat-Arians, Egyptians, Sodomites and drunkards of Ephraim, the
Devils incarnate, which are or shall be found to deny the Covenant of general
redemption: This Antichristi-apostat-Arianisme is in that Dragon, that old
Serpent called the Devil and Satan, in that he denies the holy Covenant of
general redemption, but this Dragon and grand Devil must be cast out of heaven
the Church, and all his angels, the false Ministers and tyrannous Magistrates,
must be cast out with him. Deniers of the Covenant of general redemption, and
all brute beasts and hypocrites have approved themselves devils incarnate.

(RRRRR) Divine light p. 15. The private kingdom of Christ's Justice must pass
away to give place to the public kingdom of God the Father, in his Jehovah
mercies unto all; the heavens and the earth shall not be destroyed, as drowsy
drunken Ephramites, and blind Egyptians do imagine out of their own evil hearts
by misconstruing the Scripture. Ibid. p. 2. In that abominable transgression of
our first Parents Adam and Evah, we their children transgressing in the same
line of Rebellion, by eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil that is,
by seeking in our selves a righteousness, thinking to be wise, and making our
selves like to God, we became naked, foolish, blind, and desperately wicked.

(SSSSS) Divine light p. 19. He sanctified the humane person of Christ to be a
sacrifice. Ibid. p. 4. God setting himself in his lost creatures stead, namely,
the whole Creation, God the blessed Trinity the three persons in unity in the
spirit of the Deity setting themselves in Christ's humanity: the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, the whole Godhead set it self bodily in Christ to suffer for
their transgressing creature. Christ in his humane nature feared when the
Godhead and Trinity of persons came down in him to suffer.

(TTTTT) Divine light p. 2. God was pacified by his own passionate sufferings
in that heavenly conflict which the Deity and Trinity of persons had in Christ's
humanity, when our God lovingly set himself to work out our salvation, he made
his love so to overcome his justice, as yet to satisfy his justice
meritoriously. Ibid. p. 6. God set himself in Christ's humanity in the essence
of his Deity to work out our salvation, setting his love against his justice.
Ibid. p. 5. Therefore the whole Trinity was forced to assume the whole power of
the Godhead, to suffer that passionate suffering which was due to the
transgressions of the whole Creation; this was the passionate work and
suffering of the Godhead placed in Christ's humanity to perfect redemption for
all.

(VVVVV) Ib. The elect and reprobate in their several cases in Esaus world
which is the world of the curse. Ibid. p. 8. The Father and the Son do commit
their whole strength for the delivering the whole Creation unto the
ministration of the holy Ghost, and therefore it is, that those that have been
damned in Esaus world of the curse, could not be delivered until the holy
Ghost came in full power, in the fullness of all charitable mercies unto every
creature of Angels, spirits, and mankind; likewise because all power is
committed to the holy Ghost, to manifest Christ a spiritual Christ and
all-saving Jesus, therefore the holy Ghost speaking to Christ as just Judge,
condemning, damning, and tormenting a part of his creation, etc.

(XXXXX) Divine light p. 7. Esau's world of the curse is now almost passed
away, and the world of Jacobs blessedness is now entering in. Ibid. p. 14.
Christ in his private kingdom sat Judge over the quick and dead, to condemn
and execute torments upon the rebellious whom he held as prisoners for a time;
but Christ in his public kingdom by the power of the holy Ghost shall reign
for ever to bring up all to life and immortality: Christ's public Monarchical
kingdom is now appearing, now the waters of troubles are abated, and in the
new heavens and new earth of Christ's public kingdom, there shall be no more
sea of Antichristian mysteries, only the old heavens and earth of Antichrists
wickedness must be burnt up with the fire of Gods Spirit, yea all things
natural and supernatural must be changed at these resurrections now coming.

(YYYYY) Divine light p. 7. In the world of Jacobs blessedness now entering in,
the reprobate condition of men and Angels shall be regained, death and hell
shall be destroyed, all shall be created of new to life and immortality, the
damned Prisoners shall be sent forth out of the pit. Ibid. p. 11. For a time
millions of thousands were damned by their Antichristian works, yet not damned
to perish for ever, for there is none can be damned totally, all the
generations that are deceased in the old world of Esau, shall arise by glorious
resurrections.

(ZZZZZ) Ibid. p. 11. This true Christian vocal faith is to believe the
Covenant of general redemption. Ibid. Those which believe and maintain the
Covenant of general redemption are only the true Church, of whom Christ is
the head.

(AAAAAA) Ibid. p. 11. All the damned that did not or do not receive it must
be saved by this faith. Ibid. p. 13. Although there were but three persons
believers in the earth with Christ, yet God will have his whole Creation:
although not any else did believe but these three in and with Christ. Ibid. p.
14. Such sons and daughters of God, only by believing are made instruments of
blessing unto the whole Creation, although there should be but three in the
whole earth.

(BBBBBB) A description of Familism, and confutation of the Familists by
Benjamin Bourn, to the Reader. Many of them being such formerly as were to be
beloved and delighted in; Give me leave to speak according to men, were ye not
once as real for Christ as you are now for Antichrist? yea I will be one
witness what close communion you had with God, and how many times you have to
the refreshing of many drooping spirits made a large acknowledgement of the
manifestations of Gods love and favor toward you in Jesus Christ.

(CCCCCC) The discovery of Familism p. 10. Let not the Familists say, it is not
M. Randall and we only that teach this doctrine of Henry Nicholas, there have
been and are great Doctors of Divinity so called, yea and some great Peers, and
persons of quality and estate in this Land.

(DDDDDD) The discovery of Familism p. 2. Whosoever shall teach and persuade
the people that the perfection and resurrection spoken of by Paul 1 Cor. 15.
are to be attained in the fullness and perfection of them in this present time
before the common death of the body, does herein teach the deceitful doctrine
of Familism taught by Henry Nicholas; but M. Randall does so teach, as sundry
persons that heard him can witness, and so he does destroy the hope of the
Saints as touching the personal coming of Christ in his glory to judge the
quick and the dead, and of the resurrection of the bodies of the Saints, and of
the glory of life everlasting of body and soul hereafter.

(EEEEEE) Ibid. p. 2. M. Randall delivered that a man baptized with the holy
Ghost, knew all things, even as God knew all things, which himself greatly
admired as a great mystery. Ibid. p. 7. Henry Nicholas says of himself, God
has made me alive through Christ, and anointed me with his godly being,
manned himself with me, and Godded me with him.

(FFFFFF) Discovery p. 4. M. Randall turns the holy writings of Moses and the
Prophets, of Christ and the Apostles, and the proper names, persons, and things
mentioned and contained therein, into allegories, and gives them out to be the
mystery and spiritual meaning of the same.

(GGGGGG) Benjamin Bourns description and confutation, p. 6. Their first error
is, that there is but one spirit or life in all things both in heaven and
earth, and that is absolutely and essentially God.

(HHHHHH) Ibid. p. 7, 8. Is this a universal Christ, as Antichrist calls him,
that is the flesh and blood of the whole world, which the Godhead assuming
makes out a discovery of himself to himself in and by all creatures whatsoever?

(IIIIII) Description p. 13. Whether all things are the act of God yea or no?
whether every creature in all its actions be acted and ruled by the Spirit of
God? The error is explicated and confuted.

(KKKKKK) Gangren second Part, p. 7. When the Committee of Lords and Commons
was in Guildhall, companies of thirties and fourties vented boldly all sorts of
opinions, some maintained that no mortal spirit could sin, or be capable of
sin; and it being objected, What say you to the Devils? they denied the
Devils either sinned or could sin.

(LLLLLL) Gangren first Part, division second, p. 24. Nichols did justify to
M. Greenhils face, that God was the Author of all sin; that no man was sent to
hell for any sins, but cast thither only because God would have it so.

(MMMMMM) Bourns description, p. 24. These spirits that we call good and evil
Angels, they call good or evil motions of man's mind.

(NNNNNN) Ibid. Their third error is, that nothing shall remain eternally, but
the essence, life and Spirit of God, which is now in all creatures.

(OOOOOO) Ibid. Their fourth error is this, that the Scriptures are a confused
allegory, a mere shadow, a false history, and ought not to be any man's
foundation no more then any other Book or the Apocrypha.

(PPPPPP) Bourns description p. 36. The coming, death, resurrection,
ascension, and intercession of our Lord Jesus, is absolutely denied by all the
principal writings and doctrines of the Familists. Ibid. p. 38. I will take
here in their other error, that there is no resurrection nor last judgment
for the world.

(QQQQQQ) Ibid. p. 24. They say sixthly, that all ordinances are but meat for
babes, that a man should live above them without the use of them.

(RRRRRR) Ibid. p. 53. The first branch of their seventh Chap. shall be handled
in this Chap. by way of question, whether perfection in the highest degree both
of grace and glory be attainable in this life.

(SSSSSS) M. Bourn to the Reader. I shall in the Treatise following lay open to
the view of all men, not at the second hand, but by experience having often
heard them both preach and dispute, what is that which commonly goes under the
name of Familisme, what I shall say concerning it, is not out of malice to any
person, neither shall I speak at random.

(TTTTTT) Gangren first Part, second division, p. 27. There is one Clement
Wrighter in London an Arch-heretick and fearful Apostate, sometimes a
professor of Religion and judged to have been godly; about seven or eight years
ago he fell off from the communion of our Churches to Independency and
Brownism, from that he fell to Anabaptism and Arminianism, thence to Mortalism,
holding the soul mortal, after that he fell to be a Seeker, and is now an
Antiscripturist, a Questionist and Skeptic, and I fear an Atheist.

CHAP. V. The lawfulness of Infants Baptism.
I Have at some length in the preceding Chapters set down the way and Tenets of
the Anabaptists both here and over Sea, The extreme malignity of the
Anabaptistick spirit.
both of the present and the former times: whereby it may appear to all who are
willing to see, how malign a spirit has ruled in that Sect from its first
beginning to this very day: a spirit carrying to the greatest errors and the
grossest vices that ever any who were called Christians have stumbled upon: a
spirit as much opposite to the honor of God, and to the salvation of men, Its
enmity to the salvation of men.
as any that ever troubled the Church since its first foundation. Its favor
toward the salvation of man appears in its great zeal to cast out of the
Church, and deprive of the means of grace almost all mankind with the
exception of a very few, if of any at all. When the most reformed of the
Protestant Churches come before the fan of their censure, at the first shake
they blow away that largest and most innocent part of them, their infants: all
children who have not attained to the acts of faith and repentance, are to them
in the flesh, under the power and within the verge of the Kingdom of Satan, as
well as Jews, Turks, Pagans, and others who are not so much as entered within
the hedge of Christ's sheepfold: and lest the spoiling of children of all the
grace and gifts of God had not been a sufficient vastation, they are carried on
by the spirit that leads them, to make as great havoc and desolation among
those of riper years: they Unchurch the most of those whom otherwise they love
as their best friends; they charge all the Independents, and the Brownists, and
the most rigid of the Separatists for their baptizing of infants with no
lighter a burden then Antichristianism, and a clear denial of Christ's
Incarnation: Neither here does their rashness stand, the small remnant of
Christians, the Anabaptistick Societies, which alone they will honor with the
title of true Churches, seem to them too many to be saved; therefore new
separations are run into, and those so severe, that there lives not an
Anabaptist upon earth, who by multitudes even of Anabaptists, is not condemned
with all who adhere to his subdivision, as a man in a false way not only
without, but in opposition to the true Church.

In its di honoring of God be setting up a liberty, first for all errors.
This their extreme cruelty against the souls of men wont to be colored with
the show of zeal to the truth and honor of God, but this varnish is now almost
quite wiped off: Behold, whither their zeal to the truth and honor of God is
now evanished! They for some times were so eminently zealous against errors and
vices, that very small ones were wont to draw from them an ejection out of the
Church, a deliverance to Satan, and where the Civil Sword was in their hand, a
putting out of this life, a public execution by the hand of the Hangman, when
their Princes and Prophets were not at leisure to administer Justice in their
own persons. Notwithstanding the loudest note that this day sounds in their
song, is liberty and freedom from all punishments for what ever crimes; when
all abominations imaginable are publicly proclaimed, when many more and much
viler errors walk in our streets then ever any one place in any time did hear
of, the great zeal of these religious men breaks out daily, in all the
discourses they please, and actions they dare for the safeguard of the cursed
instruments of these errors; passionately denying all power in any on earth to
restrain, in the least measure, the open propagation of the most abominable
lies, which Satan is able to utter by the tongue of any creature; no matter of
Religion say they can fall under the cognizance of any State, the false Church
has no right to censures or any Church Ordinance, the truest Churches can
meddle but with their own members; they who never were of them, or have
renounced membership with them, are without their Jurisdiction: so neither
State nor Church can put any bar of the smallest censure upon the propagation
of any error.

And next for all vice.
And lest vice, the near kinsman of error, should find any harder measure, any
greater stop from the hand of superior powers; this Sect with all the speed it
can, is posting back to its first principles, the overthrow of the civil State
as much as of the Church: That when ever they are found in the practice of
their Doctrine, of the lawfulness of adultery, and incest, robbery, and
murder, there may be none upon earth to control them. For this end they cast
down the King and Parliament, Commons as well as Lords, all Incorporations, all
Judicatories in Burgh and Land; that an absolute Monarchy, a full liberty for
every man to do all his pleasure, without any fear of punishment, may be set
up; That the Crown and Scepter, the Kingship and absolute Sovereignty may at
last be restored to the only true owners, the freeborn people of England, the
individuals, as they love to speak, of the whole Nation.

All this and much more have they set under their own hands as may be seen in
the former Chapters. Their Brownistick and Arminian Tenets I have refuted in
other Treatises
I have neither time nor mind to dispute all their positions; in my little
Antidote against Arminianism I have in a short and popular way impugned it;
their Tenets against the Protestant Churches in the heads of election,
redemption, grace, free will, and perseverance; In the first Part of my
Disswasive, I have debated at length enough the chief of those errors which
they have taught their children the Separatists: The real holiness of all
Church members, the necessity of separation for want of satisfaction in this
point alone, the power of every member of the Church to preach the word, to
ordain and to excommunicate when there is cause their very Pastors and Elders,
the Independency of every Congregation from Presbyteries and Synods, the
thousand years of Christ's visible reign upon earth; All this new light did
shine first, and still burns most brightly among the Anabaptists.

Although many of the Tenets mentioned in the former Chapter be dissembled and
denied by diverse of this Sect, Their Antipaedobaptisme and dipping shall here
be briefly and plainly considered.
yet all of them will acknowledge as their own, what ever almost is practiced
either by the Independents or Brownists; and besides, two Tenets more,
Antipaedobaptism, and Dipping: all who carry the name of Anabaptisme, though
through ignorance they know not, or through better instruction they dissent
from many positions of their Brethren, yet will avowedly and often with passion
profess their mind against the sprinkling of infants: paedorantisme to all of
them I ever heard of, is an abomination.

It will not therefore be amiss before I leave them to speak something to
those two points, which all of them are content to take upon themselves as a
Characteristick distinction from any other Sect. Let us then consider, First,
whether it be lawful to baptize any infant; Secondly, whether sprinkling be
sufficient, or if it be necessary to dip over head and ears all who are
baptized?

Concerning the state of the first Question, The state of the first question.
we need not controvert the quality of the infants to be baptized, Whether they
must be the children of true believers, or only of professors without
scandal; whether of Church members only, or if it be enough that their Parents
be Christians in the largest signification, all this belongs to another place.
The only point pertinent here, is, Whether any infants may be baptized? The
champions for the Anabaptists side in their Declaration of the public Dispute
intended by them with the City Ministers for their Tenet, set down their These
in these express terms, No infants ought to be baptized; The formal
contradiction hereof is, Some infants ought to be baptized: for this Position,
I propone some few Scripturall reasons. Who have leisure to see this point
debated at length, may look upon the worthy and judicious Writs of M. Marshall,
M. Black, M. Geere. M. Ainsworth also in his last Writ, and M. Cotton in his
latest, learnedly and zealously maintain this truth against the Anabaptists.

The first reason for the affirmative.
My first reason I frame thus, Who ever have a good right to the first Sacrament
of the New Testament ought to be baptized: But some infants have a good right
to the first Sacrament of the New Testament: Ergo, Some infants ought to be
baptized. The major is naturally clear, it needs no more for its proof but the
explication of the terms of the Proposition, for Baptism and the first
Sacrament of the New Testament are one thing, and ought to be baptized is
nothing else but to have a good right to Baptism.

Who have right to the chief promises have right to some of the seals which God
has appointed to be a means of assurance of these promises, unless the Lord
himself have made a special exception.
All the question lies in the minor, which thus I prove, Who ever have right to
the chief promises of the New Testament, they have right to the first Sacrament
of the New Testament, if the Lord have not put some impediment to their
participation of that Sacrament; But some infants have right to the chief
promises of the New Testament, and the Lord has put no impediment to their
participation of that Sacrament: Ergo. About the major I see one, and but one,
makes some velitation, all the rest give it for granted, for it is grounded
likewise on the nature of the terms of the proposition, the chief promises of
the New Testament and the first Sacrament; this is the sign and seal, that the
thing signified. The reason proceeds not from every thing signified to every
sign, but from the chief thing signified to the first sign: some of the
blessings which Circumcision did seal, belonged to Melchisedek, to Lot, to Job,
and others who were not so far as we read circumcised, but the main promises
sealed by Circumcision, In thy seed all the Nations of the earth shall be
blessed; The Messiah coming of the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
Covenant of grace as it was administered under the figures of the Ceremonial
Law, did belong to the people of Israel alone, and to the proselytes who joined
themselves to their body. Nor do we speak but of the first sign, for unless
there be a right to this, there is a right to none, and where the Lord has
appointed signs to seal up thereby the assurance of his promises, to deny to
them whom God will have to be assured of the promise, the use of all the seals,
which he has instituted to be the spiritual means of that assurance, were on
man's part a great unjustice, except the Lord himself have put a bar to the
participation of these seals, as in the Sacrament of Circumcision of old he did
to women, and to male infants before the eighth day, and to all born in the
Wilderness during the time of their forty years wandering therein.

But it is upon the minor that our Adversaries bestir themselves to purpose:
they deny stoutly both its parts, Infants have good right to the promises of
the Covenant of grace.
all the Scripturall objections which they can make against infants baptism,
they count impediments put by God to paedobaptism; and upon this ground they
deny the last part of the minor; this we shall consider when we come to answer
their objections, it were not so pertinent in this place. The first part
likewise of the minor they deny, affirming that no infants have right to any
promise of the New Testament before the time of their actual faith, which they
say cannot possibly be in them before the years of their discretion. This is
the greatest and most dangerous knot in the whole debate, for we do not so much
contend for the outward Sacrament to infants, as for their spiritual right in
God and his promises: all our adversaries deny to all infants all right in God,
all interesses in his promises and Covenant, as much as they do to Turks and
Pagans: Some of both (say they) may be elected and saved, but neither of both
have any place in the Covenant of grace or any Gospel promises, till they be
called by the Word, and by an actual faith have embraced the Gospel. If
therefore we make good the right and interest of any infants in the chief
promises of the New Testament, we establish the main hinge of this whole
controversy. For this end we will endeavor to clear from Scripture these four
propositions; First, that the infants of the Jews had real and true interest
in the Covenant of grace, even before the coming of Christ; Secondly, that the
infants of the Jews had that same right in the Covenant of grace, after the
coming of Christ in the New Testament; Thirdly, that the infants of the
Gentiles under the old Testament, when their Parents became proselytes, had
right to the Covenant of grace; Fourthly, that the infants of the Gentiles
under the New Testament had that same right continued.

The first we prove from Genesis 17. ver. 7, 12, 13. The infants of the Jews
had real interest in the Covenant of grace before the coming of Christ. Genesis
17.7, 12, 13.
I will establish my Covenant betwixt me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting Covenant to be a God unto thee and to thy
seed after thee: And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you,
and my Covenant shall be in all your flesh. Here God enters in Covenant, and
promises not only things temporal, but the chief of all spiritual blessings,
that he will be a God to Abraham's seed as well as to himself; and this his
seed is understood of infants as well as others, for with all these this
Covenant is made, who carried the seal of it in their flesh, and some of these
are expressly said to be but eight days old: this gracious Covenant was the
ground of their Circumcision, and of all the legal ceremonies exercised about
them as true members of the Jewish Church: The first males were holy to the
Lord, Christ as was the custom of other infants was brought to the Temple,
Luke 2. Luke 2.
to be presented to the Lord and to have a sacrifice offered for him; in the
second command the Lord promises mercy to the children of faithful parents,
not only in the third and fourth, but in the thousand generation; and although
the Parents were wicked, yet the Lord acknowledges his interest in the Jewish
children, and theirs in him, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. Ezekiel 16.20, 21
Moreover thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters whom thou have born unto
me, and these have thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured, thou have slain my
children. Here the Jewish infants burnt by their idolatrous Parents and
sacrificed to Molech, are called Gods children, and are said to be born to God.

The second proposition, the continuance of this right to the Jewish infants
under the Gospel: some deny it, but absurdly; for Christ when he came was a
Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. Also after Christ's coming under the
new Testament. Heb. 7.27.8, 6.
By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament; and 8.6. He is the
Mediator of a better Covenant which was established upon better promises. The
Covenant of grace for the substance was ever the same, but for the manner of
its administration it was the longer the better, and after Christ's incarnation
best of all: but it had been evidently worse after that time in a very great
and main particular, if all Jewish infants which before were Church Members and
partakers of the sacrifices and Sacraments, as the elect ones of them were of
the spiritual promises, should have lost these privileges, after the coming
of Christ; and have been so far then unchurched, that neither Covenant,
Sacrament, Promise, nor any such benefit could belong to them before their
years of discretion. But they who are resolute to controvert this point, I hope
will be content to be silenced by the Apostles determination, Acts 2.39.
The promise is unto you and to your children: It is a vain elusion to say, the
Apostle is speaking of the promises of the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost, for infants are less capable of those then of any graces and gifts in
controversy; also it is evident that the Apostle is speaking of the great
promise of making Jesus crucified and risen from the dead, Lord and Christ, v.
36. the Author of remission of sins, v. 38. of salvation, v. 31. as well as of
the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost. Neither is their evasion better who
would have no other children here understood then these who are called, for so
neither remission of sins, nor salvation, nor Christ, nor any gracious promise,
should belong at all to any child of Abraham before he were called, no not to
Isaac, nor Jacob, the children of the promise, in the time of their infancy,
which is expressly contrary to the former Scripture, and to the common sense of
all well advised Christians.

As for the third proposition, the right of proselyte infants under the Law to
the Covenant and the Sacrament which then did seal it; it is clear from Genesis
17.12. The Infants of proselyte Gentiles under the old Testament had right in
the Covenant of grace. Genesis 17.12.
He that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you every man-child in
your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any
stranger which is not of thy seed. The infants of strangers bought with money
though not of Abraham's seed, are commanded to bear the sign of the Covenant of
the Lord in their flesh. Exodus 12.48, 49. Ex. 12.48, 49.
When a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to the
Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it,
and he shall be as one born in the Land, one Law shall be to him that is
home-born, and one to the stranger that sojourneth among you. Here the stranger
Gentile, who is desired to join, is admitted to the same Law and privilege
with the Jew.

The Infants of believing Gentiles under the New Testament have right in the
Covenant of grace.
For the fourth, that the infants of believing Gentiles have right to the
promises of God under the New Testament, it is clear from what is said: for if
it were otherwise, then their condition after Christ's incarnation should be
much worse then before, which may not be admitted: but however this may be,
many places in the New Testament will decide the quarrel, I cite but two, Romans
11.24. Romans 11.24.
For if thou were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were
graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree; how much more shall these
which be the natural branches be graffed into their own olive tree? Here the
whole Church of the Gentiles is graffed into the root of the natural olive,
and that the more room might be left for them the Jews are broken off. Before
the breaking off of the Jewish branches some of the Gentiles were ingraffed
with them in the root Christ, and then the infants of the Gentiles as well as
their Parents enjoyed the privileges of the new Covenant; when the body of the
Jews is broken off, to this end that the Gentiles may grow in their place;
shall not the Gentiles then enjoy the Jewish privilege, at least their own
privilege which themselves enjoyed in worse times? for as we have showed,
under the Law the infants both of Jews and Gentile proselytes did live by the
fatness of the root, as well as their Parents: The manifold windings and
turnings of the adversary from this place, does but wrap them the further in
the net.

The next place I cite is the first of the Cor. 7 14. How infants are holy. 1
Cor. 7.14.
For the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving
wife is sanctified by the Husband, else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy. Here the children of Christians are affirmed to be holy, that is,
separated and dedicated to the service of God, as those who are in Covenant
with him, to whom he is a God and whom he takes for his people: for the Church
in the Old Testament, both young and old, were accounted a holy and separate
people, Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Ye are the children of the Lord your God, thou art an
holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to be a
peculiar people unto himself above all the Nations that are upon the earth.
Isaiah 63.18. The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while:
This privilege continues to the Church in the New Testament to the worlds end,
1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar people, which in time past were not a people, but are now
the people of God. The Anabaptists for to loose the knot of this argument,
endeavor with much pain to cast a mist of confusion upon the whole text; but
to make clear and short work with them we reason thus, The holiness spoken of
by the Apostle Paul here, is one of three, either the holiness of
justification and inherent sanctification flowing from the application of the
blood of Christ, and inhabitation of the holy Ghost; or else a civil holiness
of legitimation flowing from the lawfulness of a just matrimony; or else a
foederall holiness, whereby the whole church of God, young and old, by virtue
of his covenant with them are separate and dedicated unto him; no other senses
use to be ascribed to the word holy in this place by any disputant: the first
two are inconsistent with the text, the third therefore must be received. The
first cannot be approved by any who is sound in the doctrine of justification
and sanctification: for who ever will make all the children of every believing
parent to have the holiness of a real justification and sanctification, must
either recall this tenet, or in the end cannot but join with the Papists and
Arminians in their great article of total and final apostasy from the most
saving grace.

As for the second sense, we deny that ever in Scripture children are called
holy, because begotten in lawful marriage: for so the children of the greatest
Idolaters and worst of the Pagans, who have no relation at all to God, but as
sinful creatures dedicated to Idols; that is, of creatures very unholy, and at
best merely natural and civil, must be accounted holy according to Scripture.
2. The Apostle speaking of an holiness which belongs to the Corinthians
children, from this, that one of their parents is a believer; Legitimation
cannot be such an holiness, for the faith of one or both parents contributes
nothing to that; the children of two unbeleevers are as lawful as the children
of two believers, and so as holy in such a sense. But the holiness whereof the
Apostle is there speaking, is such whereof the children of parents who are both
unbeleevers are not capable, for it belongs to the children by virtue of the
faith of one of the parents: So this civil holiness of legitimation, if there
were any such, could not agree to the Apostles words in hand.

The first two senses being removed from the words, only the third does
remain, a foederall holiness, whereby the children are joined with God in
covenant, and dedicated to the service of God by virtue of that covenant, as
well as their parents. Such an holiness is a good reason of that which goes
before, and a solid ground of solution of the Corinthians scruple which the
Apostle is loosing: they had propounded to the Apostle their doubt, If a
believing husband might lawfully cohabit with his unbeleeving wife; the
Apostles answer is affirmative: and the reason of the answer is, because what
ever the unbeleeving parties may be in themselves, yet their cohabitation is
sanctified to believers, and of this sanctification the holiness of their
children is brought for an evidence, since the Lord counted their children holy
and in covenant with him, the believers might rest assured that their abode
with their companions (though unbeleeving) was acceptable unto God.

The Apostle here is speaking of husbands and wives, not of men and whores,
though some other Scriptures should prove the bastards of believers to be holy,
yet this Scripture speaks nothing either of them or of their holiness, or of
any thing else belonging to them: only to settle the conscience of believing
husbands and wives, concerning their lawful abode and sanctified cohabitation
with their unbeleeving companions, the foederal holiness of their children is
brought in for a proof. To have said that children was lawful, was no more then
that their marriage was lawful, which was not the question: but to say that the
children of their lawful marriage were holy, did infer not only the
lawfulness of the marriage, but the sanctified use of the marriage, and that
now their cohabitation was without sin and acceptable to God.

My second argument I take from infants Circumcision, The second argument is
from the Circumcision of Infants.
which thus I frame. Circumcision was administered to infants under the Law.
Ergo, Baptism ought to be administered to infants under the Gospel. Nothing
here is doubtful but the consequence, which thus I prove. Baptism under the
Gospel succeeds to Circumcision under the Law. Ergo, if Circumcision was
ministered to infants under the Law, Baptism ought to be ministered to infants
under the Gospel. Both the consequence and the antecedent of this argument are
denied.

When for the proof of the consequence we bring in the common rule of reasoning
from analogy and proportion, It is safe to resume from Scripturall
consequences, yea, proportions.
these of the adversaries who prove to be so great disputers as to challenge
the chief Ministers of the City to public debates, do deny to us all such
rules of disputation, and which is much worse, avow their mis-regard of what
ever consequence we are able to fetch from any Scripture by the rules of the
rightest reason; leading us directly to that base and brutall fancy of the
Jesuit Veron, who for a time did please himself to admit from Protestants in
all controversies, no consequences at all, but only express, formal, and
syllabick texts. Though the Jesuits themselves did cry down and crush this
irrational and inhumane conceit of their colleague, yet the Anabaptists, among
many more exploded and sopited errors, show their boldness to renew this also;
but in this madness, their learned friend M. Tombs deserts them; for he only
admonishes us to be sparing and cautious in our reasoning from proportion in
positive and institute worship: his advice we mind to follow as very
reasonable: for we do not from analogy infer the institution of Baptism, or
any other positive worship, only the application of Baptism, a worship
instituted by an express command, to a certain subject, to wit, infants; and
to reason thus far, yea farther from proportions and analogies is the frequent
custom both of Christ and his Apostles; thus the Lord proves it lawful for
his Disciples to pluck the ears of corn on the Sabbath, from David's eating of
the shewbread: and the Apostle proves the necessity of maintaining the
Ministers, from not muzling of the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn,
and their living by the Altar who serve at the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.9.

But the greatest stick is upon the antecedent, Baptismes succession to
Circumcision; we therefore prove it from Col. 2.11, 12. Baptism succeeds to
Circumcision. Col. 2.11, 12.
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of Christ:
buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him. The Apostle
here showing our compleatnesse in Christ, tells us that we have in him the main
thing signified by Circumcision, the spiritual Circumcision of the heart not
made with hands, the putting off of the body of sin: also that in place of the
abolished rite of Circumcision we have the new rite of Baptism, whose
substance and signification was the very same with Circumcision, a burial with
Christ, and a resurrection with him, a killing of the body of sin, and
quickening of the new man in the life of every grace. The Apostle in this his
parallel and comparison of the two Sacraments is clear, in making the substance
and signification of both to be really one. In this also that Circumcision is
put away, and accomplished by the coming of Christ, the body of all the old
shadows; but that Baptism yet remains in the Christian church in place of
Circumcision, having the same ends and significations therewith. Many
dissimilitudes are here brought by some to hinder all proportion, analogy, and
parallel betwixt these two Sacraments, but how many soever can be brought they
will prove no more but that those two are not one, which was never affirmed by
any: things that are like and agree only in some third cannot possibly be one,
for identity destroys analogy and similitude.

But if two concordances betwixt Baptism and Circumcision be made good, the
third for which we reason will of its own accord follow, if it be clear that
Circumcision and Baptism be both of them seals of the same covenant; and both
of them initiating seals; it follows that if infants were capable of the one,
they are also of the other. If the first two do not clearly enough appear from
the last passage of the Apostle, there be many more Scriptures beside to make
them evident.

The first similitude betwixt Baptism and Circumcision is, their sealing of
the covenant of grace, Circumcision did seal the Covenant of grace.
and the blessings therein contained; this of Baptism was never questioned,
but of Circumcision the Anabaptists did ever deny it; we prove it first from
Genesis 17.11. Genesis 17.11.
and it shall be a token of the covenant between me and thee; what covenant was
this whereof Circumcision is here called a token? (or as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 4.11. a sign and a seal) Moses expresses it in the 7. v. calling it an
everlasting covenant, wherein God promised to be a God to Abraham and to his
seed after him: this covenant must be of grace, since the Lord the fountain of
grace and glory promises therein to communicate even himself to Abraham's
posterity. It is true, according to the wise and wonderful dispensation of the
grace of God, both under the Law and Gospel, the promise is preached to the
whole seed, and all the members of the visible church whether elect or
reprobate; but what is offered to all in the Word and Sacraments, is conferred
only upon the elect by the efficacy of his grace who works all in all
according to the good pleasure of his will.

It is clear also from Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
that Circumcision was a seal of the covenant of grace, and the Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart and with all thy soul that thou may live; here the thing
signified by the rite of Circumcision is the sanctification of the Spirit, and
the planting of the love of God in the mortified heart, which without all doubt
are two of the principal promises of the covenant of grace.

Likewise, Romans 4.11. Romans 4.11.
is so clear that in reason it ought to stop all mouths from farther debating
in this point, and he received the sign of Circumcision a seal of the
righteousness of faith. Whence we reason, The covenant that brings to Gospel
justification, to the righteousness of faith, to remission of sins and
happiness, is the covenant of grace. But the Apostle there affirms
Circumcision to have been a seal of such a covenant. Ergo.

It Is true, the covenant of grace, The covenant of grace has been diversely
administered, but ever the same and never mixed.
in its administration before Christ's coming in the flesh, was clothed with
many shadows of now abolished ceremonies, and had adjoined to it upon mount
Sinai the old covenant of works to be a severe paedagogue for the pointing out
the way to Christ, unto the very unruly children of Israel, and for keeping
them in awe and terror by its threats and curses; also for alluring them to
obedience by its temporal promises: we grant because of those adjuncts the
covenant of grace is sometimes spoken of as an old covenant, and is
distinguished from its very self as it was administered by Christ after his
incarnation, the old dress of Sinai being changed as of an old garment: but
that the thing was ever the same, advised Christians must be loath to doubt,
for if the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham and his seed under the Law
be not truly and substantially the new covenant of grace, we desire to know by
what means they obtained either grace or glory: and to put all the Fathers of
the Old Testament in so beastly a condition as excludes from grace and glory,
who dare be so insolent? Now if we grant them a covenant which did bring them
to a state of grace in this life, and of glory hereafter, how can we deny it to
be gracious?

That which they speak of a mixed covenant is not much to the purpose, we did
never deny the adjunction of ceremonies and temporal promises, and the whole
covenant of works unto the covenant of grace under its first administration:
yea, under the very New Testament where the administration is much changed, the
new covenant wants not both its sacramental ceremonies and the promises of
this life; but none of those adjuncts do change the state and nature of the
principal; it remains ever a covenant of pure grace without any mixture; it is
neither in the whole, nor in any substantial part turned into a covenant of
works; it may not lose its denomination if it keeps its nature; it may neither
be counted wholly a covenant of works, nor a mixed covenant of grace and works.

For the other part of the similitude that Circumcision and Baptism as they
are seals of the same covenant, so they are both initiating seals, Both
Circumcision and Baptism are initiating seals.
ceremonies whereby the first solemn entry into this covenant is made, is
scarce controverted by any; of circumcision the thing is evident, whatever
covenant it sealed it was an initiating seal thereof; for it was the very first
ceremony exercised about any person: they of age at their profession of the
faith were circumcised, and infants in the eight day of their life; no
uncircumcised person might enter the Tabernacle or Temple, or eat of the
Paschall supper. The same is true of Baptism, upon those of age who profess
faith, Christ immediately puts Baptism, Go preach and baptize: none may
participate of the Lords Supper who is not before baptized: this was the order
of the Apostolic Churches, Acts 2.38.41, 42. The Apostle exhorts his hearers,
first to repent and be baptized: this being done, thereafter they go to the
breaking of bread. M. Tombs the over-turner of this order is deserted herein,
as in many other of his notions, by all the Anabaptists I know.

Thus the parts of the analogy which we touch upon are made good, as for our
inference that Baptism being an initiating sign of the same covenant in which
Circumcision initiates, therefore as Circumcision was administered to infants in
their solemn admission to the covenant under the Law; so baptism ought to be
administered to infants in their solemn admission to the same covenant under the
Gospel. The main things objected against this conclusion are two; first, that
neither under Law nor Gospel infants were admitted to any covenant of grace. I
grant if this exception were made not to the conclusion which is an informal
way of answering, but to the consequence or antecedent or some proposition, it
is very relevant if it were true; but in the former argument I have
demonstrated from diverse clear Scriptures its falsehood.

Their other exception is, There needs not a particular command for the
application of a sacrament to the diverse ages, and sexes, and conditions of
persons.
that the parallel were it most harmonious in never so many things, yet if it
be to the purpose, it must hold also in this, that as Circumcision had an
express command for its application to infants, so must Baptism. We answer,
that this exception is the very point in question, which this whole argument
and the former, and all that follows intend to prove; that for the application
of Baptism to infants, there is so much of a divine commandment as is requisite
in such a case. That express commands are not required for the application of
ordinances to the diverse ages, sexes and conditions of subjects, is clear in a
number of instances: Who ever did require a particular command, or express
institution for admitting of women to the Lords Supper? for the baptism of old
men, the baptism of Kings, of Queens, of Merchants, and so forth? If the
premises therefore be granted as we have proved them from Scripture, that
infants are in the covenant of grace, that Circumcision was, and Baptism is a
Sacramental seal, initiating and solemnly bringing into this covenant all who
are admitted thereto; and that Circumcision did initiate infants therein, it
will not in reason be avoided, but Baptism must still do the same, and that to
deny Baptism the initiating seal of the covenant of grace to infants, is
nothing else but the excluding of them from the covenant of grace it self.

It is Mr Tombs remark, that under the very Law Baptism was in use, Infants
Baptism under the Law.
and Mr Marshall adds very judiciously from the Talmud from Maimonides and
other Authors, that who ever were circumcised among the Jews were also
baptized, infants as well as their parents, women as well as men. That this
custom of baptizing all who were added to the church, children as well as
parents, did constantly continue in all ages of the Christian church, is proved
by many without any satisfactory reply; but we intend here to dispute from
Scripture alone.

Our third argument we take from Mat. 28.19. The third argument from Mat. 28.19.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Hence we reason thus, To whom that
commission of the Apostles to baptize did extend, they are commanded to be
baptized: But to some infants that commission of the Apostles does extend.
Ergo. The minor only is questionable, we prove it by these reasons; first, To
whom the chief matter of that commission does belong, to them the commission
does extend; But to some infants the chief matter of that commission does
belong: The promises of the Gospel belong to infants.
for the chief matter thereof was the glad tidings of salvation in Christ, the
holy covenant and mercy promised to the Fathers, the oath sworn to Abraham, as
Zachary expounds it, Luke 1.72, 73. Now that the covenant and promise in the
very terms of it concerned infants as much as any, appears by the words of God
to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed; and Peter,
Acts 2.39. does preach expressly, that this promise did belong as well to his
hearers children as to themselves.

Infants are not in a worse condition under the Gospel then under the Law.
A second proof, if this commission of the Gospel of salvation, and its initial
seal extend not to any infants, then the extent of the covenant of grace should
be much straiter among the Gentiles then it had been among the Jews: for
infants are a great part of every Nation, and among the Jews the covenant in
the promise of grace and of glory, and in the seals of both was extended to
infants as well as to any others; so if among the Gentiles now under the Gospel
infants were excluded, it would be a very sensible and pitiful restraint of
the covenant; but a very absurd one, for every christian Nation has the
covenant of grace communicate to them in no worse, but in much better terms
then the Jews of old.

All who are baptized needs not be capable of teaching.
The great objection against all this, is this argument; None are the objects of
baptism, but who first are the objects of teaching; But infants are not the
objects of teaching. Ergo. We answer, that both the propositions may be denied,
there is no necessity of the major, for although the commission of teaching and
baptizing go together, yet this infers not any necessity of applying these two
commands to the self same persons; be it so that these two acts are ever
conjoined, and that teaching must ever go before baptizing, for the parents
ought to be instructed before the children be baptized, and in the right
administration of baptism, the nature of the covenant is always declared
before the seal of the sacrament be appended; yet it follows not that the same
persons who are to be baptized, are at that same time to be taught: as in the
commission for Circumcision, Genesis 17. all the precepts concern not the self
same persons, but some the parents only, some the infants only, and some both,
v. 12. he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you; this belongs
only to infants, but the 11. v. ye shall circumcise the flesh of your
foreskin, this belongs only to the parents, and those of age, for no other
could obey this injunction: and v. 10. every man-child among you shall be
circumcised, belongs alike both to old and young. Even so that in the Law of
Baptism some of the injunctions should belong only to the Pastors, as the act
of preaching; and baptizing and others, only to the elder people that are to
be baptized, as that of being taught; and others, as that of being baptized, to
the younger also who are not able to be taught, there is no absurdity.

The minor also is denied upon diverse grounds. Infants are Disciples.
I speak not of that which diverse maintain of the actual faith of children,
and of the application to infants, of that of Isaiah; they shall be all taught
of God, from the least to the greatest. But I desire that to be considered,
which many more affirm, and diverse of the Anabaptists themselves do press,
that the word which Christ uses in his commission to the Apostles is,
matheteuein, which signifies say they, not to teach, but to make Disciples; now
infants may very well go under the name of Disciples, for they are brought to
the School of God, the visible Church, and there they are dedicate to Gods
discipline, and have their names given up to be the Lords subjects and
scholars. Sundry scriptures also are produced where infants are counted
Disciples, as Act. 15.10. why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the
Disciples? Circumcision is the yoke whereof the Apostle is speaking, now they
on whose neck ordinarily that yoke was put were only infants.

A third reason for the proving of our first minor, is this, Infants have
interest in the Trinity.
To whom the form and end of Baptism expressed in the place in hand does
belong, to them the commission set down in Mat. 28.19. does extend; But to some
infants the form and end of Baptism expressed in that place does belong. Ergo.
The minor is grounded upon the words of the text, for they make the form and
end of Baptism to be a dedication of the person baptized to the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, and an interessing of the three Persons in the baptized party:
now the necessity to dedicate christian infants to their Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier, and the interest of all the three Persons in the infants of their
servants so dedicated unto them is evident.

A fourth reason for the probation of that first minor, whosoever may lawfully
be baptized to them, Infants may be lawfully baptized.
the commission in hand does extend; for the baptism of women, of old men, of
Kings, of Beggars, and of all sexes, ages, and conditions, is grounded upon
this command, though neither their names nor their qualities be therein
expressly set down, nor can be fetched from thence, but only by consquence. Now
we assume, that some infants may lawfully be baptized: this, both the present
argument and the two former, and these that follow, do prove, and the Apostle
Peter, Acts 2.39. does evince by this argument, To whom the chief ground of
Baptism does belong they may lawfully be baptized; But to some children the
chief ground of baptism does belong, to wit, the promises of the new covenant:
those says he, belong to you and to your children; and upon this as a
principal foundation he builds his exhortation to them to be baptized.

Arg. 4. from the Baptism of whole families.
Our fourth main argument is this, The blessing which God bestows on whole
families without exception of any infant, ought not to be denied to all
infants; But baptism is such a blessing. Ergo. The major is grounded on that
laudable conformity which ought to be in all men with God; when he is good,
our eye without reproof may not be evil: the minor is proved from diverse
Scriptures, where the Apostles did baptize, not only them who are declared to
believe, but with them their whole household, whose actual believing is not at
all expressed, Acts 16.15. Acts 16.15.31
when she was baptized and her household, ibid. v. 31. thou and thy house shall
be saved; and v. 33. he and all his were baptized, and 1 Cor. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.16.
I baptized also the household of Stephanas. No exception here is made of
infants, and if any should except them because they cannot hear the Word and
believe, they must exclude them also from the other spiritual benefits
mentioned in these places, even from salvation it self; for as our Savior
speaks to Zacheus, Luke 19.9. This day is salvation come to this house; and the
Lord showed by the Angel to Cornelius, that Peter should tell him words whereby
he and all his house should be saved, Acts 11.14. So Paul tells the keeper of
the prison, that upon his faith himself should be saved and his house, Act.
16.31. How great a wrong it were to exclude infants either from the promise or
from the seal of salvation, when both are conferred upon whole households,
whereof infants are the most innocent parts, may be seen in all the preceding
practices of God, from the first institution of any initiating sign to that
day; What ever man, either Jew or Gentile, was moved by God to join himself to
the visible church, as himself did hear and make profession of his faith, and
receive the seal of Circumcision, so also all his male infants were
circumcised, though they could neither hear nor believe. This bounty and
kindness God did never afterward retract, and for any man to do it, it were a
great presumption; for so the Jews in the New Testament where their comforts
are enlarged should be in a more sorrowful condition then the very Gentiles
were in the Old; for then the Proselytes upon the profession of their faith,
had all their infants though unable to believe, taken within the covenant, and
all their children admitted to the seals thereof; but according to our
adversaries position, the Jews themselves in the New Testament, though never so
zealous of the faith, must have all their children excluded, not only from the
seals, but from the covenant it self, and all its gracious promises either of
grace or glory, and from every spiritual blessing. It must be a very clear
Scripture that ought to persuade so great a change of Gods administration of
his covenant, and its seals so much to the worse of that which is confessed was
before his usual practice and command.

A fifth reason, Arg. 5. from Christ's laying of his hands on infants, and
blessing them.
Whosoever by Gods express direction and practice is admitted to his favor
and blessing, and to the outward signs and seals thereof, may be baptized. But
by Christ's express direction and practice, some infants are admitted to his
favor and blessing, and to the outward signs and seals thereof. Ergo. The
major is grounded upon the nature of baptism, which is a seal of Christ's
blessings: they to whom the blessing of Christ and the outward seal thereof
belongs, why should they not be admitted to baptism when once the Lord has
solemnly declared his will, to initiate all to whom his blessings belong by the
seal of baptism? The minor is clear from Mat. 19.13. Mat. 19.13.
Then were there brought unto him little children that he should put his hands
upon them and pray, and the Disciples rebuked them, but Jesus said, Suffer
little children and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven; and
he laid his hands on them; also, Mar. 10.13, 14, 15, 16. Mark 10.13, 14 15 16.
And they brought young children to him that he should touch them, and his
Disciples rebuked those that brought them; but when Jesus saw it, he was much
displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little children to come unto me and
forbid them not, and he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and
blessed them. Here the Lord commands children to be brought to him, he is much
displeased, and reproves his Disciples for stopping of them, he laid his hands
upon them and blessed them, declaring that of such was the kingdom of heaven.

Exceptions against these places taken off.
To this argument three things are answered; First, that the children mentioned
were not infants, but grown to such years as made them capable of instruction.
Secondly, that their blessing was not spiritual but a temporal health.
Thirdly, that the sign and seal mentioned is not baptism but imposition of
hands. To the first we reply, that the children were not of so many years as
made them capable of instruction, for the text calls them expressly young and
little ones. Secondly, they were so young, that they could not walk, they were
brought to Christ, they did not come but in the arms of their parents; Christ
also took them up in his own arms. Thirdly, if they had been capable of
instruction, the Apostles could not have been offended, for they knew that it
was their masters office and delight to instruct all who were capable, and the
coming of such to the great Doctor could have given no offense.

To the second, the text gives not the least hint that any bodily cure was
either required or given. Secondly, the blessings given were such, as Christ is
desired to seek from the Father by prayer, and these could not but be the best
blessings, even spiritual and everlasting. Thirdly, it is expressed in the
place, that the greatest of all blessings was theirs, even the very kingdom of
heaven. While this is denied by the adversaries affirming that the kingdom of
heaven belongs not to infants, but only to those who are like them; the text
refels this their shift; for the kingdom of heaven must belong much more to
themselves then to such who were only like them. The scope and intention of
Christ in this place is not to speak of the condition of others like to
infants, but of infants themselves, who were unjustly stopped by the Apostles
to come to him, and the Lord is pleading for the admission only of infants to
him upon this reason, that heaven belonged to such, which had been an
impertinent argument for his conclusion, if heaven had not belonged to infants
at all, who upon this reason are required to be admitted to him. Farther, if
infants were to be admitted to Christ, because heaven belonged to these, who
resembled them in some qualities, it would follow that doves, lambs, serpents,
stones, and trees might have been brought to him upon this reason as well as
infants; for men resembling these creatures in their good qualities are to go
to heaven.

As for their third answer it is very true, that the sign in the place
alleged was not baptism, this was never alleged; for we read nothing of the
baptism of the parents of these infants who were presented to Christ; as yet
the command of baptism was not made so public as afterward, when the Lord at
his ascension sent out his Disciples in the power of the holy Ghost to gather a
formed Church, and to baptize believers and their children; the reason
proceeded not from baptism, but to baptism, and that a loco disparatorum;
since imposition of hands, a seal of Christ's grace and blessing, and of the
kingdom of heaven belonged to infants; that therefore baptism a seal of that
same kind, when once the Lord had solemnly at his ascension appointed it to be
the ordinary seal of initiation into his Church, ought not to be denied unto
them.

A sixth reason; Arg. 6. Infants under the Law were baptized.
Infants were baptized as well as their parents by Moses baptism. Ergo,
Infants as well as their parents ought to be baptized by Christ's baptism. The
antecedent is the Apostles, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.
M r^over brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our
fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea: and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the Sea. The Fathers baptized in the
cloud, and in the sea were the whole people as well young as old; for no doubt
the infants went as well through the cloud and the sea as their parents. The
consequence is proved thus; the reasons which may be brought for the exclusion
of infants from being baptized with their parents by Christ's baptism, militar,
as much against their being baptized with their parents by Moses baptism.
Therefore if notwithstanding they were admitted to the one baptism, they may
as well be admitted to the other. If it be said that the infants did with their
parents in the wilderness eat of the Manna and drink of the rock, yet may they
not now be admitted with their parents to eat and drink at the Lords Table: We
answer, there is no such necessary evidence of the infants eating of the Manna
and drinking of the rock, as of their passing through the cloud and sea; this
necessity was simple and absolute, the other not so; for infants may live on
their mothers breasts and the milk of cattle, without either eating of bread or
drinking of water: but however, there is a positive precept that hinders them
from participation of the Lords Supper; they cannot remember the Lords death,
they cannot examine the state of their own heart; no such impediment is put in
their way by the hand of God to keep them from baptism. M. Tombs observes it,
that long before John the Baptists days, baptism was in use among the Jews,
and M. Marshal adds from the Talmud, Maimonides and other Authors, that it was
a very ancient custom to baptize all that were circumcised, infants as well as
their parents, women as well as men; and that this custom of baptizing all
that were added to the Church, as well children as others, did continue in all
ages among Christians, is proved at length by many without any satisfactory
reply: but we intend here to dispute from Scripture alone.

7. Argument. Infants are partakers of remission, of regeneration, of life
eternal.
We shall bring but one other reason and so pass on, To whom the Lord gives
the whole signification of baptism, from these, men ought not to withhold the
outward sign thereof; But to some infants the Lord gives the whole
signification of baptism. For the proof of the major we need not allege the
equity of giving the less to them that gets the more, of not denying the shell
and the cask to them who enjoy the kirnell and the pearl; for the Apostles
words prove it sufficiently, Acts 10.47. Acts 10.47.
Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized which have received
the holy Ghost as well as we? and he commanded them to be baptized in the name
of the Lord; the Apostle here reasons from one part of the signification of
baptism, and that but a temporary blessing, the extraordinacy gifts of the
holy Ghost, to the outward sign of baptism, how much more may we conclude it
from its whole ordinary signification? The ground of this reason is granted by
the principal of our adversaries, who profess their willingness to baptize
any infants of whom they were certain that they had the saving graces of the
holy Ghost, and avow their exclusion of infants from baptism upon this ground
mainly, that they believe, they are excluded from the covenant of grace,
remission of sins, the saving graces of the Spirit, till in the years of
discretion they be brought actually to believe.

The minor, that some infants have the whole signification of baptism, is thus
proved; Who have remission of sins, regeneration, and right to eternal life,
they have the whole signification of baptism. But some infants have all these.
The major is clear. I prove the minor; None enters into heaven, but they whose
sins are remitted, who are regenerate, and to whom life eternal belongs. But
some infants enter into heaven. Ergo. The minor is not questioned, for the
words of Christ, of such is the kingdom of heaven, and the confession of the
adversaries puts it out of doubt. The major also is clear from Revel. 21.27.
And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. Nothing comes
into heaven but what is perfectly purged, justified, sanctified, glorified;
also, Ioh. 3.5. Jesus answered, Verily verily, I say unto thee, except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and
Romans 5.19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one man many shall be made righteous. As Adam makes all that are
descended of him sinners, infants as well as others: so Christ communicates his
righteousness to all who are in him, to all whom he receives and acknowledges
to be his without any distinction of Jew or Gentile, male or female, young or
old; who ever have interest in Christ, are justified and sanctified by him; Now
that some infants, especially these elect ones, who die before the age of
discretion, have interest in Christ and his covenant, has often been proved.

If it be said, that infants by this argument may be admitted to the Lords
Supper, we deny it, for the Lord himself has put a bar to keep them off
from that Sacrament; also they are not capable of the whole signification of
the Lords Supper, for the thing signified therein is not the Lords body and
blood simply, but his body to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken, by the
actual faith of the communicants; of this active application infants are not
capable; but in baptism no action is necessarily required of all who are to be
baptized; for as the body may be washed without any action of the party who is
washed: so the virtue of Christ's death and life may be applied in remission and
regeneration, by the act of God alone to the soul as a mere patient without any
action from it.

CHAP. VI. The Antipaedobaptists Objections answered.
M. (...), etc. M. ^om^s, and M (...) O^jecti^^.
THE exceptions which use to be taken to infant baptism, go about in a number
of late Treatises; the principal are as I take it, in the three last which I
have seen upon that subject; the declaration of the public dispute intended
betwixt six of the prime Preachers of the Anabaptists, and some City
Ministers. Mr Tombs exercitation, and the namelesse Treatise of Baptism. In
the first are nine Arguments; in the second eight, and some more in the third.
Who desire to see large and solid answers to all these, and to what else is
brought to any purpose by any other of their companions: let them look upon M
Marshals Sermon and its vindication; M^ Blacks three Treatises, and M. Cottons
Dialogue: for the time, they who are in haste may have this short reply to the
main arguments of the three named Authors.

They are in effect but few, and all invented by the old Anabaptists.
Take upon all, these two general observations; First, that what ever any of
them has, is all borrowed from the old Anabaptists, in whom the spirit of the
worst heresies did rage; who will be at the pains to compare the writs of the
Authors in hand with that which Zuinglius, Bullinger, Guy de Bres, Ainsworth,
and others have set down in the name and words of the old Anabaptists, shall
find that our late opposers do add little that is considerable to the
arguments of their Fathers. Secondly, that all the arguments which either the
elder or later Anabaptists bring against Paedobaptisme, are but two or three at
most; when they are increased to a greater number, it is but the same body put
in many diverse habits by a needless variation of shapes.

M. Cox first Argument (...) makes examples alone a full rule.
The nine Arguments of the public disputants have not as yet so far as I know
been honored with any answer; neither do I think was there any necessity of it;
for the Disputants do so insolently out-bragge the City Ministers, and the
matter of their Arguments has so often been answered in diverse Treatises, that
very justly those grave Divines did pass them by with contempt; how vain and
unworthy all that they bring is, any intelligent person may easily consider.
Their first argument is this, Only such as John and the Apostles ministered
Baptism to, ought to be baptized; But John and the Apostles administered Baptism
only to believers and not to their infants, Ergo, only believers and not their
infants are to be baptized. Answ. Both major and minor are denied; the major
because it makes examples of Scripture, the full rule of Baptism, contrary not
only to truth but to the Anabaptists own principles, and the Disputants own
arguments following, who are content to make up the Scripturall rule of
Baptism, not only of examples, but also of commands and of other Scripturall
warrants; no man ever in any ordinance of God, did tie alone to Scripturall
examples, that is but a partial rule either of faith or practice. The minor
likewise is denied, for the Apostles baptizing of whole house-holds is an
example of baptizing of all within the house, young and old, male and female,
without the exception of infants.

The second Argument; The second makes one and the same man to differ from
himself essentially.
Infant Baptism differs essentially from the Baptism taught by Christ and his
Apostles: The essential difference is put in the subject and form of Baptism:
We baptize infants, Christ taught these to be baptized who do actually believe
and repent: We baptize by sprinkling, Christ taught to baptize by dipping.
Answer; The bringing in, in a dispute before simple people, the School term of
essential difference, serves more to clogge and darken, then to clear the
understanding of the hearers; however we deny both the parts of the proof,
Sprinkling and Dipping are two forms of Baptism, differing not essentially, but
accidentally, circumstantially, or modally, so to speak, and till of very late
the Anabaptists themselves did not speak otherwise: but because now our
adversaries are come to make sprinkling alone a sufficient ground of nullifying
our Baptism, we shall consider that whole matter in a Chapter by it self: For
the other part of the proof, the essential difference of the subjects, we deny
it upon two grounds; first, let the difference betwixt infants and their
believing Parents be as great as it may, yet it is nothing to us, who affirm
that these very places which express the Baptism of believers do not infer
the exclusion of infants, but as we proved from the same, and other places, do
clearly infer their Baptism. Secondly, these new Disputants do not well to
force upon us a new Logic, especially when in their very next argument they
banish out of this dispute all the Logic, men have hitherto been acquaint
with, whether natural or artificial, Do infants and their Parents differ
essentially? is the difference betwixt any men how repugnant soever in
qualities and other accidents any more then numericall? who did ever dream that
an infant unbaptized did differ from himself when thereafter he did believe and
was baptized, essentially? I hope our Disputants intend not to multiply the
same individual person to more, differing essentially one from the other, or
rather one from it self; this were more then ever came in the mind of the
Poet, when he doubled the persons of Amphitruo and Sosia, or of the Papists
when they multiply the same body in diverse places.

The third ties God in the revelation of his will to precepts and examples
alone.
The third Argument is this, That religious worship, for which there is no
command nor example in Scripture, is unlawful: But the Baptism of infants is a
religious worship, etc. Ergo. Ans. This is the same in effect with their two
former arguments, but that the first takes only one part thereof, examples
recorded in Scripture, and the second clogges it with the needless term of
essential difference. In this third shape it is prosecuted with a great deal
of high language, as if their adversaries could not have answered it, while as
indeed it is nothing but the old cavil of all the Anabaptists, which has been
answered so often as any have ever had to do with any of that generation; and
what here is brought to relieve it is so absurd, that few of the Anabaptists
themselves will own it. But to the argument it self: Both its propositions are
false, the major for this reason, The Lords revealed will in his word is a
sufficient warrant for our practice: now the Lord reveals his will not only by
commands and examples, but also by promises, threatenings, instructions, and
other such ways of speaking: In this, the former argument came nearer the
truth, for it spoke of the doctrine of Baptism, but did not limit that doctrine
to commands and examples alone. Again, the minor is false, for all these
Scripturall commands and examples of Baptism which warrantably are applied to
the Baptism of infants, are so many commands and examples written in Scripture
for infant Baptism, and of those in our arguments for the affirmative we
brought many. Apply this your great and Achillean reason to another subject,
and its vanity will quickly appear. That religious worship for the which there
is no command nor example in Scripture is unlawful: But women's participation
of the Lords Supper, the Baptism of Kings, of Merchants, of M. Cox, or any
person in his Congregation is such: For where have they either a command or
example for the baptizing of any of these particulars, if they exclude as here
they do all kind of consequences and deductions from Scriptures.

The question is not, It everts the principles of all reasoning, and turns men
into stones.
If that which by necessary consequence is deduced from Scripture, be
Scripture; that is but a needless Logomachy: but if it be a real truth which
we ought to believe, and according to which we may lawfully practice.

However some old Anabaptists over Sea did decline so far as they might,
consequences from Scripture, yet of our late Anabaptists in England I have
heard of none before those Disputants that have ever called true Scripturall
consequences into question; and if these men should stand to this plea, they
would quickly involve themselves into worse errors then yet they have thought
of.

No Scripture can be made use of, or applied for instruction, reproof, comfort,
or any other service, to any singular person, but by consequence, and according
to the rule of reason, Dictum de omni and nullo; destroy the principle of
reasoning, you turn anon men into beasts, into timber and stone: The foolish
Jesuit Veron, who was the chief author of this extravagancy was quickly cried
down in this madness by his own companions.

The consequences that here are multiplied about Episcopacy, the Service Book,
the Ceremonies, etc. are for no purpose: for the world knows that no good
consequence from any Scripture could ever be brought for any such corruptions.
And for that which here, as also in the Preface, is so much desired concerning
a public Disputation, is but a needless vanity; this was the cry for a long
time of the old Anabaptists, but when they had gotten their belly full of
public disputations what the issue was, Munster and Zurick can bear witness.
The Disputants here themselves relate that it was no ways the fault of the City
Ministers that they got not so many and so public disputations as they wished,
but it appears that their gain by such disputations, could not have been very
great if their Arguments were not much stronger then any, which in this
Declaration they make public.

The fourth makes it an heresy to make any use of any thing in the old
Testament to clear any thing in the New.
Their fourth Argument is this, Infant Baptism denies Christ to be come in the
flesh, because it takes from him what the holy Ghost ascribes to him,
considered come in the flesh, it destroys his Prophetical and Priestly
office, for it brings light from Moses and the old Testament to clear Christ's
Doctrine of Baptism, and so makes Moses a greater Light then Christ: also it
lays the duty of infant Baptism upon the Subjects of Christ without his
warrant, and so puts him from his Kingdom. Answer: The upshot and strength of
this reason is no more then what was brought before, that infants Baptism wants
the warrant of Christ. 2. We see by the form of this reason to how high a pin
those men do stretch our error (as they count it) of paedobaptism: it must be
no less a crime then the denial of Christ's Offices and of his very
Incarnation: The people must hold us for very gross Heretics, and such from
whom a separation is absolutely necessary. 3. The phrase which here is often
repeated, Christ considered come in the flesh, is very obscure, or else a mere
nonsense: why considered come in the flesh, rather then come in the flesh?

But the chief matter and ground of the argument as here it is proponed is a
new and dangerous crotchet, which the most of the Anabaptists, as I think, will
never own: must it be a denial of Christ's Offices and Incarnation? must it be
a setting up of Moses and the Prophets as greater lights above Christ and the
Apostles, when any thing is brought out of the old Testament to clear some
passages of the New? When for the clearing of sundry things both in the Old and
New Testament we bring passages from Pagan, Jewish or Christian Writers either
old or New, do we hereby set up these humane Authors as greater lights above
Scripture? if the Disputants would admit of any consequences, they might see
what does stand at the back of such wild assertions; but what ever be their
mind of consequences, yet some of their followers from this their position
make two unhappy, though very necessary deductions; First, the casting away of
all humane Writs, at least the making of their service toward the clearing of
Scripture altogether unlawful; they make the use of all humane Arts and
Sciences for this end abominable. Secondly, the laying aside of the whole old
Testament, as that which may not be applied for to clear any thing that is in
the New: notwithstanding Christ and his Apostles are very frequent not only in
clearing, but in proving the body of their Doctrine from the Law and the
Prophets, yet I hope that none of them for this practice shall be counted by
the Disputants deniers of Christ's Incarnation or any of his Offices.

Their fifth argument is this, The fifth argument making the actions done by or
to Christ the full rule of our practice, is a wild fancy.
That which is no part of righteousness may not be observed; But the Baptism
of infants is no part of righteousness, because it was neither practiced upon
Christ's Person, nor by him upon any other person, he was neither baptized in
his infancy, nor did baptize any infants. Answer: This reason is as strange as
any of the former, both the major and minor are faulty; the major, because in
common speech and ordinary Scripture language, righteousness is
contradistinguished to holiness, so all acts of holiness according to this
argument behoved to be unlawful, being no parts of righteousness. The minor
also and its proof must both be denied: Let the word righteousness be taken in
as large a sense as they please, for all duties either to God or man; for all
acts either of piety, justice, or charity, yet to say that there is no act of
righteousness which cannot be proved to have been done either by Christ or
upon Christ, is a very wild fancy. For instance, what will they say for the
Baptism of women, and the Baptism of old men? will they deny those to be parts
of that righteousness whereof they speak? or will they affirm that these
things were practiced either upon the person of Christ or by the person of
Christ? Christ did fulfill all righteousness when he paid tribute and did all
those acts of justice which belonged to him, though he never meddled with any
duties belonging to others, but were impertinent to him as nothing belonging to
him, or whereof his person was not capable. The first argument concluding the
unlawfulness of infant Baptism from the want of Scripturall example, was
absurd; but this argument which restricts Scripturall example to the person of
Christ only to things done by him or upon him, is much more absurd.

The six^h ar^ument, will have none bap^i^^d but who b^li ve and are elect.
Their sixth argument is this, Only they are to be baptized who are Abraham's
seed either according to the flesh, or according to promi^e; But the infants of
Gentiles are not of Abraham's seed, either according to the flesh, or according
to promise because only the Jews are Abraham's seed according to the flesh, and
only believers are his seed according to promise. Ans. Upon this argument they
triumph and cry out of a deadly wound given thereby to infant Baptism: I will
be loath to upbraid any man with presumptuous ignorance; yet I cannot but
marvel what the Disputants can mean to prejudice their friends in every one of
their arguments a great deal more then their adversaries. This their deadly
reason is dead and rotten in all its parts: the major according to their own
principles is clearly false, for if none may lawfully be baptized but the seed
of Abraham according to the flesh, or his seed according to promise, and the
one be only Jews and the other be only believers, what will they say to Simon
Magus, and thousands whom themselves do baptize who are not Jews, and so not
the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, nor believers and elect persons,
and so not the seed according to the promise, nor the children of the heavenly
Jerusalem?

The minor likewise is false in both its parts: First, some infants of
believing Gentiles may well be counted the seed of Abraham and Israel according
to the flesh, such as are members of the Church visible, but reprobates. The
argument to the contrary that only Jews are Abraham's seed according to the
flesh is not good, for these very Scriptures Gal. 3. and 4. which they cite for
its ground do distinguish the children of Abraham according to the flesh and
according to the promise, the children of Sarah and Hagar, these that were born
of the freewoman the Jerusalem above, and the bondwoman Sinai and Jerusalem
upon earth: all this is applied to the Galatians who were Gentiles, the one
part of the distinction to those of them who were justified by faith, the other
to those of them who pleaded for a justification by the works of the Law, and
thereby lay under the bondage and curse of the Law: If both parts of the
distinction may not be applied to the Gentile Galatians, the ground of the
Apostle his argument and of his whole discourse is overturned.

This Arg. many ways absurd.
The other part of the minor is far more absurd; That only actual believers are
the children of the promise; for if so, then first at one breath all Christian
Infants are blown out of heaven, none of them have any more interest in Christ,
in grace, and in salvation then Turks and Pagans: Thus far the most of the
Anabaptists wont not to go, but the Disputants profess it is their real
meaning; their retortion here upon us is very silly, that we do put Christian
infants in as evil a condition as they, by granting all infants to be born in
original sin; for they know that we join to this a second assertion, That the
elect infants of believing Parents, though born in sin, and the children of
wrath by nature as well as others, yet by supernatural grace and mercy are
born under the new Covenant, and have their right and interest both in the
Covenant of grace and the seals thereof. Secondly, by this Doctrine the
Disputants cut off all Jewish infants from any interest in the promises of
grace: Isaac himself, Jacob and Joseph cannot be children of the promise in
their childhood, but according to the Disputants they must be children
according to the flesh, totally flesh without the Covenant of grace, that so
they behoved to remain till they came to those years wherein they did actually
believe, and by this actual faith became children of the promise; which
promise before their actual faith did no more belong to them then to any other
of mankind. Thirdly, by this argument Circumcision is made to be a seal only
of a Covenant of works; So Isaac and the rest of the Patriarchs by their
Circumcision had no promise of grace sealed unto them; all of them, except
Abraham, at the time of their Circumcision, and many years after were under a
Covenant of works only, all of them to the years of their discretion and
actual faith were incapable of any interest in the Covenant of grace: strange
absurdities!

Fourthly, by this argument they must profess that none but true believers,
justified, sanctified, and elect persons, are under the Covenant of grace, that
such only have right to participate of the Sacraments, the seals of that
Covenant, and that such only can be lawful members of any true Church.

They reject our distinction of an outward and inward Covenant of grace: We
teach that the Covenant of grace in the outward administration thereof, both in
preaching the promises and applying the seals of the Sacraments, is to be
proponed by Gods appointment to all the outward visible members of the Church:
But the inward saving grace of this Covenant, whether in preaching of the word,
or administering the Sacraments, is by the holy Ghost conferred only upon the
true living, invisible members of Christ's mystical body. By this common and
necessary distinction, we escape easily that blot of Arminianism which they
would lay upon us, for although we put all whom we baptize, and all to whom we
preach as to Church members, under the outward administration of a gracious
Covenant, yet do we not grant any true saving grace to any but the elect and
regenerate who do never totally and finally fall away: But the most of our
adversaries are full and gross Arminians, yea, their refusing to distinguish
betwixt the outward and inward Covenant or something equipollent, does draw
them to all these and great absurdities.

The 7, 8. and 9. Arg. are but repetitions.
Their seventh argument is a mere Battology; Infant Baptism, say they, is
unlawful, and will worship, because not administered according to the rule of
the word, having neither precept, nor example, nor rule for it. Ans. We need
not repeat what was said before to the same thing; only we observe that they
insist upon the baptizing of true believers only, for they speak here in
terminis, that they only of the Gentiles might be baptized who did sincerely
believe, and they prove this from Acts 8.37. so then it shall be as unlawful
to baptize the fairest professors if hypocrites as to baptize infants.

Their eighth argument is another Battology, to wit, that infant Baptism is
unlawful, because Christ did not command his Apostles to preach and practice
it: Their ninth argument is of the same nature; That infant Baptism is
unlawful, because it is no part of the revealed will of God; to those
tautologies our former answers need not be repeated.

The absurdities of every one of the nine arguments.
These be the nine great arguments wherewith the Ministers of the City were to
be confounded, their mouths for ever to be stopped, and the peoples eyes to be
opened so clearly, that with cheerfulness they might renounce their old, and
receive a new Baptism: yet I am in the opinion that the keeping of those
arguments within doors had served much more for the honor of the Authors, for
every one of them is clogged with its own proper absurdity. The first makes
example alone a full and complete rule of practice in all ordinances. The
second is grounded upon a wild logic notion of such an essential difference
as makes a man in his riper years differ essentially from himself in his
infancy. The third cuts off all reasoning from Scripture but in terminis, were
the consequence never so clear. The fourth makes Christ and the Apostles
ordinary practice of clearing their doctrine from the Law and the Prophets, to
be no less a wickedness then Antichristianisme and the denial of the coming
of Christ in the flesh. The fifth makes the personal example of Christ, a full
and complete rule of all Gospel ordinances. The sixth, denis Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, or any of Abraham's elect seed, when they were circumcised to have had
any right at all in the covenant of grace; also it imports that no infant
either of Jew or Gentile, had ever any interest in God, more then a Turk or a
Pagan, before they come to so ripe years as actually to believe and repent. The
seventh, eighth and ninth, are mere repetitions of the third, and import
clearly the unlawfulness of the baptism, and of the membership of any who is
not an actual and sincere believer. If such arguments be very apt to seduce
those who understand the grounds of their religion in any tolerable measure, I
confess I am much deceived.

As for M. Tombs eight Arguments, M. Tombs 8. Arguments answered by others.
for the solution whereof, he calls upon the whole body of the Assembly, who are
at the leisure to see every title of them answered at large; let them look upon
the Treatises of M. Marshall, M. Black, M. Geere, and Doctor Homes; to those,
M. Tombs replies in his Apology, but how poorly and to how small a purpose, let
any Reader who will be at the pains to compare what is brought from both hands,
freely pronounce the sentence. I shall but name the heads of his reasons.

First, the doctrine of infant baptism has no testimony of Scripture for it:
There is no truth in any of them.
the particular Scriptures which are brought to prove this point he endeavors
to answer; but the chief of these answers we have met with in our positive
arguments.

His second argument is this, in the institution of Baptism, Mat. 28. Christ
has not appointed infants to be baptized, because they are not Disciples. Ergo,
Their Baptism is unlawful. To this we did speak at length.

The third is, Infant Baptism is not according to the practice of John the
Baptist, and the Apostles who baptized only penitent believers: to this also
we have often spoken.

The fourth and the fifth is, That infant baptism in the ages next to the
Apostles was not in use: and when it came in use, that it was grounded upon
diverse errors and unwriten traditions. Answer. If the Anabaptists did any whit
regard antiquity, it were easy by formal testimonies to refell these two
assertions, and this the replyers to M. Tombs has done abundantly. But it is
well known, that the Anabaptists generally have no regard to humane writers; so
it were but loss of time to bring passages of the Fathers for their conviction.

His sixth, seventh, and eighth arguments are these, Infant Baptism has
occasioned many humane inventions, many errors, many abuses in Discipline and
worship. Answer. Some of these things which he calls humane inventions, errors
and abuses, are denied to be such; and those which be such, indeed are neither
caused nor occasioned by Paedobaptisme. But many gross heresies, errors and
abuses, are partly caused, partly occasioned by the rejection of
infant baptism, as may be seen in our former Chapter.

M. L. Treatise of Baptism needs no answer.
These are the eight Arguments which fills M. Tombs exercitation, in which there
seems not to be any thing which either for its novelty or strength did deserve
the half of the noise that has been made about them. I was minded to have
examined at greater length the arguments of the third Treatise, mentioned in
the beginning of the Chapter; for I did think that a prime member and eminent
Officer of the Independent Church at Arnhem would never have turned a
ringleader to gross Anabaptism, without some very convincing and exceedingly
pressing arguments; yet finding nothing considerable in that Treatise but what
was common and trivial, and all that it had to be cast not so much in a way of
argument as in a laxe popular discourse; I chused rather to let it alone then
to spend paper upon words, which as I conceive do rather detract then add any
strength at all to the old arguments of the Anabaptists.

CAP. VII. The lawfulness of sprinkling, and needlesnesse of dipping in
Baptism.
HOw abundant and copious in the faculty of lying and inventing of errors, The
lying spirit of Anabaptism.
the spirit of Anabaptisme was of old; how much superior in an extremely
malignant fruitfulnes he has been to any evil spirit that ever appeared in the
Christian Church before him; we have I hope, demonstrate in our first two
Chapters. That the younger Anabaptists who thus trouble the Church of England,
are nothing inferior to their Fathers in the art of erring, being sure where
ever they are ashamed of any one of their predecessors tenets to give us two
much worse in the place thereof, we have endeavored to make appear in our
third and fourth Chapters.

Among the new inventions of the late Anabaptists, there is none which with
greater animosity they set on foot, then the necessity of dipping over head and
ears, then the nullity of affusion and sprinkling in the administration of
baptism. The pressing of dipping and exploding of sprinkling is but an
yesterday conceit of the English Anabaptists.
Among the old Anabaptists, or these over sea to this day so far as I can
learn, by their writs or any relation that yet has come to my ears, the
question of dipping and sprinkling came never upon the Table. As I take it they
dip none, but all whom they baptize, they sprinkle in the same manner as is our
custom. The question about the necessity of dipping seems to be taken up only
the other year by the Anabaptists in England, as a point which alone, as they
conceive, is able to carry their desire of exterminating infant baptism: for
they know that parents upon no consideration will be content to hazard the life
of their tender infants, by plunging them over head and ears in a cold river.
Let us therefore consider if this sparkle of new light have any derivation from
the lamp of the Sanctuary, or the Sun of righteousness, if it be according to
Scripturall truth, or any good reason.

For the stating of the question, The state of the question.
the terms of dipping and sprinkling must be a little cleared; by sprinkling
we understand according as our adversaries not unfitly express it, an
application of water to the person, whether in greater or smaller measure,
whether by drops severally scattered, or poured on all together: so that there
be no sensible disgregation of the water applied. The distinction of affusion
from sprinkling in this matter, seems to be but a needless curiosity; By
dipping they understand an application of the whole person to the water, a
putting of the whole person in the water, not a pouring of the water upon the
person; an intinction not of one member, but of the whole body, a ducking, an
immersion of the whole body under the water. Consider farther, that we do not
oppose the lawfulness of dipping in some cases, but the necessity of it in all
cases: Neither do they impugn the expediency of sprinkling in some cases, but
the lawfulness of it in any case. So both their doctrine and practice makes
the state of the question to be this; Whether in Baptism it be necessary to
put the whole baptized person over the head and ears in the water, or if it be
lawful and sufficient, at least in some cases, to pour or sprinkle the water
upon the head of the person baptized? For the lawfulness of sprinkling and
against the necessity of dipping, Sprinkling is sufficient, and dipping is not
necessary in Baptism.
I reason thus.

The 1 Arg. for the affirmative Baptism in many Scriptures signifies
sprinkling and not dipping.
First, that action which the Spirit of God in diverse Scriptures expresses
formally by the name of baptism, is lawful and sufficient to be used in
baptism. But sprinkling or pouring out of water upon the party baptized without
any dipping, is by the Spirit of God in diverse Scriptures expressed formally by
the name of baptism. Ergo. The major is one of the adversaries principles; for
they reject sprinkling on this reason mainly, that the word Baptism in no good
Author, especially not in Scripture, does ever signify sprinkling, but always
dipping. The minor appears by many places of Scripture, I cite but a few.

First, that of Mark 7.4. Mark 7.4.8.
And when they come from the market they eat not except they wash, as it is in
the original, except they be baptized; also that same verse, And many other
things there be which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups and
pots, brazen vessels, and of tables; as it is in the original, the baptismes
of cups, etc. also in that same chap. ver. 8. For laying aside the commandment
of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups; as it is
in the original, the baptisms of pots and cups. That which here by the holy
Ghost is thrice expressed under the name of baptism, can be no other thing but
a washing by sprinkling, and no ways by a total immersion or dipping; for is
it imaginable that the Pharisees, often times every day, even so often as they went
to meat, yea, so often as they came home from the streets did cast off their
clothes and dip themselves over head and ears in water? sense and reason will
be against so troublesome a superstition; the text it self expones the
Pharisees daily and almost hourly baptism of the washing of their hands; now
the ordinary way of washing the hands among the Jews was, by pouring water upon
the hands from a laver, not by putting the hands in a basin, as we read 2 Kings
3.11. Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of
Elijah. Also the baptism of brazen vessels, of tables or beds, (for then in
their triclinia tables and beds were all one thing, or at least were joined
together) could be no other but pouring some little water upon them: for
suppose, that contrary to the common custom of all Nations in all times, all
their great and heavy vessels of brass and iron in every one of their washings
had been put into the water, and no water poured upon them, yet how is it
possible that all their tables and their beds, many times every day, should be
brought to deep rivers, and there put wholly under the water? Such a practice,
if possible, had made the toil of all the Jewish servants unsupportable, and
yet according to the Anabaptists Lexicography, all this labor was simply
necessary.

Another place we have, Heb. 9.10. Heb 9.10.
Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances imposed on them until the time of reformation. The original reads
it diverse baptismes; What were these legal bapti^mes and washings? doubtless
many of them were sprinklings of blood and water, prefiguring the souls washing
by the blood of Christ. In the Books of Moses, the Jews baptismes by blood were
only by sprinkling; no persons among them were drowned in blood, only in
their purifications, blood was poured or sprinkled upon them: in reference to
this manner of application, the Antitype Christ's blood, whereby the Church is
truly washed from sin, is called the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. As for
the old baptisms with water diverse of them were by sprinkling alone; Numb. 8.7.
And thus shall thou do unto them to cleanse them, sprinkle water of purifying
upon them; the most of these baptismes were by pouring out of water upon the
person, few, if any, by dipping over head and ears. The ordinary and daily
washing of the Priests at the great laver and brazen sea, was not by plunging
in the water, but by pouring out the water on the person to be washed. The sea
made by Solomon stood high on the back of the brazen bulls, and had no steps
without for any to ascend, and within for any to descend into it: and the laver
in the Tabernacle made by Moses, was not of the capacity for one man to bath,
much less for all the Priests who had to do about the Altar at one time.
Farther, the prescribed manner of washing, was only of the hands and of the
feet, though it be imaginable that the Priests might have stretched themselves
to dip their hands in the laver standing upon his high base; yet how shall we
conceive them able to have put their feet into that laver? Doubtless, many of
the legal baptismes and washings were only by sprinkling and pouring out, and
not by dipping or drowning into the blood or water.

Take for a 3 place, 1 Cor. 10.1. 1 Cor. 10.1.
Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud;
What baptism was that by the cloud which was above their head, and under the
which they did walk? was it any other thing but the dropping of the cloud upon
them, as the rain and dew falls on men from heaven? can any be dipped in a cloud
that hangs in the air above their head?

A fourth place we may have in the Revel. 19.13. Rev. 19.13.
And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood; the original reads it,
baptized in blood; now the manner of this baptizing, dipping, or dying, is
expressed by the Prophet, Esaias 63.3. Their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garment, and I will stain all my raiment. The garments of the slain, lying upon
the ground, may be rolled in blood; but the glorious Victor sitting still on
horse back, as Christ in the Revelation is described, cannot have his garments
rolled nor otherwise dipped in blood, then by the staining and sprinkling of
the blood of the wounded persons falling upon his garment.

One place more, Matthew. 3.11. Mat. 3.11.
He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. How were the Apostles
baptized in the holy Ghost and fire? was it possible for them to be dipped in
the holy Ghost, or was the spirit poured out upon them, as Peter expones it
from Joel, Acts 2.17. and were they by their baptism in fire, put into any
fire? We read, Acts 2.3. that the fiery cloven tongues did only come down and
sit upon them. By all this we see how frequent the holy Ghost in the very New
Testament is in ascribing the name and style of baptism to that which cannot
be any dipping, and is nothing else but a sprinkling, a pouring out, an
application of water, blood, or fire, to the subject; and not of the subject to
those things, much contrary to the credulity and bold assertion of the late
Anabaptists.

Our second Argument, The 2. Arg. the thing signified by Baptism is oftener
expressed in Scripture by sprinkling then dipping.
That action whereby Scripture does frequently represent the main thing
signified by baptism, is lawful and sufficient to be used in baptism; But
Scripture frequently represents the main thing signified in baptism by
sprinkling or pouring out of water. Ergo. The major is grounded on the nature
of Sacramental rites, they are signs fitly proportioned to the spiritual
blessings, they signify and seal; when we find in the sign not only a clear
representation and similitude of the thing signified; but the holy Ghost in
Scripture making use of that representation and relation, it is to us a ground
of the lawful use of that sign. This is the adversaries own argument in their
great reason for dipping, that it does fitly represent our burial with Christ;
and is used in Scripture, as they allege, for the expressing of that
representation.

As for the minor, that pouring and sprinkling frequently in Scripture
represents the main thing ^^gnified and sealed in baptism, our participation
of the benefits of Christ his blood and Spirit, In Scripture sprinkling is made
a sign of the application of Christ's blood to the soul.
many Scriptures do evidence: as first, Heb. 10.22. Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water; Here both the sign, and the thing signified of baptism are set down
together; the outward washing with water is made to signify the sprinkling of
the heart from an evil conscience. That washing by outward sprinkling
represents the inward sprinkling of the heart by the blood of Christ, as fitly
as washing by outward dipping or immersion can do, appears by 1 Pet. 1.2. 1
Pet. 1, 2.
Through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ; here the application of Christ's blood unto the soul, is
expressed in the similitude of sprinkling. And so fit is this representation,
that the holy Ghost styles the blood of Christ, whereby we are washed and
saved, the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Heb. 12.24.


The other great blessing sealed up in baptism, is our communion in the Spirit
of Jesus: Also of Ch^ists Spirit.
this blessing also the Spirit delights to express by the act of pouring or
sprinkling of water, Act. 2.16, 17. Acts 2.16, 17.
But this is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to
pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh,
Isay 44.3. Is. 44.3.
For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
offspring. Also, Is. 52.15. So shall I sprinkle many Nations. And Ezekiel. 36.25.
Ezekiel. 36 25.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, a new heart
will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you.

As the application of the blood and Spirit of Christ to the soul of the
baptized, is expressed so often in the term of sprinkling: so under the Law,
Sprinking under the Law a figure of the thing signified in Baptism.
the action of sprinkling, sometimes of blood alone, sometimes of water alone,
sometimes of both together were used, for the prefiguring of that blood and
water, which in the days of the Gospel by the Word and Sacrament were more
abundantly to be communicate. Exodus 12.7.13. Ex. 12.7.13
And they shall take of the blood and strike it on the two side posts, and on
the upper door-poste of the houses, wherein they shall eat it; And the blood
shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you are; and where I see the
blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy
you, when I smite the Land of Egypt. Leviticus 16.14. Lev. 16.14.
And he shall take of the blood of the bullocks, and spri^kle it with his
finger upon the Mercy-seat Eastward, and before the Mercy-seat shall he
sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times; here blood alone is
sprinkled. Numb. 19.18. Number. 16.18.
And a clean person shall take hyssope, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle
it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon all the persons that were
there, and the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day,
and on the seventh day; here water alone for purification is sprinkled, at
least water without blood, for this water of purification had no mixture,
except of the ashes of the burnt Heifer. Lev. 14.5, 6, 7. Lev. 14.5, 6, 7.
And the Priests shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen
vessel of running water; as for the living bird, he shall take it and the
Cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssope, and shall dip them, and the
living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water,
and he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy, seven
times, and shall pronounce him clean. In this place, blood and water together
are sprinkled upon the leper, at least with the sprinkling of the blood, the
presence of water is injoined.

The chief end of applying water to any body, whether by dipping of it in the
water, or sprinkling the water upon it, is to purge it from soil; Sprinkling
serves as much for purging as dipping can do.
that the use of water in baptism is to remove and wash away, albeit not the
defilement of the body, yet the guilt of sin from the soul; we read in the 1
Pet. 3.21. 1 Pet. 3 21.
The like figure whereunto even baptism does also now save us; not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God;
and Acts 22.16. Acts 22.16.
Rise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
This being the only end why water in baptism is used, that way of using of it
must be lawful which is fit for that end; now common experiences teaches, that
pouring and sprinkling is as meet for purifying, as dipping can be; a vessel
often dipped, if not rubbed, may keep all its soil, and sprinkling or pouring
out of water is nothing less, but oftentimes more effectual for purging.

A third Argument, If dipping be necessary, and sprinkling unsufficient, then
in all Scripturall approved baptismes, dipping was used, and not sprinkling;
But no such thing does appear in Scripture. Whether in any Sacramental
baptism mentioned in Scripture, dipping over head and ears was ever practiced,
we shall consider in our answer to the objections; but that in diverse
Sacramental baptismes approved in Scripture, no dipping at all was used, In
many Scripturall baptisms there was no dipping.
we prove by three examples.

At the first and greatest Baptism we read of, Acts 2.41. Acts 2.41.
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and the same day there
were added unto them about three thousand souls, there could be no dipping,
for that baptizing so far as the text intimates was in the streets, in the same
place wherein the people did hear Peter's Sermon. Now how was it possible to dip
in the streets of Jerusalem three thousand persons? There was no river in that
place, yea, in all Jerusalem we remember not of any river, unless it were the
brook Kedron, which run through the Suburbs in the valley under the Town, which
was so small a strand, that at no time, especially not at the Pentecost in the
midst of Summer, it was any ways meet for the immersion of aged people. I grant
they had in Jerusalem diverse fountains, and pools, and in some families were
vessels for bathing; but that either the Apostles went to these fountains and
pools, or that any bathing vessels were brought out to them, there is not the
least appearance in any Scripture. Also which way soever you can imagine the
matter to have been carried, the dipping over head and ears of three thousand
persons could not in one half day be performed by the hands of twelve weak
men, though you should give to them the assistance of the whole seventy
Disciples; and if any such action had been performed, it behoved to have made
such a din and noise, as would certainly have commoved the whole City; and
being so notable and new a circumstance, could hardly have been past in silence
by the Penmen of that holy History. Those and many more inconveniences and
impossibilities cannot be satisfied upon the supposition of dipping, but
admitting of sprinkling the case is made not only possible, but very easy,
for the twelve Apostles in a few hours, to baptize not only three, but five
thousand, and if need had been, many more.

The other example is that of the baptism of Paul by Ananias, Acts 9.18, 19.
Acts 9.18, 19.
And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he
received sight forthwith, and arose and was baptized, and when he had received
meat he was strengthened. Paul is here baptized in his lodging house, being yet
sick and weak, and having fasted three whole days: Suppose, whereof there is no
probability, that in his lodging house there had been accommodations for his
plunging and immersion, yet being in so weak a condition, as the miraculous
vision of Christ, and the extraordinary long fasting put him into, he was very
unfit to be stripped and plunged over head and all, in cold water. To assert
this without any appearance of ground from Scripture, is but rashness.

The third example we have in Acts 16.33. Acts 16.33.
And he took them the same hour of the night and washed their stripes, and was
baptized, he and all his straightway. Which way could the Jailer and all his
household in the midst of the night be brought to any deep river and plunged
over head and ears by Paul and Silas, newly washed of their sores, can hardly
be imagined.

A fourth reason; Nothing is necessary in Baptism which naturally is hurtful
to the life or chastity of any; Arg. 4. Dipping is hurtful to the life of man.
for the unchangeable God is never contrary to himself, all his laws and
ordinances have an harmonious consonancy one with another; the Lord having
discharged in the sixth and seventh Commandments the practice of all things
hurtful to the life and chastity of men, he will not in any of his Sacraments
appoint that to be practiced, which is of such a nature. But so it is, that
dipping over head and ears in baptism, is naturally hurtful both to the life
and chastity; to the life, though we speak nothing of young infants, many of
riper years in diverse places of the earth, yea, in the hottest climates at some
times of the year, cannot be plunged over the head in cold water, without
evident hazard, sometimes of life, and often of health, and this much
experience among our selves does teach, in that short time wherein this noisome
ceremony has been brought in fashion.

As for chastity, Also to his chastity.
must it not be a great scandal, in the face of all the Congregation, where
alone, Sacraments can be duly celebrated, for men and women to stand up naked,
as they were born; and naked men to go into the water with naked women,
holding them in their arms till they have plunged them in the water? it is
true, one of the great Anabaptistick Masters David George made it a part of his
art, to teach all his Disciples to look one upon another nakedness, and to
do much more then behold, without any carnal motion; but such villainous
hypocrisy cannot be but detestable to all honest minds. Some hundred years
ago, when the chastity and simplicity of the world was greater, then in these
our wretched days, the dipping of naked persons was so full of scandal, that
it occasioned a number of humane inventions about Baptism, as the Deaconesses,
the white garments, etc. and thereafter caused the change of that ceremony,
where it had gotten place, into the much more convenient rite of sprinkling.

One other reason; That is not necessarily required in baptism which lays both
upon the baptized, and the baptizer burdens which they are not able to bear;
But dipping does so. Ergo. The major is grounded upon the nature of Gods
ordinances, especially of the New Testament; they are an easy yoke and
portable. The minor is thus clear, by the necessity of this rite the baptizer
is obliged to dip the whole baptized persons under the water, and to lift them
up again above the water, but this for the most part of baptizers is altogether
unpossible: A fifth argument, dipping makes baptism insupportable. No Preacher
will be able to baptize.
How many Preachers are of that bodily strength as to lift up in their arms a
man to dip him in the water, and again to lift him clear out of the water? for
according to our adversaries, baptism is the dipping of the whole man into the
water, and the lifting of the whole man again out of the water; the putting of
his head and breast into the water is but a dipping of a part of the body, the
lifting of the head and upper parts of the body, and not of the lower and whole
parts, is not a full and complete baptism: now for this dipping of the whole
man under the water, and lifting of the whole man above the water, the strength
of more men then one is necessary; And yet Scripture requires for the
administration of baptism, no more agents then one.

Again, this dipping puts upon the baptized, burdens which neither nature, nor
civility, nor religion permits them to bear: Dipping whether of clothed or
naked persons is insupportable
We read not in Scripture, that persons in baptism did strip themselves of
their garments; and if this had been the custom, it is very like that Scripture
had not always past it over: For ordinarily in Historical narrations,
Scripture marks the casting off of the clothes: so in the prophesying of Saul,
1 Samuel 19.24. And he stripped off his clothes also and prophesied before Samuel
in like manner, and lay down naked all that day, and all that night. So in the
young man who followed Christ at his taking, Mark 14.52. And he left the linen
cloth and fled from them naked. So in the crucifying of Christ, Mark. 15.24.
And when they had crucified him they parted his garments; so in many other
Histories: wherefore if always in baptism the persons had been stripped, we
know no reason why sometimes Scripture would not have remarked this
considerable circumstance. Supposing therefore the dipping of the baptized
persons with their garments upon them, we say that this did bring a burden
upon them which to nature had been insupportable: for immediately after Baptism
we read of their going to the Table, Act. 16.33, 34. also Acts 9.18, 19.
without any change of apparel, so far as Scripture expresses it, or by any
circumstance of any text can be collected. Now how intolerable it is to nature
for any person to be dipped in their garments over head and ears, and without
any shifting of their wet clothes to go to the Table, or any other
employment, sense can inform a very simple man.

If you suppose their nakedness in baptism as the most of our dippers do,
though without any Scripturall warrant, then how extremely contrary to all
civility will every modest person find it to discover himself before a whole
Congregation of people? Though it be a part of the Georgian and Familistick
Anabaptisme, to lay down all natural shame, yet God has imprinted so much
shamefastness in the hearts of all since the fall of Adam, that no honest and
ingenuous person can endure to stand naked before any company: and if this
should be put upon them by any necessity, they could not but take it for a
great and disgraceful affliction.

As dipping puts more upon the baptized then nature and civility can bear, so
likewise then can consist with religion; Divinity admits not of Se-baptisme,
Dipping brings in Se-baptism.
and permits not the baptized to be agents, but in this act will have them to
be patients, and baptized by others; now in dipping the most part of the body
is put under the water by the parties baptized themselves: for, as they say the
custom is, they go into the water and stand there above the middle; why
therefore are they not to be reputed as well baptizers, who put the most parts
of the body in the water as they who put the less?

Against all this the grand disputants object, First, that the word Baptizein
does signify only to dip or wash, and never to sprinkle: The first objection,
That the original word Baptzein does signify always dipping and never
sprinkling removed
to prove this they bring the authority of the Septuagints, of Nonnus, of
Vossius. Answer. If this argument were cast in form the major of it would lie
upon such a general proposition, No rite may be used in any Sacrament, which
differs from the common signification of the word used in Scripture to
express that rite; If this were universally true, what gesture would be
necessary to be used by the communicants at the Lords Table? The word
expressing Christ and his Ap^stles gesture in the last Supp^r is, Anaceisthai,
Anapyptein, Anaclinein, relative to the ancient form of lying about the Table
in their Triclinia: these words do no more signify to sit, Cath^zein, then
Baptizein, signifies to sprinkle. If any upon such a grammatication would call
in question the lawfulness of sitting at the Lords Table, his criticisme would
not be judged solid by any judicious person.

The minor also, That baptism does always signify dipping, and never
sprinkling, we deny; in our first argument for the affirmative, we gave eight
instances to the contrary out of the New Testament, to which we may add,
beside other places, Luke 11.38. Lu^. 11.^8
And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvailed that he had not first washed before
dinner; in the original, that he was not first baptized before dinner. Could
it be a matter of any wonder that Jesus or any other person before dinner did
not plunge themselves over head and ears in water? or rather was not the
Pharisaicall superstition in the necessity of pouring water upon the hands for
a legal purification?

The authorities mentioned are nothing to the purpose; that of the Septuagints,
2 Kings 5.14. Then went he down and dipped himself seven times in Jordan,
according to the saying of the man of God; it only proves a washing of Naamans
body in Jordan, according to the Prophets direction; every true washing is not
by a total immersion, as daily experience and many Scriptures prove; the woman
washed Christ's feet with her tears, and David washed his bed with his tears,
only by sprinkling. But suppose the Septuagints in this place had taken the
word for a dipping over head and ears, will it follow that the word is no
otherwise taken by any Author any where else? Go to the same Septuagints,
Dan. 4.33. Dan. 4.33.
His body was wet with the dew of heaven, (...), the Hebrew tabal, and the
Chaldee jits tabang, which ordinarily are translated by baptizo, and here by
its root bapto, which often is more and never less then baptizo, can no
otherwise be taken then for sprinkling; for which other way did the rain and
dew fall upon Nebuchadnezars body then by drops? We grant that Nonnus expounds
baptizo by cathairo, but this makes nothing at all for dipping, for many more
purifications were by sprinkling and affusion then by immersion and dipping.

As for Vossius, suppose his criticisme were well founded, that baptizein did
signify principally to dip, which may very well be questioned; (for why may we
not make the first signification of the word to be washing, and the second
dipping, the first being the end, and the other but the mean, as well as to
make dipping the first signification, and washing the second, because the one
is the cause, and the other the effect?) yet all this is for no purpose, for
though the word did signify first to dip* yet if in the second, third, fourth,
fifth, or any place it signified to sprinkle, it is enough for all that we
affirm: now that the word baptizo, has truly this signification of sprinkling,
Vossius in this very place alleged to the contrary does prove it from many
passages both of Scripture and Antiquity.

Their second objection they take from these Scriptures, where the baptized
seem to have been dipped, The second objection, No evidence in Scripture that
any were ever dipped over head and ears in Baptism.
Matthew. 3.13.16. Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be
baptized of him, and Jesus when he was baptized went up straightway out of the
water. John 3.23. And John also was baptizing in Enon, because there was much
water there. Act. 8.38, 39. And he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and
they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized
him, and when they were come up out of the water, etc. Ans. First, suppose that
in all these places dipping had been used, it follows not that it was so
universally; we have proved that diverse Scripturall baptismes were by
sprinkling, and not by dipping. Secondly, although dipping had been universal
in the Primitive times, yet th^s practice would not infer any necessity of
its continuance, unless two things were made good; first, that practice and
example alone is a sufficient ground for the institution of a Sacramental
rite; again, that every circumstance of a Sacrament generally practiced in
Scripturall times, must be of an unchangeable and unvariable nature, and so
necessary, that without sin it may not in any case be altered. Thirdly, none of
the places alleged, do look toward the dipping of a naked person over head
and ears, which is the main question. Fourthly, there is no word expressly in
any of the places of dipping, and if they will admit us to dispute by
consequences, see if from any of those places there be a necessary inference of
any dipping; the multitude of waters in the third of John, John 3.23.
infers not the plunging of all who were baptized in them, but only the
convenience of baptizing a multitude, rather in a place of many waters then in
a desert void of water, such as many places in Canaan were. In the days of the
Patriarchs the finding of a fountain in these bounds was a rare and singular
benefit: however we deny that the convenience of much water for the baptizing
of a multitude of people, does import a necessity of dipping any who are
baptized therein.

The other place of Act. 8.38, 39. imports Philip and the Eunuchs going down
from the coach toward the water, and their ascending again into the coach from
the lower place where the water was; but does either this descending, or
ascending, infer Philips stripping of the Eunuch, and dipping him over head and
ears in that water?

The third place is not so important, for it speaks nothing of Christ's going
down into the water, and what it says of his coming up may well be expounded
of the low situation of the river beneath the field, where John did preach:
readily they have stood on the brink, or within the river when they were
sprinkled, and had the water of the river poured upon them, but that in the
midst of that multitude Christ did discover himself, and that John so often as he
baptized any did cause to strip both himself and them, and went so naked with
them into the river taking them in his arms, and plunging them therein, is a
matter of so great unlikelihood, that without Scripture or greater reason then
yet appears it may not be admitted.

The third objection, Immersion is necessarily to be practiced, because it
signifies our burial with Christ, The third objection, That Baptism is a sign
of the burial of Christ, has no reference at all to Immersion.
according to Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried with him
by Baptism unto death; also Col. 2.12. Buried with him in Baptism, wherein
also you are risen with him. Ans. First, it is a presumption in any man to put
a divine institution upon any rite, which in its own nature is only
indifferent; But it is a presumption in the highest degree to affixe a
signification to any such rite; we grant Baptism for its signification has the
death of Christ and all the fruits thereof, also that it seals to us our
fellowship not only in Christ's death, but in his burial, his resurrection,
his ascension, his sitting at the right hand of God; but what diverse
Scriptures, and particularly the places in hand do ascribe to Baptism, we have
no warrant to apply it unto immersion.

Secondly, if men would go to make analogicall significations according to
their own pleasure, we might say that sprinkling did put water upon the head,
and so the whole person under the water, and by this were a sign of burial as
well as immersion. It makes nothing against this, that by sprinkling, a little
quantity of water is applied only to the head, and much water by dipping is
applied to the whole body, for in Sacraments the quantity of the element, the
shortness of the outward action is not attended: The tasting of a little bread
and a little wine does signify to us our full communion with the whole body
and the whole blood of Christ, as well as the largest banquet of wine and all
delicates could do. The cutting off a very little from one part of the body
only did signify the Circumcision and cutting off of the whole body of
corruption, as well as if much skin and much flesh had been cutted off from
every member: even so the sprinkling of a little water may signify and seal up
unto us our participation in Christ's life, death, burial, resurrection, and
every thing else of his wherein we have interest, as well as a total immersion
in the whole Ocean for so long a time as Jonah lay under the billows of the
great deep.

Thirdly, this argument draws us to two great inconveniences: The danger of
dipping.
First, a necessity, as we would not abolish a Sacramental and significant
rite, to keep every baptized person so long a time wholly under the water, as
may sensibly express Christ's burial under the ground; now to be put for so
long a time wholly under the water by the hand of a weak Minister, though never
so careful to preserve, cannot but bring an evident hazard of life or health
to many.

Secondly, consider if it bring not in the institution of a new Sacrament,
whereof none that yet I have heard of have spoken, the Sacrament of emersion,
The new Sacrament of Emersion.
at least the addition of this as a new large half unto the old Sacrament of
Baptism or Immersion; this their new rite of emersion does signify and seal
up to us as they say our resurrection with Christ: this can be no part of
baptism or immersion, nor rationally be comprehended under it, though always
it were conjoined and did follow at its back; for emersion and immersion are
contraries, and one contrary is not a part, nor cannot go under the name of
the other, except you will make bitter sweet, and darkness light.

Unto those Arguments of the Disputants the Treatiser adds nothing considerable
in all his long Discourse, except some testimonies, partly from Protestant, but
most from Popish writers: asserting the ancient custom of dipping in baptism.
A general answer to the testimonies for dipping.
To which I answer, first, what ever authority testimonies may have with us,
yet with him that brings them, and with his whole party, they are of no value
at all: Will they mislike, or so much as suspect any of their absurdest
novelties, when it is demonstrate to them that the whole current of all
Christian writers ancient and modern is against them? is it not then their
custom with a great deal of scorn to declaim against the vanity and
frivolousnesse of an argument from humane assertions? Secondly, the Treatiser
himself cannot but know that every one of the Authors he brings, does
positively impugn his assertion, the necessity of dipping and unlawfulness of
sprinkling in Baptism. Thirdly, his witnesses, though they assert indefinitely
the antiquity of dipping, yet none of them does deny the like ancient use of
sprinkling; both those may well stand together, and so it is the judgment of
many, that sometimes dipping, and sometimes sprinkling, as the occasion
required were practiced in the Primitive times. Fourthly, of those that speak
of ancient dipping, how many do understand it of the total immersion of a
naked body over head and ears? and yet this alone is our question. Fifthly,
though even for this testimonies were brought, yet they come not home unless
such a dipping be attested to be a rite unchangeable, and so necessary, that
the omission of it at any occasion, were a sin, and breach of the Lords
institution. When any writer, either ancient or modern, except some few of the
latest Anabaptists, is brought to bear witness to any such assertion, I shall
acknowledge my information of that whereof hitherto I have been altogether
ignorant.

THE CONTENTS OF the Treatise.
The PREFACE.
Slothfulness is fatal when unseasonable. Men are most careless when their
dangers be greatest. The present danger of the Protestant Churches: of France,
Holland, of Germany, of Zuitserland, of Britain, by the Malignants, by the
Sectaries. Our dangers from the Malignants are not yet past. The unexcusable
obstinacy of the Episcopal Divines. Its blindness and dementation to misprize
the danger from France. Antichrist is possibly near to swallow down the whole
Reformed Churches. A flood of Errors and Heresies is like to overwhelm the
Church of England. A liberty for all Errors is the great aim of some. They
spoil the Parliament of all power to reform or meddle with Religion. Who now
are the persecutors. How great is the monster of Libertinism. The Sectaries
having done with the Church, proceed to the overthrow of the State. The
Parliament must be abolished. The best remedy of our dangers from the
Malignants, is the return of the King to his Parliament in just terms. The
zealous diligence of Ministers might do much to cure the evil of our errors.
The sedulous activity of the Sectaries does shame our slothfulness. The
caveats of zeal. Presbyterians are far from opposing the least degree of true
piety. Charity and compassion are to be extended to our enemies. Presbyterians
were never persecutors. The dignity and power of the Magistrate must be
carefully preserved. The scope of the Treatise.
CAP. I. The Original and Progress of the Anabaptists.
BErengarius no Anabaptist. The Albigenses knew not Anabaptisme. p. 1. Neither
Melanctho^ nor Carolostadius did favor Antipaedobaptism. p. 2 The true
original of the Anabaptists. The malignity of their spirit. Their singular
hypocrisy. p. 3 The preposterous pity and charity of good men toward them was
the cause of their strength. Their wicked doctrines and practices. Luther did
justly stir up the Magistrate against them. p. 5 Great numbers of them were
slain. The unhappy end of their Author Muncer. ib. Zuinglius did oppose their
gathering of Churches in Zuitserland. The reason of their banishment thence. p.
6 Their intolerable practices. The tragedy of Munster. p. 7 The ordinary
custom of Heretics is not to labor, but to spoil the labors of others. King
Becold enters Munster. Some of the prime Ministers are gained to Anabaptisme.
The slacknesse of the Magistrate, though orthodoxe, did ruin the City. The
Sectaries though fewer and weaker, yet by wit and industry did master their
opposites. By the stirrup of Toleration the Sectaries ascended to the saddle of
Sovereignty. p. 8 Being once masters of the City, they presently changed the
government. They seized on the goods of all, and killed whom they would. The
peoples minds being ensnared by their errors, their tyranny became
irremediable. They proclaimed Polygamy. p. 9 A faint and unsuccessefull
resistance did hasten and confirm Becolds Kingdom. The splendor of Becolds
Court. His barbarous cruelty and hypocrisy. His unhappy end. p. 10 Amsterdam
in hazard to be a second Munster. A woman Messiah. Division and Schisms were
the Anabaptists ruin. p. 11 The difference betwixt the Monasterians and the
Battenburgicks. The Sect of the Hophmanists. p. 12 Who were the Mennonists. A
Synod for union did divide them amongst themselves more then ever. David
Georgius labors for union. p. 13 Diverse Sects of Anabaptists evanished. David
George had a great show of zeal and piety. p. 14 Yet his absurdities were
horrible. The extraordinary zeal of his followers. His strange end. p. 15 The
increase of the Mennonists. The errors of the Mennonists. Their Schisms. p. 16
For a light cause four late separations among them. The state of the
Anabaptists in England. p. 17 Independency the cause of their increase and
boldness. p. 18 Their late Confession is neither a full nor a clear
declaration of their tenets.
CAP. II. The tenets of the old Anabaptists.
THe most applauded tenets of our modern Anabaptists are the self-same with
what the old Anabaptists did invent. p. 29 Their first prime tenet was a
necessity of gathering Churches out of Churches, and of separation from the
best reformed in their time, because of mixed communion. ib. Antipaedobaptisme,
became at last their greatest d^rling. They were the authors of the prophesying
and questioning of private men in the face of the Church. Women preachers are
from them. p. 30 Their Pastors must renounce all former Ordination, and their
full call of new must come from the hands of their people. They required no
letters in their Preachers. The crying down of Tithes and all set Stipends, is
from them. Independency of Congregations, and the peoples power in Church
censures, is their invention. The Seekers who deny all Churches are their
Disciples. After the overthrow of the Church they fell next upon the State. p.
31 First, they cried down the Magistrates power in matters of Religion. Next in
all matters even Civil. Yet they took to themselves an absolute Civil power;
first, over all them in their own Churches. Next, over all Princes and people
in the whole world. They were strong Millenaries. p. 32 They made adulteries
and murders lawful. Robberies also. 33 Their hypocrisy ended in the open
practice of crimes extremely contrary to their first professions. Their
abominable uncleanness. They deny both Old and New Testament. p. 34 They deny
angels, and devils, and souls. They deny heaven and hell, and eternal life.
They cast away all the Ordinances of God. p. 35 David George to them was
spiritual Christ, much more excellent then Christ crucified. Many people were
ready to seal with their blood all these abominations. The monster David George
did live and die in plenty and peace. The best of the Anabaptists have very
gross errors. The Mennonists deny original sin. p. 36 In the points of
election, redemption, grace, free will, perseverance, justification,
perfection, they are grosser then the Arminians or Jesuits. They are yet more
absurd. They deny the omnipresence of God. They deny the Trinity. And the truth
of Christ's humanity. p. 37 They refuse all consequences from Scripture. They
refuse reasoning from the Old Testament. The covenant with Abraham they make
carnal. They exclude all infants from the covenant of grace.
CAP. III. The modern tenets of the Anabaptists in England.
THe spirit of Anabaptisme clearly devilish. p. 47 The fair profession of many
English Anabaptists not to be trusted. What errors may be charged upon all,
what only upon some of them. p. 48 The confession of the seven Churches is a
very imperfect and ambiguous declaration of their judgment. Let no error be
charged upon any man, which he truly disclaims. A brief sum of all the
Anabaptists errors. Every Anabaptist is at least a rigid Separatist. p. 49
Though the Independents offer to collude with the Anabaptists, yet they
separate from the Independents no less then from the Brownists as
antichristian. p. 50 They avow all their members to be holy and elect, and some
of them are for their perfection. p. 51 After they have separate from all other
Churches, they run next away from their own selves. They charge one another
with Antichristianisme. They are Independents. They put all Church power in the
hand of the people. They give the power of preaching and celebrating the
Sacraments to any of their gifted members out of all office. p. 52 Even unto
women. They must not preach in a Steeple-house. p. 53 All Tithes and all set
Stipends are unlawful, their Preachers must work with theit own hands, and may
not go in black clothes. They celebrate the Lords Supper in any common
Innes, after another feast. All the new light of the Independents and Brownists
is borrowed from the Anabaptists. The anointing of the sick with oil, the
rejecting of the Lords Prayer, of all set Psalms, of Universities, and humane
learning, are the Anabaptists inventions. The Independent Apologists are for
liberty to most of the Sects. 54 And some of their prime friends are for a
general liberty to all. 55 The Anabaptists deny all power to Magistrates in
any thing which concerns Religion. Turkisme, Popery, Atheism, the greatest
blasphemies they would not have punished with so much as a discountenance. They
press a liberty for preaching and propagating openly all errors imaginable.
Yet they grant that error is a soul-murder, and a greater crime then the
destruction of a King, of a Parliament, of a whole Nation. p. 56 They hate the
Covenant. They are injurious to the Scots. p. 57 All punishing of error with
them is persecution. They press liberty of conscience much out of policy. p.
58 The granting of all this liberty will not assure the Magistrates of the
Sectaries civil obedience. p. 59 The tenets and practice of the Sectaries
destroy Magistracy. They profess their design to overturn from the ground the
government of our State as now it stands. Kings and Lords are no more
tolerable: Neither is the House of Lords any longer to be endured. p. 60 The
poorest beggar in the land has a share of the Sovereignty, above the King and
Parliament. All former Laws and Acts of Parliament must be abolished. p. 61 The
will of the multitude must stand for the Sovereign Law hereafter. p. 62 The
three fundamental Laws of our new Vtopian Republic. p. 63 According to reason
and experience the present distemper of the Sectaries is posting on fast to a
Dictatorship and absolute Tyranny in the hand of one. The State in danger by
the Sectaries principles. p. 64 The greatest purchase which the overturners of
States usually make, is a late repentance. p. 65
CAP. IV. Their Antipaedobaptisme, Arminianisme, Arrianisme, Familisme, and
other wicked errors.
ALL Anabaptists are for Antipaedobaptisme. They avow the nullity of our
Baptism. p. 89 They press on us a re-baptization. They exclude all infants
from the covenant of grace, and make Circumcision a seal only of carnal
promises. Many of them deny original sin, and assert all the articles of
Arminius. p. 90 They separate from all who renounce not Paedobaptisme. Yet they
admit into their Churches many much worse then these from whom they separate.
p. 91 Sprinkling to them nullifies Baptism. M. Tombs new way. He is a rigid
Antipaedobaptist, yet not against sprinkling. He spoils all infants of all
interest in the covenant of grace. p. 92 He is a friend to the worst
Anabaptists, and injurious to all who oppose them. He makes Baptism a rite
needless either to young or old. He admits of a frequent re-baptization. He
admits unbaptized persons to the Lords Table. He is a gross Erastian. The most
of the Anabaptists are Arminians. p. 93 The second Edition of their confession
is not so free of Arminianism as the first. The chief Churches of the
Anabaptists are gross Arminians. p. 94 Many of them are Antinomians, laying
aside all care of moral duties. Making all grief for sin unlawful. p. 95
Denying Christ's satisfaction and reconciliation of God to men. The best of them
are inclineable to Libertinisme. The Antinomian controversies are not as the
prime Independents do make them, only about words and methods of preaching.
p. 96 Many of the Anabaptists are become Seekers, denying all Churches, all
Officers, all Ordinances. Many of the Anabaptists are become Antitrinitarians.
p. 97 Richardson one of their prime leaders, a blasphemer of the Trinity. p. 98
Diverse of them are abominable bl sphemers of Christ's Person. Others of them are
become perfect Atheists. They evert and reject the whole Scripture. p. 99 Many
of them are turned Familists, denying the immortality of the soul. Denying
Heaven and Hell, Angels and Devils. Some of them make the world eternal:
others all creatures to perish. p. 100 Some deny all resurrection, others make
the beasts rise to glory. They teach abominable obscenities. They follow David
George in his greatest absurdities. The divine light of their new Prophet. The
fall of Adam, and the clearest Scriptures are but allegories. The whole
Divinity suffered in the Person of Christ's humanity. p. 101 The great light
which this Prophet brings from heaven, is, that all the Devils and all the
Reprobates shall be saved by his Gospel. Randall his gross Familisme. p. 102
No resurrection, no heaven, no hell after this life. The Saints in this life
become as perfect as God. The clearest Scriptures are false in a literal
sense. That God is formally the life and subsistence of all creatures. p. 103
That Christ had not a particular soul, nor a particular body. Creatures in
their very sins are acted only by the Spirit of God. There is no such spirits
as Angels, Devils, or Souls. Nothing remains for ever but God. Scripture is but
a false shadow, and no ground of faith. They deny both the first and second
coming of Christ. They cast away all Ordinances. The certain truth of these
imputations. p. 104 The English Anabaptists are generally more erroneous then
the Dutch. Amongst the English Secta^^es there is no zeal at all against any
error.
CAP. V. The lawfulness of Infants Baptism.
THe extreme malignity of the Anabaptistick spirit. Its enmity to the salvation
of men. p. 129 Its dishonouring of God by setting up a liberty, first, for all
errors; and next for all vice. p. 130 Their Brownistick and Arminian tenets I
have refuted in other Treatises. p. 131 Their Antipaedobaptisme and dipping
shall here be briefly and plainly considered. The state of the first question.
The first reason for the affirmative. p. 132 Who have right to the chief
promises, have right to some of the seals which God has appointed to be a means
of assurance of these promises, unless the Lord himself has made a special
exception. Infants have good right to the promises of the covenant of grace. p.
133 The infants of the Jews had real interest in the covenant of grace before
the coming of Christ. Genesis 17.12, 13. Also after Christ coming under the New
Testament, Heb. 7.27.8.6. The infants of proselyte Gentiles under the Old
Testament had right in the covenant of grace, Genesis 17.12. Exodus 12.48 49. p.
135 The infants of believing Gentiles under the New Testament have right in the
covenant of grace, Romans 11.24. How infants are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. p. 13 The
second argument is from the Circumcision of Infants. p. 138 It is safe to
reason from Scripturall consequences, yea, proportions. p. 139 Baptism
succeeds to Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. Circumcision did seal the covenant of
grace, Genesis 17.11. p. 140 The covenant of grace has been diversely administered,
but ever the same, and never mixed. p. 141 Both Circumcision and Baptism are
initiating seals. p. 142 There needs not a particular comman^ for application
of a Sacrament to the diverse ages, and sexes, and conditions of persons.
Infants Baptism under the Law. The third argument from Matthew. 28.19. p. 143
The promises of the Gospel belong to Infants. p. 144 Infants are not in a worse
condition under the Gospel then under the Law. All who are baptized need not be
capable of teaching. ibid. Infants are Disciples. p. 145 Infants have interest
in the Trinity. ibid. Infants may be lawfully baptized. p. 146 The fourth
argument from the baptism of whole families. ib. The fifth argument from
Christ laying of his hands on infants and blessing them. p. 147 The sixth
argument, Infants under the Law were baptized. p. 149 The seventh argument,
Infants are partakers of remission, of regeneration, of life eternal. p. 150
Mr Coxe, Mr Tombs, Mr L. Objections. p. 152 They are in effect but few, and
all invented by the old Anabaptists. ib. Mr Coxe first argument makes examples
alone a full rule. ib. The second makes one and the same man to differ from
himself essentially. p. 153 The third ties God in the revelation of his will to
precepts and examples alone. p. 154 It everts the principles of all reasoning,
and turns men into stones. p. 155 The fourth makes it an heresy to make any
use of any thing in the Old Testament to clear any thing in the New. p. 156 The
fifth argument making the actions done by, or to Christ, the full rule of our
practice, is a wild fancy. p. 157 The sixth argument, will have none
baptized but who believe and are elect. p. 158 The seventh, eighth and ninth
arguments, are but repetitions. p. 160 The absurdities of every one of the nine
arguments. ib. M. Tombs 8. arguments answered by others: there is no truth in
any of them. p. 161 M. L. Treatise of Baptism needs no answer. p. 162 The
pressing of dipping and exploding of sprinkling is but an yesterday conceit of
the English Anabaptists. p. 163 Sprinkling is sufficient, and dipping is not
necessary in Baptism. p. 164 The first arg. for the affirmative: Baptism in
many Scriptures signifies sprinkling and not dipping: as Mark 7.4.8. Heb. 9.10.
1 Cor. 10.1. Rev. 19.13. Mat. 3.11. p. 164 The second arg. The thing signified
by Baptism is oftener expressed in Scripture by sprinkling then dipping. p. 167
In Scripture sprinkling is made a sign of the application of Christ's blood to
the soul. p. 167 Also of Christ's Spirit. p. 168 Sprinkling under the Law a
figure of the thing signified in Baptism. ibid. Sprinkling serves as much for
purging as dipping can do. p. 169 A third arg. In many Scripturall Baptismes
there was no dipping. ib. A fourth arg. Dipping is hurtful to the life of man.
p. 171 Also to his chastity. ib. A fifth arg. Dipping makes Baptism
insupportable. No Preacher will be able to baptize. p. 172 Dipping brings in
Se-baptisme. p. 173 The first Object. That the original word Baptizing does
signify always dipping and never sprinkling, removed. ib. The second Object.
No evidence in Scripture that any were ever dipped over head and ears in
Baptism. p. 175 The third Object. That Baptism is a sign of the Burial of
Christ, has no reference at all to Immersion. A general answer to the
testimonies for dipping. p. 178
The Authors out of which the Testimonies of the first two Chapters are taken,
concerning the old Anabaptists of Germany.
CAssandri opera, last Edit. fol. Bullingerus adversus Anabaptistas. Historia
Davidis? Georgii conscripta ab ipsius genero Nicolao Blesdikio. Guy de Bres
contre les Anabaptists. Sleidani Commentaria, Argentorati. 1621. Conradi
Heresbachii Historia Anabaptistica una cum notis Theodori Strackii, and
Lamberto Hortensio, Amsterodami. 1637. Cloppenburgii Gangraena Anabaptistica,
una cum Spanhemii disputationum Anti-Anabaptisticaru^ prima generali.
Apocalypsis Haeresiarcharum.
All faithfully translated into English.

The Authors out of the which the Testimonies of the third and fourth Chapters
are taken concerning the modern Anabaptists of England.
THe Confession of the seven Churches, the first Edition; also the second with
additions and alterations dedicated to the Parliament. The Declaration of the
public dispute by M. Coxe, M. Hobson, etc. M. Tombs Exercitation. Also his
Apology. M. Richardson against D. Featley. M. Blackwoods storming of
Antichrist. M. Spilberries Saints privilege. William Kiffin his answer in
Ricrafts Looking-glass for the Anabaptists. M. Cornwels Vindication. The
Treatise of Baptism. The Unity of childish Baptism. John the Baptist. Diverse
Treatises of M. Saltmarsh. The Compassionate Sam^ritan^. Diverse Treatises set
out with great confidence and passion for a lib^rty to all Sects, especially
the Anaba^tists. Such as, Liberty of Conscience. Toleration justified. Englands
Birthright. Conscience c^utioned. Innocence and truth justified. The just man's
justification. A Pearl in a Dunghill. A Letter to a friend. The just man in
bonds. An Alarm to the House of Lords. The Remonstrance of many thousands to
their own House of Commons. The last warning John Goodwins Theomachia. M.
Williams Bloody Tenet. Little Non-such. M^ns Mortality. Divine Light. Also the
Treatises of some gracious and learned Divines that have ^pposed those ways:
Such as, M. Marshals Sermon, and def^nce. M. Gattakers ans. to M. Saltm^rsh. M.
Blacks birth priviledg^, ^n^ ^nswer to M. Tombs. A discovery of Familism.
Benjamin Burns description and confutation of Familism^. Especially M. Edwards
Gangrena, first and second part. To which ^s yet I have seen nothing replied,
to any thing that is considerable, though many with great passion have essay d
c.
FINIS.

