A brief and true RELATION

Of the great disorders and riot attempted and committed upon the House and
Good of THOMAS HUBBERT Esquire, (one of His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace for
the County of Middlesex) in Moore-fields on the 21. day of March last, (being
the Lords day.)

And of the chief Passages and Occurrences Concerning the same, set forth and
published by the said Justice, for the better satisfying of misinformed people.

And vindicating the City Apprentices from that scandalous aspersion cast upon
them, of being either the first promoters of it, or chief actors in it.

April 9th LONDON Printed by I. C. and are to be sold by Henry Overton, at his
Shop in Popeshead-Alley. 1647.

A brief and true RELATION Of the great disorders and riot, attempted and
committed upon the house and goods of Thomas Hubbert Esquire, (one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, for the County of Middlesex) in Moore-fields
on the 21. day of march last, (being the Lords day.) etc.
NOthing does sooner take the hearts and mouths of the people then same,
especially when it is popular, and report is of such a diffusive nature that it
ever gathers in its flying: wherefore that I many clip the wing of false
report, and extend and add feathers to the wing of Truth, and that I may
disgorge the bitterness of falsehood, where it is already suck in, and infuse
and settle in that mind the sweetness of truth, and take of all present
misdeemings and misprissoners, and prent future, in and amongst the people
concerning the aforesaid riot, I thought good to employ some endeavors truly
to anatomize the whole body of their Monster, and to publish and set it forth
to the view of such as are desirous to be truly informed therein.

Upon the said 21. day of March last, as I and my family were repairing home
from the afternoon Sermon at Shoreditch Church, we unexpectedly met with a
great confluence of people congregated at and before the door of the Ship
Alehouse, near the six Windmills in Moore-fields, in so much that the common
high way and passage was much obstructed by the throung, which was occasioned
by the apprehension of several persons that were found tippling in the said
Alehouse; by the High Constable and other Officers of Shoreditch; who upon
their entrance in, and apprehending of the tiplers, whereby them opposed and
repelled, and the doors were shut upon them; yet nevertheless, the Officers
maintained their Guard about the house, expecting the coming forth of the
Company that were within, until such time as I came by, who perceiving the
multitude of people, immediately wished the High Constable and the rest, to
desist and depart for that time, and only to take an Account of their names
that were drinking there; yet for all that, the High Constable did charge two
Carmen, being then and there present to aid and assist him in the fetching out
of the offenders that were in the Alehouse, and they affronting and abusing
the High Constable, and peremptorily refusing to obey his charge (the
effendours in the interim making there escape) were forthwith taken hold of and
(with no small hurt, and detriment to the officers) were brought before me,
which Officers were pursued by an unruly and unreasonable crew; who forthwith
(upon the bringing in of the two (Carmen) complotted and contrived the
assaulting, and demolishing of my walls and House, without any the least
instigation or demerrit of mine; and did causlesly, and violently throw Stones,
and Brickbats at the Windows of my House. Whereupon I gave present Order to
the Officers, to discharge the two Carmen convented before me; who accordingly
did forthwith conduct them out at the Gate, they themselves openly Proclaiming,
and Declaring unto them all, that the Justice had freely enlarged them.

Yet nevertheless the inveterate malice, and barbarous violence of the rude
multitude, could not in the least manner be appeased; but still they persisted
to break down the Wall, and Windows of my house: And then and not til then:
some friends of mine that were within the house, did advise to discharge some
small hail shot out at the Windows; thinking thereby to disperse the tumult
(whereupon it was generally bruted abroad that there were four or five killed,
which has since bin found, and evidently made known to be most untrue, some of
them having since benne seen and spoken with by diverse in the City; only
having received some small hurt upon some part of their body) but still they
coutinued their onset, and invesion more and more upon the house, until such
time as they had made themselves forcible p^ssessors thereof. Where they
mercilesly ransaked, and took away diverse goods with them; and forced the
people of the house, and others that were with them to fly for their lives, and
leave the house, and goods to their merciless piety.

And forasmuch as there are diverse scandalous untruths fomented, and spread
abroad, that the City Apprentices were the chief actors in this tragedy; I
have solemnly, and primarily engaged my self, to put in Print this Relation,
somewhat to vindicate their aspersion herein; my own conscience bearing me
witness, and I experimentally knowing by the discovery, and examination of such
as are apprehended, and in durance, that the City Apprentices had the least
hand in this high offense, (only some few that were provoaked, and set on by
the multitude) and I shall endeavor for the general satisfaction of all men
to give you a just account of the quallity of the chief of the offenders; who
(as it has since appeared as well by several Informations upon oath of diverse
as were then present, as by some of their own examinations, and confessions)
were idle, loose, and profane livers masterlesse men, and such as have bin out
in the Warts, and Housekeepers that have spent and consumed their fortunes in
sinful and it religious courses, and such as have neither the fear of God nor
man before their eyes; And these and such as these were the principal
Ringleaders, abetters, and maintainers of the said tumultuous riot.

Thus in discharge of my solemn engagement, and for the fully satisfying of
the misinformed, I have endeavored faithfully to impart my real knowledge
concerning the premises, confidently assuring the inquisitive Reader, that he
may build upon the truth of this Relation; and what other soever he has
already entertained, that he decline as false and erroneous. Desiring him with
my self, and all other well affected people always to pray for, Study and
maintain the establishment of the Laws of the Realm, the Majestracy and
Civil Government of this Kingdom, and the happy Union, Peace, and tranquillity
of the same.

Quaerite Justitiam cuncti, pacemque probate.
FINIS.

