ENGLAND SAVED WITH A NOTWITHSTANDING: REPRESENTED In a SERMON to the
Honorable House of COMMONS, assembled in Parliament, November. 5. 1647. The Day
of Thanksgiving for Deliverance from the Powder Plot.

BY William Bridge, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge, now
Preacher of Gods word at Yarmouth.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, and are to be sold at the sign of the Crown
and Bible at Dowgate, near Canning-street. 1648.

Die Sabbathi 6. November. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Allen do give the
thanks of this House to Mr. Bridge for the great pains he took in the Sermon he
Preached yesterday the 5. of November, before the House, at Margarets
Westminster: and that he be desired to print his Sermon, and to have the like
privilege in printing thereof as others inlike cases usually have.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Robert Dawlman to print this Sermon, and no man else.

WILLIAM BRIDGE.

TO The Honorable House of COMMONS ASSEMBLED In PARLIAMENT.
IN what frosts and snows your hand has cleaved to your plough, is not unknown
to this Kingdom; Magistratus labor major rusticano. Luther.
unthankfulness may say you have done little for us, but the truth cannot,
Guberna^io est divina quaedam virtus, ideoque vocat Deus magistratus omnes,
Deos, non propter creationem, sed propter administrationem, quae solius Dei
est, qui igitur in regimine est, est quasi Deus incarnatus. Luther in Genesis
The Lord has said ye are Gods. Still therefore be pleased to act unweariedly
and unchangeably: God does save us with a Notwithstanding our reluctance, so
should the Magistrate. God is a Father of the fatherless, and an help to the
oppressed; gathers the outcasts, cares for those whom none cares for, and
does sometimes carve for them first who do sit lowest: So should Magistrates
be and do, and therefore the Lord having said concerning Magistrates, that
they are Gods, Psalm. 82.1. he adds in v. 3. and 4. deliver ye the poor and
needy, etc. The Magistrate should not always stay till the crying complaints
of the poor be brought to him, but should sometimes seek and inquire after
them; Clamor afflictorum pertinet ad eos, qui in Magistratu sunt etiamsi ad
ipsos non clametur; nam non dicit, liberabit egenum ad se clamentem, sed
clamentem and afflictum cui non est adjutor, hoc est, cui nihil est in rebus
afflictis patrocinii, Muscul. in Psalm.
The cry of the afflicted belongs to the Magistrate, though they cry not to
him: Musculus therefore observes well, that the Psalm. does not say of the
Magistrate, He shall deliver the poor and needy when he cries unto him, but
when he cries, Psalm. 72.12. God is a God of love, mercy and grace, he is
called love it self, not justice, though he be so, but God is love, so should
the Magistrate be, full of love, bowels, and tender compassions unto the
people; therefore he is called ab ^elle quasi volens been suis (...) dictus,
(...) Genesis 41. aliqui ducuna a benedixit, genua flexit, clamabam enim autem
cum, genua fle^te: sic Ab^^ Efra; alii dividunt verbum in (...) and (...) R:
Solomon quod (...) in lingua Aramaea est Rex. Na^ Joseph fuit pater Regis: sed
vo^ Ebraica (...) significat tener, mollis, quia princeps tener and mollis
pater est, Mayer. philolog. Sacr. par. prima. p. 116. (...) a (...) levavit,
^leuavit, sublevavit, portavit.
Father, tender Father, and Nasi, not only because he is lift up above the
people, but because he does lift up, or ease their burden, and does portare
populum in gremio suo. Now most worthy Patriots, ye have conquered this
Kingdom with your sword, conquer us once more with your love, in providing for
the poor, desolate, and in healing our sad divisions with a fatherly hand, and
you are complete Saviors and Fathers to this bleeding Kingdom. Pacem nos
poscimus, but not such a peace (as Augustine speaks) ut mimici submittant, sed
ut amici jungant. I had thought to have been (date veniam verbo) disobedient to
your command of printing this Sermon, but being persuaded that it may in some
(...) unto love both toward God and man, I chose rather to disobey mine own
inclinations then your order. Now the Lord himself make you the repairers of
our breaches, and the restorers of paths to dwell in: which is and must be the
prayer of

Your servant in the Gospel of Christ, WILLIAM BRIDGE.

A SERMON, PREACHED Before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, November. 5. 1647.
Psalm. 106. v. 8. Nevertheless, he saved them for his Names sake: that he
might make his mighty power to be known.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of Thanksgiving, as the first, and last Verses declare.
Now because a man is most fit to praise God, when he is most sensible of his
own sin and unworthiness; the Psalmist does throughout this Psalm, lay
Israel's sin, and Gods mercy together. Verse the seventh, Our fathers (says
he) understood not the wonders in Egypt.

They saw them with their Eyes, but they did not understand them with their
Heart: they did not apprehend the Design, and Scope, and End of God in those
wonders. And therefore they remembered not (says the Text) thy mercies; for a
man Remembers no more then he Understands.

But it may be these Mercies were very few, and so their Sin in forgetfulness
the less?

Nay, not so, for Verse the seventh, They remembered not the multitude of thy
mercies.

But it may be this was their infirmity, or weakness, and so they were the
rather to be born with all?

(...) sed rebellaverunt a (...): non dicit, et obedientes, vel haesitantes,
aut tergiversantes, sed rebels fuerunt; rebellio est qua per contumaciam and
contumeliam adversatur subditus majori suo; sic Israelitae non simpliciter
detrectabant obsequi, sed addebant murmura, obloquia, contumelias adversus Deum
and Moy sen, Muscul. in Psalm.
Not so, but they rebelled against him: So Montanus reads it better.

But it may be this sin was committed whilst they were in Egypt, among the
Egyptians, being put on by them?

Not so neither, but when they were come out of Egypt, and only had to deal
with God, and saw his glorious power at the Red sea; then they rebelled against
him, at the sea, even at the Red sea.

What then? did not the Lord destroy them?

No, (says the Text) Notwithstanding all their ignorance, unthankfulness, and
their rebellion, he saved them for his names sake.

He saved them] that is, with an outward salvation.

For his Names sake] the name of God is that whereby he is made known unto us.
Gods working for his Names sake, is still set in opposition to our deservings.

God does sometimes work for his Names sake, that it may not be Defiled, and
Polluted by Men. Sometimes that the glory, and honor of his Name may shine out
the more. In both these respects the words are to be understood; but especially
they are meant in the latter; and so they are explained in Esaias 63.12. And to
this purpose the following words, That he might make his Mighty power known:
The word in the Hebrew is, To make known his mighty power. (...) ad
notificandum fortitudinem suam, Ar. Mont.


Much of Gods power is to be read, and known in all his Creatures: but in this
their deliverance at the Red sea, there were the special prints of his fingers,
the Characters, and Marks of his infinite Power, and Deity, whereby he might be
plainly and clearly known. And that this Name, and Power of his might be thus
known, he did save them with a Notwithstanding all their former Sins. Whence
observe Two things,

for his own Names sake. He does sometimes save his people with a
Notwithstanding; Notwithstanding all their Sin and Guilt.

Notwithstanding, he does then leave such Marks and Characters of his mighty
power upon their Salvation, that he may be clearly and fully known, and
manifested to the Sons of men.

God d^^h sometimes save a people with a Notwithstanding all their Sin, and all
their Unworthiness.

Tim. 1.15. how the Lord dealt with Paul: says Paul himself, I was a
Blasphemer, Injurious, Persecutor; Nevertheless I obtained mercy, although I
did it ignorantly through unbelief, or Notwithstanding I did it ignorantly,
etc. Ye read the words ordinarily thus, For I did it ignorantly; as if
Ignorance were the reason of his Conversion, by way of Excuse: But the Greek
ti, which you translate For, may be read, Although. As in Luke 23.40. Fear
thou not God, (says the Thief on the Cross to his fellow) (...); Luke 23.40.
(...), Act. 1.17. Vulg. annumerabatur enim nobiscum, quasi esset ratio cur iste
se ducem praebuerit illis qui Christum capiebant, cum contrarium velit
Apostolus, hoc modo, ille Judas a diabolo and carne sua seductus eo pervenit
dementiae, ut suum dominum turpiter prodiderit, quamvis cum aliis maximis ab eo
sit affectus beneficiis, tum vel hoc inprimis ornatus, quod in numerum and
Collegium Apostolorum erat cooptatus. Tarnov. exercit. bibl. 188. 189.
Seeing, or Although thou art in the same condemnation? So Acts 1.17. who
(speaking of Judas) was guide to them that took Jesus, although he was numbered
with us: ye read it ordinarily for, but it should be rather rendered although,
for it is the same ti. Neither can it be truly translated For, by way of
Extenuation, it being an Aggravation rather: For Sins of Ignorance are of Two
sorts: Either such as are simple Ignorance; Or of Prave disposition. Simple
Ignorance does excuse; but Ignorance of Prave, or ill disposition does
aggravate. Such was Paulus cum verbum de Christo praedicato audiret, nolebat
credere, sed repugnabat, ut alii Pharisaei, licet hic cis fervidius, fecit enim
ea quae sunt infidelitatis; hoc est, non tantum habuerit fidei vacuitatem, sed
etiam malorum operum plenitudinem: quo spectat quod vox (...) saepe includat
peithean imo repugnantiam. Ignorantia facti and circumstantiae excusat, in
tantum, non in totum, sed Paulus peccavit ex ignorantia Juris, quae non
excusat. Nam Paulus se vocat peccatorem primum seu praecipuum, and
misericordiam Dei praedicat, quae, quo peccatum majus, eo and ipsa major.
quamvis igitur Paulus Pharisaeus, cum scire omnino posset and deberet,
Jerosolymis vivens, Christ^ doctrinam esse divinam, quippe tot miraculis
confirmatam, ipsumque esse mundi Salvatorem in V. Test. promissam, tamen oculos
ad tantam lucem claudens, volens illam ignorabat quam habere poterat, si non
restitisset praefracte; and jam id admirans dicebat, gratiam nihilominus sibi
esse factam, quantumvis ignorans fecerit illa sua incredulitate, Idem p. 1106.
1107. etc. quomodo igitur per ti vel quia, ignorantia potest constitu^ causae?
quum extraordinaria praeter Dei volumatem nullam habeant, saltem quod nos
sciamus, causam. Paulus enim hic constituitur pr pot posin omnium qui sunt
credituri, confer v. 15.16. Et hic versu 16 est causa cur deus Paulum
converterit di toto: si enim ti vertis causaliter, tum ignorantia and
incredulitas erunt causa remissionis peccatorum, and proinde omnis qui peccat
ex incredulitate and ignoranti^, ut Judaei, Act. 37. c. 13.27. 1 Cor. 2.6.
gratiam consequitur, quod tamen falsum est, Idem. exercit. bibl. page 193. 189.
Paul's Ignorance: for (says he) I did it ignorantly in Unbelief. He does not
barely say, I did it ignorantly; but ignorantly in Unbelief: which is the worst
disposition, and that does aggravate.

Besides, Ignorance is either such, as is Invincible, and cannot be helped; Or
such as is Wilful and may be helped: Such was Paul's Ignorance, for he stood by,
and held the clothes of those that stoned Steven. There was enough done, and
said before him to convince him of Christ, and therefore his Ignorance was
rather aggravating.

Yea, and as Tarnovius does well observe, Paul in this Scripture does not go
about to extenuate, but aggravate his Sin. Witness the precedent, and
following words: In the precedent words, says he, I was a Blasphemer, and a
Persecutor, and Injurious. In the following words, Whereof I am chief, etc.

Besides, the conversion of Paul was miraculous, and not to be laid on the
ordinary cause of Ignorance: and if he were therefore converted because
Ignorant, then all that are Ignorant should be converted; but not so, we see
the contrary. The words therefore, are not to be read with For, but with an
Although, or with a Notwithstanding, thus: I was a Blasphemer, Injurious,
Persecutor, Nevertheless, I obtained mercy, Although I did it ignorantly in
unbelief.

And will the Lord save a particular person with a Notwithstanding, and will he
not save a People, his People with a Notwithstanding all their Guilt, and Sin?

God keeps the same method in giving out the benefits that do come by Christ,
as in giving out of Christ himself. Now for Christ himself: the first promise
that was given of him, was given with a Notwithstanding, Notwithstanding the
great Sin that Adam and Eve committed in the fall, yet (says the Lord) The
seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.

Thus in the Types of Christ; There were Three great Types of him in the
Wilderness; the Manna, the Brasen-Serpent, and the Rock: but though all these
were Types, yet the Rock especially: and therefore in the 1 Cor. 10. says the
Apostle, And that Rock was Christ. He had said before, They did all eat the
same spiritual meat; yet he does not say, And that meat was Christ, or that
Manna was Christ: but having said, They all drank of the same spiritual Rock,
he adds, And that Rock was Christ. Why? but because the Rock, and Water, was
a special Type of Christ. Now if we look into the History, we shall find, that
the waters of the Rock, whereby Israel were saved from death, was given with a
Notwithstanding: They murmured, and sinned much through Unbelief; yet the Lord
struck the Rock, and waters came forth like honey; yea, and the Apostle tells us
that the Rock followed them, they did not follow the Rock, but the Rock went
after them. And when Christ himself came into the world, ye may read in the
third of Luke, what a pack of wicked men were then in Judea that were in
Office; Pontius Pilate, Herod, Annas and Caiaphas; yet then, even then did
Christ come notwithstanding all the malice of those Tyrants and times. And if
ye look into the 57 of Esaias, ye may read a clear proof of all this (verse the
17) For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me,
and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. What then? I
have seen his ways (at the 18. Verse) I will heal him: I will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. All this is spoken of a
people, as well as of a particular person. Here Is mercy! here is love! here is
Pardon with a Notwithstanding. So that God does sometimes save his people with
a Notwithstanding all their Sins. That is the first Reason.

Notwithstanding; How should the glory of his Mercy appear? If a Physician
should only cure a man that has the Headache, or Toothache; one that has
taken Cold, or some small disease; it would not argue any great skill, and
excellency in the Physician. But when a man is nigh unto death, has one foot
in the grave, or is in the eye of reason past all recovery; if then the
Physiciam cure him, it argues much the skill and excellency of that Physician:
So now, if God should only cure, and save a People that were less evil and
wicked; or that were good indeed, where should the Excellency of mercy appear?
but when a People shall be drawing on, lying bedridden, as it were, and the Lord
out of his free love, for his own Names sake, shall raise, and cure such an
unworthy People, this sets out the glory of his Mercy. Read therefore, and
consider, what is said in Psalm. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee: (...)
gloriosa dicta in te. Ar. Mont.
but rather (according to the Hebrew) In thee. O thou City of God. What are
those glorious things? Verse the 4. I will make mention of Rahab, and Babylon,
to them that know me; Rahab signifies, Pride, and Insolency; for Egypt dealt
Proudly and Insolently with the people of God: Babylon also oppressed them
sorely, and held them in captivity; yet (says the Lord) I will make mention of
Egypt, and Babylon to them that know me. Yea, Philistia, and Tire, and
Aethiopia; men and people that were very wicked; shall be found with the Saints;
the Lord will take special notice of them, Verse. 4. and 5.
as of those in Zion. What then? Then glorious things shall be spoken In thee.
Mercy is never Glorious, but when it is Rich; It is never Rich, but when it is
free; and the more free it is, and works with a Notwithstanding, the more
glorious it is. Now God, who is the God of Glory, will have his Mercy, which is
his Glory, made Glorious; and therefore, though the Sin of a People be
exceeding great, and very heinous, yet he will sometimes save them for his own
Names sake, with a Notwithstanding all their Sins.

Notwithstanding all their Sin: Then it is possible (I see nothing in the Word
contrary to it) but that England, Scotland, Ireland, may yet be saved, with an
outward Salvation, Notwithstanding all our fears, notwithstanding all our Sins.
The Lord saved Israel, brought them out of Egypt through the Red sea,
Notwithstanding all their Rebellion. The Lord saved Lot out of Sodom.
Notwithstanding he saw what he would do with his two daughters afterward. The
Lord saved Israel out of Babylon, Notwithstanding that they were loath to
depart, and were grown exceeding vile, and very wicked there. The Jews were a
people that were under the Law; indeed they were saved by the same Covenant of
Grace that we are, and by Jesus Christ as we are: yet were under the Law, for
God dealt with them in a more Legal way, and manner then he does deal by us.
And did the Lords grace, and free love so strive upon them, as to save them
with a Notwithstanding? and shall not his grace, and love now strive upon his
Gospel-People, to save, and deliver them with a Notwithstanding? Were they
under the Law, and yet saved by Grace? Did the Lord save the Mosaicall Israel,
for his own Names sake, with a Notwithstanding? and shall he not save Christian
Israel, in a way of free-love, with a Notwithstanding also? Surely, the Lord is
as full of grace now, in the times of the New Testament, as ever he was in the
times of the Old Testament.



Israel so in the land of Egypt? read Ezekiel. 20.



Israel unwilling to go out of the land of Egypt?



Israel chide with Moses?



Israel? It Is said, in the Verse precedent; They rebelled at the Sea, even at
the Red Sea. Or (as in the Hebrew) even In the Red Sea: when the waters stood
like walls on both sides of them; when they saw those walls of waters that
never people saw before, and saw the Power, the infinite Power of God leading
them through on dry land; Then did they Rebel, At the Sea, Even In the Sea;
(...) Graec. (...) vulg. Lat. in mare. Hieron. in m^ri rubr^; ^ran^ in grandi,
and praesenti, and incuitabili discrimine constituti, nam Aegyptii a tergo,
monitbus impediebantur ne vel ad dextram vel ad senistram declinare, mari vero
ne progredi possent occludebantur: hisce augustiis inclusi murmurabant and
rebellabam ubi potissimum divinae b^nitatis memoria vigere debet. Muscul. in
Nas.
and yet for all this the Lord saved them, he saved them with a Notwithstanding
all this. And I say, shall the Lord put forth so much of grace upon a People,
that were under the Law? and not put forth much more of his grace upon those
that are under the Gospel? O England, England, I cannot write thee lost, or
forsaken; thou may yet be saved (I speak of Outward Salvation) thou may
yet be saved, Notwithstanding all thy Fears, and all thy Sins. Yea, the Lord
has saved us, he has saved us with a Notwithstanding; as great, and large a
Notwithstanding as ever People, and Nation were saved with. Witness the Mercy,
and Deliverance of this day. When the Powder Treason was on foot, what a dark
night of security had trodden upon the glory of our English day? Then did our
strength lie fast asleep in the lap of Delilah: What Pride? Oppression?
Court-uncleannesse? Supersttions, and Persecutions of the Saints then, under
the name of Puritans? Nevertheless he sa^ed us, and our Fathers.

And now of late; What Bitterness of spirit among Professors? What Divisions?
Oppressions, instead of Justice? What newfangled Prides? What unwillingnesse
to be Reformed? Time was heretofore when we did call for Truth, and cried aloud
for Truth; Oh! that we might know the Truth! But now we deal by Truth, as the
Friar said the people did by their Holy Water; Ye call, and cry (said he) for
Holy Water, but when the Sexton sprinkles it, ye turn away your faces, and it
falls on your backs. So the times were heretofore that we called, and cried out
for Truth, Truth: it is now come unto you, we would sprinkle it upon you, but
ye turn away your faces from it, and it falls on your backs.

And is there not as much Swearing? Drunkenness? Profaneness still as before?
I read of a street in Rome, called Vicus Sobrius, the Sober street: because
there was never an Alehouse to be found in it. And upon this account, I think
there will be never a sober street in England; or very rare.

As for the precious Ordinances of Jesus Christ, never so slighted, and
rejected as now. Nevertheless, the Lord has saved us; yea, he has saved us
with a great Salvation; I may say, Miraculous Salvation: oh! if ever people
were saved in a way of free love, and with a Notwithstanding, thus are we saved
here in England.

Notwithstanding, for his own Names sake, out of his mercy, and free love:
What is our Duty that does flow from hence?

Notwithstanding, for his own Names sake, out of mere grace; Then, what
mighty engagements are upon us all, to become gracious; to repent of, and turn
from our former sins, nothwithstanding which he has saved us. An ungracious
heart may possibly mourn for Sin that it may be pardoned; but an ingenuous,
gracious heart, will mourn for sin because it is pardoned. Yea, and the more he
apprehends that his Sin is pardoned, the more he will, and does mourn for it.

We read of David, that he had sinned greatly, and he lay long therein without
testimony of repentance; at the last, he breaks out into a Penitential Psalm,
the 51. Psalm. and there he melts, and breaks all to pieces in Repentance. When
was that Psalm made? the Title tells us, A Psalm of David -- when Nathan the
Prophet came unto him, that is, after Nathan the Prophet had come. And what did
Nathan say to him, but thy Sin is forgiven thee? whereupon he did melt into
that Repentance. So now, when a person does truly consider, how many
Notwithstandings the Lord does carry his Conversion through, then he does melt
indeed, if there be ingenuity in him. Oh! (says he) I was a poor, Ignorant
man, a Drunkard, a Swearer, an Opposer, and a Jearer at goodness, and good
men; yet the Lord saved me, showed mercy to me Notwithstanding all this: and
therefore, what infinite cause have I to be humbled for Sin committed? here he
breaks, and melts. And if ye look into the 9. of Ezra, ye shall find, that
nothing did so melt, and break his heart as this, That the people sinned
against the free love of God. ver. 6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift
up my face to thee, my God: For now for a little space grace has been showed
from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail
in his holy place. ver. 10. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this?
for we have forsaken thy commandments. ver. 13. And after all that is come
upon us, for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our
God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such
deliverance as this: Should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? O Lord our God, thou art
righteous, for we remain yet escaped: behold we are before thee in our
trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. So say I, Has
the Lord showed mercy to us with a Notwithstanding all our Sins? and shall we
sin against him Notwithstanding all his Mercies? how shall we stand before him
because of this? Surely, the latter end will be sad, and smart. Ye read of the
children of Israel's unbelief, and that therefore they fell, and died in the
Wilderness: They had sinned greatly in Unbelief on the other side the water,
before they came through the Red sea, but God pardoned that: but when the Lord
had brought them through the Red sea, and they had seen God saving them with a
Notwithstanding, and then fell into that unbelief, they died for it: Their
unbelief on this side the water, was at a dearer rate, then on the other. And
so it will be with us: Many and great were our sins which we committed before
the Lord saved us; and if yet we will go on, and will not repent of them; now
they will cost us dear. The Lord has saved us with a Notwithstanding: Oh! what
a mighty engagement is this upon us all to leave those sins Notwithstanding
which the Lord has saved us? This is our first duty.

with a Notwithstanding, out of free love; Then let us all walk Humbly after
all our Deliverances, Victories, Salvations. Be it known unto thee, O Israel,
(says the Lord) that not for thy Righteousness, not for thy Uprightness, but
for mine own Names sake have I done all this. So may I say to England, O
England, the Lord has done great things for thee formerly, and of late; yet,
be it known unto thee, that not for thy Righteousness, nor thine Uprightness,
but for his own Names sake has he done it. Why should any of us then be Proud,
and not walk Humbly under all? My soul (says Mary) does magnify the Lord,
(...).
etc. for he that is mighty has magnified me: So your old Service Book; but it
is, according to the Original, Has done great things for me. She does not
say, as Austine observes, Fecit in me, or fecit per me, but fecit mihi, he has
done great things, not In me, nor By me, but To me, and For me. Holy and
reverent is his Name; as for me, I am not so much an agent, as a poor patient.
So may we say, The Lord has done great things For us, not In us, not By us,
but For us, and to us for his own Names sake. Oh! therefore let us all walk
humbly with our God. That is the second.

with a Notwithstanding; Then why should not we love one another with a
Notwithstanding? Diversum sentire duos de rebus eisdem Incolumi licuit semper
amicitta.
You say. I could love such, or such a man, but that he is of this Opinion: I
confess he is Godly, but not of my Judgment, not of my Opinion, this or that
failing, or odnesse of carriage he has. But did God love me with a
Notwithstanding all my Sin? and shall not I love his Children with a
Notwithstanding all their failings? ye know the Parable: When the Lord forgave
his Servant frankly, and freely, what he expected that the Servant should do to
his fellow Servant: and because he did not, his Lord was wroth with him. This
is an Everlasting Rule; That when Christ loves us, he expects that we should
love his as he has loved us. And therefore says he, A new commandment give I
unto you, that ye love one another, even as I have loved you. Now he has loved
us freely, Notwithstanding all our failings, and Sins; all our odnesses and
weaknesses: Awake, Awake, O love of the Saints, Awake!

Some think the best way to Unite hearts in these Dividing times, is to make
all things Common, according to that verse, Si duo de nostris, etc. Si duo de
nostris tollas Praenomina rebus prolia cessarent, pax sine lite foret.
Take but two Pronouns, that is, meum and tuum, out of our matters, and Wars
will cease, and there will be Peace without strife. But the Statute of meum and
tuum, was made in Heaven, and it is engraven in our Nature; Thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is his. This His, is part of the Moral Law, and
so in our Nature. Indeed we read, that when Cain, a wicked man, came to
sacrifice, that it is said, he brought an offering of the field, in Common: But
when godly Abel brought a Sacrifice, it is said, he brought a firstling of His
sheep: the word of Propriety being written upon his Sacrifice. And surely, the
way to unite hearts, is not to dissolve our Nature: but if you would love one
another, as this Doctrine calls for at our hands, let me tell you, that the way
to love, is to begin in faith. As in our love to God: Love is the fruit of
Faith, Faith is the Root of Love: I cannot love God if I do no not trust him:
nor can I ever love my Neighbor, if I do not trust him. Away therefore with
all Designings one upon another; and let us first profess Simplicity, and
Integrity: Though I can never help you as I would, yet I will never detain you;
ye cannot love, if ye do not trust first. And therefore, let us so carry it
toward one another, in all Simplicity, and godly Gospel integrity, that we may
confide in each other. And if you would love one another much, do not expect
too much from any; man is but man: Verily every man in his best estate (and
therefore though he be godly) is altogether vanity. There is somewhat of the
worst in the best, In optimo semper aliquid pessimi -- Every man must have his
allowance, he has his failings. When ever you look upon another man's
Infirmities, think of his other Excellencies. As when you look upon your own
Excellency, think withal upon your other Infirmity: So when you look on
another man's Infirmity, think withal on his other Excellency. If we expect too
much, we are disappointed; and disappointment does breed vexation, and
displeasure: if we expect little, and find much, it breeds love: if we expect
much, and find little, it breaks love.

Again, if you would have the returns of love upon your heart, Walk, and be
together, you that are godly. Strangeness is the next door to Enmity:
Strangeness does breed Suspicion; and Suspicion does breed Enmity. There are
some things wherein Nunciatum est mihi de vobis fratres ab aliquibus qui in
vestra congregatione sunt and ad nos inde venerunt, quod de hacre dissensiones
in vobis sunt, itaque dilectissimi ne vos perturbet hujus quaestionis
obscuritas, moneo vos primum ut de his quae intelligitis agatis Deo gratias;
quicquid est autem quo pervenire nondum potest vestrae mentis intentio, pacem
inter vos and charitatem servantes a domino ut intelligatis orate, and donec
res ipsa perducat ad ea quae nondum intelligitis ibi ambulate quo pervenire
potuistis. Hac etiam admo^et Apostolus Paulus, qui cum dixisset se nondum
perfectum esse, paulo post ait, quotquot ergo perfecti sumus hoc sapiamus, and
si quid aliter sapitis hoc quoque Deus revelabit, verumtamen in quod pervenimus
in eo ambulamus, Phil. 3.15, 16. Augustine: vide Cassandri tractat. de pii vi^i
officio circa religionis dendium.
we are all agreed, let us walk together in the practice of them. It Is a vain
thing for men to run up and down to get work, when much lies unmade up on their
Shop-boards. Now there is much on our board yet not made up, let us all work to
make up that which lies on our board for the present, and by that time it is
made up, through Gods grace we shall be agreed in the rest. And in the mean
time, let every man keep his Place. A learned man being asked what the reason
was of the Unde tot in rebus humanis turbae, nisi quod fere omnes eam quam.
Deus imposuit nobis personam, nobis volumus, and peregrinam agere desideramus:
qui agere debet Theologum, agere audet politicum, qui privata contentus esse
umbra debet, publico apricari sole molitur: quod non minus creat in hac mundi
histrionia incommodi, quam si in Comoedia servus agat berum and ancilla
domin^on, morio Regem etc. Est via ad concordiam, quisque faciat in suo vitae
genere ad quod Deus eum vocavit suum officium. Non extollat se supra alios
neque opera al^^r^m reprehendat, and sua velut meliora laudet, sed alii aliis
per charitatem serviant. Luther.
Dissentions of those times wherein he lived, said, because men do not keep
their Places, all men were out of their Places. I wish I might not say so too;
We are out of our Places: and what Peace, or love while men are out of their
Places, and do not act, nor move in their own Spears? Oh! you that are
Scholars of Jesus Christ, away to your Places, your Lord is coming, and if he
find you out of your Places he will take the rod into his hand.

But above all things think of this Truth much that is now before ye.
Lactantius observes, that the Heathens accounted it the best Honoring of their
Gods, to be like them: and therefore some would be wicked, that they might be
like to Jupiter their Mores and vitia regis imirari genus obsequii est:
abjecerunt pietatem ne exprobrare regi (Jovi) scelus viderentur. Lact.
God: and though it were evil which they did, yet they thought they Honored
their Gods in it, because they were like to them. Ye would all Honor your God:
labor more and more to be like to him; he has saved, delivered and loved you
with a Notwithstanding. Oh! therefore let us love one another Notwithstanding
all our failings, and infirmities.

Ye read of Rebecca, that when she was with her Servants, she rode on Camels:
but when she saw Isaac on foot, she did alight and walk as he did. It may be
when you are with your fellow servants, you think it fit to be on horseback,
you are High, and in your Ruff: But, behold our Isaac, our Savior has
condescended to our infirmities, Came down, walked on foot: He has saved us
with a Notwithstanding; and why should not all we be contented to walk, as
Christ walked; and to love, as he loved? he has loved us with a
Notwithstanding, so let us do. That is the Third.

with a Nevertheless, out of mere love: Then why should we Despise, or
Despair of any, though they be never so Vile: or Envy at any, though they be
never so Good? Say not (says Austine) Number quid Deus correcturus est hominem
tam vilem etc. Will God Correct, and Attend quem rogas non pro quo rogas,
vides periculum morbi sed non vides potentiam medici fecit resicere potest,
August.
Convert a man so vile, and so perverse? Do not Despair (says he) Attend whom
thou prayest to, not for whom thou prayest. You see the Disease of the Patient,
but not the Power of the Physician. And seeing God works, and saves with a
Notwithstanding, who knows what he will do, whose ways are past finding out?
Joseph was thrown behind for a while: and though he had a promise that his
sheafe should be higher then the rest of his brethrens: yet at the first it was
lowest, but God took him, raised him, and made his sheafe higher then all his
brethrens. So can God do by this or that wicked person: though now he stands
behind, God may take him, and set him before; for God works freely. Oh!
therefore, never Despise any, though they be never so Wicked: Nor, I say, Envy
at others, though they be never so Good, for their Parts, Gifts, and Abilities:
God can take you, and make you as Good, or better. For the present indeed, you
may bemoan your selves, and say, Is God so good, so gracious, so free as to
save with a Notwithstanding? and am I the only wicked man, or woman that shall
have none of this free love; that shall not taste of this rich grace? Si impius
es (says one) If thou be wicked, think on the Publican: If Unclean, think
on Rahab: If Injurious, think on the Thief; If an Idolater, think on Abraham;
If a Blasphemer, think on Paul: Who would have thought, that should have seen
Paul trudging with a persecuting Commission, that he would ever have been such
a famous Preacher of the Gospel? but the Lord, our Lord works, Delivers, saves,
with a Notwithstanding; he does work freely: Therefore, Despise not any, though
they be never so Vile: Envy not at any, though they be never so Good. That is
the fourth.

for his own Nam^s sake; Then let us all be tender of his Name: take heed that
we do not wrong his Name, our only friend in adversity: But if we be in any
danger, labor more and more to engage his Name in our work, and upon all
occasions Exalt this Name of the Lord. Abulensis observes, that though Moses
did strike other things with his Rod, yet himself would not strike the waters,
but spoke to Aaron to strike them, when they were to be turned into blood: for
(says he) Moses was preserved in the waters, and out of thankfulness he would
not strike the waters that had preserved him. I do not like his reason; but I
allude: It Is the Name of the Lord that has preserved you, and shall we now
strike his Name? I say nothing of those that do Swear by his Name, their own
consciences tell them, that they wound the Name of God: But how few are there
in these days, that are tender of Gods Name? If a man, a Professor, fall and
Sin, how ready are others to spread, and divulge his Sin? yea, though the
spreading thereof be a scandal unto Gods Name. As Luther said in his time, ob
quodcunque erratum, for every fault, and Error, they presently cry out, These
are your fruits of the Gospel: So now, this is the fruit of your Profession,
and Holiness.

But ye see into what times of danger we are now fallen. The Name of the Lord
(says Solomon) is a strong Tower: the righteous fly thereunto, and are safe:
or as some read it, lift up. If a man be in a Tower, he may not only Defend
himself, but offend his Enemy. Abimelech, and a sorry Woman, were too unequally
matched: What was a weak woman to him? Yet, Judge. 9. A woman, having the
advantage of a strong Tower, proved too good for him; for, from the Tower she
cast down a great stone upon Abimelech, brake his scull, and he died. Now such
a strong Tower is the Name of the Lord: though you be so weak as a Woman, yet
if in-Tower'd in the Name of God, you shall be able to cast down milstones upon
all your Enemies. Who would not therefore Engage the Name of God more and more
in the time of danger? And seeing for his own Names sake, he has saved you,
and your Fathers, and Children, and Families, as it is this day; Come now, and
let us Exalt his Name together.

The Name of God is Exalted, when ye speak highly of his Power, Faithfulness,
Mercy, free love and grace, and of all his Attributes.

A man Exalts his Name, when he ventures upon Great things, and Hard things,
even Lions in his way, upon confidence on the Name of God: as David against
Goliath.

The Name of God is Exalted, when men yield up their Resolutions, and
Engagements, and that Presently, upon the least discovery of Dishonor that may
come thereby to this Name of God.

We Exalt the Name of God, when we labor to bear up those Ordinances, Ways,
and Truths of God, which the world Decries. There is a Verbal; and there is a
Real Exalting of Gods Name: its not the Verbal, but the Real that God
expects. And seeing he saves us, and all Ours hitherto, for his own Names
sake; Why should we not all join together in Exalting his Name? Oh! you that
are Parents, call upon your Children to Exalt his Name: You that are
Governors, and Masters, call upon your Servants to Exalt his Name: Tell them,
how he has saved us with a Notwithstanding, for his own Names sake; and
therefore Exalt his Name. This is the fifth Duty.

I should now tell you in the Next place, That if God does save us with a
Notwithstanding, then we should Serve him with a Notwithstanding all
Opposition, Notwithstanding all Discouragements: that we should Believe, and
Trust in him, Notwithstanding all our Fears, and Dangers. But I hasten to the
Next Doctrine, which is this;

When God does save his people with a Notwithstanding, he does then leave such
Marks, and Characters, of his Infinite Power upon their Deliverance to
Salvation, that he may be Fully, Clearly, Plainly known to the Sons of men.

Ye shall observe therefore, That when God promised any great Deliverance to
his people in the time of the Prophets, he frequently adds these words, Then
shall ye know that I am the Lord; or, Then shall ye know that I am Jehovah.
Gods Infinite, and Almighty Power is never more seen, or legible, then when he
works in a way of free love. And therefore, if ye look into the 14. Numb. you
find, that when Moses pleaded with God to pardon, and pass by the iniquity of
his people, to show forth his grace, and love to them; he does then implore,
and call in the Power, the Great Power of God. ver. 17. it is said, He made the
Heavens by his Power; but here Great Power is used, and expressed for the
pardoning of Sin. And in Psalm. 99.8. we find, that his free love, and Power are
knit together. Deus fortis condonans etc. For he is not only strong, and
Merciful, but he is strong in Mercy. So that, whenever God does save his
people with a Notwithstanding, his great Design is to make known his mighty
power unto the Sons of men.

Notwithstanding: But what Marks, or Impressions of a Deity, or of Infinite
Power are there upon the Deliverances, or Salvations that we have had?



second cause will not, cannot bear; then the hand, and arm, and special
power of God is, and may be seen therein, Jer. 31.22. I the Lord have created a
new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man. Neque enim simpliciter
Propheta hic de viro loquitur, sed nominat virum robustum. (...) enim sumitur a
fortitudine; cum igitur foeminam viro comparet, non dubito quin significet
Propheta Israelitas' qui similes erant foeminis, hoc est carebant viribus,
destituti erant omni auxilio, quin dicit superiores sore hostibus suis quorum
potentia poterat toti mundo terrorem incu^ere: Nam (...) significat non
amplecti sed obsidere, saepenumero, and multis accipitur scripturae locis in
malam partem: Hosts circundederunt me, Psalm. 118. Cum igitur noratur obsidio
Scriptura hoc verbum usurpat. and perinde est ^^si Propheta dixisset, redigent
foeminae viros in angustias, ita ut ipsos captivos teneant. Calvin. in Ierem.
31.22.
It Is ordinarily understood of Christ in the womb of the Virgin Mary: But as
Calvin does well observe, ('it is his Comment, not Mine) it is not said, That a
woman shall compass a man barely, but a Strong one: a woman shall compass a
strong one, or one that is strong: so the Hebrew word signifies; And (says he)
that word which is translated, Compass, signifies such a Compassing, as
Enemies do use when they lay Siege to a City. So Psalm. 118. They Compassed me
about like bees. It Is the same word there, which is used in a Hostile way. And
so the meaning is thus: Though, O ye Israelites, ye be as weak as Women, and
your Enemies strong; yet you shall lay Siege to them, and take them captive; for
I will create a new thing.

When God works Creation-wise, then he puts forth his Almighty power: and when
a Woman, or those that are weak, shall lay Siege to, and take the strong, then
his Creating hand is at work.

And has it not been thus in these Great Deliverances that he has wrought for
us of late? We may all say, The Lord has Created a new thing, for the woman,
(that is) those that are weak, have laid Siege to, and taken those that are
strong. Here is Power legible.

The Lord is known by the Judgment that he executes: The wicked is snared in
the work of their own hands. When the wicked Plot, Consult, and Design upon,
and against the righteous, and they are so snared in their complotments, as
that the cause of the just and righteous is furthered by their own workings;
then is the Lord known: then, and there are the Marks, Impressions, Characters,
of a Deity upon that work. And has not the Lord led you in this way all a long?

First, for the Powder Treason: the Enemies, and Papists, thought to have
swallowed up the Protestant party, and to have subdued all this Kingdom with
their Religion; promising themselves such a good day, as they never had before:
But never had the Papists such a blow, nor that Religion made more odious in
this Kingdom, then by this design of their own: they were snared in their
own works.

Now I have seen a Deity, now have I seen the Lord, and his Mighty power?



Let me tell you plainly: Some men come to Gods work full of their own Sense.
Interpretation follows the Disposition. Every man interprets according to his
own affection.

It Is therefore observed by Masius, That when Moses and Joshua came down from
the Mount, and heard the people dancing, playing, and singing before their
golden Calf; Joshua, being of a warlike disposition, interprets the noise to be
the noise of war: Moses, being a meek man, interprets the noise to be the noise
of singing. I have read of a certain Controversy that was at Rome, concerning
the two Missals (or Services) of Gregory and Ambrose: the Controversy was very
hot, whose Missall or Masse-book should be allowed, and authentic: and
thereupon they determined, that they should both be left upon the Altar in
Peter's Church all the night; and that they would expect some immediate
revelation from Heaven the next morning: it was so done, both were left on the
Altar; and in the morning, they found, that Gregory's Masse-book was rent, and
torn in many pieces, and lay scattered about the Church: But Ambrose's whole,
and open upon the Altar. Which event, says my Author, one would have thought,
should have signified thus much, That the Missall of Gregory should have been
cancelled, and abolished; and that of Ambrose Authentic, and Canonical: But
Pope Adrian, in whose time it was, being for Gregory's Mass book, expounded
this lying Miracle thus: That the rending of Gregory's Missall, intended the
dispersing thereof over all the Christian World, and that it only should be
made Authentic. Thus do men's Interpretations follow their own Dispositions.
And so now, when men come to Gods Works, Deliverances, and Salvations, though
there be much of a Deity therein, yet coming to them in their own sense, and
abounding in their affection, they follow their own Disposition, and so they
lose the Deity.

But when Moses came to see the wonder of the burning bush, that was not
consumed; though he said, I will turn aside to see this great wonder; the Lord
said, Pull off thy Shoes, Moses, pull off thy Shoes. So does God now call
unto us: you say, I Will turn aside, and see this wonder, That Englands bush has
been burning thus many years, and is not consumed; a wonder indeed, to be
beheld, and considered by all: But if you would see the Lord therein, ye must
pull off your own shoes; and the Lord calls unto ye, O my servants, pull off
your shoes; lay aside your own Dispositions, else you will not see this
wonder, nor my power.

Ira sequitur invidiam, quae mentem exulcerat, sensum hebetat, linguam immutat,
oculos obumbrat, totumque corpus perturbat. Ambros.
Envy is blind. They will not see (says Esaias, in a case of Justice) but they
shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at thy people. If a man have an
envious, malicious eye at Gods Instruments, he will never see much of God in
the work.

Notwithstanding: yet sometimes men see not God, because they stand poring so
much on the second cause. God seldom does any great work, but still he does
use some Creature in the doing of it, though the Creature be too short to reach
the work. And though it be but a piece of brass, which (say the Naturalists)
to behold is hurtful to those that are stung with the Serpent: yet the
Israelites will rather adore the brazen Serpent, then they will see the Lord.

The Jewish Rabbis say, That when the Philistims had taken Ebrai tamen dicunt
quod Philistaei fecerunt eum dormi^e eum mulieribus robustis, ut ex eo prol^m
robustam susciperent: quomam idem vocabul: Iud. 16.21. (...) and Job 31. (...)
Dilherus: Elect. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Sampson, and saw that he was a man of such strength, none like him in all the
earth; they caused him to sleep with some women, that they might have a
Generation of Sampsons, and strong men among them: and the reason of this
Notion they take from Judge. 16.21. where it is said, That they made him grind
(not in the Mill, but) they made him grind. Which word is the same in the
Hebrew, with that in Job 31. Then let my wise grind to another. And if this
Notion of theirs be true: ye see how the Phil stims lost the sight of God in
the strength of Sampson; namely, by poring too much on the second Cause of
strength. But when our Lord Jesus Christ was on earth, what great and glorious
things did he do! yet the Jews had not an eye to see them, or God in them: Why?
Is not this the Carpenters son? say they. Can any good come out of Nazareth?
they looked no higher then Nazareth, or a Carpenter. There was Flesh in Christ,
and a Deity: they looked so much upon his flesh, as they did lose his Deity. So
in all these great things that God has done for us: there is a flesh in the
work, something of flesh; and there is a Deity, the Impressions of infinite
power: but men stand looking so much upon the Flesh of the action, as they lose
the Deity of it. Some stretch, and crack their eye-strings so much in beholding
the Creatures, and in the admiration of Men; as they have no eye left for to
see the Lord: sometimes men see no more of God in his works because they are
not acquainted with his ways and methods of his proceedings with his people;
his way is in the deep, and therefore his footsteps are not known; we seek for
him in our own way, and find him not: for his ways are not as our ways:
whereupon says Discamus regulam and ordinem gubernationis Deo usitatum, nam
ego saepe certas rations conatus sum Deo praescribere, quibus uteretur in
administratione sanctae Ecclesiae and aliarum rerion; ab Domine, dixi, hoc
velim ita sieri, hoc eventu; sed Deus pro sus contrarium faciebat ab eo quod
petiveram: ibi tum cogitabam, atqui meum confilium non est alicuum a gloria
Dei, sed plurimum facit ad sanctificandum nomen ejus: sed risit haud dubic
dominus hanc sapientiam and dixit, age vero novi te esse prudentem and
cruditum, sed mihi nunquam hic mos fuit ut aut Petrus, aut Divus Martinus, aut
alius me doceret: non sum Deus passivus, sed activus. Selamus Deum se
abscondere sub specie possimi Diaboli, ideo ut discamus bonitatem,
misericordiam, potentiam Dei non posse comprehendi speculando, sed experiendo.
Deus suos humiliat ut exaltet, occidit ut vivificet, confiendit ut glorificet,
subjicit ut extollat. Nam sic Deus sapientiam nostram mortificat, ut homo
agrestis mirabilem symphoniam tot votum in orga^is, aut Cythara non intelligit,
propterea quod totius harmoniae rationem ignorant: sic nos arbitramur temere
omnia fieri, diabolum vigilare, Deum dormire, etc. Luther in Genesis
Luther, If we would see more of God in his works, we must understand his ways
as distinct from ours. Nam ego, (says he) I often endeavored to prescribe God
his way which he should walk in. O Lord (said I) this I would have thus done,
in this order, and with this event: but God did the contrary unto what I
desired: then did I think, but my counsel was for Gods glory, and did make to
the sanctifying of his name; sed risit dominus, the Lord laughed at my wisdom,
saying, I know thou art a wise man, and learned; but it is not my manner to do,
or work, or govern, as Peter Mar: Luther, or any other shall teach; for I am
not a passive, but an active God: sciamus ergo, we must know therefore, that
God does sometimes hide himself, that we may learn that his goodness, mercy,
power, is not to be attained by speculation, but experience. The way to see him
in his work is to understand his method in working, which nothing can attain
unto, but faith: all men have not faith, few that do live by faith. Sometimes
men are so discontented with what is evil amongst us, that for anguish of
their souls, they cannot see what is good: some crum goes awry, and so they
lose the whole meal of mercy. But would you have a true prospect of the great
things God has done for us? then let us all go, and run unto Jesus Christ, to
open the mystery and parable of his works; he is the Lord that is now at work.
And as when he lived, without a parable spoke he nothing; so now without a
parable works he nothing: his works are all parabolicall as his words were.

We read, that when John, in Revel. 5. met with a sealed Book that had seven
seals, which neither he, nor any could open; he fell down and wept: but one
came to him and told him, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah is worthy to open the
book: and so he was fully quieted, praising the Lord. Now there is a great
Folio-book of Providence that is before you: indeed it is sealed with many
seals; but if opened, you will find that it is written in every Page, Free
grace, Free love, Salvation with a Notwithstanding: Would you open this book?
away then to Jesus Christ: and as the Disciples said, so do you also, Lord,
tell us the meaning of this Parable; tell us the meaning of this Dispensation:
oh! tell us the meaning of this thy Providence. Christ is very ready to teach
you; as a Schoolmaster, morning by morning teaches his scholars; so Christ,
Esaias 50. 4. And all the worst he will say to you, as to Peter, What I do thou
know not now, but thou shall know.

that the Lord has done great things for us; that we have seen the Marks, and
Characters of his Almighty power imprinted upon all our Deliverances, upon the
Deliverance of this day, and upon all those Salvations which this age has
brought forth: But then what is our work? and what returns are we to make unto
God again?

Revel. 15.
Great and wonderful are thy works, O Lord God Almighty, Just and true are thy
ways, who shall not fear thee, and worship thy Name?

David, Paul, Zacheus, and many others. And because Hezekiah did not make
answerable Return of praise, (though he did praise the Lord for his
deliverance) God was displeased with him, and it cost him dear. Now God has
done Great things for us, and made known his infinite power, in a way of free
love to us; what Great thing shall we do for God? Yea, what Great thing shall
we not do for God?

Let us fix here a little.

work. It Is an hard thing for one that has been used, to be contented to be
used no more: oh! that Magistrates, Ministers, Men of service could but be
willing to be used no more, and to be laid aside if God will have it so. A man
is never more fit for service, then when he is willing to be used no more in
service.





Wherefore, Right Honorable, if you would do any Great thing for God, Look
over your Laws and Ordinances of Justice, Equity, and Mercy; and consider what
there is that clogs the speedy execution thereof: take off the clogs. It may
be, some Half-ordinance against Sabbath-sportings, Drunkenness, and Swearing
may lie before you; oh! that there may be more dispatch, more dispatch, this
will put life into all your works, and make them Great, though otherwise small
in your own eyes.

time, and tide of working. There is a time for all things under the sun: and
because men know not their time, and judgment, therefore their evil is Tale
ingenium erat laudatissimi Principis Frederici Saxoniae ducis Electoris. Is
erat vir vere industrius, qui non dicebat, non faciebat omnia quae poterat in
praesens dicere, and facere; sed expectabat tempus, persoram, locum commodum,
dissimutabat omnia, suo autem tempore and loco, uno verbo plus efficiebat quam
multi alii sine hac industria potentia and viribus summis, etc. quare adhibenda
est etiam oration ut Deus adsit. Luther in Genesis
great upon them, says Solomon. But if men could take the tide of Providence,
how easily might they carry up a great burden? whereas, losing their tide, and
rowing against the streams of providence, things come off heavily, and with
much difficulty.

When a man is at Sea, in a Vessel he must not go where he will, but as the wind
and tide carries him. Ye are now imbarqued in a great work and service; ye may
not, ye cannot go where, and when you will: Sometimes ye must lie becalmed.
But, oh! that men did know the gale of providence, the time and tide of
providence! But though we have often come up against tide; and come down with
the tide, yet how few do know the time and tide of providence! how many heats
of our own hearts have we lost? Would you therefore do any great thing for God?
take your time and tide, and improve those heats of your hearts, when
providence warms them. This will be your wisdom, and thus shall you be great,
and do great things in the eyes of heaven and earth.

Wales, if men had an heart for it: and, oh! that they had a heart to do it!
But to spread the Gospel into all the parts of the world, is something. Thus
the Jesuits, thus the Papists do in regard of their Gospel. Why should not we
be as active for good, as they are for evil? you have a better Master, and you
shall have better wages. When shall the blessing of the poor Indian come upon
our English Parliament? this would be a great thing; let encouragement be given
this way.

It is no great matter, for a man to do that which is right, and good; yea, to
do it exactly: but to walk exactly in a crowd, and throng of business, this is
somewhat.

It is no great matter, for to be Godly in a godly place: but to be godly in an
Ungodly place, in the midst of those that are most ungodly, this is somewhat.

It is no great matter for a man to be the same for God in the same condition:
but to have a samenesse of heart for God in variety of conditions, this is
somewhat.

It is no great matter to be thankful, rejoice, and love God in prosperity:
but to fear God in prosperity, and to love God in adversity: to bless God when
he takes away from us, and to be in all things thankful (as the Apostle
speaks) is something.

It is no great matter, for a man to pray morning, and evening, thinking no
more of God all the day after: but to be heavenly in all our earthly
employments throughout the day; and in all our dealings with man, still to deal
with God, living to God, and in God, this is somewhat.

It is no great matter, to do well, and hear well: but to do well, and hear
ill, for a man to do great things for God, Magnum est, magna facere, and
teipsum putare nihil. Eusebius. Neiremb.
and think himself nothing, to believe in the dark, to see through natural
impossibilities, and to trust in God for life in a business, when the sentence
of death is upon second causes; this is a great matter.

Many other great things that I might lay before ye: but I should be too long.
God has done great things for us: a thankful heart says, What shall I return
unto the Lord for all his benefits? and the answer is, Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be praised: great is the Lord, and greatly to be served: He has
done great things for us, we must do great things for him: small things now
will not serve our turn. This is the first Duty.

Rome, and of the Papists; then why should you not all prejudice your hearts
against that Religion that was the Mother of such a bloody design as the
Powder Treason was? The Papists said indeed, when their Plot miscarried, That
it was but the work of some few unfortunate Gentlemen. I, and blessed be the
Lord they were so unfortunate. But had the Plot sired, and taken, then the
Execution thereof would have been painted in the Popes Palace: as I have read
the Massacre of Paris was, in perpetuam rei memoriam. But if their Si vero
dominus temporalis requisitus and monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam purgare
neglexerit ab hac haeretica foeditate, per Metropolitanum and caeteros
Episcopos excommunicationis vinculo innodetur: and si satisfacere contempserit
intra annum, significetur hoc summo Pontifici ut ex tunc ipse vassallos ab ejus
fidelitate absolutos denunciet and terram exponat Catholicis (...) pa^^am, qui
eam exterminatis haereticis sinc ulla contradictione possideant. Edecretis
Concilii, Ge^e^alis L^^e^anensis tempore Innocentii Papae 3. de fide Cathol.
cap. 3. Binius. Omnesque qui (...) (Imp^ra^^ra s^^l.) j^ra nento fidelitatis
aliquo modo tenentur astricti, vel obligati, a juramento hujusmodi perp^tuo
absolvimus and liberamus, auctoritate Apostolica firmiter and stricte inhibendo
ne quisquam de^a^^ro ^i tanquam Imperatori vel Regi pareat: decernendo
quoslibet qui deinceps ei velut Imperatori vel Regi consilium, vol auxilium
praestiterint, seu fautorem ipso facto excommunicationis vinculo subjacere.
Council. Lugdun. 13. oecumenic. approbatum centum and quadraginta Episcoporum,
causa Frederici 2. Imperat. deponendi celebratum, 1245. Bin. vide plura apud
Mat. Paris: cum depositione, and submissione Io^nnis Regis Anglicani.
Principibus apostatantibus a fide non est obediendum, and ideo cum cito aliquis
per sententiam denunciatur excommunicatus propter apostasiam a fide, ipso facto
ejus subditisunt absoluti a dominio ejus and juramento fidelitatis, Thom.
Aquin. 22. quaest. 12. art. 2. and qu^st. 10. art. 10. Non licet Christianis
tolerare Regem infidelem haereticum si ille conctur pertrahere subdito ad suam
haeresim vel infidelitatem, tenentur Christiani non pati super se regem non
Christianum, si ille co^etur avertere populum a fide. Bellarm. de Roman.
pontif. lib. 5. cap. 7. Possumus veritatem hanc authoritate and praxi Ecclesiae
ostendere, and post varia exempla addit, at vero haec omnia, and similia non
temere nec in angulo, sed aliqua ex illis in conciliis frequentissimis,
aliquando in Generali. Ergo incredibile est fuisse actus usurpatae, and non
verae authoritatis. Suarez. lib. 3. de Romans pontif. cap. 23.24. qua nam sunt
apostatarum and haereticorum poenae? privatio politicae potestatis juxta
Canonem nos Sanctorum and can. juratos 15. q. 6. and extravagantem Martini 5.
ad evitanda; septima poena est poena corporis, viz. incarceratio, exilium,
mors. Tannerus de fide, disput. 1. quaest. 8. dub. 6. Tom. 3. in Thom. Aquinat.
Em. Sa in voce, Tyrannus. Mariana lib. 6. de reg. c. 6. p. 59.
Religion it self do carry such principles in the bosom of it as do naturally
breed and lead to such practices, then it cannot be said that this was only
the design of a few unfortunate Gentlemen. Now what are the Principles of that
Religion? the Papists themselves say, That what a Pope determines in a
Council, or General Council, is de fide: ask therefore the Lateran
Council, and Concilium Lugdunense, ask Aquinas, Bellarmine, Suarez, Tollet,
Sa, Mariana, Tannerus, and Becanus, they will tell you, that infidelious,
heretical, apostatizing Princes and Governors are to be deposed and
excommunicated by the Pope. Secondly, that being so sentenced, their Subjects
are absolved and freed from the Oath of fidelity and Allegiance. Thirdly, that
excommunicated persons (being heretics) cujuscunque ordinis, are to be
deprived of their estates, jurisdictions; yea, their life's; haeretici sunt
comburendi. And though this Powder Treason were the design of some unfortunate
Gentleman: yet I dare challenge all the Jesuits in the world, to show such a
practice designed by any unfortunate Gentlemen of the Protestant party.

Or, is this the only bloody practice of the Papists and Jesuits? Or is this
the only evil of that Religion? Truly, as things lie in my apprehension, this
Religion, this Bellarminian Religion destroies the whole Law, and Gospel; the
Law, and the ten Commandments.

It destroies the First Commandment: for they worship a piece of bread for
God, with the worship of God.

It destroies the Second: witness their many Images.

It destroies the Third: taking Gods Name in vain, by Praying and Worshipping
in an unknown tongue.

It destroies the Fourth, by denying the Morality of the Sabbath.

It destroies the Fifth: for if a man, or woman get into a Cloister, and say
Corban, it is a Gift; they are no more bound to obey their Parents.

It destroies the Sixth Commandment: for they murder Princes, and Magistrates:
witness this day, and the Principles of this action.

It destroies the Seventh: for they say, single Fornication is no sin, or
venial.

It destroies the Eighth: for it has stolen away the Cup in the Lords Supper
from the people; and the Scriptures from them too.

It destroies the Ninth: for they bear false witness of the Fathers, and
ancient Writers, making them say what they never did, to bear up their own
Cause: and of godly Luther, Calvin, Beza, and others; affirming that they did,
and died, as they did not, and died not.

It destroies the Tenth Commandment: for they say, Concupiscence is no sin:
and that Original sin is, Peccatum minus minimo, less then the least: I know
nothing less then the least, but nothing.

It destroies the Gospel: setting up a Covenant of works. The comfort and
sweetness of the Gospel hangs on the Priestly Office of Christ; which consists
in his Satisfaction for sin, and Intercession: this Religion tells us of other
satisfactions then that of Christ, and other Mediators, and Intercessours; as
Saints, and Angels.

It destroies your Faith: Council. Trident. Sess. 6. c. 9. 12.
for it holds Doubtings; and that a man cannot be ordinarily assured of his
Salvation.

It destroies your Repentance: quicunque peccatum originis extenuant, doctrinam
de poenitentia depravant Gerard.
by extenuation of sin, the great sin of our nature; and giving a babble Penance
for true Repentance.

It destroies your Obedience, by the ingrediency of merits.

It destroies the whole Law of God, and Scripture, Vide Gerardi disputation.
Theolog. l. 2. ubi de hisce omnibus agitur susius.
by making it a Nose of Wax; and insufficient Rule for us to live by, without
their own Traditions.

It destroies the Laws of man too: for what is the Law of England, but the
Parliament? The Law is a dead Parliament: and the Parliament is a living Law.
You have now time to dispute your Liberty of Subjects, Privilege of
Parliament, and Royal Prerogative: But had this Design taken, in what woeful
confusion had all been wrapped up together?

It may be you say, So they are now.

But unthankful heart, it had been worse then, infinitely worse then. Then
might the poor Countryman have come up and seen an heap of blood, flesh, and
stones together: and after long scraping in that heap, possibly might have
found the head of their Knight, and Burgess, saying, Here is the head of our
dear Knight and Burgess, but where are his arms? where his legs?

Then might the Wife, and Children have done the like, and said, Here, oh! here
is my Husbands head, but where is his body? my Fathers head, but where is his
body? Then might you have heard, not Rachel mourning for her Children; but all
the Children of this Land mourning for their Fathers, and not comforted,
because they were not. You will mourn, and lament, and weep (sometime) at the
execution of a Malefactor, and say, What pity is it, that such a man as this
should die? though he were thus and thus faulty in this matter, yet otherwise a
valiant man, a wise man, a brave man: What pity is it that his head should thus
be stricken off at one blow? But here the Head of England should have been
stricken off at one blow: And not a Malefactor executed, but our Judges
themselves under the stroke of injustice, tumbling in their goare. Oh!
unparalleld cruelty! I know nothing beyond it, but Hell it self. Speak, O Sun!
whether in all thy travels from one end of the heavens to the other, thou have
ever beheld such a practice as this? yet this design, this black, cruel,
hellish design has this Jesuiticall Religion brought forth, as it is this day.

But I say no more; ye know what the Northern Gentleman said: I cannot dispute,
but I have two Arguments against the Papists, that can never be answered,
Equivocation, and the Powder Treason; and this may all you say that cannot
dispute. Who would not prejudice his own heart, his Childrens, his Servants
hearts against this Religion? oh! for ever take heed of tampering with this
Religion.

I fear the hand of the Jesuit is too much among us at this day: but, O
England! O Parliament! for ever remember the Fifth of November: The snare is
broken, and we are delivered.

To praise him, and speak well of his Name.

The Lord has saved us, and made his mighty power known in the midst of us: O
be thankful unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy indures for ever. We
read in Psalm. 126. that when the Lord turned the captivity of Zion, it is said,
The Church was like unto those that are restored to health. The words run thus,
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like unto them that
dream: But the words should rather be translated; We Incolumis, sanus, sanatus,
reviluit, convaluit, sic Ps. 126. fuimus sicut convalescentes, Targum: sicut
aegroti, qui sanati sunt, ut captivitas morbo and sanationi liberatio
comparetur. Sept. (...) sicut consolati. Alii sicut somniantes, ex
significatione secunda: Shind. p. 582. fuimus sicut convalescentes, veram esse
hanc Prophetiam res postca gesta testatur, quoniam similes ex aegritudine
convalescentibus fuerunt redeuntes ex captivitate Babyloniae, paulatim enim
auctae sunt vires eorum. Cajetan. in Psalm. 125.
are like unto those that are restored to health. The Hebrew word signifies, to
recover, or to be restored to health. And so the same word is translated in the
38. of Esaias, when Hezekiah recovered, he made a Psalm of Praise, and said, O
Lord, by these things men live, and in all things is the life of my spirit: so
will thou recover me, and make me to live. It Is the same word that is used
here. Thus Cajetan, Shindler, and others would have it translated here; and it
suits best with the following words, Then were our mouths filled with laughter,
and our tongues with praise. When a man is in a good dream, his mouth is not
filled with laughter; nor his tongue with praise: If a man be in a bad dream,
his mouth is not filled with laughter, nor his tongue with praise; but when a
man is restored to health after a great sickness, it is so. And therefore
(says the Psalmist) When the Lord turned our captivity, etc. Now if you look
into Scripture, you will find, that the word, captivity, is used for any
violence that is done by others upon Gods people. So it is said of Job, when he
prayed for his friends. He was never from his own house in all his affliction,
how then in captivity? he was under violence, for the present put into the
hands of Satan, and so in captivity. When Gods people are under violence, then
in Scripture phrase they are said to be in captivity. Ye have also been under
the violence of men; in Queen Mary's days, under the violence of Papists: In
later days, under the violence of Prelates. And now of late, the Parliament
under the violence of the Rout. And the godly of the City under violence too.
But the Lord having freed you from this violence, he has turned your
captivity, even as the waters of the South: and therefore, why should not all
we be as those that are restored to health again? When a man is restored to
health, then he praises the Lord, and rejoices in all his goodness: yea, he
will praise the Lord for less strength and health, then before; for that which
he did not praise God before.

Wherefore now then (though we do not keep this day as an Holy Day) Let our
mouths be filled with laughter, and our tongues with praises. O give thanks
unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy indures for ever. He has
scattered the proud in the imaginations of their hearts: for his mercy indures
for ever. He has saved us with a Notwithstanding: for his mercy indures for
ever. He has not only delivered us from one Powder Treason, but from many, in
these late years; for his mercy indures for ever.

Oh! you, Right Honorable, the House of Peers, Praise ye the Lord, for he is
good; for his mercy indures for ever.

And you, most Honorable, the House of Commons, Praise ye the Lord, for he is
good; for his mercy indures for ever.

And let all the household of the faithful, praise the Lord, for he is good; for
his mercy indures for ever. O give thanks unto the God of Gods; for his mercy
indures for ever. We sinned, God saved us: We sinned greatly, he has saved us
with a great salvation, with a Nevertheless: Nevertheless he has saved us,
for his own Names sake; that he might make his mighty power known: Now then,
Let us all praise the Lord, and call upon his Name.

FINIS.

