The VVounded CONSCIENCE cured, the weak one strengthened, and the doubting
satisfied. By way of Answer to Doctor Fearne. Where the main point is rightly
stated, and Objections thoroughly answered for the good of those who are willing
not to be deceived. By WILLIAM BRIDGE, Preacher of Gods Word.

1 TIMOTHY 1. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away;
and concerning faith, have made shipwreck. Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. IT is Ordered this 30 day of
January, 1642. by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament,
concerning Printing, that this Answer to Dr. Fearnes Book be printed.

John White.



The second Edition, corrected and amended. Whereunto are added three Sermons
of the same Author; 1. Of Courage, preached to the Volunteers. 2. Of stoppage
in Gods mercies to England, with their remedies. 3. A preparation for suffering
in these plundering times.

London, Printed for BENJAMIN ALLEN, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1642.

THis Treatise was once before traveling abroad into the world, till it came
unto the Author, who could not look upon it without much indignation, to see
how that, and in it himself also was so much wronged and abused; being so
perverted and misplaced (besides other Errata) in the printing, that it was
nothing like the Book that was intended; so falsely, and so contrary to his
meaning, that the Author may truly say as Martial to one:

Quem recitas meus est, O Fidentine libellus,
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
O Fidentine, a Book of mine
Thou printed'st with my will:
And yet not mine, but it is thine,
Because its printed ill.
Much wrong and damage accrued to many by it; but such be the times, that all
suffer in one thing or other, and so this may be the more easily born. Its now
corrected, and much amended, by the care and industry of a friend, who desires
to commend the Book unto thy view, and serious thoughts upon it.

To the Reader.
IT is Gods wont to warn before he smite a people, thereby walking himself
after his own rule, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, 13. who would have no City to be destroyed
till peace has first been offered to it; the sword of the Lord is ever drawn,
his bow bent, his arows prepared, his instruments of death made ready, his cup
mingled, yet he does not use to power down his plagues, until he have rained a
shower of mercy before them, he does not surprise men at unawares, God never
discharges his murdering pieces, till he have first discharged his warning
ones, pax domini Luke 10. peace to this house was sounded at every door where
the Apostles came. All Ages and Nations will bear witness to this truth, the
old world, Sodom, Pharaoh, etc. but no Nation or Age can better subscribe to
Gods goodness, and fair dealing in this then we, who have been warned
sometimes by prodigious signs, as by the appearance of that wonderful Comet
An. 1618. as importing some strange changes which we have seen and heard since,
and as if its last influence might seem to end in this Island; when it blazed
over England, it was seen no more, And Herlicius Stargardensis (a noted
Astrologer) held, that its influence was like to continue between twenty and
thirty years: sometimes by his Ministers, by his administration of Justice, and
dealing with other Nations; how long has the sword walked circuit in Cermany,
and in Ireland? sometimes by lesser and lighter judgments; how long has the
plague continued in this City without intermission? sometime by taking many
godly out of the world, and the removing many others out of the Kingdom, who
were wont to stand in the gap; sometime by a general withdrawing himself,
pulling down his hangings, not assisting his ordinances, etc. And unless we
will wilfully shut our eyes, how has the goodness, patience, bounty,
merciful, and powerful dealings of God toward us, and for us of late, been
as an hand put forth to lead us home unto him? to cause us to meet him, and
take warning that we might prevent these wasting calamities that are gathered
together in a black cloud, as though they meant to empty themselves in a shower
of blood upon our heads? But we are so far from taking warning, that we study
to hasten our own ruin, almost every one instead of bringing his bucket of
water to quench the fire that is already flaming about our ears, bring their
bellows in their hands to blow up these coals of dissension in all places, so
that now not only is there a Kingdom divided, but the head and the members
divided, and the members among themselves, Cities and Towns divided, yea
families divided, Parents against children, brother against brether, and
familiar friends become bitter enemies one to another, the most sure symptom
and presage of a fearful desolation to fall upon all, unless some speedy
remedy be applied to this desperate disease, and the great God himself become
our Physician and heal our distempers. I shall desire to commend these two
Sermons to thy serious consideration; in the one thou shall see there is a
stoppage made of Gods mercies (who was coming to heal us but we would not be
healed) the causes are discovered, and the remedies prescribed, that could we
so go to work to open these stoppings, and bring God again into the way of his
mercies; could we see our sins removed, and God returned, I might then truly
say that there would be yet hope for England. The other Sermon is a preparative
to bear that cross that so many have already on their backs, viz. of being
turned out of all our earthly comforts; a sad calamity indeed, but now too
usual, and when so many of our neighbors houses are on fire, why should we
think to escape scotfree, that are as deep in sin as they? being therefore
forewarned, let us be for^arm'd, and get into God and his favor, as that one
necessary thing for us all to look after, as the only means to keep us from
sinking unedr the waves that flow in upon all, especially on Gods people;
experience showing, that if we will live in the power of godliness, and not
walk in the same excess of riot with the world, we shall make our selves a
prey, and had need to have our helmets on to latch the blows that fall upon
us, and resolve to sit loose from the world, that we may suffer the spoiling of
our goods with joy, and bo able to say with that noble Spartan; who being told
of the death of his children, Answered; I know well they were all begot
mortal. 2. That his goods were confiscate, I knew what was but for mine use,
was not mine. 3. That his honor was gone, I knew no glory could be everlasting
on this miserable earth. 4. That his sentence was to dye, that is nothing,
Nature has given the like sentence both of my condemners and of me; Now should
we get a stock of faith and learn how to use it, to live by it when our lands,
our stocks, our trades, our friends, our wit, our shifts (as the ordinary means
of our livelihood) shall fail us. That we may live not only above our fears,
and troubles, and doubts, but above the world, above our selves, in God and in
Christ, in whom we may see supply to all our wants, satisfaction to all our
desires, and have recompense for all our losses, and every thing that may make
for our good and welfare; light in our darkness, life in our death, strength
in our weakness, riches in our poverty, and comfort our selves, that we serve
a Master that will one day right all our wrongs, reckoning the injuries that be
done to his, as done to himself; so that we should not think much to part with
our Country, our Children, our Possessions, our life if the world will take
them from us, for Christ and his Gospels sake. All these, and much better than
these shall be restored to us one day, and we may say thus to our selves; yet
I am not miserable so long as my Redeemer is happy, he lives, and I shall live
with him, men may take from me my goods, but they cannot rob me of my grace,
they may banish me from my Country, but not from Heaven, take from me my life;
but not my happiness; no, my faith, my heaven, my soul, my happiness is in his
keeping, that will safely preserve them for me, and me for them. But I fear I
have held thee too long in the porch, I shall now open thee the door and let
thee in, praying God to make those lessons as profitable to thee, as the
Authors desire was they might both in his preaching them, and his
willingness to have them published for public good.

I. A.

AN INTRODVCTION Unto the Treatise necessary for all good Subjects to
understand, etc.
I Have perused Doctor Fearne his book entitled, The resolving of Conscience,
wherein I find that he has exceedingly mistaken the question; the question in
truth is, whether the Parliament now has justly taken up arms; we affirm it,
he denies it, and withal slips into another question, whether it be lawful
for the Subjects to take ^ arms against their King: But if he will so propound
the question, ^en I must preface these two or three distinctions, and one
caution, First, unitive, conjunctively, OR divisive divisively.


The Subject considered ^^visively has always applied himself to prayers and
tears, using no her remedy; and of this we speak not: but conjunctively
considered ^ate-wise, so he now does, and it is lawful for him thus to take up
arms. ^condly, the Subject may be said to take up arms either as an act of

That it is lawful for the Subjects conjunctively considered to take up The
position.
^nes for selfe-preservation against the Kings commandment, where ^o things
are to be cleared: First, that this is the case of the Parliament. any
reasonable by-stander may observe there are 3 grounds of this the proceeding,
the one is to fetch in Delinquents, and such persons as a^

First, from nature; It is the most natural work in the world for ever^
Jacob; Almain de auth: ecclesi^ apud Gerlon.
the natural law, which is selfe-preservation, Cum humana potest is supra j^
naturae non ^^istit, seeing that no humane power is above the law of nature.

Secondly, from Scripture: the Word of God says expressly in 1 Chr^ David
went out against Saul to battle: yet he was Sau^ subject at that time, for
the Lord of the Philistims sent him away, sayin^ he will fall to his Master
Saul: which Text I bring not to prove that Subject may take up arms against
the King person; but that the Subject may take up arms against those that are
malignant about the Kings person, notwithstanding the Kings command to the
contrary, which because this of David is said to be against Saul, and that
David's heart smote hi^ for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment: the meaning
therefore must nee^ be that he went out in battle against those that attended
upon Sau^ strengthened by Saul's authority, notwithstanding Saul's command to the
contrary. And in the new Testament, Romans 13. 1 We are commanded to subject to
the higher Powers, now the Parliament being the highest Cou^ of Justice in this
Kingdom (as King James says in his Basilicon Doron must needs be the higher
powers of England, though the King be s^preme, yet they have the high power of
declaring the law (as this Doct^ Fearne confesses) being most fit to judge
what is law. They therefore declaring this to be the fundamental Law of the
Kingdom for the su^jects to defend themselves by forcible resistance,
notwithstanding t^ Kings command to the contrary, it is the duty of all the
subjects to be ^bedient to these higher powers.

Thirdly, from the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: It is according to the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (yea written and not unseene Laws) That the
Parliament are trusted by the Commonweal with the welfare and security
thereof; whence I do reason thus: If it be the duty of the King to look to
the safety of the Kingdom, and that because he is trusted therewith by the
Commonweal; then if the Parliament be immediately trusted by the Commonweal
with the safety thereof as well as the King, though not so much, then are they
to look to it, and to use all means for the preservation thereof as well as
the King: But so it is that the Prince is bound to look to the safety and
welfare of the Kingdom as is agreed by all; and secondly, therefore he is
bound to it because he receives this power original (I speak not in
opposition Judges 8. 22. The men of Israel come unto Gideon to make him their
King, and Judges the 9. 6. They gathered together and made Abimeleck their
King, and Judges 11. 8, 9, 10, 11. The people covenanted with Jephtha and made
him their King: and as for Saul, (though he was designed by God to the
Kingdom) yet the people themselves chose the kind of their government first,
when they said, Give us a King to rule over us after the manner of the Nations:
After that God had anointed Saul, it is said, 1 Samuel 11. 15. And all the
people went to Gilgall, and there they made Saul King before the Lord in
Gigall: and as for David, though he was anointed King by Samuel, yet we find
that he continued a Subject unto Saul after that; and the 2. of Sam. 2. He came
unto Hebron, and there the men of Judah were, and there they anointed David
King over the house of Judah, v. 4. After that he was thus anointed by Judah
to be King over them, yet he did not rule over Israel, till the other tribes
also went out and made him King over them, 1 Cron. 12. 38. It is said that all
these men of war came with a perfect heart to Hebron to make David King over
all Israel, and as for Solomon (though he was designed by God to the Kingdom,
yet) it is said of him also, 1 Chro. 29. 22. that all the Corgregation did eat
and drink before the Lord, and they made Solomon the son of David King the
second time, and anointed him unto ^he Lord to be the chief Governor.
Solomon being dead, the second of the Chron. 10. 1. It is said of Rehoboam,
that he went to Shechem, where all Israel came to make him King; and in the
second of Sam. 16. 18. it is said thus: And Hushai said unto Absolon, God save
the King, God save the King: and Absolon said unto Hushai, Is this thy
kindness unto thy friend, why wentest thou not with thy friend? And Hushai
said unto Absalom again, nay, but whom the Lord and this people and all the
men of Israel choose, his will I be, and with him will I abid^: ^ that we see
that these Monarchs both of the Judges and Kings ^ Israel were chosen and
entrusted* by the people, and had their power of governing from them. 3. The
Parliament also is immediately trusted b^ David's time also; there were some
Officer^ then that were the Kings Officers, his Cooks, his Bakers, the steward
o^ his house, and the like. Others were the officers of the Kingdom called the
Elders and heads of the Tribes, which though they were under him yet were they
with him trusted in the affairs of the Kingdom, whom therefore he did consult
with in the great affairs of the State, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1^ wherefore seeing the
King is to look to the safety of the Kingdom, and that because he is trusted
therewith by the people, and the Parliament ar^ as well trusted by the people
with the safety of the land, it is their duty i^ case of danger to look to it,
which they are not able to do^, and mak^ good their trust, unless they have
power to take up Arms against an enemy, when the Prince is misled or defective.

4. From the being of a Parliament. As it is a Parliament it is the highest
Court of Justice in the Kingdom, therefore has power to ^^nd for by force
those that are accused before them that they may come to their trial; which
power (if I mistake not) inferior Courts have, much more the highest. It Is out
of doubt agreed on by all that the Parliament has a power to send a Sergeant
at Arms to bring up such an one as is accused before them; and if they have a
power to send one Sergeant at Arms* then 20. if 20. be accused, then a 100. if
there be a 100. accused* then a thousand, if there be a thousand accused, then
ten thousand* if there be ten thousand accused, and so more or less as
occasion serves* for there is the same reason for two as for one, and for 4. as
for 2. and for a 100. as for 20. and for a 1000. as for a 100. and take away
this power from the Parliament, and it is no longer a Parliament* but the King^
and his forefathers have by law settled these libertie^ of Parliament, and
therefore according to Laws, they have a power to send for by force those that
are accused to be tried before them, which they cannot do unless they raise an
army, when the accused are kept from them by an army.

5. From the common trust reposed on Princes and the end thereof, which is to
feed their people, Psalm. 78. 70. He chose David his servant an^ took him from
the Sheepfold to feed his people, Jacob and his inheritance in Israel. The end
why the people have trusted the Prince is the s^fety and security of the
Kingdom, the safety and welfare of the State, not that the King might be
great, and the Subjects slaves. Now if a people should have no power to take up
arms for their own defense because they had trusted the Prince therewithal,
then by that trust they intended to make themselves slaves. For suppose the
King will let in a common enemy upon them, or take his own subjects and make
the^ slaves in Galleys, if they may not take up arms for their own defense
because they had trusted their Prince therewithal, what can this be but by
their trust to make themselves slaves unto him?

2. The caution that is to be premised is this; notwithstanding all that

Object. But if the power of the Prince be derived from the people, then they
may take away that power again. Resp. It follows not, neither shall the
people need to think of such an inference. Indeed if the power were derived
from the people to the Prince firstly, and that the people should be so
strait-laced that they should have no power left to defend themselves in case
of danger when the Prince is misled, or unfaithful, then the people might be
occasioned to think of deposing their Prince: but though the power of the
Prince be originally from them, yet if they have so much power left as in
times of danger, to look to their own preservation, what need they think of
any such matter?

Object. Why but if the people give the power, then if abused, they may take it
away also. Res. No that needs not; seeing they never gave away that power of
self preservation; so that this position of ours is the only way to keep
people from such assaults, whereby the power of the Prince is more fully
established: whereas if people were kept from power of selfe-preservation which
is natural to them, it were the only way to break all in pieces; for Nullum
violentum contranaturale est perpetuum, no violent thing against nature is
perpetual. Thus have I clearly opened our opinion, and proved our sentence,
give me leave now to speak with the Doctor.

Section I.
THe Doctor says, That in the proposition or principle, by the word resistance
is meant not a denying of obedience to the Princes command, but a rising in
arms a forcible resistance: this though clear in the question, yet I thought
good to insinuate to take off that false imputation laid upon the Divines of
this Kingdom, and upon all those that appear for the King in this cause.
Gubernat^res ergo in ^is rebus quae cum decalog^ and justis legibus pugnant
nihil juris aut immunitatis habent p^ae caeteris hominibus privatis; and
perpretrantes id quod malum est, Coguntur tam metuere ordinationem Dei gladium
prestante ad vindictam nocentium quam alii homines privati nam Paulus To. 13.
docet Deum ordi^asse and instituisse potestatem illam gladio defendendi bonum*
and puniendi malum, and praecipit ut omnis anima (and sic ipsi guber n^ores*
tali Dei ordinationi fit subjecta, hoc est obligat ad sacien^^m bonum si velit
defendi is it a. Dei ordinatione and non ob sua facino^a impia puniri.
Magdeburgensis cent. 1 l. 20. cap. 4. page 457. Quod a^tem ad nos proprie
pertiner possum enumerare duodecim aut etiam amplius reges qui ob scelera and
flagitia aut in perpetuum carcetem su^t damnati, aut exilio vel morte
voluntaria justas sceleru^ poenas fugerant nos autemid contendimus populum a
quo reges nostri habent quicquid juris sibi vindicant regibus ess^ potentiore^:
Iusque idem in cos habere multitudinem quod illi in singulos a multitudine
habent, B^^ de Gub: Regni apud Sco^os.


Here the Dr. would insinuate in the very entrance of his book (that so he
might the better captare benevolentiam, curry favor for the matter of his
discourse following.) That the Divines of England are of his judgment. But if
they be so, surely their judgment is lately changed: But indeed what Divines
are of his judgment? not the Divines of Germany, not the Divines of the French
Protestant Churches, not the Divines of Geneva, not of Scotland, not of
Holland, not of England.

Not the Divines of Germany, who say thus: Governors therefore in such things
that are repugnant to the Law of God, have no power or immunity above other
private men, and they themselves commanding that which is evil, have no power
or immunity above other private men, and they themselves commanding that which
is evil, are as much bound to fear the ordinance of God, bearing the sword
for the punishment of vice as other private men. For Saint Paul in Romans 3.
says, that God did institute and ordain a power both of defending that which
is good, and punishing that which is evil, and he commands that every soul
(and so the Governors themselves) would be subject to this ordinance of God
that is bound to do good, if they would be defended by this ordinance of God,
and not by their wicked deeds, make themselves liable to punishment.

Not the Divines of the French Protestant Churches; witness their taking up of
arms for the defense of themselves at Rochell.

Not the Divines of Geneva: For as Calvin in the 4. book of his institutions
chap. 10. says thus: For though the correcting of unbridled government be
revengement of the Lord, let us not by and by think that it is committed to us,
to whom then is given no other commandment but to obey and suffer; I speak
always of private men, for if there be at this time any Magistrates in the
behalf of the people (such as in old time were the Ephori that were set
against the Kings of Lacedemonia, or the tribuner of the people against the
Roman Consuls, or the Demarchy against the Senate at Athens, and the same power
which peradventure as things are now the 3 States have in every Realm when they
hold their principal assemblies) I do so not forbid them according to their
office to withstand the outraging licentiousness of Kings, that I affirm, if
they wink at Kings wilfully ranging over and treading down the poor Commonalty,
their dissembling is not without wicked breach of faith, because they
deceitfully betray the liberty of the people whereof they know themselves
appointed to be protectors by the ordinance of God.

Not the Divines of Holland, for we know what their practice is toward the
King of Spain.

Not the Divines of Scotland: for Buca^an says: for I can number twelve, ^r
more Kings among our selves, who for their sin and wickedness were either
cast into prison during their life, or else eschewed the punishment by
banishment. But this is that which we contend for, that the people from whom
the Kings have all that they have are greater then the Kings, and the whole
multitude have the same power over them, as they have over particular men out
of the multitude, witness also their late taking up arms when they came into
England, which by the King and Parliament is not judged rebellion.

Not our English Divines, whose judgment Dr. Willet was acquainted with as
well as our present Dr. who says thus: Touching the point of resistance
certain differences are to be observed: for when there is an extraordinary
calling (as in the time of the Judges) or when the Kingdom is usurped without
any right, as by Athalia, or when the land is invaded by foreign enemies, as*
in the time of Maccabees, or when the government is altogether elective as the
Empire of Germany, in all these cases then is least question of resistance to
be made by the general Council of the States, yet where none of these concur,
God forbid that the Church and Commonwealth should be left without remedy, the
former conditions (viz. those alleged by Pareus) observed, when havoc is made
of the Commonwealth, or the Church and Religion. Thus also Doctor Bilson
(whose book was allowed by public authority and printed at Oxford) speaks:
If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a foreign Realm, or
change the form of the Commonweal from Empery to Tyranny, or neglect the
laws established by common consent of Pr. and people to execute his own
pleasure in these and other cases which might be named: if the Nobles and
Commons join together to defend their ancient and acoustomed liberties,
regiments and laws, they may not well be accounted rebels. And the title of
that page is, the Law sometimes permits resistance; and the margent is, in some
cases the Nobles and Commons may stand for their public regiment and laws of
their Kingdom.

All which judgments of several Divines* I do not bring forth as if I were
of their minds for deposing or punishing of Princes by the people, which we
plead not for in Hereditary Princes, but to show how the Doctors Dr. Willet.
Co. on To. 13. Q. 17.
judgment is different from the judgment of the Divines of all Protestant
Countries, notwithstanding he would insinuate that our Divines of England are
of his judgment: and that our judgment is no Bilsons true difference between
Christ^an subjection* and unchristian rebellion, p. 5. 251.
new upstart opinion, you see what was the judgment of the Divines in the
Counsel of Basil, where one of them says thus: That in every well ordered
Kingdom it ought specially to be desired that the whole Realm ought to be of
more authority then the King, which if it happened contrary, it is not to be
called a Kingdom, but tyranny, so likewise does he think of the Church, etc.

And presently another* of the Divines of the some Co^^^^ll says thus: For the
Pope is in the Church, as the King* is in his Kingdom, and for a King* to be
of more authority then his Kingdom this were too absurd, ergo neither ought
the Pope to be above the Church; for like as oftentimes Kings which do
wickedly rule the Commonweal, and exercise cruelty are deprived of their
Kingdoms, even so it is not to he doubted but that the Bishops of Rome may be
dep^sed by the Church, that is to say, by the general Council; neither do I
herein allow them which attribute so large and ample authority unto Kings, that
they will not have them bound under any Laws, for such as do so say are but
flatterers, who do talk otherwise then they think. For albeit that they do
say that the moderation of the law is always in the Princes power^, that do I
thus understand; that when as reason shall persuade, he ought to digress from
the rigor of the law: for he is called a King who cares and provideth for the
Commonweal, takes pleasure in the profit and commodity of the subjects, and
in all his doings has respect to the commodity of those over whom he rules,
which if he do not, he is not to be accounted a King^, but a Tyrant, whose
property it is only to suck his own profit. For in this point a King differs
from a Tyrant, that the one seeks the commodity and profit of them whom he
rules, the other only his own: The which to make more manifest, the cause is
also to be alleged wherefore Kings were ordained. At the beginning* (as
Cicero* in his Offices says) It is certain that there was a certain time
when the people lived without Kings: but afterward when ^and and possessions
began to* be divided according to the custom of every Nation, then were Kings
ordained for no other cause but only to execute Justice. For when as at the
beginning the common people were oppressed by rich and mighty men, they ran by
and by to some* good and virtuous man who should defend the poor from injury,
and ordain Laws, whereby the rich and poor should dwell together. But when
as yet under the rule of Kings the poor were often oppressed, laws were
ordained and instituted, the which should judge neither for hatred nor favor,
and give like care unto the poor, as unto the rich, whereby we do understand
not only the people but the King to be subject unto the Laws. Then the Doctor
tells us, that he is against the Arbitrary way of government. For (says he) we
may and ought to deny obedience to such commands of the Prince as are unlawful
by the Law of God, yea by the established Laws of the Kingdom.

Ans. This reason does no way destroy Arbitrary government but rather erect it.
For government is not said to be Arbitrary, because the subjects may deny in
word, and so left to suffer: For then the Tur^ish government is not arbitrary.
For when the great Turk commands his subjects to do any thing, if they will
deny and suffer for their denial they may, and do sometimes deny their
obedience. If there be laws whereby a King is to rule which he shall command
his subjects to break, and his subjects are neither bound to obey him nor
suffer by him, then his government is not arbitrary; but if there be laws
made, and he may enforce his subjects either to keep them or break them, and
punish them at his pleasure that shall refuse, and the whole kingdom bound in
conscience to suffer whatsoever he shall inflict for not breaking those Laws,
then is his government arbitrary: for arbitrary government is that whereby a
Prince does rule ex arbitrio; which he does, when either there is no law to
rule by but his own will, or when he has a power to break those laws at
his will, and to punish the subject at his pleasure for not breaking them; and
in truth this latter is rather an arbitrary government then the former, as it
shows more liberty in the will, that it has a power to act when reason
persuades to the contrary, then if there were no reason dissuading, and else
there should be no arbitrary government in the world. For no State but has
some laws whereby they rule and are ruled even the very Indians; only here
lies the arbitrarinesse of a government, that notwithstanding the law, the
Ruler may pro arbitrio force his subjects according to his own pleasure. Then
the Doctor says,

We must consider that they which plead for resistance in such a case as is
supposed, do grant that it must be concluded upon, Omnibus ordinibus regni
consentientibus, that is, with the general and unanimous consent of the two
houses.

Ans. 1. First these words are ill translated; for omnes ordines regni may
consentire, and yet there may not be an unanimous and general consent of the
Members of the two houses as of one man.

2. If so that the Doctor grant this to be our Sentence, why then does he
object against us, that the Christians in the primitive times did not take up
arms for the defense of themselves against the Emperors, seeing they had not
the consent of all the orders of the Empire, and therefore their case is
nothing to ours, as he pretends afterward. But if they had the whole Senate of
Rome with them, the representative body of the Empire, then their case had
been more like unto ours; and then no question but they would have taken up
arms for the defense of themselves.

Then the Doctor says, We suppose that the Prince must be so and so disposed,
bent to overthrow Religion, Liberties, Laws, etc.

Ans. Here he takes that for granted which was never given, but we say not
that we suppose, but seeing and finding experimentally that a Prince is misled
by those about him that would overthrow religion, liberties, laws; that then
it is lawful to take up arms to deliver the King from them, and to bring them
to condign punishment. Then he proceeds to propound three Generals, which he
endeavors to prove in his following Discourse, which I shall speak to in
order.

Sect. II.
THe Doctor says, that the principle is untrue upon which they go that
resist, and the conscience cannot find clear ground to rest upon for making
resistance: for it hears the Apostle expressly say, Whosoever resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. Poenam (...) sic malo quam condemnationem,
p^to enim hoc intelligendu^ de poe^a. quam insert magistratus, sicut verba
frequentis declarant, and* sic verbu^ (...) acc^p^tur pro puni^e 1* Cor. 6. 11.
Piscat. Romans 13. 1* Sam. 14.


Ans. In this his resolving of Conscience he endeavors to scare those that are
tender with the word of damnation, and forbids this resistance upon pain of
damnation; but the word in the Greek is rather to be^ translated judgment and
punishment, and as Piscator observes thereby i^ not meant eternal damnation,
but the punishment of the Magistrate in this life; as appears by the following
words which are given by the Apostle as a reason of the former, thus: They that
resist shall receive to themselves judgment, for rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to evil.

Then he proceeds to some examples of Scripture, which are brough^ by us to
strengthen our Doctrine; wherein he takes what he pleases and leaves out what
he lists. The first example alleged is that of the peoples rescuing Jonathan
out of the hands of Saul, to which he answers the people drew not into arms of
themselves, but being there by Readiness comman^ did by a loving violence and
importunity hinder the execution of a particular passionate, and unlawful
command.

Ans. First, here the Doctor grants that the people used a violence which is
that that we would prove; but he does not make it out by tha^ Scripture that
it was a loving violence, which is the thing he should prove: Neither is there
any thing in that place which does argue that he was delivered by love, for it
is said that the people rescued him; and wha^ is the rescue by men in arms but
a violence? 2. According to the Doctors position they should not have rescued
him, but only have defende^ themselves by prayers and tears, and left
Jonathan to suffer; and therefore though he grants but a rescue by loving
violence, he gives away h^ cause in the threshold of his work.

The second example alleged (says the Doctor) is David's resisting ^ Saul, to
which he answers, that David's guard which he had about him was only to secure
his person against the cruelty of Saul, who sent to take away his life.

Ans. Therefore according to his own grounds a Parliament may tak^ up a guard
to secure their persons against the cutthroats that are abo^^ a King, and this
is more then prayers or tears or mere sufferings which the Doctor only
allows in the following part of his discourse.

2. Herein also he gives his cause, for if David's guard was to secure his
person against the cutthroats of Saul if sent to take away his life (as he
says) they could not secure David but by fighting against those messengers of
the King: and if he grants that messengers sent by the king may be resisted by
arms, he grants all that his adversaries contend for.

2. The Doctor says, this practice of David's was a mere defense without all
violence offered to Saul.

Ans. But what think you then of David's words which he used to Achisb in 1 Samuel
29. 8. And David said unto Achish, what have I done, and what have thou sound
in thy servant so long as I have been with thee to this day, that I may not
go fight against the enemies of my Lord the King? amongst which enemies was
Saul and his cutthroats (as the Doctor calls them) but

2. His adversaries desire no more from this instance of David but an hostile
defense: for where there is an hostile defense, though there be no blows
given, yet the defender would strike if there were cause, else why is he in
arms?

3. David also was but one subject; and if it were lawful for one subject to
defend himself by way of hostility, much more for the representative body of
the whole Kingdom.

4. According to the Doctors principles David ought to have done no more then
to have sought God with tears and prayers, and given up himself in a
suffering way to the fury of Saul, and therefore though it were merely an
hostile defense, yet it is more then his doctrine teaches, and so in granting
of this, he is contrary to what he says afterward.

For the matter of Keilah, the Doctor answers our supposition (as he calls it)
with his own saying: but whether David would have defended Keilah against Saul,
I leave to the conscience of the Reader, considering that this only is made the
reason of his removing from Keilah, because the men of Keilah would not be
faithful unto him, for he did not enquire of the Lord whether it were lawful
for him to abide in Keilah, but having enquired whether Saul would come down
against him, and whether Keilah would deliver him up into Saul's hand; he
removed from Keilah because the Lord answered him that they would deliver him
up, not because it was unlawful for him to keep the City, but because the
City would be false to him.

And whereas the Doctor says that in all this the example of David was
extraordinary, for he was anointed and designed by the Lord to succeed Saul.

Ans. I answer, though David was Gods Anointed, yet he was Saul's subject, and
though God did extraordinarily protect David, yet his extraordinary protection
does not argue that his practice was unlawful but does rather argue it to be
more lawful and commendable: for Go^ will not give extraordinary protections
to unlawful actions, and if David's demeanor herein was extraordinary, then he
had an extraordinary command for what he did. For it is not lawful for a man
to step from Gods ordinary way, but by some special commandment from God, and
if he had such a command then how is that true which the Doctor says
afterward, that there is no command in Scripture for such a practice o^ kind
of resistance as this.

3. In the words immediately before, the Doctor says, this practice ^^ David
was a mere defense without all violence offered to Saul; and if so, ho^ was
his demeanor in standing out against Saul a work extraordinary (...) if it
were a work extraordinary, then it was not a mere defense without all
violence, for that is an ordinary work of the subjects toward their King.

Then the Doctor comes to other examples of his adversaries, whereby the^
contend (as he says for resistance, as that of the High Priest resisting the
King in the Temple, and Elisha shutting the door against the Kings Messenger
tha^ came to take away his life; to the first he says that the High Priest did
no more then what every Minister may and ought to do if the King should
attempt t^ administer the Sacrament, that is reprove him, and keep the
elements from him.

Ans. But if that were all, the Priests should not have been commended for
their valor, but their faithfulness: and ver. 17. it is said that Azariah ^
Chron. ^^, 17
the Priest went after him, and with him fourscore Priests of the Lord that
were valiant men. In that they were commended here for valiant, it shows that
their work was not only reproof but resistance.

And whereas he says, that they thrust him out of the Temple because God ^and
was first upon him, smiting him with Leprosy, and by that discharging him of
the Kingdom also.

Ans. I answer, how does that appear out of Scripture that the King being
smitten with the leprosy was an actual discharge from his crown^^

Then the Doctor says, Elisha's example speaks very little, but let u^ thence
(says he) take occasion to say that personal defense is lawful against the
sudden and illegal assaults of such Messeng^rs, yea of the Prince himself
thu^ far, to ward his blows, to hold his hand, and the like, etc.

Ans. 1. If you may ward his blows, and hold his hands, this is more then
praying and crying and suffering.

2. Suppose the King has an army with him, how can you hold an armies hands
without an army? and therefore according to his own word^ it is lawful for
the subjects considered State-wise to raise an army to de^end themselves.

3. But this instance of Elisha tells us that Messengers sent by the King to
take away a man's life may be taken prisoners, is not that a resistance? for
Elisha said, see you how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my head?
look when the messenger comes, shut the door, and hold him fast at the
door, 2 Kings 6. 32.

Then the Doctor comes to answer a similitude of the body natural and
politic, whereby it is argued that as the body natural, so the body
politic may defend it self: to which the Doctor answers, as the natural
body defends it self against an outward force, but strives not by schism or
contention within it self, so may the body politic against an outward power,
but not as now by one part of it set against the head, and another part of the
same body.

Answ. Now therefore here the Doctor grants that it is lawful for the
natural body to defend it self against an outward force, and what is the
Militia for especially, but against forrainers?

Then the Doctor distinguishes betwixt a personal defense and a general
resistance by arms. He says, a personal defense may be without all offense,
and does not strike at the order and power that is over us, as
generall-resistance by arms does, which does immediately strike at that order
which is the life of the Commonweal, which says he makes a large difference
betwixt Elisha's shutting of the door against the Kings messenger, and their
resisting the King by armed men.

Answ. But why was Elisha's defense personal? because he was but one person
that was defended? then if one man defend himself against 1000. in arms that
is a personal defense, or was it personal because only the person of the
Prophet made defense and had none to assist him? not so because he spoke to the
Elders to shut the door and hold him fast, and if this act of Elisha was
contrary to the Kings command, why did it not as immediately strike at the
order and power that was over him, as our resistance does now? indeed if the
subjects as private men strengthened with no authority should gather together in
a rude multitude to oppose laws and governors, then that work should strike
immediately at the order and power and life of a State, but that the State
should send out an army to bring in Delinquents to be tried at the highest
Court of the Kingdom, that justice and judgment may run down like water
which has been stanched up, is rather to confirm and strengthen the order
and power of authority, and so it is in our case.

Then the Doctor proceeds to some Scriptures, wherewithal he thinks to
strengthen his opinion, let us follow him: First (says he) we have the two
hundred and fifty Princes of the Congregation gathering the people against
Moses and Aaron, Numbers 16. 3. and perishing in their sin.

Ans. I answer that Moses and Aaron had not neglected their trust, and our
question is in the general laying aside all respect to our Sovereign whether
a Prince neglecting his trust, and doing that through his ba^ Council which
may tend to the ruin of a State, may not by the whol^ State be resisted
therein? Now see how extremely wide this instance (...) from this question.

First of all the 250. Princes of the Congregation were not the whol^ people,
nor the representative Body, nor any employed by the whol^ people.

2. Moses and Aaron had not offended but were innocent.

The Dr. answers, The other supposed they had bin guilty, and that is enoug^ it
seems.

Ans. It seems so indeed by him, that supposalls are enough to charg^ the
Parliament, but with us supposalls are not enough to charge ou^ Prince.

2. The Dr. argues from 1 Samuel 8. 11. saying, there the people are let t^
understand how they would be oppressed under Kings, yet all that violence and
injustice that should be done unto them is no just cause of resistance, for
they have no remedy left but crying to the Lord, verse. 18.

Ans. In this Scripture Samuel showed them what their King would do not what he
should do; and when he says at the 18. verse, You shall cry out in that day
because of your King which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not
hear you in that day, he tells them not what should be their duty, but what
should be their punishment, for he does not say, then shall you cry unto the
Lord and he shall hear you as is the manner of Scripture when it enjoyneth a
duty to annex a promise of acceptance. But he says you shall cry in that day
because of your King, and the Lord will not hear you in that day, setting
forth the punishment of that their choice.

3. The Dr. says that according to Scripture the people might not be gathered
together either for civil assemblies or for War but by his command; wh^ ^ad
the power of the Trumpet, that is the supreme, as Moses was, Number. 10.

Answ. The Parliament has sounded no Trumpet for War but what the supreme
power has given commandment for. For the^ Doctor says Section 1. page 2.
That in the established Laws of the Lan^ we have the Princes will and consent
given upon good advice, and to obey hi^ against the Laws, were to obey him
against himself, his sudden will against his deliberate will, so that if
there be any established Laws whereby the King has given his former
deliberate consent for the blowing of the Trumpet that now sounds, then this
objection is but a false allarum.

Now though I be no Lawyer, and must refer you much to what the Parliament has
said who are the Judges of the Law, yet thus much I can tell you as consonant
to right reason: That unless the Parliament have a power to send for
delinquents and accused persons to be tried in that highest Court of Justice, I
say unless they have such a power they are no Parliament. The King has often
protested to maintain the liberties and privileges of Parliament: Now suppose
a man be complained of to the Parliament for some notorious crime, it is
granted by all that the Parliament has a power to send a Sergeant at Arms for
him, and if he refuse to come, that Sergeant at Arms has a power to call in
more help; and if the Delinquent shall raise twenty or thirty, or a hundred
men to rescue himself, then the Parliament has power to send down more
messengers by force to bring up the Delinquent, and if they may raise a
hundred; why may they not upon the like occasion raise a thousand, and so ten
thousand? And if the King shall protect these Delinquents, that is but his
sudden will, the Doctor says, his deliberate will in the Law is to be
preferred before his sudden will; now this is the known Law of the Kingdom,
and the constant practice of all Parliaments that they have a power to send for
their Delinquents, and indeed else how can they be a Court of Justice, if they
cannot force the accused to appear before them? And therefore according to the
Doctors own principles the Kings deliberate will being in his Law, he himself
has sounded this Trumpet, though by his sudden will (as he calls it) he is
pleased to sound a retreat. For though the Doctor says that the Parliament
takes up Arms against the King, yet herein he does but abuse them, mistake the
question deceive many.

The truth is, they do but in this Army now on foot under the command of the
Earl of Essex send for those Delinquents that have been obnoxious to the
State: and to deny them such a power as this, is to deny them the very being of
a Parliament: For by the same reason that they may send one Sergeant at Arms
for one, they may send one thousand for one thousand.

Then the Doctor tells us, That it is a mavelous thing that among so many
Prophets reprehending the Kings of Israel for Idolatry, cruelty, and
oppression, none should call upon the Elders of the people for this duty of
resistance.

Ans. I cannot but wonder at the Dr. his marvelling: For what ca^ be more
plain then that Text, 2 Kings 6. 32. But Elisha sat in his house an^ the
Elders sat with him, and the King sent a man from before him, etc. bu^ when
the messenger came to him, he said to the Elders, see how this son of a
murderer has sent to take away my head, look when the messenger comes shut
the door, and hold him fast at the door. The Dr. wonders if resistance were
lawful, why no Prophet should call upon the Elders of the people for this duty
of resistance, here is the Prophet Elisha calling on the Elders to imprison the
Kings messenger.

Then lastly, the Dr. says that Scripture, Romans 13. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers; and ver. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation,
does above all give us a clear manifestation upon the point.

Ans. Now therefore let us here join issue, and if this place which the Dr.
makes the very hinge which all his discourse moves upon, be no^ clearly and
fully against him, then let the consciences of men be satisfie^ in all that he
says, but if it be against him, then let them reject all that h^ affirms.

He would prove from hence that it is not lawful for any man to resi^ with a
forcible resistance the command of a King though he comman^ what is unlawful,
because (says he) that this commandment was given un^ the Christians to be
obedient unto Roman Emperors whose commands were merely destructive to the
Christian Religion, and those powers nothing but subverters of that which was
good and just.

Ans. That there is no such thing commanded in this Scripture I pro^ by these
reasons.

1. Because the power that every soul is here commanded to be subject to, and
not to resist is that power which is not a terror to go^ works but to evil.
The 3. verse being made a reason of the 2. the 2. ver^ says, Whosoever resists
the power resists the ordinance of God, and they that res^ shall receive to
themselves judgment; then the reason is given: for Rule^ are not a terror to
good works, but to evil, ver. 3. and therefore the subjection commanded, and
resistance forbidden, is not in things that are u^ lawful, and contrary to the
Law of God. 2. The power that we a^ commanded to be subject to, and not to
resist is the ordinance of God; a^ the Minister thereof is the ordinance of God
to us for good, ver. 4. ^ says the Apostle, speaking of the Ruler that we are
to obey, he is the Minister of God to us for good: but when he commands a thing
unlawful, a^ contrary to the law of God, he is not the Minister of God to us
for go^ therefore in this Scripture there is no such thing commanded us to
subject to, and not to resist the ungodly command of Princes.

Ob. And if it be said that though his commands are unlawful, yet he may be a
penal ordinance of God for our good.

I answer, that in this Scripture we are not commanded to submit unto a penal
ordinance, because the submission enjoined here by the Apostle reaches to all
times and places: and all times and places have not their authority and
government by way of a penal ordinance.

3. Therein the Apostle commands us in this Scripture to be subject, and not to
resist, wherein the Magistrates are Gods Ministers, but in unlawful commands
they are not properly and actively Gods Ministers though God may make use of
them: though in regard of their place they may be Gods Minister, yet in regard
of the thing commanded they are not; when they command things that are evil
and contrary to Law. Now so we are commanded to be obedient as they are in that
action Gods Ministers.

Verse 6. For this cause pay you tribute also for they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon this very thing.

4. It appears by all the first verses of this 13. Chapter that the subjection
and obedience here commanded by the Apostle is not passive obedience or
subjection, but active; for the Apostle having said, ver. 1. and 2. Let every
soul be subject to the higher power, and not resist, he says at the third
verse, Why will thou not then be afraid of the power, do that which is good,
and at the sixth verse, For this cause pay you tribute also. But if the King
command any thing that is unlawful and sinful (the Doctor says) we are to be
subject only passively: therefore the subjection commanded, and resistance
forbidden in the Scripture, not such as relates the unlawful command of
Princes (as he affirms when the Roman Emperor commanded things destructive to
the Christian Religion) accordingly Hierom upon the place, Oftendit Apostolus
in his quae recta sunt judicibus obediendum, non in illi quae religioni
contraria sunt. And besides, the Doctor himself confesses, page 11. that this
prohibition was not temporary, but perpetual: therefore to reach unto those
times, when the Prince should command that which was good, therefore the
subjection here commanded was active subjection, and not merely passive.

But the Doctor says, he will free this place from all exceptions, and
therefore he says first, I may suppose the King supreme, as St. Peter calls
him, or the higher power as St. Paul here, though it be by some now put to the
question.

Answ. And is it but now put to the question? What shall we say then of that
speech of Doctor Bilson? By superior powers ordained of God, we understand not
only Princes, but all public States and Regiments, some where the people,
somewhere the Nobles having the same entrust to the sword that Princes have in
this Kingdom: and from this place Romans 13. we are commanded to be obedient to
those that are in authority. Suppose we be in some country where there is no
King, but States, does not this Scripture command us subjection there also? How
therefore by the higher Powers here is meant only the King? The Doctor
acknowledges that the Parliament is the highest Court of Justice in the
Kingdom; and the highest Court of Justice must needs fall within the compass
of these words, the higher Powers; unto which, by virtue of this commandment
of the Apostle, we are to be obedient. How then is this true which the Doctor
says, that by the higher Power is meant the King only or supreme, in
opposition to the Parliament.

But I prove it (says he.) For S. Peter's distinction comprehends all that are
in authority, the King as supreme, and all that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
in which latter rank are the two Houses of Parliament, being sent by him, or
sent for by him, and by his Writ sitting there.

Ans. Calvin (and other Interpreters) herein is contrary unto the Doctor, Nam
qui pronomen (e^m) ad Regem refe^unt multum falluntur. Estigitur huc communi
ratio^^ commendandam omnium magistratu^ authoritate^ quod mancato Dei praesunt
and ab eo mit^unt^r: unde sequitur (quemadmodum and Paulus do^^^) Deo resistere
q^i ab eo ordi nata non se obedienter submittunt. Calv. in 2 Pet. 1. 13.
who says thus; Those that refer the pronoune ( him) to the King, are much
deceived: for this is that common reason, whereby the authority of all
Magistrates is commanded; because they do rule by the commandment of God, and
are sent by him: ( By him) being referred to God by other Interpreters, and to
the King with the Doctor.

Then the Doctor says secondly: In this Text of the Apostle it is said, All
persons under the higher powers, are expressly forbidden to resist: for
whosoever in the second verse, must be as large as the every soul in the first.

Ans. That which the Doctor aims at in these words, is to make the whole
Parliament subject unto the King. And who denies them to be the Kings
subjects? and that as men, and Englishmen, they should not be subject unto the
King? But if he means, that as a Parliament, they should be subject to enact
and do what ever he commands, then how is that true which he says in the
25. 26. page That there is such an excellent temper of the three States in
Parliament, there being a power of denying in each of them: for what might
follow if the King and Lords without the Commons, or these and the Lords
without the King, might determine, etc. Or if he mean, that as a Parliament
jointly considered, they are to submit passively unto the unlawful commands of
the King, and that passive obedience is commanded only here in this 13. To.
then this is so to straiten the Text, as never any yet has straightened it:
neither indeed can any conscience think, that when the Apostle commands us to
be subject unto the higher powers, his meaning is only by way of suffering in
his unlawful commands, and not by way of obedience in his lawful commands.

Thirdly, the Doctor says, That the Roman State might challenge more by the
fundamentals of that State, then our great Council (he thinks) will or can.

Ans. But what then? Is it not therefore lawful for the subjects now to resist
the higher power commanding things unlawful, because the Apostle commanded
there that we should not resist the higher powers in things that are lawful?
Herein lies the Doctors continued mistake: He thinks this command of the
Apostle was given to the Christians to be obedient to Nero in his unlawful
commands; whereas the Apostles command in this place, reaches to all times, and
is made to all that are Christians: Although they did live under Nero, yet it
does not follow, that the Apostle commanded them to be subject to him in
unlawfulls. If indeed Nero's commandments were only unlawful, and this
direction of the Apostle was made only to the Christians in those times, and
that the subjection commanded were only suffering subjection, then this
Scripture might make much for his purpose. But though Nero was an enemy to the
Christians, yet some of his commandments were lawful; and this direction of
the Apostle was not made only to the Christians in those times, but as a
general rule for all good men: and the obedience and subjection here
commanded, was not only to be passive, but active (which I have proved
already, wherein I also appeal to the Doctors own conscience, whether that
this Scripture does not command active obedience and subjection to the Prince)
and therefore his interpretation thereof is exceeding wide, and his argument
null.

Then the Doctor says, If it be replied, that that prohibition was temporary,
and fit for those times, as it is said by some whom he answers.

Ans. I answer, that the Doctor here makes his own adversary, and fights with
him. Many other answers he refutes also, it being not in my purpose to make
good every pamphlet, but to satisfy men's consciences: only I cannot but here
take notice, that the Doctor professes against arbitrary power, or such as
conquerours use, as he did Sect. 1. profess, that he was much against
arbitrary government. But I wish the Doctor would be pleased to consider his
own principles, as he delivers them in these papers: for he says: that the
Roman Emperors were absolute Monarchs, and did indeed rule absolutely and
arbitrarily, and that they did make themselves such absolute Monarchs by
conquest. Then he says, this Crown of England is descended by three
conquests. And therefore if one conquest is a reason for the arbitrary
government of the Emperor, he cannot but think (though he conceal his mind)
that his government also ought to be much more arbitrary.

What else remains in this Section, I have either spoken to it already, or
shall more aptly in the following Discourse.

Sect. III.
THe Doctor says, That for the proving this power of resistance there is much
speech used about the Fundamentals of this power; which because they lie low
and unseen by vulgar eyes, being not written laws, the people are made to
believe that they are such as they that have the power to put new laws upon
them, say they are.

Ans. Herein he turns the Metaphor of Fundamentalls too far, as if because the
fundamentals of a house cannot be seen, therefore the fundamental laws cannot
be seen; which are not therefore called Fundamental, because they ly under
ground, but because they are the most essential upon which all the rest are
built, as fundamental points of Religion are most seen, and yet fundamental.

Secondly, he says, these fundamentals are not written laws. The Parliament
say they are, and produce several written laws for what they do. The Doctor,
and those that are of his sense, say they are not: who should the people be
ruled by in this case, but by the Parliament, seeing the Doctor himself says,
none are so fit to judge of the laws as they?

Then the Doctor says, Those that plead for this power of resistance, lay the
first ground work of their Fundamentals thus; The power is originally in and
from the people; and if when by election they have entrusted a Prince with a
power, he will not discharge his trust, then it falls to the people: or, as in
this kingdom, to the two Houses of Parliament, the representative body of this
Kingdom, to see to it: they may reassume the power. This is the bottom of
their fundamentals, as they are now discovered to the people.

Ans. We distinguish, as he does, the power abstractively considered from the
qualifications of that power, and the designation of a person to that power.
The power abstractively considered, is from God, not from the people: but the
qualifications of that power, according to the diverse ways of executing in
several forms of government, and the designation of the person that is to
work under this power, is of man: And therefore the power it self we never
offer to take out of Gods hand, but leave it where we found it. But if the
person entrusted with that power, shall not discharge his trust, then indeed it
falls to the people, or the representative body of them to see to it; which
they do as an act of selfe-preservation, not as an act of jurisdiction over
their Prince. It is one thing for them to see to it, so as to preserve
themselves for the present, and another thing so to reassume the power, as to
put the Prince from his office. As for example: Suppose there be a ship full of
passengers at the sea in the time of a storm, which is in great danger to be
cast away through the negligence and fault of the Steers-man; the passengers
may for their own present safety (that they may not be all cast away) desire
the Steers-man to stand by, and cause another to stand at the Stern for the
present, though they do not put the Steers-man out of his office. And this is
our case: we do not say that the Prince not discharging his trust, the people
and Parliament are so to reassume the power, as if the Prince were to be put
from his Office; which the (Doctor not distinguishing thus) would obtrude upon
us, but only that the Prince being abused by those that are about him, whereby
the charge is neglected, the people, or representative Body may so look to it
for the present, setting some at the stern till the storm be over, lest the
whole suffer ship wrack. And herein the Doctor does exceedingly wrong us,
disputing against us, as if we went about to depose our King, which we contend
not for, nor from these principles can be collected.

Then the Doctor says, That however the fundamentalls of this government are
much talked of, this is according to th^n the fundamental in all Kingdoms and
governments; for they say power was every where from the people at first, and
so this would serve no more for the power of resistance in England, then in
France or Turkey.

Ans. If it be the fundamental in all Kingdoms, and Governments, then it
seems it does not lie so low, and unseen (as the Doctor said before) because
all the world sees it.

Secondly, whereas he says, this will serve no more for power of resistance in
England, then in France or Turkey: he seems to insinuate that France and
Turkey have no such power of resistance: but who does not know that the
Protestants in France are of this judgment with us and practice? witness that
business of Rochell.

Then the Doctor says, we will clear up these two particulars, whether the
power be so originally, and chiefly from the people as they would have it; Then
whether they may upon just causes reassume that power: and says, first of the
original of power which they would have to be so from the people, as that it
shall be from God only by a permissive approbation.

Ans. If the Doctor takes Power for Magistracy it self, and sufficiency of
authority to command or coerce in the governing of a people abstractively
considered, as distinguished from the qualification of that power, according to
the diverse ways of executing it in several forms of government, and the
designation thereof unto some person, then I do not believe there is any man in
the Parliament (whom the Doctor especially disputes against) or of those who
write for them, that hold that the power is from the people, and by permission
and approbation only of God; neither can they: for in that they contend so
much for the Parliament, it argues they are of opinion that authority and power
in the abstract is from God himself: and for the designation of a person, or
qualification of the power according to several forms of government; the Dr.
himself grants it in this Section to be the invention of man, and by Gods
permissive approbation.

Then the Doctor comes to prove this by 3. arguments, That power as
distinguished from the qualification thereof, and designation, is of divine
institution.

Ans. Wherein he might have saved his labor in those three arguments, for none
does deny it: yet we will examine what he says in the arguments: 1. he says,
that the Apostle speaks expressly, that the powers are of God, Romans 13. 1. and
the ordinance of God, verse. 2. by which power he understands the power it self
of Magistracy as distinguished from the qualifications thereof, or designation
of any person thereto.

1. And if so, how is that true which he says before, Section 2. where he
says, that the higher power in Paul, Rom 13. is all one with the King as
supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 12. whereas he confesses that the government of a King or
Prince is the qualification of the power? so does the Apostle himself, calling
it (...), an humane constitution.

2. If by power here, Romans 13. be understood Magistracy, and authority it
self in the abstract, then when we are commanded to submit thereunto, the
meaning cannot be that the Christians in those times, must submit to the
unlawful commands of the Emperor, (as the Doctor would have it before) seeing
the way of governing by an Emperor or Prince, is but the qualification of the
power; surely if by power we are now to understand Magistracy and Authority it
self in the abstract, then all that is commanded in the 13. Romans to submit
thereunto, is to acknowledge a Magistracy, and then all the Doctors arguments,
and his strength whereby he would prove that we may not make forcible
resistance to unlawful commands from Romans 13. falls to the ground.

Then the Doctor tells us in the same argument, this power is called an
ordinance of man subjective, wherein he la^es this distinction, That power is
considered two ways, either as it is subjective amongst men, and so it is
(...), or else as it is considered causaliter, and so it is (...), of God.

Ans. But this is too strait, for it is called (...), not only because it is
amongst men, but it is (...) an humane constitution in four respects, 1.
because it is so causaliter, the form of several governments being an
invention of man. 2. Subjective, because it is amongst men. 3. Objective,
because it is busied about men. 4. Finaliter, because it is ordained for man,
and the Commonweal, yet power it self is the constitution and ordinance of
God.

Then the Doctor proves, That the power is of God, because the Magistrate is
called the Minister of God, Romans 13. verse. 4.

Ans. But here he slips from the power it self, to the person designed to the
power: for the power it self is not called the Minister of God, which was the
thing he undertook for to prove.

And so in this third argument where he says to the same purpose, speak those
other places, By me Kings reign, I have said ye are Gods, yet he confesses,
that the forms of government by Kings and Emperors, is an invention of man in
the first argument.

But now suppose the Doctor had proved that the power abstractively considered,
is of Gods institution, and had granted that the qualifications of this
governing power in several forms of government, and the designation of the
person thereto be of man, what has he gotten from, or gained upon his imagined
adversary? For suppose that his adversary should say that they may depose their
Prince, if he neglect his trust (which is not our case) because that his power
is originally from them, how does that which the Dr. has said, weaken this
argument? For though he has proved that the power of it self is from God, yet
having granted that the forms of that government, and the designation of a
person thereto, is from the people, they may as well urge and say therefore we
may alter the government, and may depose the person because he was of our
designing, as well as they might have argued so, if the power it self had been
from themselves.

Then the Doctor says; The imputation is causlesse which the pleaders on the
other side do heedlessely and ignorantly lay upon us Divines, as if we cried
up Monarchy, and that only government to be Jure Divino.

Ans. To let pass reproaches, how can we think otherwise, if we should
believe all that the Doctor says? For he proves that the power mentioned, Romans
13. is Jure Divino, and yet he says, Sect. 2. That the ^igher power there, is
all one with the Supreme, or King in Peter: but this with ^he nature of
Monarchical government, we shall come to consider more ^ptly in that which
follows.

The remaining part of this Section is but to prove that the power it self is
of God, that the qualification and designation was firstly of man, which we all
grant.

Sect. IV.
NOw we come to the forfeiture (says the Doctor) of this power, if the Prince,
say they, will not discharge his trust, then it falls to the people or the two
Houses (the representative body of the people) to see to it, and to reassume
that power, and thereby to resist. This they conceive to follow upon the
derivation of power from the people by virtue of election, and upon the
stipulation or covenant of the Prince with the people, as also to be necessary
in regard of th^se means of safety which every state should have within it
self. We will examin^ them in order.

Ans. Herein he does charge us with this opinion, that we hold it lawful for
the people to reassume their power, in case the Prince discharges not his
trust, making the world believe that we contend for deposing of Kings; or that
the Parliament goes about such a work as that is* for what else is it for the
people or Parliament to reassume their power from the Prince? whereas we
desire all the world should know, that we now take up arms as an act of
selfe-preservation, not endeavoring o^ intending to thrust the King from his
Office, though for the present the State sets some under the King at the
Ster^e, till the waters be calmed, as we said before.

Then the Doctor says, concerning the derivation of power, we answer, first*
if it be not from the people, as they will have it, and as before it was
cleared, the^ can there be no re-assuming of this power by the people.

Ans. How does this follow? for all that the Doctor had cleared before, was
this; that power abstractively considered was from God, no^ from the people;
now let us see whether the clearing of that will brin^ in such a consequence as
this, that there can be no re-assuming of this power by the people: if it will
enforce such a consequence, then the syllogism is this; ^f power and
magistracy and authority it self be of God and the forms of government and
designation of persons be of man, the^ there can be no re-assuming of this
power by the people. But the power itself and magistracy is of God, the forms
of government and designation of persons is of man (says the Doctor Sect. 3.)
Therefore there ca^ be no re-assuming this power by the people, says the
Doctor, Sect. 4.

Ans. Will not his imagined adversaries easily deny the sequel? indee^ if he
had proved that neither the power nor the qualification, nor the d^signation
were of man but of God, and cleared that first, then he had taken that
argument from his adversaries: but seeing he has granted the the ways of
government and designation of persons to be of m^ (though he has proved the
power it self of God) sure he has no w^^ stopped the course of their
arguments, or practice against whom he d^^putes.

The^^ he comes to show the inconsequence, and says. If the people should gi^^
the power ^^absolutely ^^they would have it, leaving nothing to God in it but
approbation, yet could they not therefore have right to take that power away,
for many things which are altogether in our disposing before we part ^ith the^
are not afterward i^ our power to recall them.

Ans. He supposes we go to take the power away from the Prince, (which we do
not, as has been said.)

2. There is a difference between disposing of things by way of donation or
sale, and disposing things by way of trust: true; those things which we dispose
of by way of donation or sale are not afterward in our power to recall, as they
were before the donation or sale; as if a man give his child land, or sell
land to his neighbor, it is not in the power of the father or neighbor to
recall or dispose of the land, as before the donation or sale: But if a thing
be disposed of by way of trust, then if the fiduciary or trusted shall not
discharge his trust, it is in the power (at least of the trusting) to look to
the matter himself; as in case that a Steward be ^usted with a man's house;
and thus when any government is set up in a land by a people, they trust the
governor, they do not give away their liberties or rights, but trust them in
the hand of the governor, who if abused that he do not perform his Stewardly
trust as he should, the people or representative body as an act of self
preservation (I do not say, as an act of jurisdiction) are to looketo it.
Neither herein do they so reassume their power as to take away any thing which
they gave to the King, but so as to actuate that power which they always had
left in themselves, (as the power of selfe-preservation.)

Then the Dr. says, Although it were as they would have it, that they give the
power, and God approves, yet because the Lords hand also and his oil is upon
the person elected to the Crown, and then he is the Lords Anointed, and the
Minister of God, those hands of the people which were used in lifting him up to
the Crown, may not again be lifted up against him, either to take the Crown
from his head, or the sword out of his hand.

Ans. ^f this be true, then Princes that are merely elective and not
hereditary, and whose coming to the Crown is merely pactionall, cannot be
deposed by the people, for they are the Lords Anointed, and the Ministers of
God; but this is contrary to the Doctor himself, who in this same Section
says thus, Although such arguments (speaking of the forfeiture of the Princes
power in the next line before) may seem to have some force in States merely
elective, and pactionall, yet can it never be made to appear by any
indifferent understanding, that the like must obtain in this Kingdom. And to
this purpose says the Dr. Phil. Paraeus ex^useth what his father had written
on Romans 13. in the point of resistance: that it was to be understood of
elective and pactionall government, and when the government is elective and
pactionall, are not the Princes the Ministers, and the Lords Anointed?

Then the Doctor says, How shall the Conscience be sati^fied that this their
argument grounded upon election, and the derivation of power from the people;
can have place in this Kingdom, when as the Crown not only descends by
inheritance, but also has so often been settled by conquest, in the lines of
Saxons, Danes and Normans.

Answ. First, how can the Conscience be ^atisfied in that which the Dr. writes
in this his book, where he acknowledges in this Section that it is probable
indeed that Kings at the first were by choice here as else where? And in
Section 5. says, that the forms of several governments (whereof Princedome is
one) are from the invention of man, and so by derivation from man.

2. The Drs. great design I perceive by his frequent touching this matter is to
make our King a King by conquest; for in Sect. 3. He says Gods Vicegerents
here on earth came into their Office either by immediate designation, the
election of the people, succession and inheritance, or by conquest; now he
cannot say that our King came in by immediate designation, and he does not say
that our Princes lay claim to the Crown by virtue of their election, and if by
inheritance, then by the right of an election or by conquest; for by mere
inheritance a man has no more, then what those first had whom he does succeed;
Inheritance being but the continuation of the first right upon the children,
the right of election he does disclaim, and of derivation of power from the
people, therefore the right that he makes our Prince to have to the Crown is
only the right of a Conquest; then if any man's sword be longer or stronger
then his, he may quickly have as much right to the Crown as the King; which
opinion of the Drs. for my own part I must abhor from, what danger will it not
expose our dread Sovereign to? Did not Athaliah reign as a Conqueresse six
years? And who knows not that she was lawfully thrust from the Throne again
by a stronger hand then her own? Mere conquest being nothing else but an
unjust usurpation: and if the Conqueror rule the whole Kingdom, and keep
them under by conquest only, why may not the subject rise and take up arms to
deiiver themselves from that slavery? Thus does the Doctor open the door to
greater resistance then those that he disputes against.

3. Though a Prince should hold his right by conquest as the next right, yet if
he hold it also by derivation from the people as the remote right, and the last
be the more natural and just way, then arguments grounded on that remote right
may be more valid, then those that are grounded on the next right, but thus it
is with our Prince who although he does succeed the conqueror, yet does also
take in the voluntary and free consent of the Commonweal unto his Crown,
which a mere conqueror does not, but rules without the consent and against the
good liking of the people.

Then the Dr. says, We tell them the Roman Emperors were not to be resisted;
they reply that they were absolute Monarchs, was it any other way then by force
and arms, the way that the Saxons, Danes and Normans made themselves masters of
this people. Ans. Now in these words we see the Drs. mind plainly that he
contends for an arbitrary government; for he says page 11. that the Emperors
did rule absolutely and arbitrarily, and here he says how came they of
Subjects to be absolute Monarchs, was it any other ways then by force and arms
the way that the Saxons, Danes and Normans made themselves masters of this
people, in whose right and lines he says before, the Crown descended upon our
King. What can be more plain then this for an arbitrary government? It seems
the Dr. was conscious to himself that herein he had discovered himself, and
therefore he says this, I speak not as if the Kings of this land might rule
as Conquerours, but that will not heal it.

Then the Doctor comes to the matter of capitulation or covenant, or oath which
the Prince takes to confirm what he promised, which, says he, are so alleged
as if the breach or nonperformance of the Princes part were, a forfeiture of
his power. But we answer, says he, the words capitulation or covenant are now
much used, to make men believe the Kings admittance to the Crown is altogether
conditional: whereas our King is King before he comes to the Coronation.

Ans. Herein the Doctor mistakes us: for though we aknowledge a covenant, yet
we cannot be so weak as to think that any breach of the covenant is a
forfeiture of the Kings power, for then the best man could not be King long;
but we first affirm a Covenant, for though the Kings of Israel were Monarchs,
and immediately designed by God himself to their office, and so one would
think there should be no need of their coming to the Crown by a covenant,
yet to show the necessity of this oath and covenant when they came to their
Crowns, they also took an oath, and entered into covenant with the people to
protect their rights and persons, 1 Chro. 11. 3. 2. We say that this mutual
covenant betwixt the King and the people, binds the King to the people, as well
as the people to the King, and that therefore it is as well unlawful for a
King by force to oppress his subjects, and to take up arms against them, as
for the subjects to take up arms against him.

Thirdly, that hence it follows that the Kings power is limited.

4. From this covenant and capitulation we say, thereby it appeare^ that the
people do commit a trust to the King: which,

5. If he does neglect, as he does not always forfeit his power, so neither
are they to forfeit their right of looking to themselves for the present And
therefore all that the Doctor says, that we urge the covenant a^^ capitulation
so much as if our King were a conditional King, and that which he brings to
prove that he is a King before Coronation is needlessly urged against us: for we
say and speak plainly, that though the righ^ that our King has to the Crown
is firstly by derivation of power from the people, yet he has his right by
inheritance, and is not such an elective King as is chosen for a time, and his
life if he rule well: and so his right to end in himself, but to continue upon
his posterity: for the people do derive their power two ways, either so as to
choose a man into office for his life only in case he rule well, and so our
Kings Predecessors were not brought to the Crown; or so as to commit the trus^
of the State unto him, to descend upon his posterity, which when his posterity
comes to, has both a right of election and inheritance; it being the right of
inheritance as it is left by their forefathers, and the right o^ election in
regard of its principle from whence it flowed: and thus w^ do estate our King
in his Throne, hereby establishing him more sur^ therein, and then the opposite
opinion of conquest does.

Then the Doctor tells us, That though the King do break his covenant or not
make performance thereof, yet a forfeiture of his power does not follow from
thence: for says he, could they in this covenant show us such an agreement
between the King and his people, that in case he will not discharge his trust,
thus it shall be lawful for the States of the Kingdom by arms to resist, and
provide for the safety thereof it were something.

To which I answer, we do not press the forfeiture of the Kings power upon
nonperformance of covenant, but we say this; that the end o^ his trust being
to look to the Kingdom, though there be no such word expressed in the
covenant or agreement betwixt the King and his people that in case he shall not
discharge his trust, then it shall be lawful for the State of the Kingdom by
arms to resist, and to look to their own^ safety: their safety being the end
of this trust, and ratio legis being lex in reason that must be implied, there
is a covenant stricken between man and a woman at Marriage; when they marry
one another it is not ve^bally expressed in their agreement, that if one commit
adultery, the party shall be divorced; and yet we know that that covenant of
marri^g^ carries the force of such condition. What followed in this Section i^
either^ repetition of what was before, or what in substance we have answered
already.

Only at the last the Doctor moves this question: What then if the Prince
take to himself more power, or not perform what he is bound to? and answers,
then may the subjects use all fair means as are fit to use, cries to God,
petitions to the Prince, denial of obedience to his lawful commands, denial
of Subsidies, etc. but are left without all means to compel by force or
resistance.

Ans. The subjects are considered two ways:

Socially Severally
Severally as private men, and so it has been taken for granted, that in ^ase
of oppression the subjects have used no arms but tears and prayers. Before
this Parliament, how many oppressions were there upon the people, both in their
estates and in Gods worship, by those who had un^uly gotten authority from the
King; and yet we saw no forcible resistance made, but every man quietly
subjecting himself under that suffering condition.

Socially and jointly, and so there is other remedy for the subjects then only
prayers and tears, and that the subjects are considered in this posture
wherein now we are, professing that we take not up arms as we are private men
barely, but as subjects united and joined in the representative body of the
Kingdom, which never yet was counted unlawful by any Divines, as I have
showed before.

Sect. V.
THe Doctor comes unto that which he calls our last reason, the safety of the
Kingdom, where he says first, that we have many weapons sharp^^d for this
resistance at the Philistims forge, our arguments being borrowed from the Roman
Schools, as he says.

Ans. But there is much difference between us and the Papists in this
particular; for, 1. The Papists contend for the lawfulness of deposing Kings,
which we do not. 2. The Papists plead for a power to depose a Prince in case
that he turn Heretic, which we do not; for we hold that though a Prince may
leave and change his religion, the subjects are not thereby excused from their
allegiance. 3 The Papists do not only hold ^^ lawful to depose and thus to
depose their Prince, but to kill him also: (...), that a private man invested
with the Popes authority may do thus: all which we abhor from: why therefore
should the Doctor charge us thus, and make the world believe that we favor the
Popish doctrine in this particular? But as the Parliaments Army is scandalized
by the adversaries, saying, there are many Papists in their army to help on
their designs; so is our doctrine scandalized by our adversaries, saying that
we make use of Popish arguments to strengthen our opinion; but the truth of
this we leave to all the world to judge of.

But to prove this, the Doctor says further, that by this reason the Pope
assumes a power of curbing or deposing Kings; for that if there be not a power
in the Church, in case the civil Magistrate will not discharge his trust, the
Church has not means for the maintenance of the Catholic faith, and its own
safety.

Ans. But what likeness is there between that of the Papists, and this of
ours? The Papists saying, the Church has a power of preserving its own safety,
and therefore the Pope may depose: we say the Kingdom has a power to preserve
it self, and therefore if the King neglect the trust, the State for the
present is to look unto it: And as for the matter of the Church, we turn the
Doctors argument upon himself thus;

If the Church cannot be preserved where the Officer is an heretic, unless
the Church have a power to reject him after once or twice admonition, then
cannot a Kingdom have a power to preserve it self, when the officer is
unfaithful; unless the Kingdom have a power either to depose him, or to
look to their own matters till things be better settled: But the Church has
excommunication granted to it by Christ himself for its own preservation;
neither can we conceive how a Church can preserve it self from evils and
errors, unless it have a power to cast out the wicked officers; as in the body
natural it cannot preserve it self, unless nature had given it a power to
deliver it self from its own burdens, therefore the Commonweal also by the
like reason cannot have a power to preserve it self, unless it have a power
to deliver it self from its burden; but in case that an Officer be
unfaithful, we do not say that it i^ lawful for the Kingdom to depose him,
therefore it may be lawful for themselves socially considered Statewise, in
time of danger to help themselves. Neither herein as the Doctor would, do we
appropinquate to the Romish doctrine, for the Papists from this power of the
Church do infer a power unto the Pope, and not unto the Church or community.

Secondly, the Doctor asks us this question by way of his second answer, If
every State has such means to provide for its safety, what means o^ safety
had the Christian Religion under the Roman Emperors, in or after the Apostles
times, or the people then inslaved, what means had they for their liberty had
they this of resistance? Tertullian in his Apology, says thus, the Christians
had number and force sufficient to withstand, but they had no warrant.

Ans. 1. The question is wrong stated, it should have been made thus, If any
State has such means to provide for its safety; what means of safety had the
Roman State under the Roman Emperors, when as he does say, what means of
safety had the Christian Religion under the Roman Emperors? Christian
Religion, and the State are two different things.

Secondly, in the primitive times the Christians indeed had none of this power
of resistance, nor warrant for it (as Tertullian speaks) because the Roman
State was not with them: but suppose that the Roman Senate or Parliament had
stood up for them, and with them, the representative body of the whole Empire
(and this is our case, not as the Doctor ^ayes it) then would not the
Christians have made resistance for their own defense? No question but they
would, and would have known that they had warrant therein; who may not see
that has but half an eye, the vast difference between the condition of the
Christians in the primitive times, and ours? they not having the State to join
with them, they not being the representative body of the Empire, as it is now
with us; yet this objection makes a great outcry, and there is some thread of
it runs through the Doctors book, but how easily it may be cut, let the
world judge; there being no more likeness between our condition and the
condition of the primitive Christians, then between the condition of private
men whom the whole State does move against, and the condition of people whom
the State is with.

The Doctor replies; that though the Senate of Rome were against the Christians
of those times; yet if the people have the first right, and all power be from
the people, that people must rise up and resist, because the Senate did not
dis^harge the trust* and so it will be in this State, if at any time a King
that would ^ule arbitrarily, should by some means or other, work out of the
two Houses ^he better affected, and by consent of the major part of them that
remain, com^asse his desires, the people may tell them they discharged not
their trust, they those them not to betray them, or inslave them; and so might
lay hold on this power of resistance for the representative body claims it by
them.

Ans. Concerning the Senate of Rome, and the people of the Roman Empire, we
say that though the Emperor and the Senate had been for the ^estructio^ of the
Christians, yet if the whole body of the Empire had joint^y risen for the
Christians, I make no question but that many of those that ^ied, would so far
have resisted that they would have saved their own ^ves; but the Emperors and
Senate being against them, and the body of the Empire jointly considered, not
rising for them* it is true indeed, they had no warrant to make resistanc^* but
to suffer as they did. This i^ none of our case.

Secondly, whereas the Doctor says, both here and afterward in this Section;
that if upon our grounds the King will not discharge his tru^^ that therefore
it falls to the representative body of the people to see to i^ then the people
having this power may also say, if the Members of the tw^^ Houses do not
discharge their trust committed to them, they do not that which they were
chosen and sent for, and then may the multitude by this rule and principle now
taught them, take the power to themselves.

First, I answer, that there is not the same reason why the people should be so
ready to think that the Parliament do neglect their trust, being they are
very many chosen out of the whole Kingdom for their faithfulness, approved
every way for their goodness and wisdom; whereas a Prince may be borne to
the Crown, and so by virtue of his inheritance may rule, though he be known to
be vicious; as also because it is received by all the Kingdom that we ought to
be governed by Laws, and the people all know that the Parliament are better
able to judge of the Law then the Prince is; as also because the people do
actually elect and trust the Parliament men with the present affairs of the
Kingdom. Now though the Prince indeed be trusted by the Commonwealth with
their affairs in our forefathers, whereunto the people do now consent, yet
there is not that actual election or designation of him unto the present
affairs of the Kingdom, as there is of the Parliament men chosen for these
particular businesses; as for example, suppose that a people do choose their
Minister, trusting him with all the great affairs of their souls, and there
does rise a controversy between neighbors, wherein they choose an arbitrator
to umpire the businesses, though these two Parishioners that have fallen out,
have formerly trusted their Minister with all the affairs of conscience, yet
they do not so readily stand to his verdict, by reason of the general trust,
as to the verdict of those arbitrators whom they have now actually chosen for
this business; neither can they in law o^ reason so easily revoke or renounce
the sentence of Arbitrator, who^ they have chosen to this business, as the
sentence of their Minister wh^^ they have trusted in the general: so in this
case of ours, though the Kin^ be entrusted by our forefathers and us with the
general affairs of the Kingdom, yet the Parliamentary men are actually
elected and designe^ by the people for the present affairs of the Kingdom; and
therefore the people take themselves bound to stand to their arbitrament:
neither c^^ they think, that they are at the like liberty to renounce their
arbitrament and sentence, as they are for the denial of their Princes
commandment.

Secondly, I say, there is not the same reason that the people should recall
their power from the Parliament, in case the Parliament should be unfaithful,
as there is they should see to things in case the Prince be misled: I say
there is not the same reason, (though both the Parliament and Prince have both
their power originally by derivation from the people) because that the
derivation of power from the people unto the Prince, is not made the sole
reason by those that the Dr. disputes against for this their resistance: but
the authority that they are clothed with, whereas if a people upon surmises
that the Parliament do not perform their trust, should call in their trust
and their power, then they should have left themselves naked of all authority,
and should be private men; but now that they look to themselves in this time
of danger, and in that sense do reassume their power which they have derived
to their Prince, they are still led on by authority.

Thirdly, the Doctor answers, that we cannot expect any absolute means of
safety and security in a State.

Ans. Neither do we expect it, though this be granted which we desire, or that
granted which he contends for.

Then he says, that there is an excellent temper of the three Estates in
Parliament, there being a power of denying in each of them, and no power of
enacting in one or two of them, without the third: for what might follow, if
the King and Lords without the Commons, or those and the Lords without the King
might determine, the evils of these days do show: so is this power of
denying, for the security of each State against other.

Ans. This both the Doctor and I must leave to the judgment of those that know
the Laws and the Liberties, and the Privileges of all three Estates.

Further, he says, that now not only the name of Parliament which implies the
three* Estates, is restrained usually to the two Houses, but also that temper
is dissolved.

Ans. First, it was always so, that the Parliament was made distinct from the
King, in ordinary speech saying, The King and his Parliament: when the
Parliament is mentioned alone, it may include the King; but when the King and
Parliament are mentioned together, the speech can intend no more then the two
Houses. As when the body is mentioned alone, it includes the head and the
members; but when the head and the body are mentioned together, then the body
does not include the head.

Secondly, that the Doctor says, this trust of the three States is di^solved,
I conceive it is a scandalous charge, and so I leave that t^ others.

Then the Doctor says, If it be replied, as it is, for the reasonableness^ of
this means of safety through that power of resistance, and that many s^^ more
then one, and more safety in the judgment of many then of one, I answe^ (says
the Doctor) true: but 1. Conscience might here demand for its satisfaction, why
should one hundred in the House of Commons see more then thr^^ hundred, or
twenty in the Lords House more then sixty that are of differen^ judgment, and
withdrawn?

Ans. I answer, if there be three hundred of the House of Common withdrawn,
and but an hundred left; and sixty of the Lords House withdrawn unto twenty,
if indeed there be so many gone away, wh^ did they not come all this while and
carry things by a vote, and the controversy had been now at an end? Then
could it never have bee^ said to the people, that the Parliament are against
the King, the^ might the three States have all joined together, and there had
been n^ further question.

Secondly, the Doctor answers, that the Prince, though one, sees wi^^ the eyes
of many, for which his Houses of Parliament are his great Counsel to present
to his eyes the differences of things, with the reasons of them.

Ans. This needs no other answer then that which follows in the Doctors own
words, where he says, that the King sometime dissen^ from the major or
prevailing part of the Parliament, so that he man see with their eyes, and see
other things then they do, and be of different judgment from them. And if he
may see with other men's ey^ that are of different judgment from him, because
they do present t^ his eyes the difference of things, with the reasons of
them, then m^ the Houses of Parliament also see more then he does, because the
di^ference of things, with the reasons of them, are presented to them al^^*

Then the Doctor descends to prove, that Monarchical government is t^ best,
and that God made choice to set up that still, first in Moses, then in t^^
Judges, then in the Kings.

Ans. But how come we to this discourse, to compare Monarc^ and Aristocracy?
and to say that Monarchy is better government the Aristocracy? Does it follow
from the word True, which the Dr. ha^ said to that proposition, many see more
then one, and more safety (...) the judgment of many then of one. But seeing
he is pleased to say, ^he government which God made choice of to set up among
his people, was Monarchical still, first in Moses, then in the Judges, then in
the Kings, let us now diligently observe, that Monarchical government which
God made choice of. If Moses, the Judges, and Kings, were are all Monarchs, and
Monarchy the best government, Then

1. The best government is such, where the people have the free choice of their
Governor: for so they had in the time of the Judges, Chap. 11. 5. And it was
so, when the children of Ammon ma^e war against Israel, the Elders of Israel
went to fetch Jephtha out of the Land of Tob, and ^hey said unto Jephtha, Come
and be our Captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon. And Jephtha
said unto the Elders of Gilead, If ^^ bring me home again to fight with the
children of Ammon, and the Lord ^eliver them before me, shall I be your head?
And the Elders of Gilead said into Jephtha, The Lord be witness betwixt us, if
we do not so according ^o thy word. Then Jephtha went with the Elders of
Gilead, and the people ^ad^ him Head and Captain over them, v. 11. Thus we
see that that government which the Doctor calls the best, and set up by God, is
such, when the people have the choice of their King, and the derivation of ^is
power is from them; as I have proved at large in the Preface, to ^ave been in
the Judges and Kings of Israel.

Secondly, then the best government is that, where the King and people strike a
covenant at his Coronation: which covenant the King is bound to observe,
neither does his covenanting with the people, make him no Monarch: for David
was a Monarch, yet David ^ade a covenant with the Elders of Israel, and so they
anointed him King ^ver Israel, 1 Chronicles. 11. 3.

Thirdly, then the best government is such also, where the Prince ^oth advise
with his people and Elders, doing no great matter in State ^^ Religion without
their consent, and with their consent doing. So David, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1. And
David consulted with the Captains of thou^ands, and hundreds, and every
Leader; and David said unto all the Con^^egation of Israel, If it seem good
unto you* let us bring again the Arc ^^ the Lord our God unto us: and all the
Congregation said, that they would ^^ so: for the thing was right in the eyes
of all the Congregation. So that ^^e people having an agency in the great
affairs of the Kingdom, is ^o way repugnant, but consistent with Monarchical
government or ^^e government appointed by God himself.

Fourthly, then also is the best government appointed by God, such ^^ does
carry along with i^ a lawfulness for the subjects to take up arms, and make
forcible resistance for their own security, and safety of the Common weal
against their Monarchs, when cause requires: for did not the people sometime
in Israel take up arms against some of the Judges? And did not David though
yet a subject to Saul) take up arms, and make forcible resistance? It is said
expressly, 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. 19. Then David received them, and made them
Captains of the Band, and there fell some of Manasses to David, when he came
with the Philistines against Saul to battle. The Doctor said before in his
Treatise, that David took up arms only in his own defense. But do these
words note no more? Only I press them thus far, as may show a lawfulnes for
the people to take up arms in a way of forcible resistance against the Kings
commandment, when the danger is eminent: which we find agreeable to the best
government set up by God himself, as the Doctor acknowledges.

In the fourth place the Doctor answers, that such power of resistance will be
no means of safety to a State, but rather a remedy worse then the disease;
which he proves from Romans 13. (which I have answered already) and from some
reasons, as 1. This power of resistance, if admitted and preserved, may proceed
to a change of government.

Ans. To which I answer, that if several forms of government be of humane
constitu^ion (as the Doctor speaks) why should we think that they are utterly
unalterable, as the laws of the Medes and Persians.

But secondly, this principle of ours cannot boil up to that height: for we
only say, that when the Prince shall neglect his trust, the people are to see
to it, and silenced not for deposing.

2. He says, This power of resistance is accompanied with the evils of ^
civil war.

Ans. No, but therefore we are afflicted with civil war, because some people
are misled from their own natures, to take up arms against their own Country:
Civil war is from the cause thereof, now the Parliament calls for arms only
to defend the Country: these make the civil war that are against the Countries
defense.

Thirdly, he says, There is danger in this power of resistance: for the if the
people be discontented, and have gotten power, they may say, the Members of the
two Houses do not discharge their trust, and so by this rule, tak^ up the
power to themselves, and so all rapine and confusion brought into the Kingdom.

Ans. There can be no such inference made from this principle o^ ours: for the
people do all acknowledge, that we are to be governed by Laws, and that (as
the Doctor says) the Parliament is the Judge what is Law: the people do
acknowledge, according to truth, that the Parliament has the declarative
power, or the supreme power of declaring the Law, the King does not profess
this, but rather the contrary, that he is no Lawyer, nor skilled in the Laws.
The Parliament do profess it, and the people acknowledge them to be so; and
therefore there is not the same reason, that they should take their power to
themselves, in case that the Parliament should neglect their trust: for why
should the people take that power unto themselves, should it be according to
Law? The Parliament will then tell them, that they have done that which is
according to law, wherein they confess, that the two Houses have the power of
declaring. But now if the Prince shall neglect his trust, and the people take a
power to look to themselves in times of danger, by way of forcible resistance,
the Prince cannot say, when the Parliament is against him, the supreme power of
declaring law, does agree my course to be lawful: so that you see there is not
the same reason of both.

And whereas the Doctor says, That upon the like reason, if the Parliament
shall neglect their trust, the people may call in their power. How can the
people think that the Parliament does any thing contrary to the law of the
land, when the Parliament are the Judges thereof, and the people confess so:
and therefore the Doctor may be out of fear for this matter.

Lastly, the Doctor says, That seeing some must be trusted in every Estate, it
is reason that the highest and final trust should be in the higher and supreme
power, and that he should have the best security, which is worth ten thousand
of his subjects.

Ans. I answer, therefore the people do trust the King and his Parliament, who
are the highest power and Court in the Kingdom: and if the greatest and best
security should be about the King, because he is worth 10000. subjects, then
surely the Kingdom it self should have the best security, because the King is
ordained for his Kingdom.

In Fine, the Doctor presses the oath of Supremacy, Allegiance, and the last
Protestation upon the conscience, and wishes men here to consider their power
of resistance, and taking up of arms is contrary thereto; in which he says,
We swear and protest to defend the Kings person.

Ans. And thus we do by taking up of Arms: for what man is there that considers
things rightly, may not easily perceive, that if the Popish party should
prevail (which are either about the King, or of his Armies,) I say, who may
not easily think, if they should prevail, that either our King must be a rank
Papist, of a dead man? Who knows not, that if the Papists get the upper hand,
though now they cry out for Supremacy, Supremacy, that either they will force
the King to another Supremacy, or else quickly make a hand of him? Is it not
their opinion? What better service therefore can a true subject perform to his
Majesty's person, then by force of Arms to deliver him out of the hands of
those spoylers that lie in wait for his precious soul? In the oath of
Supremacy we swear him our Sovereign to be Supreme in opposition to the
Pope, or any other particular person. How does our doctrine or practice
infringe this? In the oath of Allegiance we swear to be his liege Subjects
according to Law, and that which we do is so: And in our Protestation we
protest to maintain the Kings Person, the Parliaments privileges, the
Subjects rights, and our Religion: if we do not take up arms in this time of
Popish insurrection, how can we with good conscience say, that either we defend
the Kings Person from the violence of Papists, which (according to their own
Doctrine) we know shall be made upon our King, or the privileges of
Parliament, whose power is to send for delinquents, and those that are accused
before them, even by force to bring them into their trial; or the liberty of
subjects, who have this given by nature to defend themselves, or the truth of
our religion, which notwithstanding all flourishes, we have seen such invasions
made upon, and now in our conscience under more hazard; because those that are
opposite unto it, do profess to defend it: whereupon I presume that every
good man that makes conscience of his ways (considering these things) will
not be backward to advance this public design. And though the Doctor be
frequent with his damnation both in this Section and in others, charging men
from this resistance upon pain or damnation; yet a settled conscience will be
no more scared with the Doctors damnation, then with the Cavalliers God damn
us.

Sect. VI.
NOw the Doctor comes to the application of all in these two fast Sections, in
which I intend not to trace him into all that he says. The application of all
being left unto what men see and know experimentally; yet something I must say
unto these Sections. In this sixth he tells us that we do not walk up unto
our own^ principles, which are as (he says) that our resistance must be
omnibus ordin but regni consentientibus: that is (as he translates it) agreed
upon and undertaken by the general and unanimous consent of the whole States.

Ans. But is this a good and true translation of the words? The Doctor may know
that when the matter comes to a scrutiny in the Regent house the matter is to
pass with the consent of the Regents, non-Regents, and heads of the
University; and though all do not manimously as one Man consent, yet it may be
omnibus ordinibus consentientibus.

But he says, How shall conscience be persuaded that this resistance was
agreed upon by an unanimous and free consent of the States; for says he, he
that knows how the Militia ( in which this resistance chiefly began) was
brought in, with what opposition especially in the Lords House, and by what
number that at length was voted; also how the like proceedings was voted since,
how that a vote passed by a few upon the place, though it have the power and
condition of a vote, for the formality of law was not passed in full
assemblies, cannot be persuaded in conscience that this is such an unanimous,
free and general consent as makes the judgment of the whole Kingdom.

Ans. To the which I answer, that by the like reasoning, there is no act of
Parliament or Law, shall be of any force; and he may as well question any law
that is made; for when was there ever any law made, which all did unanimously
as one man consent to? By the constant law of the Kingdom though there be not
so many in either House which have been present at these late affairs of the
Kingdom, it is to be acknowledged for an act of Parliament, and so the
judgment of the whole Kingdom.

Then secondly, he tells us, That we do not walk up to our second principle,
viz. that our resistance must be merely defensive, for, says he, those that
are first in arms cannot be upon the defensive part, page 22. and then page
21. says he, who were first in arms? He that can number the succession of
months and weeks in his Almanacke, may decide this, he shall find that armed men
were thrust into Hull, the Militia set up, etc.

Ans. To which I answer, If those that are first in arms cannot be on the
defensive part, then surely David's act was not mere defense, as the Doctor
says before: for we find in Scripture, that David, and his men were gotten
into arms before that Saul followed him: surely the Doctors Almanac has not
all the months in it, for he begins his account only at the business at Hull,
whereas before that, the King came in hostile manner unto the Parliament,
gathered forces about Windsor, but this must be left unto men's eyes, and
experienced knowledge, it being matter of fact.

Then the Dr. (I know not how) comes to enquire into the cause of these arms,
wherein after some flourishes, he says, Would an^ man have defended the revolt
of the ten Tribes, if Rehoboam had promised to conserve their liberties? Saying
further, what shall we then generally think of this revolt from allegiance,
which has possessed well near tenn^ Tribes of the twelve, and yet in page 21.
he tells us of a vote passed by ^ few upon the place, that this work of
resistance is not carried on with a general and unanimous consent, and yet
here he says, ten tribes of twelv^ are for it.

In examining the causes of this war and resistance, the Dr. says* To speak
truth, Religion and liberties can be no other then the pretenses of this war,
the King having fortified them with so many acts of his grace passed this
Parliament, that they cannot be in that danger that is pretende^ for the
raising of this war: It must be something that his Majesty indeed does deny,
for which the contention is raised; which we shall find to be his power of
arms, his power of denying in Parliament the government of the Church, and the
revenue of it, which he is bound by oath to maintain, as by law they are
established.

Ans. This is a very bold assertion and scandalous to charge a Parliament in
the face of the world with hypocrisy: but how does this agree to the Drs. own
principles, who does declaime against me^ for their uncharitableness, in not
believing the Kings Protestations? Is this then no uncharitableness in him,
charging the Houses with pretending one thing, and intending another? Is not
conscience a^ well bound to be charitable, and to believe the Protestations of
the Parliament, as those papers that come out in the name of the King? and has
the Parliament and Houses carried themselves so unworthily and basely, that
under pretense of Religion, we should think^ they gape after the revenues of
the Church? O where is this man^ charity? And if the King be bound by oath (as
the Dr. says) to maintain the government of the Church as by Law established,
yet h^ is no more bound by virtue of that oath to maintain that government
then any other Law of the Kingdom; and as for other Laws, i^ the King and
Parliament think fit to repeal them, they may, ye^ without breach of the
Kings oath: so in this also.

Then the Doctor comes in the 25. page to open himself some what more freely
concerning the government of the Church b^ Bishops: where he says, That it is
such a government which t^^ Church always had since the first receiving of the
Christian faith in the land, and of all other governments simply the best, the
abolishing where of, the King has reason by power of Arms to divert.

To which I answer, First, that if the Doctor look into the story of Queen
Mary's time, he shall find, that suffering Protestant Churches, (which by
reason of persecution, were feign to lie hid in London) were governed by Elders
and Deacons: That is simply the best government of the Church which is chalked
and ruled out by the Scripture, as the Doctor will confess: and if this
government be so, I wonder that those that are so much for it, should be of
that judgment, that there is no particular form of Church Government laid
down in the word: which judgment they must needs be of, unless they will
hold, that the government of other Churches is sinful, and contrary unto the
word, which they are loath for to do. And truly if this government be simply
the best, the best has the worst success: for there is no government in all
the Churches of Christendom, that has had so many Sects and Schisms, or
occasioned so much separation from the Churches of Christ, as this has done.
There are many Sects and divisions in the low Countries, but none of them
departing from the Protestant Church there, by reason of the Church Government
or discipline, but by reason of doctrine.

Let any man but seriously consider the Protestant Churches in Switzerland,
France, Holland, Germany, Scotland, and he shall easily observe, that there is
no such separation or division made from the Churches by reason of the
Church Government stablished in them, as has been here in England, by reason
of this Diocesan government. And if any man shall say, this bad success here
is rather to be imputed to the wickedness of the Governors, then the
corruption of government: Why should he think that the Governors in England
are more wicked then in other Protestant Churches, if the government itself
did not give scope to their wickedness? And if the government of Diocesan
Bishops, be of all governments the best, we wonder that Christ and his
Apostles should not appoint it: surely they appointed some government in the
Church; and what they appointed was ^ure Divino, and so best; whereas this was
never counted Iure Divino till of late. But if this government be simply the
best, it will abide trial in its due time and place: but that it should be so
good, as that the abolishing thereof, the King has reason by power of Arms to
divert, this is strange. Now the Doctor shows himself, that he had rather
the Kingdom should be embrewed in a bloody war, then Episcopacie should be
put down; and that will stir up the King to an unnatural civil war for
the upholding of that order: Judge ye, O all Englishmen, whether it be better
for you to have this order taken away, then for the whole Kingdom to lie
imbrewed in their own gore?

In the conclusion of this Section the Doctor complains, That the Kings Spear
and Cruse, and necessary Ammunition, and provisions, are taken away, not
restored though often demanded, contrary, says he, to the example of David,
who having taken the Spear and the Cruse from Saul his King, restored them
again before they were demanded, 1 Samuel 26.

Ans. But though Saul's Spear was restored before it was demanded, yet not
before Saul had humbled himself to David, saying, I have sinned; return, my
son David, for I will no more do thee harm; because my soul was precious
in thine eyes this day: Behold, I have played the fool, and have erred
exceedingly, verse. 21. Whereupon David arose, and said, verse. 22. Behold the
Kings Spear, let one of the young men come over and fetch it. Neither is
mention here made of restoring the Cruse. Some other things the Doctor has in
this Section, wherein he does rather charge then prove, but men's knowledge may
sufficiently answer to those things.

SECT. VII.
IN this last Section the Doctor tells us, That though Conscience could be
persuaded that it is lawful to make a defensive resistance, yet it can never
be persuaded that the King is such as the people must be made to believe he
is: for indeed it concerns all such as will resist upon the principles now
taught, to render their Prince odious to his people, under the hateful notions
of Tyrant, subverter of Religion and Laws, a person not to be trusted, or at
least as one seduced to such evil designs, by wicked counsels, that he will
bring in Popery, that he will not stand to his promises.

Ans. These are sad charges, but how groundless God and the world knows; who
may not see how tender the Parliament has been of the Kings honor? Therefore
they have not been willing to believe that those Declarations that came out in
his name, are his own: Therefore they charge all that is done on his
counselors, not on himself; herein being fully like unto David, who though
Saul came out against him, yet did he not impute that unnatural war unto
Saul himself, so much as unto those that were about him, saying unto Saul, If
the Lord has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering; but if
they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lord: for they have
driven me out* this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, 1 Samuel
26. 19. Therefore also when the Parliament has written any thing that might in
the least measure reflect upon his Majesty, I have observed that they never did
write so, but to vindicate and to clear themselves from some aspersions first
cast upon them; and when they did write so, like Shem and Japhet, they took a
garment and went backward; desiring rather to cover then to behold any
nakedness in our dread Sovereign: And woe be unto them from the Lord, (but I
will not curse them with the curse of Cham) who put his Majesty upon such
actions, whereby any nakedness should be discovered.

Then the Doctor comes to the examination of those fears and jealousies which
have possessed the people, which he says are raised on these grounds, report
of foreign powers to be brought in, the Queens religion, the resort of Papists
to his Majesty, his intercepting of means sent for the relief of Ireland: To
which he answers, first, That the report of foreign invasions given out to
keep the people in a muse, the easier to draw them into a posture of defense
are discovered in time to have been vain: But says he, If there be now any
foraigne aid coming toward the King (as all Christian Kings cannot but think
themselves concerned in this cause) it will be just for him to use them against
subjects now in arms.

Answ. To which I answer, That it does not appear that our fears were vain,
because foreign invasion has been prevented; for we may rather think that
therefore we have not been invaded by forraigners, because the Parliament has
been vigilant both by sea and land to prevent them. But who does not see that
so far as lies in the Doctor, he does invite foreign forces into the land,
and so stir up other Princes for to send them, and our King for to use them?
Whether this be agreeable to an English Divine, or an English Subject, I leave
to be judged.

Then he says, The Queens religion is no new cause.

Answ. To this I say nothing but leave it (being matter of fact) to the
judgment of eyes that have seen actions, whether there be no more cause of
jealousy now then at her first entrance.

And thirdly, for the resort of Papists, and the Kings entertaining them, the
Doctor strengthens the entrust of it with that example of David, we may see
says he, what manner of men were gathered to David in his distress, and how
Ziba was rewarded.

Answ. To which I say this only, how can the Doctor make it appear, that those
that were gathered to David were men of another Religion from David, and of
such a Religion that by the State was counted rebellion, who also by the State
was to be disarmed? Which if the Doctor does not make good, this instance is
nothing to our case.

And 4: for the matter of Ireland, I leave that wholly to the Parliaments
Declarations, who without doubt know the proceedings of those better then this
Doctor, and what conscience enlightened will not rather rest for satisfaction
upon Parliamentary Declarations, then upon this Doctors assertion in this
matter.

The other things in this Section are mostly matter of fact, and therefore I
must refer them to men's sense, only I cannot but observe how in all things
the Doctor cleares the King, and casts dirt upon the Parliament, but still with
this cunning; when he has laid the greatest aspertion upon them, he retracts
in these words: I speak not this to cast any blemish upon the wisdom of the
great Council, like as before, when he had said what he could, (or happily
dared) for the Kings ruling by conquest, he comes often with this kind of
speech, This I speak not as if the Kings of the land might rule as Conquerours;
and this is an ordinary slight when men have preached against purity and
holiness with as much bitterness as they can, then they think to come off in
this or the like manner, God forbid that I should speak against purity and
holiness: But let him in Gods name, clear the King in what he may, (as we
are all bound to do as far as we can) but can he not clear his Majesty
without such foul aspertions cast on the Parliament? of whom he says thus
page 30. Men are higly concerned to consider whether they also that are the
maine directors of this resistance do discharge this trust they are called to,
whether to divest the King of the power of Arms, and to use them, be to defend
his Person, Right and Dignity? Whether the forcing of the Subjects property to
the advancing of this resistance, and the imprisoning of their persons for
denial, be the maintaining of the right and privilege of the subjects?
Whether the suffering of so many Sects to vent their Doctrines, and to commit
such unsufferable outrages upon the worship of God with such licentiousness,
be a defending of Religion, and the established worship of this Church?

Answ. These are foul charges upon the Parliament: How can the Doctor say, I
enter not this discourse to cast the least blemish upon the Parliament? Well,
blessed is the man that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows: The Doctor confesses, That man to be subject to higher powers and
that we are to submit to them, he confesses also, That the Parliament is the
highest Court in the Kingdom, and it ought to judge what is the Law; they
having therefore judged this resistance to be lawful, if the Doctor shall
resist this their declarative power, saying it is not law, and cast such dirt
and reproaches upon them, does he not condemn himself in the thing which he
allows?

But in this last clause of his book, he summons conscience to answer upon
pain of damnation, and I make no question, but when men shall have seriously
considered his book, the verdict that conscience will bring in, will this be:

As in the sight of God, I have perused this Treatise of his, and I find it
injurious to the King, to the Parliament, to the Divines of this Kingdom, to
the other Subjects, and to the Treatiser himself.

To the King, for hereby he is put on, and exasperated against his Parliament
and Subjects, further engaged in this war, and encouraged to take the
assistance of Papists, who if he conquer by their means, what Protestant good
subject does not bleed to think what will become of him?

To the Parliament, being charged with the blood that is spilt in these wars,
with the miseries of Ireland, with the Schisms and Sects of this Kingdom,
with open hypocrisy, pretending one thing, and intending another.

To Divines, all whom he makes to be of his judgment.

To the Subjects, denying to them the liberty given them by God, and Nature,
and the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and calling in forraigners upon
them.

To the Treatiser himself, who has needlessely embarked himself in a bad
cause.

And lastly, to the Scripture and God, and his great Officer on Earth,
Conscience; the Scripture being wrested, God dishonored, and the conscience
deceived.

Now the Lord grant that whilst we speak of Conscience, we may in all things
make conscience of our ways, for multi conscientiam habuit adjudicium, non ad
remedium. As concerning the King, Give the King thy judgments, O God, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings Son: And as concerning the two Houses of
Parliament, Let the mountains bring grace unto the people, and the little
hills thy righteousness. Let the King and Queen, and people praise thee, O
God, yea let all our England praise thee.

FINIS.

