Sir William Breretons LETTER SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker
of the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning all the Passages and Treaties Of
the Siege and taking of the City of CHESTER. AND By Mr. SPEAKER appointed to be
printed and published. With a most Exact DECLARATION of Chesters Enlargement
after three years Bondage, Set forth by Nathanael Lancaster, Chaplein to the
Cheshire Forces.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 5. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
I Will not presume to present the enclosed to the more public view of the
House; Yet I have thought fit to Communicate them unto your self, that so you
may receive a more full and exact account of the particulars of our
transactions and proceedings here: Touching which I doubt not, but you have
heard various Reports, as though there had been a neglect in the use of that
endeavor, that might have tended to the speedy reducement of this City: Which
it is most true, might have been sooner subdued if there had been a sufficient
Army employed against it: But there were more Armed men within the City, then
there were foot in our whole Army to maintain the Leaguer, block up Hoult and
Hawarden, and to make good all our out Quarters: This City being the more
Tenable* because more then the half thereof is encompassed and secured by the
River of Dee; so as their whole strength might be applied to maintain that part
where we stormed, and the whole circumstance of their Walls are not (I believe)
so large as the whole Works about Namptwich or Manchester: As also we have not
been sufficiently furnished with Ammunition, nor Grenades until now of late,
having bought near 800 or 1000 pounds worth of Ammunition, besides what was
sent from London and made use of, whereof you received a former account which
was a very large proportion, as I have heard there was near forty Barrels spent
in two days. It is true, our last Grenades (which we could not possibly
pro^^^^ any sooner, then they came unto us) did great execution, and were (...)
^^rrible and the City might have been thereby defaced and destroyed; but not
much sooner reduced* by reason that the Citizens were so enawed and enslaved,
as that they durst not displease nor resist the Governor or Officers, who were
possessed with expectation of relief by Letters intercepted from Sir Jacob
Ashley, Sir William Neal and diverse others, giving them assurance, that there
was 15000 Danes, French* and Irish in Ireland, ready to be transported for
their relief: Whereunto I gave no credit, but have thought good to send the
Copies of some of the Letters, that so it may appear unto you, that they had
hopes of relief, whereby they were induced to be so obstinate as to hold out so
long, knowing well their own strength and our weakness; and that the season
of the year would not permit us to prosecute those advantages that otherwise
might have been better improved; It not being possible for us to proceed on
with our Line, nor entrench by reason of the extreme hard frost: so as
howsoever it might seem a teadious work; yet when it is considered how much our
strength was unsuitable to the work, and the great want of Money which made it
the more difficult to keep together (upon such extreme hard duty) an Army
constituted and collected out of several Counties, how often it has been
attempted to relieve this City, how often they have been repulsed: how little
relief has been conveied into the City, and how often the enemy has Sallied
out, and been always repulsed: so as during more then twenty weeks close
siege, our Quarters have not been beaten up, neither have we sustained any
considerable loss, whereby I hope we may be sufficiently vindicated against
those calumnies, which the envy of some and impatience of others, have cast
upon us: Pardon I beseech you that I have so long detained you* and believe
that I am, and will always remain

Your very faithful Friend and Servant, W. B.
Chester, Feb. 9. 1645. SInce the concluding hereof, I hear there are some
Irish and some few French landed in Wales, the certainty I shall be able to
inform you in my next; but if there be any, they are not much considerable, not
said to be above a hundred and fifty in the whole.



Letters intercepted from Sir Jacob Ashley, the Countess of Leinster and
others, directed to the Lord Byron and others.
To the Lord Byron.
MY very good Lord, I received a Copy of your Lordships of the second of Jan.
this 11 of the same, and am sorry to hear your Lordships reduced to so hard an
exigent; the original was sent with a packet from Ireland to Oxford by the
Governor of Worcester, I being come to Liechfield, where yet I am. I writ to
your Lordship from Worcester by Mr. Walley, about 14 days since, but I
perceive by Sir John Wats to me of the 4 of this instant (which I received the
10,) that he yet stays at Chirk-Castle; from whence mine has been sent to
your Lordship two ways, so that I hope ours is come to hand. I missed of
Captain Elies, I being come from Worcester, and thereby of the particular
Relation of the state of Chester: I perceive the Peace in Ireland is concluded,
for my Lord Marquis Ormond has written to my Lord Archbishop of York by
Letters of the 12 December. last, (a Copy whereof his Grace sent me, and came to
my hands the 10 of this instant) That he had 3000 foot in readiness to be
shipped for relief of Chester, for which he desired fit Quarters to be provided
against their Landing, which by computation from his Letter should be about
this time. I have written to his Grace, praying his best power and assistance
to be contributed for providing Quarters for them accordingly; and so soon as I
shall have notice of their Landing, I shall advance with what strength I can
make, which I hope will be about 1500 horse, and 6 or 700 foot to join with
them; and am glad your Lordship can add so considerable a number, which I hope
may do the work. My Lord, as by my last, so again I pray you to inform me the
Enemies strength* and what way is best to come, and such like circumstances as
your Lordship thinks pertinent. I assure your Lordship I am very sensible how
much the preservation of that place imports His Majesty's advantage, and I
shall employ the utmost of my endeavors to render it relief: wherein I beseech
your Lordship be confident of, and that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Jacob Ashley.
Liechfield, 12. Ian. 1645.
For Sir Richard Lloyd.
SIR, My Lord Ashley is not returned from Liechfield; I sent the Letters to
him, whose Answer I expect hourly; by the 24 of this month, there will be a
force sufficient with Gods blessing to raise the Siege; you may assure the
City, so much was in Cipher, of all this I am very confident, and you may do
well to send this to my Lord, whom I will strive to serve to my utmost. I had
gone to my Lord Ashley, but for fear of my missing him upon the way.

Your faithful Servant, Rob: Elice.
Bridgnorth, Ian. 14. 1645.
For my general Friend Sir William Neal.
DEar Knight, Pray be pleased to speed this enclosed Paper with all possible
speed into Chester, it contains crumbs of comfort. My Lord Byron has the key,
for your present satisfaction, be pleased to know, that my Lord Ashley, Sir
Charles Lucas, Sir William Vaughan, and plenty of gallant Blades will be in
these parts ere many days, with a sufficient force (by the blessing of God) to
raise the Siege at Chester: pray seal up the enclosed in a Paper, and direct it
for my Lord Byron: my duty to you all.

Dear Knight, Your true Servant, John Wats.
Jan. 18. 2645. The Scribe is yours and my Ladies most faithful Servant: This
enclosed will be most welcome to your Neighbors: use all possible means to
hasten it, to prevent all sluggering comers.



For my Lord Byron.
MY Noble Lord, This night ours is come from my Lord Digby, and you post night
and day to the King with assurance that 15000 are ready with all Accommodations
for to come over for to relieve Chester, which will crown your Lordships work,
and the truly loyal Mayor, whose Names will be Honored by all virtuous
posterity: they had come over before now, if some miscarriage had not happened,
which will suddenly be removed, and then 24 hours will Land them upon English
ground, they care not for the Enemies ships. My Noble Lord, when Sir William
Gerrard writes in Cipher, he will acquaint where the error was, that before now
this gallant Army came not; I hope in good time it will: if peoples patience be
not in Chester altogether exhausted, which God forbid, I assure them those of
our Country Gentry that are gone in to the Enemy, conceive themselves much
neglected by them, I would not have thus much trespassed upon your Lordships
most serious occasions, but knowing of Sir W. Ia. absence, thought it necessary
to impart this News in haste to youward, Noble Mayor. God direct you both, and
have you in his keeping. So wishes,

My Lord* Your most humble Servant, Leinster.
Ian. 18. 1645.
For my Lord Byron.
MAy it please your Lordship, I have sent you these enclosed, which I am sure
will be welcome to you; I durst not write to you before now, by reason I had no
certainty to write: I believe your Lordship does know of my condition: here the
Enemy lives in Hawarden, Aston, and Stretton and Bretton. I received a Letter
from Denby, intimating great hopes of the Irish Landing by this fair wind. My
Lord, the Enemy brags of a Parley for the delivering of the City, but I believe
them not: I beseech your Lordships care, and two fires if this come safe to
your hands; and if all be well an hour after our fire to be made upon the
Castle: So desiring you will be pleased to let me hear from you as soon as
possible you can, that I may further serve your Lordship, which shall never be
wanting by him that will remain.

My Lord, Your faithful Servant. William Neal.
Haw: Castle, Ian. 19. 1645.
For the Ea. of Leinster.
MY Honorable Lord, This night has produced this News, that 15000 men are
already in Ireland, with shipping both from France and Denmark with all other
accommodations, and I hope will come in good time, to crown your Lordships and
the truly loyal Majors work, which deserves all honor: They had been over
before now to your Relief, but for some miscarriage, which will suddenly be
removed, and that done, their readiness is so complete, 24 hours will land
them on English ground. I have no more to say, but I hear some of our country
Gentry being gone to the Enemy, begin to think themselves much neglected by
them; so let all be which turn turn-coats. God have you all in his keeping.

Yours till death, Leinster.
January 18.
Sir Edmond Verney and Major Throp refusing to carry in the Propositions
tendered by Sir Will: Brereton, diverse of these Copies were thrown over the walls
which produced good effects amongst the Citizens.
I Did this day deliver unto Sir Edmond Verney and Major Throp Conditions,
wherein I tendered to all the Welsh Soldiers and Officers, liberty to go and
live at their own homes. For the Irish (that have not taken part with the
Rebels) liberty to return into Ireland, or to march to any of the Kings
Garrisons. To the Citizens (who were not Commissioners of Array nor Members of
Parliament) the liberty of their persons, the enjoyment of their estates, and
freedom of Trade, as other Towns and Cities under the Parliaments power and
protection; which would have been performed had they been accepted, but they
would not receive them as was desired by

William Breretor.
Chester Suburbs, Ian. 21. 1645.
SIr, We are told by Sir Edm: Verney, and Major Thomas Throp (employed from the
Lo: Byron our Governor with Propositions) that you intended to send some by a
Trumpet of your own (the bringing thereof being contrary to their Instructions)
we have since seen Papers under your hand thrown over the walls (two whereof we
send enclosed) and desire to know whether those be the Conditions you offered
to their conveyance, which if they be not, we wish those may be sent you
tendered to them: And remain,

Your Servants, Cha: Walley Major, for my self and Citizens. Rob: Tatton, Vic.
Com. Cestr.

Chester, Ian. 24. 1645.
GEntlemen, I have received your Letter, and because this day is set apart for
Sacred duties, I shall send my Propositions tomorrow, if before nine of the
clock in the morning I receive a Pass from the Lord Byron for Col: Chidley
Coot, and Lieut. Col. Rob. Venables, and in the mean time I remain

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Ian. 25. 1645.
SIr, I send enclosed a Pass for Col: Coot, and Lieutenant Colonel Venables,
their horses and servants, where you shall think fit, that they may meet with
Lieutenant Colonel Io. Robinson, and Alderman William Ince, whom I shall send
to receive your Propositions; and for whom, with their servants and horses, I
desire your Pass, and leave it to your choice, whether at the Iron Bridge, or
between your Works and our Fort. Upon receipt and consideration had of your
Propositions: I shall give such Answer thereunto as shall be consonant to
Honor and Justice, and remain

Your Servant, John Byron.
Chester, 26. Ian. 1645.
To all Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of His Majestirs Army and Garrisons
whom it may concern.
YOu are hereby required to suffer the bearers hereof, Col: Chidley Coot, and
Lieut. Col. Venables, their servants and horses, quietly to pass and travel to
the Iron Bridge, or to the midway between the Fort and the Enemies works at
the choice of them, there to meet with Lieut. Col. Io: Robinson, and Alderman
William Ince, and to return into the Forgate street without any your let or
interruption.

John Byron.
Chester, 26 Ian. 1645.
MY Lord, Although I expected a Pass for those two Gentlemen I nominated to
come into the City, as I granted to yours to come into my Quarters, yet to
satisfy the Citizens desire and expectation, I have sent you a Pass for those
Gentlemen you desire to meet the midway (betwixt two and three of the clock
this afternoon) between your Fort and our Works, which you shall receive
enclosed, and I remain

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs, Ian. 26. 1645.
To all Commanders, Officers and common Soldiers, in service for King and
Parliament, whom it may concern.
YOu are hereby required to suffer the Bearers hereof, Lieut. Col. John
Robinson and Alderman William Ince, their servants and horses quietly to pass
and travel the mid*way between our Works and the Enemies Fort, there to meet
with Col. Chidley Coot and Lieut. Col. Robert Venables, and to return into
Chester without any your let or molestation.

William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs, Ian. 26. 1645.
MY Lord, I cannot now send you such Propositions as have been formerly
rejected, every day producing loss of Blood and expense of Treasure: neither
will I trouble my self with answering the particulars of your unparalleld
demands, to which if I should suit mine, I could require no less then your
self and all the Officers and Commanders to be my prisoners, and the rest
submitted to mercy.

Yet to witness my desires of the preservation of the City, I have upon
serious consideration and debate thought fit to tender these enclosed
Conditions, for the perfecting whereof, I am content Commissioners meet
concerning them, and such further particulars as may be conceived conducible to
the welfare of the City and counties adjacent, and have given Commission to
these Gentlemen to receive your Answer in writing to these Propositions of mine
herewith sent, touching which I shall not be so scrupulous as to demand their
return, not valuing to what view they may be exposed, therefore they are to be
left with you if you please, and remain

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs, Ian. 26. 1645.
From the Lord Byron to Sir William Brereton, upon the first tender of his
PROPOSITIONS.
SIR, I have received your Propositions by the Gentlemen, sent to meet yours;
whereunto, in regard of the several conditions of men therein concerned, I
cannot for the present give an Answer: upon consideration thereof had by those
therein concerned, I shall not fail to give you a punctual Answer thereunto;
and in the mean time rest,

Your Servant, John Byron.
Chester, Ian. 26. 1645.
The second Letter from the Lord Byron to Sir William Brereton, touching the
said Propositions.
SIR, These demands of mine which you term unparalleld, have been heretofore
granted (by far greater Commanders then your self, no disparagement to you) to
places in far worse condition then (God be thanked) this yet is, witness the
Basse, Breda, Mastrick, and as many other Towns as have been beleaguered either
by the Spanyard or Hollander; or to come nearer home, York and Carlifle, and
nearest of all Beeston Castle. And therefore you must excuse me, if upon the
Authority of so many Examples, I have not only propounded, but think fit to
insist upon them as the sense of ali manner of people in the City. As for your
conceit in the demanding of my self and the rest of the Commanders and Officers
to be your Prisoners, I would have you know, That we esteem our Honors so far
above our lives, that no extremity whatsoever, can put so mean thoughts into
the meanest of us all. And that to submit to your mercy, is by us reckoned
amongst those things we intend never to make use of; I am nevertheless still
content that the Commissioners whose Names I formerly tendered unto you, meet
with such as you shall appoint, in any indifferent place, to Treat upon
Honorable conditions, and desire you to assure your self that no other will be
assented unto you by

Your Servant, John Byron.
Chester, Ian. 27. 1645.
Sir William Breretons Reply to the former.
MY Lord, I cannot believe that you conceive the War betwixt the Hollander and
Spaniard, is to be made a president for us: Neither can I believe that such
conditions as you demanded, were granted to Basse, Breda, or Mastrick: Sure I
am, none such were given to York, Garlisle, or Beeston, though some of them
were maintained by as great Commanders as you self, and no disparagement to you.

I shall therefore offer to your consideration, the Examples of Liverpool,
Basing and Latham, who by their refusal of Honorable terms when they were
propounded, were not long after subjected to Captivity and the Sword.

You may the refore do right to all those many in^ocents under your Command, to
tender their safety, and the preservation of the City; for which end, I have
sent you fair and Honorable conditions, such as are the sense of all the
Officers and Soldiers with me, which being rejected, you may expect worse from

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs, Ian. 27. 1645.
A Leter from the Major of Chester and Mr. Tatton to Sir W: Brereton.
SIR, My Lord Byron having acquainted us with a Letter which he received from
you the last night, in answer to his sent by the said Drum, by which we
conceive you apprehend a rejection of your Propositions, which we much wonder
at, well knowing that my Lord writ unto you to appoint an indifferent place
where ours and your Commissioners might meet to Treat upon the Propos. on both
sides, which is apprehended by us to be your sense also, your own Propositions
iming so much, and you having so often by Letter expressed your tender care of
the Cities preservation, and prevention of the effusion of innocent blood. Our
desire therefore is, That you will nominate your Commissioners, with the time
and place, that ours and yours may meet to debate and Treat upon the
Propositions tendered on both sides, without which there can be no hopes of a
conclusion. So expecting your Answer, we rest,

Your Servants, Cha: Walley Mayor, Rob: Tatton, Vic. Com. Cestr.

Chester, Ian* 28. 1645.
Answer to the have.
ALthough I hold my self dis-engaged from any former tenders, and do very well
know your necessitous condition, whereof I have received abundant information
several ways: Yet because I desire the Cities preservation, and not to
lengthen your miseries, I am content to appoint for Commissioners, the
Gentlemen whose names are enclosed to Treat with yours upon my Propositions
already tendered, to morrow morning by ten of the Clock in the Forgatestreet,
if you send in the mean time for a Pass for your Commissioners formerly named,
and their servants: In the mean time I remain

Your servant, W. Brereton.
Ian. 28. 1645. The names of the Commissioners. Col. Bowyer. Col. Io. Booth.
Col. Duckenfield. Col. Mich. Jones. Col. Chidley Coot. Col. Carter. Adju. Genesis
Lowthian. Jonathan Bruen Esquire Roger Wilbraham Esquire Lieut. Col. Hunt. Lieut. Col.
Venables. Mr. Rich. Bradshaw.




From the Major of Chester, and Mr. Tatton to Sir W: Brereton.
Sir,
WE desire that a Pass for our Commissioners formerly named, their servants
and horses, may be sen by this Drum, to meet with yours in the Forgate-street
to morrow morning by nine of the Clock, and to return. Remaining

Your servants Cha. Walley Major. Robert Tatton, Vic. Com. Cestr.

Chester the 28 of Ian. 1645.
They delaying time, and not sending for a Pass so soon as was expected, this
was sent in to them.
Gentlemen,
I Have received your several Dilatory Answers, and do assure yon, that if the
Lord Byron (in whom you say the sole power of Treaty rests) do not assent and
act therein, you may forbear sending. Do not deceive your selves in expectation
that I will Treat when you please. I am sorry my care of the Cities
preservation has produced such unsuitable effects. The further misery that is
like to befall that City, be on your heads, and not on

Your servant Will. Brereton.
January 29. 1645.
Lord Byron to Sir William Brereton.
SIR, I was knowing of, and consenting to the Letter this day sent by Mr. Mayor
and Mr. Sheriff Tatton, touching the intended Treaty, and am content (if a
Pass may be sent for that purpose) that the Commissioners formerly named, do
meet with yours at the time and place in that Letter mentioned, and remain

Your Servant, John Byron.
Chester, Ian. 29.
MY Lord, I have, according to your desire, sent you a Pass here enclosed, for
those Gentlemen you formerly nominate, who are to morrow expected at the time
and place appointed, where mine also shall be ready. In the mean time I remain

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs, 29 Ian. 1645.
A Pass for the Chester Commissioners.
To all Commanders, Officers and other Soldiers under my command, in service
for King and Parliament.
THese are to command you to permit and suffer the persons under named, with
their Attendants (not exceeding twenty four in number) quietly and peaceably to
pass your Scouts and Guards from Chester to this place, with their Horses and
Arms, and to return without any your let or hindrance: Hereof fail not at your
perils.

Given under my hand at my Quarters, in the Forgate street, Ian. 29. 1645. Sir
Edm: Verney Knight and Col. William Ince Alderman. Thomas Cholmondley Esquire
Lieut. Col. Peter Griffith. Lieut. Col. Henry Leigh. Christopher Blease
Alderman. Sergeant Major Tho: Throp. Lieut. Col. John Robinson. John Johnson
Merchant. John Werden Gent. Dr. Moreton, Divines. Tho: Bridge,


From the Mayor and Lord Byron to Sir William Brereton.
SIR, Upon the return of those Commissioners sent to treat with yours, and the
Account they have given of their proceedings, we find it so absolutely
impossible to make a final conclusion in the time limited, the matter being of
so high a concernment to the Estates, Liberties, Lives and Consciences of the
several conditions of people in this City, that we are enforced to require a
further day, which we desire no longer then Monday next, at which time we
hereby engage our selves, they shall return with full power to conclude:
Hereunto not doubting your assent, we rest

Your Servants, John Byron. Cha: Walley for my self and Citizens.
Chester, 31 Jan. 1645.
MY Lord, Upon due consideration how you have carried on this Treaty, and upon
consultation with those with whom I have advised, I find nothing more then
delays in your desires, there being no new matter proposed yesterday, but what
you have had sufficient time to consider.

I shall not therefore admit of any further delay, nor longer time to treat and
conclude upon the Conditions tendered then this day, and so remain

Your Servant, William Brereton.
Ian. 31. 1645.
Articles concluded and agreed upon Feb. 1. 1645. between the Commissioners
appointed on the behalf of John Lord Byron, Field Marshal General of
North*Wales, and Governor of Chester on the one part, and the Commissioners on
the behalf of Sir William Brereton Baronet, Commander in chief of all the
Forces of Cheshire, and at the Leaguer before Chester, on the other part; for
the Surrender of the City of Chester, with the Castle and Fort thereof.
1. THat the Lord Byron, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen and
Soldiers, and all other Persons whatsoever, now residing in the City of
Chester, and the Castle and Fort thereof, shall have liberty to march out of
the said City, Castle, and Fort, with all their Apparel whatsoever, and no
other or more Goods, Horses or Arms, then are hereafter mentioned, viz. The
Lord Byron with his Horse and Arms, and ten men with their Horses and Arms to
attend him: Also his Lady and Servants, two Coaches and four Horses in either
of them, for the accommodating of them, and such other Ladies and Gentlewomen
as the said Lord Byron shall think meet, with eighty of the said Lords Books,
and all his Deeds and Evidences, Manuscripts and Writings in his possession;
the said Lord, his Lady, nor any their Attendants, carrying amongst them all
above forty pounds in money, and twenty pounds in Plate: The rest of the
Noblemen with their Ladies and Servants, to march with their Horses, each of
the said Lords attended with four men, their Horses and Arms; every such
Nobleman carrying with him not above thirty pounds in money: Every Knight and
Colonel to march with two men, their Horses and Arms; no such Knight or Colonel
to carry with him above ten pounds in money: Every Lieutenant Colonel, Major
and Captain of Horse, with one man, their Horses and Arms; no such Lieutenant
Colonel, Major or Captain, carrying with him above five pounds in money: Every
Captain of Foot, Esquire, Graduate, Preaching Minister, Gentlemen of quality,
the Advocate and Secretary to the Army, every of them with his own Horse and
Sword (the Ministers without Swords) none of them carrying with him above fifty
shillings, and the Ministers to have all their own Manuscripts, Notes, and
Evidences: Lieutenants, Cornets, Ensigns, and other inferior Officers in
Commission, on Foot with every man his Sword, and not above twenty shillings in
money: All Troopers, Foot-Souldiers, Gunpowder Makers, Canoneers, and all other
not before mentioned, to march without Horse or Arms. And that none of the said
Persons before mentioned, shall in their march, after they are out of the City
and Liberties thereof, be plundered, searched or molested.

2. That all Women of what degree soever, that please to march out of the City,
shall have all their Apparel with them; and such Officers Wives, whose Husbands
are Prisoners or absent, may carry such sums of money with them, as are allowed
by these Articles to*Commanders, Officers, and Gentlemen of their Husbands
qualities and no more.

3. That none of the Commanders, Officers or Soldiers, or any other at or
before their marching out of the City, Castle or Fort, do injure or plunder the
Person or Goods of any* nor carry any thing away out of the said City, Castle
or Fort, but what is their own and hereby allowed.

4. That all Citizens and others now residing within the City, shall be saved
and secured in their Persons, and their Goods and Estates within the City and
Liberties thereof, preserved and kept from the plunder and violence of the
Soldiers, and have the like freedom of Trade, as other Cities and Towns under
the Parliaments protection have, and such immunities as they of right ought to
have. And that every such Merchant, and Tradesman of Chester, as shall desire
to go into North Wales, to look after his Goods, shall have a Pass to go
thither, and return back again; he first giving security, that (during his
absence) he will do no act to the prejudice of the Parliament: And that no such
person shall at any time without License carry more moneys with him, then
sufficient to defray the charges of his journey. And that all Citizens and
other Inhabitants, who shall now or hereafter desire to march forth of the City
of Chester, and not act any thing against the Parliament, his, or their Wives,
or Families, to have the benefit and privilege of Inhabitants.

5. That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick, or wounded within
the City of Chester, or the Castle, or Fort thereof, shall have liberty to stay
until their recovery, and then have Passes to Conway, or any of the Kings
Garrisons not blocked up: In the mean time to be provided for.

6. That the said Lord Byron, Noblemen, Commanders, Gentlemen, Officers and
Soldiers, and all others that shall march out of the Town, shall have liberty
to march to Conway, and five days are allowed them to march thither with a
Convoy of two hundred Horse; the Welsh Officers and Soldiers to have liberty
to go to their own homes, all of them to have free Quarter in their march, and
twelve carriages (if they shall have occasion to use so many) which carriages
are to be returned on the sixth day, and that Passes be given them for their
safe return to Chester, and that they be secured until they return thither.

7. That no Soldier in his march shall be inveigled or enticed from his
Colors or Command, with any promise or inducement whatsoever.

8. That all such Persons, Citizens, or others, who have Families in Chester,
and are now in places remote thence, shall have the like benefit of these
Articles, as those who are now resident in the City.

9. That the Friends of the Earls of Derby and Leitchfield, or of any of those
whose dead Bodies are not yet interred in Chester, shall have two months time
to fetch them thence, whither they please; provided, that none of them come
attended with above twenty horse.

10. That no Church within the City, or Evidences, or Writings, belonging to
the same, shall be defaced.

11. That such Irish as were born of Irish Parents, and have taken part with
the Rebels in Ireland, and now in the City, shall be prisoners.

12. That all those Horses and Arms belonging to those that march out, and not
by these Articles allowed to be taken and carried out of the City (except such
Horses as are the proper Goods of the Citizens and Inhabitants that shall
remain in the City) before the delivery of the same be brought, the Horses into
the Castle Court, and the Arms in to the Shire-Hall, where Officers shall be
appointed to receive them.

13. That in consideration hereof, the said City and Castle without any
slighting or defacing thereof, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and
all other furniture and Provisions of War therein whatsoever, except what is
allowed to be carried away, and all the Records in the Castle, without
diminution, imbezelling or defacing, be delivered to the said Sir William
Brereton or such as he shall appoint for the use of King and Parliament upon
Tuesday next being the third of this instant February 1645. by ten of the cloak
in the forenoone.

14. That the Fort with all the Ordnance, Arms Ammunition and Provision
therein, of what sort soever, not formally granted or allowed of, upon the
signing of these Articles be delivered to Sir William Brereton, or such as he
shall appoint.

15. That upon Signing of these Articles all Prisoners in the City, Castle, and
Fort, that have been in Arms for the Parliament, or imprisoned for adhearing
thereunto, shall immediately be set at Liberty.

16. That the Convoy shall not receive any injury in their going or coming
back, and shall have three days allowed for their return.

17. That if any Person concerned in any of these Articles shall violate any
part of them, such Person shall loose the benefit of all the said Articles.

18. That upon the Signinig of these Articles, sufficient Hostages, such as
shall be approved of, be given for the performance of the said Articles.

Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of the right
Honorable the Lord Byron. Edmund Verney. John Robinson. Thomas Cholmondeley.
Peter Griffith. Henry Legh. Thomas Throppe. Christopher Blease. William Jnce.
John Werden. John Johnson. Edward Moreton. Thomas Bridge.

What is done by the Commissioners is confirmed by John Byron.
Chesters Enlargement after three years bondage. Or, A Compendious Narration
of the reducing of Chester and Beston Castle, with the memorable occurrances
conducing thereunto.
THe City of Chester is a strong Prize in it self, anciently such by the high
and broad Walls, with many Towers and Bulwarks flankering the same, and since
these troubles fortified by more than ordinary Mud-walls securing the Suburbs:
and to complete the whole, the river Dee (in some measure Navigable) secures it
on the West and South, which swells so broad and high in the Tide, that no
forces by Land can restrain relief by Sea.

The situation likewise makes it most advantageous to the possessors, it being
the key of Ireland, and a tie to unite North- Wales to Lancashire by a small
neck of land in Cheshire, five miles over, the Rivers on both sides foardable.

This City ever since the beginning of these troubles (Perfideously surprised
by the Commissioners of Array, in time of Truce) was kept for the King,
esteemed the masterpiece of these parts of the Kingdom, and in some measure
accordingly looked upon by the Parliament, whence it came to pass that much
time and Treasure was expended by the prudent Commander Sir William Brereton
for the reducing of it.

More then two years agone it was first attempted, but the work not well
managed (the Militia being then in its infancy) it proved abortive. The enemy
perceiving what they might expect in time, endeavored their utmost, by art and
industry to make it impregnable.

Sir William Brereton perceiving that work too difficult, betook himself to
another Design, the reducing of Boston Castle, a piece of such annoyance and
charge to the Country, that it will not be impertinent to give a brief
account of the fortifying, losing, and regaining of it, but the work of this
piece, and the City, did at all times so mutually interfare, that they must be
twisted in the history.

At the beginning of these Wars, and many years before, this piece was no
more than the Skelliton, or bare Anatomy of a Castle, Sir William Brereton
prizing it by the situation, caused the Breaches to be made up with mud-walls,
the Well of the outer Ward to be cleansed, and a few rooms erected, the old
Walls being the greatest part of the fabric; a Captain or two being wearied
out of the charge of such a Prison, it was committed to Captain Steel, (a
rough-heawn man, no Soldier) whose care was more to see it repaired,
victualled, and to live quietly there, than the safe custody of it. After it
was well stored with provision, the Army out of Ireland, with the accession of
other Forces, under the command of Sir John Byron* drew into Cheshire: Steel
had as sufficient notice of his danger, as we of his negligence: the enemy
suddenly surprised the inner Ward, where was nothing but stones, and a good
prospect, he by his sloth having lost that part, out of cowardice gave up the
other without delay: his reward was death, upon the sentence of a Counsel of
War, ours, the loss of the Country, and the shaking of the whole County for
the regaining of it, which the enemy kept in possession, about the space of two
years.

In December 1644. Sir William Brereton with the Forces of Cheshire and
Auxiliaries of the Counties of Lancaster, York, Darby, Stafford, Warwicks, and
Mountgomerie, a very considerable Army, designed the reducing of Chester and
this Castle, began to beleaguer the Castle by fortifying Beston house, half a
mile from it, and by some guards of Horse and Foot in adjacent places. The
enemy from Holt Castle falling upon our Quarters, caused us to quarter a strong
party in Farne, by which we restrained the incursions from that Castle. Then
the enemy from Chester fell upon our Quarters at Aldford* which occasioned us
to bring the greatest part of the Army to straiten Chester, in the month of
February Christleton being the head quarter (about a mile from Chester) was
secured from Horse by sleight mud-walls, by this means the City was straightened
on this side the River: At this time (holding correspondence with some in the
town) we attempted a surprisall, but (for ought we can learn) were drawn on
by a subtle wile of the enemy, yet brought off without loss by divine
providence.

One memorable atcheivement fell out in thetime of this Leaguer; the enemy from
Chester with a body of fifteen hundred Horse and Foot, endeavored the
surprisall of Christleton, whiles they were at dinner, after notice of their
approach by the centry on the steeple, in a quarter of an hours space,
Colonel Jones drew up the Horse, and adjutant Louthiane seven hundred Foot,
the enemy laid a strong Ambuscado of above three hundred Foot in the hedges,
the Body of their Horse advanced toward their Foot in a fair broad Lane
nere Boughton, Colonel Jones with his own Troop, and Major Sankey with his,
charged through their Ambuscado, which so terrified the Enemy that many of them
cast down their Arms, then they routed their Horse, against whom the City
shut their Gates, least by their retreat they should loose all their Foot,
Adjutant Louthian divided his foot, and drew them into the feildes to fall on
the Enemies foot on both sides the lane, whom he utterly routed, chasing them
within Musket shot of their own Works. Our Horse being but few not seconded by
the Reserve, the Enemies Horse many, and compelled by the Citizens to face
about, we were necessitated to drive away what prisoners we could with safety,
and whom we could not bring off we cut and slasht miserably, which caused many
to supplicate themselves prisoners, that they might escape wounds, many escaped
from us down a steep Hill by the river, others got into boggy places. The
success was good* we took Colonel Werden* Livetenant Colonel Vain, six
Captains, twenty more Officers by Commission, one hundred and eighty other
Officers and Soldiers, slew but few, wounded very many, to the great amazement
of the Citizens, who vowed they would never come out again, we lost one on the
ground, three died of their wounds, about twenty wounded, Major Sankey sore
wounded, but not dangerously, Colonel Jones slightly wounded, and Captain
Blackwall taken prisoner.

On Easter Eave we blockt up the City on the Welsh side also, for the space of
six weckes, adjutant Louthiane, who quartered in Hawarden blockt up the
Castle, drew his Trenches within a stones cast of it, and so far advance the
work by undermining and battery, that in all probability* a few days had set
us in possession of it, others quartered in all the Towns and Houses nearer
Chester, to the repressing of markets, but not restraining of relief, for both
sides were in some measure open to intelligence, and some provision, specially
the Cheshire side. Our hopes of success were great, but the time of mercy for
so* high a favor was* not yet come; Our eyes were so fixed on the vast body of
an army, being the cream and gallantry of all the adjacent Counties, that God
would not eclypse his own glory, lest it should be said man had done it. For
upon the approach of Prince Maurice with a far less force, we quit that side
of the river, leaving the City open to Wales, and upon Prince Ruperts advance
toward him, with accession of Force, we quit both the Leaguers, and having
strengthened the Garrisons, drew to the further side of Cheshire, remotest from
danger.

This proved fatal to the Country, for the enemy at Holte burnt Faune, Chester
burnt Christleton, having before upon our approach burnt great Boughton, they
of Beston Castle burnt Beston hall, and Tilston house, two goodly mansions, and
required seventeene weeks arrears of the Country (which was paid) according to
the time we had blockt up the Castle, in which time we lost much blood, both in
Wales and at Beston, spent much Treasure, and almost wasted the Country on both
sides the river.

The enemy encouraged hereby issued out of Chester with three hundred Foot and
one hundred and twenty horse (the design not yet known to us) passed nere
Tarvin, so through Barrow, and accidentally fell upon Captain Gleggs quarters
at Helseby, took him, all his Troop, and some Country men prisoners, marched
toward Beston, intending to pass home by Holte: Upon intelligence, Tarvin
sent out, under the Command of Livetenant Colonel Venables two hundred horse
(most of which by special providence happened to be there at that time) and one
hundred and ninty Foot, these hasted toward the enemy, whom they encountered
in Eaton town, rescued Captain Glegg, all his men, the Country men, and some
of his Horse, slew seven, many escaped by counterfeting themselves dead, took
three Captains, many Officers two hundred and twenty Soldiers, and all their
plunder, lost not a man on the ground, but four dyed of their wounds not long
after.

After this Sir William Brereton, by an Ordinance, was called up to the
Parliament; the transaction of the Civil affairs of the County, were
committed to seven Trustees, and the Deputy Lievtenants, the Military to
Colonel Jones and adjut. Louthiane, men of such known worth, that they need
no Character of honor from this pen.

These two Soldiers laid the foundation to the work according to their own
principles. First they endeavored to appease the Soldiers who were
desperately mutinous, and the Horse on their march to leave the County for want
of pay, and because of their deep arreares, this the Gentlemen performed by
fair language, a months pay in hand (borrowed and out of their own purses)
and by deep engagements for a constant monthly pay, then they put in execution
the new Moddle, by which the soldiers were reduced to such order that they
past muster every night upon the Parade, and all that came not daily upon duty
lost their pay. The Country were as sensible of their own happiness, that
they paid to none, but those that served, and that all free quarter to the
Foot was taken off.

Their first service was for Leicestershire, Colonel Jones went out with five
hundred Horse and Dragoones, adjutant Louthiane with a considerable body of
Foot, as far as Bakewell, the Horse were Commanded to Darby to join with
Sir John Gell, who so retarded the Forces under his Command that they came
short of the Battle at Nasby, to which service they were designed, yet
advancing afterward to Lecester, were very serviceable for the reducing of
that Town, till the work was perfected.

The first design upon their return, was the siege of Beston Castle, by their
own Forces only: to make the work sure (which formerly proved abortive) they
erected a strong Fort within musket shot of the Castle, before the Gate,
finished it in seven days, built a convenient house in it, which they stoard
with provision and ammunition, afterward made a Counterskerfe, hereby all hope
of releise to the Castle was utterly cut off, and they enabled to draw off the
greatest part of their Force, when called thereto, by an invading enemy (which
fell out twice) or for the carrying on of any design, by which means
unexpectedly they surprised the Suburbs of Chester. God so far smyl'd upon
this enterprise, that in all the dangerous work of the Fort, we lost not a
man, nor a drop of Blood, though perpetually a fair mark to a violent enemy.

This work so far advancr, their thoughts were upon Chester, though it
seemed a design almost impossible in the judgment of man, for all visible
means was gone, the Commander in chief to the Parliament all the Auxiliaries
dispersed to their own Countries, and we a small despised in considerable
Force, not only engaged in the Leaguer of Beston, but hard put to it by the
incursions of Holte Castle (a bad neighbor) besides other Forces out of Wales
and Chester, daily infesting some part of the County, but laying to heart the
reproach cast on us by some of our pretended friends, as if all our work were
to lie idle in the Leaguer, and considering it was all one with God to work
with many or few, we resolved to storm the City.

But whiles we were intent upon this, two rubbs fell in the way, the King with
some force drew toward Namptwich intending for the North, which caused us to
draw off the Foot, to secure the Garrisons from surprizall, and Collonell Jones
with the Horse, and a small party of Foot undertook the charge of Beston. The
King drawing off from those parts inclined his course doubtfully, whether for
Darby, or the lower parts of Cheshire, intending to fall into the North, and so
to join with Mountresse, which counterchanged our course, for Adjutant
Louthiane with the Foot, and a small party of Horse undertook the Leaguer of
Beston, Colonel Jones with four hundred Horse and Dragoones went into the
field, to save the Country (in the lower parts of Cheshire) from spoil, to
fall upon the rear of the enemy, and to fight if occasion should require,
having an accession of foot in the skirts of the County. In this expedition he
was drawn by authority to a longer march than was intended, expecting to be
engaged toward Doncaster or Newarke, where the Scots and the adjacent
Countries made up a very puissant Army. Upon his return preparation was again
made for the intended enterprise upon the City, but was retarded a few weeks
by want of pay for the Army, and by the intelligence of the King drawing this
way (being taken off his expedition for the North) which made us stand on our
guard, that we might not lose the ground we had gained at Beston.

That cloud dispelled, they fixed upon a day for this so great a work, and
that it might be done without noise, they made use only of their own strength,
being about five hundred Horse, two hundred Dragoones, and seven hundred Foot,
and they that were privy to the design took an oath of secrecy.

On Friday September 19. we drew off the Leaguer at Beston toward Chester, but
out of the common rode, that we might make no noise in the Country, nor the
beleaguered Castle give any signal of forces abroad: after a tedious march all
night, we stormed the Suburbs of the City by break of day, were not
discovered till we attempted the Work, the Sentinel shot at our men, asked if
we had brought our dear brethren (meaning the Scots) with us, to take the
City: We multiplied not words, but fell to the work, Captain Gymbert was
the first that entered, his Ladder being to short, he lift up his man to the
mount (near the river side) from the top of it, his man drew him up by the
hand, and then they cryde, a town, a town, immediately they cleared that
Mount, slew Lieutenant Aldersey, the Captain e of the Watch, and put the rest,
about six men to flight, then others set too their Ladders, possessed themselves
of all the Mounts on that side the City, and with the instruments we brought
with us, brake open the gates: then all the Horse entered, with the remainder of
the Foot, with loud shouts, which utterly daunted the enemy. The next work
was to take the Bars, being the Fortification for the Forest street, which
was effected speedily, by entering at the back of some houses, not far from
the gate, so we fell upon that guard in the reere, who fled in all have into
the City, that while our men opened the gate into the Forest street, which we
entered with a full body of Horse and Foot, and some so close persu'd the Guard,
that they were near entering the City with them. Master Major very difficultly
got into the City, but made such haste, that he left the Sword and Mace at his
house in the Suburbs.

Thus possessed of the out-workes, we set guards in all places, where the enemy
might fall in upon us, posted Letters to the Gent. over all the County, also to
Lancashire, Salop, and Staffordshire, signifying what God had done for us,
desiring their assistance to the perfecting of this work, who neglecting all
other engagements, hasted toward us, as if the work had been their own.

The enemies first work was to fire the Suburbs, by their instruments lurking
amongst us, some of which we slew, they burnt Cow-lane, and St. John's lane:
after that they burnt up all the street without the North gate, to deprive us
of all quarter, though many hundred Families of their party, and much
provision were destroyed thereby.

The next day after the storm, we brought in the Artillery, prepared a
battery that night, fell upon the work the next day, made a wide breach by
the New gate, intending to storm the City at night: before which Master Major
was writ to, by way of advise to prepare the City to a summons (which was
peremptory) for the surrender of it, the Summons they would not read, because
the form in the direction pleased them not, the answer returned by the Major,
was to his wife in the Suburbs, that she might comfort her heart, for the King
was within four miles for their relief. About seven a clock that night, we
stormed the town in three or four places, some fought valiantly upon the tops
of their Ladders, many of which proved too short: Captain Finch with his
Firelocks entered the breach, beat off the enemy, but he, his Lieutenant, and
some others being wounded and carried off, they who were to second them were
discouraged: so the work was suspended for that time.

The City, apprehensive of their own danger, in that we followed the work so
close, sent to the King, who gave them assurance of relief, drawing toward
them with all speed, which caused us to send out some to seek out General
Pointz, and to hasten him to our relief, which was seasonably effected, for he
quartering at Whitchurch on Tuesday night, marched thence before midnight:
about six a clock next morning, advanced wirhin three miles of Chester, near
the Kings Army, before they knew of one another. Poyntz was upon Hatton Heath,
divided from the Enemy by a short Lane, whom he charged with a Forlorn hope,
was very active in his own person, and many gallant Gentlemen with him, but
being overpowred by the body of the Enemy, who were in a good posture upon the
open field, they put him to a retreat, though their loss was judged near as
great as his, but the wounding of Colonel Greaves, Colonel Bethel, and
Captain Cotton, gallant men, wrought no small distraction amongst them: both
Armies continuing facing one another after the skirmish (a lane betwixt them)
till about four a clock; by which time Colonel Jones was sent from the
Suburbs of Chester with five hundred Horse, and as many Foot, commanded by
Colonel John Boothe to the relief of Poyntz: the enemy in Chester perceiving
that, sent about one thousand horse and foot upon the reere of Collonell Jones,
yet by two hundred Horse, and as many Foot, sent out of the Suburbs by Adjut.
Louthaine, those were repelled and driven another way, so Colonel Jones
arrived safe to the field.

The Enemy in Chester perceiving so many gone out of the Suburbs, took the
opportunity to assault the Works, endeavoring to cast out such unwelcome
neighbors, this they attempted in diverse places, but were valiantly repulsed
by Adjutant Louthaine, this was the second work of that day, wherein God
appeared for us, making these the first fruits of a glorious ensuing victory.

When the Enemy perceived General Poyntz, and the Cheshire Forces about to
join, they quit their ground, drew into a body, and set themselves in Batalia
upon Rowton Moore, we mattialled our selves likewise and joined Battle
between four and five a clock, the greatest burden lay upon the Cheshire
Horse, because they were fresh for service, the rest much wearied with an
incessant march and long fasting; Colonel Jones encouraged his soldiers with
such language, that he drew tears from their eyes, and vows from their
mouths, that they would stick fast to him, whether in life or death, which
they faithfully performed: the rest also buckled themselves to the service in
hand, and to give both sides their due, they performed the work with as much
valor and resolution as could be expected from men: But God owning his own
cause, made the Parliament party victorious, who slew them with a great
slaughter on the ground, and chased them over all the Country.

Some of their scattred party united themselves near Chester, and made head
again; these were composed of those, who following Colonel Jones in the
reere, were driven toward bridge Trafford, and the escaped in the field, who
were partly twisted in the Parliaments Army, whiles they pursued the victory,
and part of them driven before us: opportunity serving, they separated
themselves, drew into a body, fell upon our pursuing Army, who suspected no
danger, got ground of us, and put us to retreat, but more force coming up, we
drove them under the Walls of the Suburbs, where the guards from the Walls made
execution on them. The reversion of these, and the rest, were gleaned up over
all the County, and in diverse other Countries where they were scattered, so
that God made it the most clear and full victory of any Battle yet fought in
the Kingdom, for we slew about three hundred men on the ground, many were
drowned, attempting to swim the river, we took above 1000. prisoners, besides
what daily were gleaned up by country men and women, yea, by known Cavaliers.
We took most of the Horse, to the great replenishing of the County, and our
Troops: amongst other considerable men, the Earl of Litchfield was slain.
We lost not 30. men on the ground, the chiefest of those, Captain Culme and
Capt. Crant, and some few died of their wounds afterward, the chief of them
were, Colonel Prince, and Captain Cotton, men much lamented.

After this, necessity required some refreshing for General Points his Army,
he intended his quarters near to the City that night, and the next day to
compass it on the other side the river, not only to distress the City, but to
encompasse the King in it, or pursue his lean reversion, if escaped thence.
But two men of seeming quality (yet not discovered) told him as messengers from
the Cheshire Gentlemen, that he was to take up his quarters at Northwich, by
which plot they tired his Army, and took him off his intended enterprise.

The next Sabbath in the morning Sept. 27. General Poyntz with his own Army,
and the accession of 1000. Lancashire and Cheshire foot, and 500. Cheshire
horse, passed over the river to the Welsh side: the King was then at Denbigh,
to whom Prince Maurice, with Sir Jacob Ashley joined themselves, to reinforce
the broken Army, or bring the King off: But having a signal by fire from a
steeple in Chester, of our passing over the River, the King, Prince Maurice,
and that small force they had, fled by night to Chirke Castle; We quartered
that night near Chester, on Monday night at Wrexham, endeavoring to inform
our selves of the Kings motion, and to follow him as opportunity might serve.
Upon Wednesday October. 1. the intelligence was, that the King marched toward
Hereford, thereupon General Poyntz that day marched after him from Wrexham to
Elesmere, and Colonel Jones toward Chester, to make good the Leaguer there.

To hasten the work of reducing the City, we sent a Convoy for the great Guns
at Stafford and Salop, by them to force a speedy entry, before the King could
reinforce himself to return, Powder and Ball was altogether wanting for so
great a service, but the Gentlemen of the County were so forward for the work,
that they engaged themselves for four hundred pounds, by which we were
furnished with Ammunition from Warrington: but such juggling there was to
prevent the ball, and retard the Guns, and by subtle agents, that cannot
endure the work should prosper in the hands of these instruments (who affect
the cause, as they fancy the Leader) that we lost above a week for the
effecting of this great Design. Upon Monday October. 5. the City was so strictly
begirt on both sides the River, that none could pass in or out for the guards,
of which Sir John Byron the Governor complained in his Letters to the
Archbish. of York, and his brother, sent to them at Conway, but intercepted by
us that day, the Powder and Ball being come, we fixed a battery on Tuesday
night, on the Northside toward the River, and made a breast-worke for
Musketeers on the Welsh side, which cleared a good part of the wall on the
inside. On Wednesday we battered the Bulwark next the North gate, even with
the Wall; On Thursday the wall it self, close by the Goblen Tower, which
proved so thick, and the Ball so brittle, that not much more than the
battlements was beaten down: whiles the besieged endeavored to make up the
breach by packs, feather-beds, etc. and to line the Wall all along; Our Cannon
on the Welsh side made great execution, swords, arms, legs, whole bodies were
seen to fly in the ayte, cart loads of bodies drawn off, and the Horse in
the rear driving up men and women to make up the breach. That night, a little
before Sun-sett we stormed the City upon the new breach, the old breach near
the new gate, and by scaling betwixt the East gate, and the Fenix tower: the
storm was very hot for near two hours together, some of ours carried it very
stoutly, fighting in the breach, and on the tops of the ladders, had they been
sutably seconded, the Town in all probability had been ours that night: In
conclusion, we made good our retreat in the dark: we lost 27 men on the
ground, of those, no Officers, but a Sergeant and a Corporal, about 60.
wounded, amongst them Lievtenant-Collonell Venables, and Captain Massy,
brother to the renowned Massy of Gloucester, but neither of them dangerously:
the report from within the City is, that their loss was more than ours,
amongst others, Sir William Manwaring was slain, an unlucky Knight, to fall
the first time he came into the field, and a wall betwixt him and danger.

Upon Saturday October. 18* the bridge of Boats (a very useful piece, uniting
the Forces on both sides the River) was finished: the one end fixed within the
Works, the other guarded with a Fort, whence the line was intended to entrench
the City on the Welsh side, to prevent all relief. The Monday after, we had a
design upon Holt, in regard of the Enemy drawn thither, reported to be 700.
which endangered the relief of Beston, and the beating up of our quarters.
Thereupon Colonel Jones fellsuddenly upon Holt, with above 1000. horse and
foot, who fell so unexpected on the Enemy, that had the Forlorn hope observed
the command, to keep within Musket shot of the Body, in all probability, we
had entered the Castle, before they had drawn up the Bridges; There we had a
sharp skirmish with about 140 horse, and the Castle foot, (for that was all
the strength that Fame had made 700.) upon whom we fell with such violence,
that we beat them into the Castle ditch, made great execution on them in the
fall, slew one Major, and many other soldiers, wounded very many* took
Lieutenant Coll. Byron, the Lord Byrons Brother, five more, and some good
horses: our loss was two men slain three wounded, not mortally, others
slightly wounded: fourteen of our Forlorn hope taken, whose neglect of
commands rendered them prisoners. By this achievement, we quite brake that
Body, secured the Leaguer at Beston, and our own quarters.

Near about that time Major Sankey with a party of horse fell upon Hawarden
town, which would not contribute to the Leaguer, laid an Ambuscado within
pistol shot of the Castle, drew the rest about to the other end of the Town,
at the alarm given, the listed Soldiers in the Town and some others besides,
hasted to the Castle, the ambuscado slew some, took 12. prisoners, fetched off
42. head of Cattle, 50. sheep of the Governors* 14. Horse, and a Bear, which
roared upon the man that laid hold on him for a calfe, none of ours either
lost, or wounded, thenceforth the Town contributed, and we restored the Cattle,
this became a good president to the Welsh, who above 20. miles off, follow
their example.

Upon Friday, and some days after our Cannon played on the enemies mills,
spoiled 3. of them, and battered the water Tower, by which water was conveyed
into the whole City. At this time we had sure intelligence of the enemies
advance toward us, whereupon the Commanders speeded Letters to all the
adjacent parts to hasten all the releife possible, that we might be enabled to
make good the Leaguer, and give Battle to the enemy in the field, that so we
might loose no ground.

Hitherto the military affairs of this County were under the charge of Col.
Jones and adju. Louthiane, who discharged that trust in all their undertakings,
with as much prudence, resolution and gallantry, as could be expressed from
men, whose endeavors God still crowned with happy success, and the work in
their hands so far advanc'^, that Chester, unless relieved with an army,
must necessarily yield up themselves, and Beston Castle gasping for every thing
necessary but air and water.

Upon Saturday October the twenty five Sir William Brereton came to Namptwich,
appointed by the Parliament to Command in chief, to whom the Commanders from
the Leaguer signified the enemies design, and the preparation already made to
entertain them. Sir William approving of that course, seconded their Letters,
to draw in the Auxiliaries, who were very forward of themselves to promote this
great design, in which they were all so much concerned.

By this time the enemy in Wales were reported to be potent, to the great
encouragement of the beleaguerd City and Castle. Sir William Brereton, however
summoned the Castle hopeing their low condition might incline them to a Parlie,
but they being confident of help at hand, by signalls from the City, and
adjacent Castles, sent back the Drum in a most scornful and reproachful
manner. Then Sir William sent away Colonel Jones with fourteen hundred Horse
and Dragoones, and adjutant Louthiane with one thousand Foot, to seek and
dissipute the enemy reported to be about three thousand at Denbigh. October the
twenty nine we marc't to Moulde, the next day to Ruthen, and November the first
to Denbigh, where the enemy being about one and twenty hundred Pedees making up
the number stayed for us, not knowing we were so many, we intended for Denbigh
green, a fair piece of ground for a Battle, they intercepted our course, at a
place called Whitechurch, a mile from Denbigh, where our Forlorn hope was
engaged, and fought courageously, till the Body came up, after which, though we
got ground, yet could not the Horse pass through that strait lane, before
which the enemy was marshald in a body, therefore a competent part being left
to keep that ground, the rest marched in a compass nere four miles, to form
the Batalia upon Denbigh green, or if the enemy would not there fight, to
compass them on both sides, which they perceiving, fell upon the party left to
keep that pass, ours beat them off and got into open ground which caused
them to fly to the Castle hill for shelter, there they rallied, and came down
again, our Foot with the Warwick and Darby Horse dispersed them again* drove
them from under the Walls of the Castle, and put them to a total rout, whom
the Horse pursued 8. miles, till the night forct them home, it is conjectured
that we slew about 100. on the ground took above 300. many of which we lost in
haste to get seasonably to the camp, and because we saw they were not worth
the keeping. Sir William Vaughan their Commander escapt by a timely flight,
advertising the Townsmen to provide for themselves, who thereupon took
Sanctuary in the Castle, burnt a great part of the Town, and attempted the
fireing of the whole, we took above 800. Horse, lost not a man on the field,
or but one, and not 20 wounded.

The Monday after this blessed atcheivement, we returned to the Leaguer at
Chester, about 30. advancing, before the army came up in sight of the City, and
wandering upon a vexatious marish ground, gave occasion to the enemy to think
we were routed, whereupon, after a great shout given in the City, all the Horse
and some Foot sallied out upon our quarters next the Bridge, which caused a
very sharp Skirmige of long continuance, in conclusion, we drove them in with
some loss on our side, which warnd us, not to be secure upon a victory, nor to
neglect our guards. The maine business of the Leaguer thenceforth was, to
finish the Trenches on the Welchside the City, that went slowly on for want of
money, which occasioned the enemy out of the Town to take their advantages to
fall upon our Guards, which put us to almost daily Skirmishing, and some loss.

Upon Friday November 14. after 18. weeks Seige the beleagured Castle of
Beston was brought to such extremities for want of provision, that their stout
hearts came down to beat a Parley, Sir William Brereton appointed Colonel
Croxton the Governor of Namptwich to Treat with them, who took to his
assistance Livetenant Colonel Coote, they delivered up the Castle the next
Lords day upon these conditions: To march out every man armed, Colors flying,
Drums beating, Matches light, a proportion of powder and ball, all their
proper goods to be carried with them, which laded two waines, a Convoy to guard
them to Flint Castle, as many as pleased to live quietly at their own homes,
and so far trusted, that no hostage was left to secure the return of the
Convoy, they were brought so low that they had eaten their catts, and had not
provision for that night, High conditions for a most bloody, insolent
Country-wasteing enemy, and them brought to such a starved condition. Their
march being on the Sabbath, occasioned the breach of that holy rest to many in
the Country, who attended their first opportunity to enquire after their
plundered goods, stoard up in that Cage of violence, and den of theives.

The next Wednesday after Sir William Brereton summoned the City in hope that
their wants within, and loss of Beston, might incline them to a Parley, after
full deliberation on the summons, they returned an high scornful, and
contempteous answer, playing upon, and jeering at the most persuasive a
rguments used for the surrender of the City: that taking no better effect, he
sent to them once more by their own Trumpet, that since they despised such
favor tendered, their blood must rest on their own heads.

On Tuesday night November 9. about midnight, the enemy in the City had a great
design to fire our bridge of boats, and to cut off the Leaguer guards on the
Welch-side to the effecting thereof, they sent 2. Boats carried down with the
Tide, laden with Tallow, Pitch, and other combustible matter, with a frame of
wood on the top of them, on which were fixed double charged Carbines, and other
shorter pieces, to make execution on them that sought to quench the fire; the
one of these fired hard by the Bridge they intended to burn, made no execution
on it, or on any person, but was seized on by our men, and the fire quenched,
the other fired in the mid way, betwixt their Bridge and ours, consumed it
self, without hurt to any. To put us to the greater distraction, they sallyed
out Horse and Foot at the same time upon the Guards nere the Bridge, and they
of Holt Castle alarmed our quarters at Pulford, thinking thereby to work such
distraction, that one Guard might not relieve an other, if their design should
take, but this attempt proved destructive to themselves, for after an hot
dispute, we beat them in, wounded many, slew 12. by the confession of their
own party, which put them to great distractions within the City, when that
which promised releife, proved their loss. In all that service we lost not a
man, nor a drop of blood that we know of.

December 4. a great packet of Letters was intercepted by our guards, sent out
of the City by a fit agent, signifying to their own party their low condition
with desire of releife. The maine business was locked up in Characters, and
they had the key, the report of their condition was referred to the Messenger,
who chose rather to run all hazards, than confess and discover his Message.
Being sent prisoner for Tarvin behind one of our men, he took the opportunity
to dismount himself on the new bridge, leapt into the water, in hope to escape
into the City by swyming, but sunk in the mid way, and was drowned; whom,
though he escaped Martial justice, vengeance would not suffer to live.

Now came in the happy tidings of the surrender of Latham, upon very honorable
conditions, to Colonel John Booth, who thereupon tendered the further
assistance of Lancashire, for the service of this Leaguer, which tender was as
opportune, as courteous, for this piece being so considerable, the enemy
commanded by Sir William Vaughan drew into a posture nere Bridgenorth for the
releife of it: they advanced into Shropshire with about 2000. Horse and Foot,
fell upon Rockadine Church, where the Parliament had a small Garrison, which
beat them off with loss, this caused Sir William Brereton to prepare
seasonably to break that design, to the carryng on of which, Lancashire
supplied us with 13. Troops, and 300. Foot. Upon the Sabbath day December 21.
we drew off all we could spare from the Leaguer, and marched that day to
Whitchurch the army joined was about 1500. Horse and 1500. Foot, there we
stayed till Friday, which was a little respiration to this wasted County, and so
far wrought upon the enemy, that we heard no more of them, then a retreat
toward Kiddermuster. In that time the enemy issued out of Chester and made an
escape with 18. Horse, and the Lord Saint Paul, the way was open for their
passage, because no Trenches were cut on the Welch-side to interrupt them in
their march, yet the Guard took Livetenant Colonel Needeham, and 3. more.
Upon Friday, Dec. 26. the violence of the Spring tide was such, that carrying
up a great weight of Ice, it brake the new Bridge made of Boats; the beleagured
were much encouraged hereby, made use of the present opportunity for some
relief, before we could repair that broken piece. On Saturday night the Enemy
in Wales with about 150 horse of the L. Byrons and others joined with his,
marched beside our guards into the City, with some small relief of Wheat,
Oatmeal, Pyes, and Moneys for the Welsh Soldiers, which was collected for them
toward Conway. The next morning, with the assistance of Chester horse, and
about 600 foot, they forced their passage through the guards to Hawarden
castle, with the loss of a Cornet, a Corporal, and one common Soldier taken
by the guard.

Col: Jones perceiving the danger might ensue to the Leaguer on the Welsh side
by this unhappy accident of the Bridge broken, hasted that day over the Foard
with 600 horse, 100 Dragoons, and appointed 100 foot to march after him, to
dissipate that party, which was preparing relief for the City, and to ease
these oppressed parts of the burden of free quarter; that night we quartered
at Mould, then coasted about the country near Ridley, Denbigh and Ruthen, and
returned to the Leaguer upon Saturday: In all the march we found the country
well-affected to us, not wanting in courteous entertainment, rejoicing in our
success, contributing freely to the relief of the Leaguer, tendering their
assistance as opportunity might serve, for reducing of the country: A people
rather to be pitied for their ignorance (whose Leaders have taught them to
err) then spoiled for their malignity.

Col: Jones with the Cheshire and Darbyshire horse, upon their return took up
their Leaguer quarters close by Hawarden castle, and Col: Massey with about 400
foot in Hawarden town, which (though the service was dangerous, and requiring
much duty) proved very advantageous for the Intercepting of all relief that
might come from those parts of Wales to the City: The Enemy perceiving our
posture, utterly despaired of sending relief by land, and applied themselves to
attempt that design by water, for the effecting whereof they fraught a Vessel
with a good quantity of Wheat, Bacon, Beef, and such like provision, not
doubting but the Wind, Tide and their Oars, might secure them to pass our
Boats, when the swelling River made the course passable besides the Channel: To
the preventing of which, nothing was left unattempted that might conduce to the
guarding of the River.

The beleaguered seeing their desperate condition, some from within the City
assured us, that they were mindful to parlye, and that upon Summons they
would*undoubtedly deliver it up, such care there was to preserve the City from
plunder, and to save the lives of many in a starving condition, that not
standing upon a Punctillio of honor, where there was a probability of reducing
a piece of such consequence, it was agreed by a Council of War, that the
City once more should be summoned.

The Summons was this.

Gent. Experience tells you upon what foundation your hopes of releife were
grounded but that you may see the tender care of the preservation of the City,
the lives and estates of the Inhabitants, Once more J Summon you to deliver the
City, Castle, and Fort into my hands, for the use of King and Parliament.

Your servant William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs 7. Jan. 1645.
For the Major of Chester and the Lord Byron.

This summons was dated the seventh and sent away the eighth by a Trumpet, whom
they admitted to the Bridge, and no further, received the summons and returned
this answer.

I have received your summons, to which in convenient time J shall return an
answer by a Messenger of mine own.

Your servant John Byron.
Chester 8. Jan, 1645.

They defered the answer till Monday January 12. which caused Sir William
Brereton to send to them again, requiring an answer of the summons.

Whiles our Trumpet went with that Message, their Drum brought in this
answer, so much expected.

We are not convinced by experience of the groundless foundation of our hopes
of releife, neither (God be thanked) is our conditionsuch, as to precipitate us
to a prejudicial treaty however if within twelve days we be not assured of
releife, by a Gentleman and Citizen, whom we shall send for the purpose, with a
Trumpet of ours, and a pass from you, we shall then be content to enter into a
Treaty upon honorable and Soldier like conditions, remaining.

John Biron. Charles Walley Major for himself and Brethren.
Chester Ian: 12. 1645.

To which answer Sir William Brereton thus reolyed.

The paper sent by your drum was no satisfactory answer, neither will I
assent to your desires in it. If you return not a more positive answer by
tomorrow at ten a clock, expect no further parlie.

Your servant William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs Jan. 12. 1645.

To this no answer was returned the next day, which rendered the Treaty as
broken off, and occasioned us to endeavor the further blocking up of all
passages for releife of the City. Upon Wednesday January. 14. a party of Horse
and Foot were sent to quarter in Holte, thereby that Castle was blockt up,
which was accustomed to range abroad daily into Cheshire, to the great
prejudice of that wasted County, which also proved a posterne, by which some
small releife many nights was sent into the City. The charge of this work was
undertaken by General Mytton, who came so unexpected upon the Town that he
took 32. Horses, and 3. persons Prisoners: but the next day, being oversecure
in their quarters, about 14. were surprised by the enemy, out of the Castle.
This blocking up of the two neighbor Castles rendered to the enemy their
condition desperate of any considerable releife, unless by a potent army.

The enemy perceiving their pretenses slighted, and pincht with their own
necessities, applied themselves to seek for a parle, by this Letter sent to
Sir William Brereton.

Sir, at the entreaty of us the Major, Noblemen, Gent. Alderman and Citizens of
Chester, the Lord Byron our Governor (in whom the sole power of Treaty rests)
is pleased to give way to a Treaty upon honorable conditions, to which if you
assent, Commissioners to that purpose may be agreed upon by both sides:
expecting your answer I rest.

Your servants Charles Walley Major, Robers Tatton vic. Comes.
Chester. 15. Jan 1645.

To which Sir William Brereton returned this answer.

When I have so long considered of an answer to your Letter, as you the Major
and the Lord Byron took time to answer my summons, you shall hear from me by
a Messenger of mine own: in the mean time I rest.

Your servant William Brereton.
Chester Suburbs 15. Ian. 1645
To the Major of Chester and Robert Tatton Esquire.

The day after (notwithstanding) this Letter was sent into the City.

Gent. We have prevailed with Sir William Brereton to give us leave to return
this answer to your last Letter, that notwithstanding your former rejection of
fair and honorable conditions, and the expense of time and blood, (which has
bin occasioned by your obstinacy) might justly provoake him to refuse any
further treaty, yet that it may appear he reteines his wonted desires of the
preservation of the City, and the lives and estates of the inhabitants, if your
Governor (in whom you say lies the full power to treat) send out reasonable
Propositions, betwixt this and Monday morning, he will take them into
consideration, and return such answer as may stand with honor and justice, and
may prevent the destruction of this ancient City, which is desired by.

Your servants Robert Duckenfield. James Louthiane.

Chester Suburbs 16. Jan. 1645.
For the Major of Chester and Robert Tatton Esquire.

To which Letter this answer was returned.

Gent. We have acquainted the Lord Byron with your Letter to us directed, who
is pleased to promise, that within the time therein limited, a full answer
shall be thereto returned, we remain.

Your servants Charles Walley. Robert Tatton. Vic. Com.

Chester. 17. Jan. 1645.
For Colonel Duckenfield and adjutant General Louthiane.

Upon Monday about noone, they sent a long Letter without the propositions
expected, the contents whereof was, to excuse their not sending in of
propositions for want of time fully to deliberate upon things of so great
importance. Also they nominated 12. men for Commissioners, consisting of the
Gentry, Soldiery, Citizens, and Clergy, because all these had their share in
the treaty, desiring Sir William also to nominate persons of that number and
quality on his part, and to design a place where they might treat. Sir William
took it not well, that they sent not the propositions, as was expected, and
approved not of so great a number of Commissioners; therefore he required their
propositions speedily, or to expect no further treaty, the next day they sent
again signifying, their propositions were ready, but they would not send them
by Drum or Trumpet, but by Commissioners, which they desired might be agreed
upon, the place designed, and their persons protected. Answer was made to the
Lord Byron, that if they sent propositions into the Suburbs, by two persons of
their choice, they should have safe conduct. Accordingly they sent 36.
propositions upon Thursday January 22. by Sir Edmund Verney and Major Thropp,
which were so extreme high, that they were ridiculous, not fit to burden the
Press, or to read, otherwise than to make sport. Sir William then tendered to
them his own propositions, which they utterly refused to take, because they
had no such Commission.

Hereupon Sir William caused diverse papers to be dispersed upon the walls that
night, which the Centries took in from our Soldiers, in which he signified
their unreasonable Demands in their propositions, and that they refused to take
with them his propositions in which he sought their good, and preservation of
the City, not doubting but this would work a mutiny, and force them to a
parlye in a more humble way.

Their extremities caused them to pretend a desire to continue the parlie,
whiles new hopes of releife by late intelligence quickened their droopeing
spirits to more than ordinary acclamations. For, upon Friday January 23. they
reported to our Guards their great confidence of releife by an army out of
Ireland, already landed, and others to be assistant to them in Wales, for joy
whereof they shot off their Guns, and gave a great shout upon the Walls, and
within the City, which they doubted not would prove effectual to animate the
gasping Citizens, and to work on us to allow them better conditions.

But to clear all on our part, Genesis Mytton with 800. Horse and 200. Foot and
Dragoones. January 25. marched into Wales, quartered that night in Ruthen,
endeavoring to find out and disipate that body of the enemy, what ever it
might prove, under the command of the Lord Saint Paul. Colonel Jones the day
after sent a party toward Ruthland Castle, hoping thereby to enclose the
enemy, or interrupt them in the way, if they attempted the releife of Chester,
whiles so great a party of ours was abroad in the Country. The enemy not
appearing, the party sent out by Colonel Jones made a speedy return with a
booty of Horse taken from the enemy, who had secured them in Ruthland, and good
stoare of Catle, for restitution of which the Country there paid their arreares
of contribution for the Leaguer. But Genesis Mytton continued in Ruthen, having
great hopes of the Castle, destitute of the Governor, Ammunition and fuel.

This while the Citizens were more sensible of their desperate condition, then
the Commanders, resolved to feed no longer upon lies, which had brought them a
long time to feed upon horesslesh so they forced the Commissioners to treat
with us, and to make the best conclusion they could but however to conclude,
Upon Friday January 30. their 12. Commissioners were admitted into the forest
street, which sent the same number of able men to join with them they
continued late that night in debating the propositions but the work drew not
toward a period. Our Commissioners agreed, that unless they came the next day
by 12. a clock and ended by 6. the treaty should cease: they desired to
defer it till Monday, which would not be admitted, so they all met upon
Saturday, continued the treaty all night, and all the next day. Our
Commissioners held them so close to it, that they yielded to very hard
conditions, which because they will be public, and larger then will suit to
this short narration, shall not burden this paper.

Betwixt ten and eleven at night they possessed us of the royal Fort, we having
first sent Col. Bowyer, and Col. Massy, hostages to Hawarden Castle, to secure
them of our fidelity in making good the Conditions on our part: upon Tuesday
we were possessed of the City and Castle, by which the Almighty (who ever-own'd
our undertakings) finished the great work of reducing this afflicted County,
almost spent under the incessant travel of a three years war. Our hopes
are, that this respiration to us, will be the first fruits of mercy to
Northwales, carrying with it a strong influence, for the reducing of the many
Castles, such bad neighbors to us, and destructive to that Country, which now
seem as ripe figgs that fall into the mouth of the eater.

The present posture of Cheshire and Northwales.
THe reducing of Chester has better lessoned the Commissioners of Array, then
all the Kings Papers, they begin to enquire after the Covenant, and suspect
their former oaths unwarrantable* the Cannonicall prophecy will be made good:
the rest were affrighttd and gave glory to the God of heaven. Apoc. 11.

Holt, Hawarden and Ruthen Castle, are blockt up and straightly begirt by
General Mytton, with the assistance of the Cheshire forces: Hawarden being
batterable will be necessitate to make a timely surrender.

The Bishops and great men are quiting Conway, not trusting to a strong Town
destitute of releise, this must needs put Denbigh to a stand, as destitute to
be a prison in a reduced Country.

Cheshire (who can as well cease to live, as to be out of action) will not be
wanting to General Mytton, and the Salopians for the reducing of Chirke
Castle, and high Archall, or to march to Bridgenorth.

A full harvest will fall out in the spring, if our sins blast not these
designs: we want no reapers with sharp siccles to cut down the harvest and
vintage so fully dried, if the stronger forces above watch the Mideanites, who
were accustomed to put the siccles into our labors, or to devour them, when
prepared to our mouths.

Cheshire who has indefatigably stuck to the work desires the unsupportable
burden of the many useless Garrisons may be removed from their shouldiers,
else, whiles secured of their lives, they are spoyld of their livelihood, and
disabled to contribute to the work abroad.

Many great benefices now vacant are undisposed, good Ministers want means,
and like Noah's, Dove find no rest for the soales of their feet, but in worse
case, for they have no arc to return too, but where the provission is spent,
and was never competent, it makes well for them who are very busy in collecting
Churches, and the Idol shepherds are not without hopes of return to their
own Cures, before they be disposed of. But there is one who sitts at stearne,
whose zeal will manage the work, that Christ may reign.

That worthless man may derogate nothing from the all working God, we may
render this account of heavens influence upon our designs, which gave them
life.
Remarkable providence concerning the Battle at Rowton Moore.
1. THat General Points came so seasonably for the Battle, whereas two days
before, we could not learn by any intelligence where that army was. As birds
flying God saves Jerusalem, and to those that fear his name, the sun of
righteousness artseth with healing in his wings.

2, A great part of General Points army, and those the best Regiments, were
not come up to the service, in regard of his speedy march. Its all one with God
to save with many or few. The less of man the more of God.

3. No part of the army but was first brought through the fire, before God
would crown them with victory. General Points had a stormy morning, and a
Cloudy day, first beaten off, whiles attempting the work, then all the day
kept under a sad apprehension of further evil. Colonel Jon^s marched on the
body of the enemy, and a strong party in his reere: the instruments to carry on
the work were chosen in the furnace of afflction.

4. Our army was interlynd with the enemy, who brake through the weaker part of
the left hand of our body, so that whiles we pursued the victory, they were
mixed and twisted amongst us, both parties knew it, yet they struck not at any
of ours, though we chased and beat down those that were before us. It was in
their power to hurt us, but God gave Laban a charge concerning his servant
Jacob.

5. Whiles they sought a place to secure themselves, they fell under our Walls,
where diverse perished. So God struck the Syrians with blindness, who went
into Samaria, whiles they sought Dothan. Others fled into the river in hopes to
escape, where very many perished. God has more instruments than the sword to
over power his enemies. The river Kishan swept them away.

Providence concerning the Battle at Denbigh.
1. THe Foundation to their ruin was their own lies: they reporting
themselves to be many, drew us out to seek them speedily, the Country voting
us few, caused them to stay for us: Their publishing of lies prepared them to
destruction, and their trusting in a lie slew them: He shall sweep away the
refuge of lies.

2. While our body was entyre we could not break in upon them, but trifled out
the time, when reduct to a small part that did the work. When Gideons many
thousands are sent away 300. beat the Mideanites. God seldom fights with many.

3. We slew about 100. of theirs, they not a man of ours on the ground. An
hundred slain for none, it is as good as the promise, one shall chase an
hundred.

4. The summer was lengthned beyond natures ordinary course, for the effecting
of these atcheivements, the like this age has not known, but so soon as the
serene heavens had smyld us success, the chyding winds, with blustering
storms, threatened the laden soldiers into their winter quarters. He that
lengthned the day to Josua for the conquest of Canaan, extended this summer for
the spoiling of Babylon. Though we look not for miracles, we have a God that
works wonders.

Providence concerning the Storming and Beleaguring of Chester.
1. WHiles with many thousands and vast expenses, the work was attempted, the
endeavors were unsuccessefull: but when reduced to a small number, and that
under a double engagement, the work was done beyond expectation, not by might,
nor by power.

2. God prepared a way to the work, by giveing first into our hands the chief
actors of our ruin*, Colonel Marrow, Colonel Werden, Major Philips and
Captain Monday: when their Charret wheels were taken off* they drove slowly.

3. The Gentlemen of the County were so active on their part and so semented
with the Commanders in the bond of dear affection, that it seemed to us the
first fruits of an harvest of peace for the whole County.

4. Though the darkness, and the way unknown, rendered the surprisall of the
work difficult, and the height of the walls made it seem desperate, yet we
found the Churches old friend the same to us, as to his Champion David, in whom
we glory upon the like service: thou will lighten my candle: by my God I have
leaped over a wall.

5. Though the thrice storming of that strong piece seemed desperate, and the
enemy gloried in the slaughter of many hundreds, yet (that we know of) we lost
not above 30. on the ground, in those three assaults, their loss (as they
confess) was more, their rock is not as our rock, our enemies themselves
being judges.

6. God so cleared the sky, and crusted the myrie ground with a continued
frost, that the air and soil became healthful to the great guards, that had
the earth for their beds, and the heavens for their Canopie, and most
accommodious for the carrying in of provision to the Leaguer: Heaven and earth
contribute to their service, who are in service to their Maker.

7. What was wanting to the soldiers in accommodation, was supplied by a
spiritfull resolution, for though diverse lived on bread and water, (...) their
arreares of pay deep, they resolved to stick to their work, what ever were
their wages. When God has a work to do, nothing shall disappoint it.

Providence concerning Beston Castle.
1. A Friend of ours, a Gun-smith betook himself purposely to the enemy there
to do good offices for us, so rested their arms in firing of them* that none
could take such aim, as to come near the mark. Hushai pretends for Absalom,
when he does the best offices for David.

2. In erecting of the Fort and house, within Musket shot of the Castle, we
lost not a man, though much blood was spilt in the former Leaguer. God makes
the blind, when he engages men on his own service.

3. A woman bringing Letters and intelligence out of the North, encompassed by
two or three hundred of our soldiers whiles examined about it, and kneeling
betwixt a soldiers legs, at further distance from the Castle than the Fort,
the enemy discharged a Musket at so fair a mark, the bullet shot her
mortally through the back, kneeling in that posture, but touched not any of
ours. An a^r^w shot at a venture strikes Ahab through a joint of his armor:
man shootes the bullet. God gives the ticket.

FINIS.

