A Brief Account of Captain WILLIAM GOVAN, His last Speech and Prayers, with a
Miraculous Instance after his Death, Concerning the Bleeding of his Head.
IN the Year 1661, the now Deceast Earl of Midletoun, and Chancelour Cunningham
and others, who then had the Government among their Hands, thinking to
Ingratiat themselves in the Kings favors by Bloody Expiations; Several
innocent Persons suffered by their cruelty, and particularly one Captain Govan
then designed of Kirktounholme he and Mr. James Guthrie a Minister, were
Execute at the Cross of Edinburgh both in one day. And it is recent in the
Hearts and Minds of many Honest Hearted Christians yet Living how it was the
common Talk then, of that Cruel Persecuting party, that there were a necessity
for some of every one of their three Stations and Qualities following to die,
Viz. of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, Argile he behoved to die for the
Nobility, Captain Govean and Swintoun of That Ilk, if he had not happily made
his escape, for the Gentry, and Mr. James Guthrie for the Ministry. And it is
very well Remembered by many, how that Captain Govan when he was upon the Ladder
Speaking his last Words to the World, he Prayed Heartily for the King, and for
the Church of Scotland, and that his Blood might not be on the Nation, nor on
the City, and that GOD might preserve his Church and Hedge and Fence in his
Vine Yard, from the Crafty Foxes and Distroying Boars of the Forest, moreover
he told the Spectators how that Midletoun and he had been fellow Soldiers, and
that many a time both of them had equally Hazarded their Lives in the King's
service, though now unequally Rewarded, the one with a Throne, being the Kings
High Commissioner, and the other with a Rope, and Condemned to die an
Ignominious Death. Yet You may tell Midletoun said he to the Spectators, that I
will not (though it were in my offer) change my Rope for his Throne for I hope
in GOD through the Merits of my Redeemer, to be in a better State within a few
Minutes.

Nor was it any Fable, that there fell some Drops of Blood from his Head upon
Chancelour Cunningham's Coach, who was the main Instrument of taking away his
Life, which never could be Wiped out, till they were forced to out away the
Looder, Blood and all where it fell on. And these dropes of Blood, Droped from
his Head or rather the Dry Bones, after the Head had been Bon'd, Oil'd, Dried
and Parched with the Heat of the Sun, Wind and Weather a long time.

It is also to be Noted, that a great Deal of what he Prophesied has already
perfectly come to pass, as also those last Words and Prophesies of others who
suffered for the same Cause, which he did, are now very much Accomplished, and
part of them are yet to be Accomplished.

Reverend Sir please Remember Capton Govans Daughters (...) to the Reverend
Presbytery of Edinburgh




