A Breviate of a Sentence given AGAINST JEROME ALEXANDER Esquire, An Utter
Barrester of Lincolns-Inne, In the Court of Star Chamber, the 17th day of
November, in the second year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. With Exceptions taken to the said
Sentence, to unfold the Iniquity thereof. With a short Narrative of diverse
other passages and Oppressions, wherewith he has been also grieved in other
times of his life, both before and since. Printed for the Satisfaction of his
Friends, against those many Calumnies and aspertions raised thereupon to
blemish him in their opinion, and in the opinion of all others with whom he
has to do.

PSALM. 118.6, 7, 8, 9. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do
unto me, the Lord takes my part with them that help me, therefore shall I see
my desire upon them that hate me; It is better to trust in the Lord then to put
any confidence in man; it is better to trust in the Lord then to put any
confidence in Princes.

PSALM. 9.13, 14. Have mercy then upon me O Lord, consider my trouble which I
suffer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death;
that I may show forth all thy praise, in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1644.

To the Reader.
A Working Vessel is saved from breaking by a vent; a heart oppressed with
sorrows eased, when it has revealed its discontents: I have long labored
under many afflictions and oppressions, and to this hour could yet never find
Justice at leisure to examine my Complaint; the vinegar of which delay, has
been as ill to me, as the injustice which I have received: whiles thus my
Calamities have been prolonged, increased too by common Fame, and though in
this time my innocence has cleared the main debt; yet have I been undone, with
the Arrerages of the suspicion, which is an arrow of slander, that pierces the
inward parts, men being apt to believe Relations as they come to them; that a
good man oftentimes may deliver untruths by here-say, from the credit of one he
trusts, and thereby wrong the reputation of him he knows not, and the
innocent thus many times may suffer reproach undeservedly: For the satisfaction
therefore of my acquaintance, I have Printed this Map of my misery, until the
time shall come, that my cause may be rightly judged, Psa. 105.19, 20.
and that in the interim I may not lie under the guilt of those slanders
wherewith I have been blemished, chosing rather that my enemy should eat my
heart, than a friend should grieve it, as it is much better to dye of the meat
one likes not, then to surfeit of the meat one loves, a man is not therefore
unworthy because he has had disasters follow him at the heels, for the
whistling whirlwind must blow before Elias be rapt up to heaven: great and
mighty fishes, are not bred in small and sweet waters, but in the Salt-sea; as
brave Spirits by difficult attempts, become victorious; a fruitful tree,
though the bark be bitter, yet the fruit is sweet, though a man may seem harsh
in the more strict performance of his duty, yet is it profitable to the
public, nor shall you ever find any cudgells thrown at an Apple tree, that
bears only leaves; no man was ever envied for evil, it is virtue that has so
many enemies, for a bad man is to himself the worst, and needs no other enemy
to undo him, then his own desires; as Midas made his Idol become his ruin,
thus we hate the Foxes advise though never so current, the Wolfs skin does
detect his Counsel, in persons faulty we suspect truth; and therefore it was
observed of Aristides that he was wont to propose such advices as he knew did
conduce unto the Public weal by some other men, and not from himself, lest
Themistocles out of hatred of his person, should have with stood and
impedimented a general good: as a fire made of green wood, which is fed with
it as fuel, but quenched with it as it is green; and thus when the Murtle tree
will quickly rot, the Sethim wood cannot be eat with worms; the Sapphire will
not crack, when the flint is quickly shivered in pieces: when the evil man
like him in the Philosopher, who thought where ever he went that he saw his own
picture walk before him; unto a wise man you can do no wrong, who like a good
soldier will keep his rank; receive with thanks whatsoever falls, that which
is constant we say does pass for excelten, it is true in the use of good
things, as it is in sufferings for the truth; for thus the malice and venom of
an enemy too may by wisdom be converted into a medicine, and by managing become
a benefit, which was by him intended for an injury, or to use the similitude of
Plutarch, as healthy and strong beasts do eat and concoct Serpents, whereas
weak stomachs do nauseate at delicates, so wise men do exceedingly profit by
the hatred of their enemies, whereas fools are corrupted with the love of their
friends, and an injury does one man more good, than a courtesy does another, as
wind and thunder, when they trouble the air, do withal purge it, whereas a
long Calm does dispose it unto putrefaction, the same whetstone that takes from
a weapon does likewise give it an edge, 1 Samuel 13.30.
and sharpens it, as the Israelites when there was no Smith amongst them, 1 Samuel 13.30. did sharpen their instruments with the Philistims; so an enemy
serves to quicken and put an edge upon those virtues which by lying unexercised
may contract rust and dullness, and many times when the reasons of the thing it
self cannot persuade, the fear of giving advantage will overruled a man, lest
hereby he gives his foe matter of insultation, the eye and neerenesse of an
Adversary exciteth Caution and diligence, and makes a man's life more fruitful
and orderly then otherwise it would have been; like a sink by a house side it
makes all the house the cleaner, as those Roses and Violets are sweetest which
grow near unto Garlic, and other strong sented Herbs, because these draw away
to them any fetid or noxious nonrishment: and as vermin do ever devour the
purest Corn, and moaths eat into the finest Cloth, and the Cautharides blasts
the swetest flowers, so envy does ever gnaw upon that which is most beautiful
in another whom it hates, poison never works, where it finds no heat; envy
still follows the better part, as the Vulture it draws sickness from a persum,
a rancorous nature, trouble, from the good it sees in him he hates; and
odiorum acriores causae quando iniquae, when hatred is built upon a bad
foundation it commonly raises it self the higher, and the reason is because in
passions of this nature, the less we have from the object, the more we have
from our selves, and what is defective to make up malice in the demerit of him
whom we hate, it supplied by the raising of our own stomachs; as we see in the
body that thin and empty nourishment, will more often swell it then that which
is substantial; but after the greatest inundation the waters are dried up, the
subtillest lightning has but his flash; the rattling thunderbolt has but his
clap: In the fullness of time the Israelites shall return out of Babylon, in
the mean time we must awaite Gods leisure with patience, Exodus 12.41.
stand still and see the Salvation of God: a cheerful heart makes a strong
back, and the well couching together of the pack availes much to the Carrier:
by much sufferance comes great ease; the experience of Gods deliverances is a
strong Oblation to trust in him for future mercies; the Suns heat will be most
comfortable when we are most cold, in the greatst perplexity to find a
deliverer, will be much more welcome to the distressed; and though disgrace be
a tough bit for flesh and blood to digest, yet he that will live godly in this
world, must resolve for to endure tribulation, for at the best it is full of
Cares. Job 5.7.
For man is born unto trouble, as the Sparks flies upwards; Esaias 45.7.
that it is no wonder if in this world he meets with many miseries, but as that
man only can look upon the Sea with comfort, that has escapt a shipwreck, so
with the Prophet David he only can the best content himself to have been
miserable, Psalm. 30.12.13.
whose sackcloath God has put off, and girded his loins with gladness, and
if rightly to consider the manner of Gods Husbandry; most commonly he begins to
plow that soil betimes, which he means so to sow in his season, Jer. 3.27.
and tilleth and harroweth it over and over again, from which he does expect to
have a good and plentiful harvest, Psalm. 129.1.2.
therefore it is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth; grace
cannot go on but with many rubs, Job 18.7 Psalm. 22.15. Psa. 119.67. Judge. 3.20.
Joh. 5.2, 3.
and affliction is the better endured, before the steps of a man's strength be
straightned, or that he be dried up like a potsheard: it is sickness we say,
which makes health so much esteemed, for by wanting we deem the thing better,
when it is enjoyed; and no man sees himself so clearly, as in the glass of
adversity, when every blow that God lays on, seems to say as Ehud unto Eglon,
I have a message to thee from God; which if he shall consider, it will make his
grief a Bethesda, to cure him of his infirmities; and thus he will come out of
the furnace as pure gold, cleared from the dross of his corruptions: it is very
painful to hide a wound. Then by that which follows I hope I may say without
offense, Lam. 3.1
I am the man that have seen affliction, nay like waves in a storm, they have
pressed violently in, one upon the neck of another: I accounted it my first
unhappiness, that after I had some good time continued in the University, and
obtained some measure of knowledge in those Arts, which contented me, and that
for my own part, I had resolved to have fixed there; I was constrained by my
friends, upon whom I then depended for livelihood and subsistence, for to
forsake that way in which I was, and to apply my self unto the study of the
Law; for as every thing lives the best in his proper Element, so he thrives
commonly the best, and proceeds with most success that is settled in that
course to which his Genius is most inclined; yet here I accounted it my good
hap to fall into such hands for my Education, that in the first place, I was
taught this principle of Religion, Pro. 8.7.
above all things to buy the truth and sell it not; it being a thing so
precious and desired, that Christ himself came to bear witness unto it, Joh.
18.37. and 8.32. and 3.21.
and by his works manifested it to be the thing which should make his followers
free: the fashion God so much regards not, as the stuff; and that seed is ever
the best, which is the most white within: now it was not long ere I was put
upon the trial, to see if I would hold this ground wherein I stood, retain
this Doctrine in which I was instructed; for the silver cannot appear till
Benjamins sack be unloosed: A noble friend of mine now in the minority both of
my years and profession, having conferred upon me by grant, the Stewardship of
many hundreds in the County where I lived, and the then Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, being my Countryman, and having purchased the Fee of two of
those hundreds, moved me to depart with my interest in two of those
Stewardships, for an Officer of his own, without other right, but only because
he desired to have it so; which for that I refused (without the approbation and
consent of him that trusted me, who had Letters Pattents thereof for the life
of another (which I had no reason to solicit for to let go, and his Lordship
thought was below him to seek after otherwise, and I maintaining my right
therein in this time against the many disturbances and opposition of those
employed by his Lordship, attempting to have gained the present possession by
an User of the Office) therefore he was much displeased with me, and did not
forbear in plain terms to tell me so, with other expressions in language clear
enough, to let me know his meaning, that I was to stand upon my guard, for if
ever I came in his way, I should be sure of a lash. Now a young beginner does
not so well understand what the Scholars of the upper form do; and this being
in the first of my coming forth, in a time when I was fully persuaded that
faithfulness and truth could not have been over-mastred by an enemy, and that
he was not worthy to wear his masters Livery, and bear the name of a Christian,
Jer. 9.3.
that was not valiant for the truth upon the earth; the Spirit being truth, Jo.
1.5, 6.
and knowing that God made his everlasting Covenant with them only that love
judgment, Esaias 6.8.
and do their works in truth; and being commanded by the Word of truth, to
withdraw from men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, who only suppose
gain to be godliness; Acts 6.11.
yet no sooner did Stephen plead for this truth but some were therefore
suborned against him to kill him: no sooner did Paul begin to Preach this
truth, Romans 2.2
but opposers began also to consult how to put him out of the way; for as
Origin says of the Devils, There is ne greater torment to them then to see
men addicted to the Scriptures; so the same may be said of truth, The Devil
and his Angels cannot endure it, it is so contrary to his nature, who is the
father of Lies.

Having thus truth upon my side, and being therefore loath to let go a Bird in
hand for two in the bush; and esteeming a sallet of sour Herbs with content,
better than a stalled Ox, Zrch. 8.16. 1 Titus 6.5. and 1.14. Jam. 1.18.
Eccles. 3.21, 22.23 1 Samuel 6.19.
with trouble and disquietnesse; and having also learned this rule, that
confidence built upon such uncertain grounds, most commonly fails the
expectation, and that to live farthest from Jupiter, was to be safest from
thunder: the truth is, Many great ones in those times, being like Briars, and
unfruitful Plants, that evermore took something from the fleece that came
nighthem, living by other men's Ruins, as some fishes wax big by devouring of
others; nay, rather than not to be satisfied, they would feed upon their own
Spawns to fill their Maws: the longest robe contracting the greatest soil;
power and authority, which have great influence, being seldom so happy as to
be employed and improved readily for God; for not many noble, not many mighty,
are called, either to enjoy Salvation in heaven, or to do great services on
earth; which was the reason that our Savior Christ chose poor fishermen for
his Disciples, Mat. 5.11. Joh 32.9. Luke 7.22. Jam. 2.5.
that could better intend and wait upon his service, then the Scribes and
Pharisees, and great Doctors of the Law. But the next news that I heard of him
was, that when I was to have brought in my Exercise for the bar in Lincolns
Inn, whereof I was a Member, I was required to forbear; whereupon tendering a
Certificate of my conformity, and performance of my Exercises, and payment of
all Duties in the house as others, I desired to have a like equal favor with
the rest of my fellows, that were at that time called with my self, but for a
time I was refused, without any public cause or reason shown unto me for the
same: then addressing my self to Master William Noye, then one of the Benchers
of the house, a man then in great esteem and opinion with the people, both for
his learning and integrity, and a great lover of Truth and Justice; he told me
plainly, The cause of this stay proceeded from a message sent to them of the
Council of that house, from that Lord Chief Justice, that I had injured him in
some things, for which he desired satisfaction before I were admitted to the
Bar (and other cause to do this to my remembrance I never gave him, then as
aforesaid) but Master Noye so labored the matter in my behalf, as at last the
restraint upon me was taken off, and I performed my Exercise and proceeded
accordingly: And not long afterward one Edmund Bullock Esquire, an Utter
Barrester at Law, of the same House, and my ancient for some years, and my next
Neighbor in the Country, being grieved at the prosperity which God blessed me
withal, and thinking that I began to bud too fast in my Profession, by the
ways and helps which God afforded me; therefore extremely maligned me, used
many Scandalous speeches of me behind my back, to my disparagement, such as
were Actionable, thinking to have nipt me in the blossom; and for which words
I afterward brought my Action at Law against him, whereby he perceiving
himself pinched to the quick, and fallen in danger of a Council, as sure to be
overthrown with good damages to be given me for the words, as to suffer in his
credit and reputation also, that knowing his Masters will, yet would offend
against it, to be beaten with many stripes; therefore in the interim before the
Trial, he raked up some accusations against me in the Country, and thereupon
petitioned the then Lord Chief Justince Ley to have them heard at the said
assizes with my Nisi prius, and thus did raise a divertive war, an old trick of
Machavells, to keep his enemy from his own quarters, wherein if not to prosper
with a victory, yet to raise it as a means to accomplish some Propositions of
Peace at least; and herein he had by the help and countenance of my good friend
this Lord Chief Justice that I told you of before, who underhand dealt with his
brethren, and those of mine own Coat and Country, for their assistance to
Master Bullock in this Action, by which means too, Master Bullock had the
happiness to be taken notice of more than ever in his life before, and to
gain that countenance and respect, which for many years before he was without
(and to deviate a little) I pray observe this much by the way, by this, and
that which follows, it has been most men's haps, that have ever done me wrong,
when I sought a legal repair at their hands, they evermore have found means by
the help of power and greatness to save themselves and be protected, and gain
also great acquaintance and preferments into the bargain: but it is no wonder,
for as one star rises another must fall, as one sea flows, another ebbs;
when Rachel dies, Benjamin is brought forth: amongst men of the same
abilities, one is many times thought disadvantagious to the other: stars that
do agree in light and qualities, the smallest suffers loss by the brightness
of them above, as one Tradesmans profit, is made less by the other: that thus
I am sure, by my falls, I have been set for the rising of many, the most and
greatest of which notwithstanding, I have lived to see God Almighty taken
revenge upon: but to proceed, M. Bullock to save his stake, was apt to follow
any advise, might save himself, and preferred a Petition to the said then Lord
chief Justice Ley, against me accordingly, as I said before, supposing in
Generals many misdemeanors I should have committed in the exercise of my
Office of Stewardship, and gained a reference upon it unto two Justices of the
Peace in the Country, and which was in effect giving them power to receive any
complaints that should come in against me; and the common sort of people being
now thereof informed who like tinder, are apt to take fire with every Spark,
were some of them drawn and persuaded for to complain, but without cause, all
which were first prepared in the Country, and after appointed to be heard at
the same Assizes before the Judges, before whom my action against him was also
to be tried: and now these Justices of the Peace had made a certificate for the
purpose, but I must tell you, that most of the Justices of the Peace, thought
themselves to be jolly Judges, at that time, and ruled the Country as little
Kings in their Dominions, all was fish that came into their nets, and their
Warrants flew abroad as Bees in July, betwixt party and party, and in
whatsoever other thing, though it were besides their Commission, and whereof
they had not Cognizance, it made no matter: if any man assumed the boldness to
be at Action with them for any such miscarriage or wrong doing, they had every
one their relations and dependances to some great Officer or States man here
above, who put them in Commission, to do their turns, that by a Petition at
Council Table, or before themselves, would convent their adversaries, and have
their wills of them by hook or by crook; and to speak the truth, those that
guided at the Helm of State, and had their designs laid for introducing of an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government at that time; it was a part of their work
to indeer all the Gentry of the Kingdoms unto their side, by making them
Justices of the Peace, and employing them in Commissions for the Kings
occasians, and by putting them in Offices and places under his Majesty and
themselves, the devils great policy to offer men the kingdoms of this world
to catch them at the last: the more for to prepare and fit them for their
hands, that very few were left uningaged, as now we find it true, by too
woeful experience, how mainly they have obstructed and still do the work of
Reformation; and if there were any man whom God had blessed with more than an
ordinary understanding or with power in his Country, and who that for
Conscience sake would not be wrought upon to side with that party, and run into
the same excess of riot and disorder with themselves, such were sure to be
opposed, oppressed, and persecuted every way unto ruin and destruction; but to
proceed: Upon this Certificate of the said referrees, this matter was first
caused to be called upon in the public face of the County at the said Assizes,
and all that Rebel rout and crew, which had been so mustred up and gathered
together, came with open mouth to charge me before that great assembly: but the
accusations being read, and my answers received, the Complaints appeared to be
so poor and frivolous, and so false and scandalous, as that my accusers were
ashamed of the prosecution, and then means was made to the then Lords Justices
of Assizes, the Lord Chief Justice Ley, and Master Justice Dodderidge, that
they would take up the matter of Difference betwixt Master Bullock and my
self, that so my trial might not go on and proceed against him; which upon
motion of the Judges, I condescended unto, and they were pleased to make peace
betwixt us: And I cannot forget the good Counsel which my Lord Chief Justice
Ley gave unto me at that time in his Chamber privately between him and me,
advising me for the Future to be evermore of the Defensive part, which, says
he, like an hedgehog will leave thine Adversary nothing but prickles to fight
against; saying, if I should have sought repair, and to have righted my self by
law, of every one that has done me injury by words and deeds, I had had enough
to do to right my self, and should never have sat in the place where now I
sit; which from that time you will perceive by that which follows, I have
observed as much as possible. There was one at this time also that was an
Attorney at the Common Law, that dieted and lodged in my house, who in the
course of his practice, had omitted to file an Original Writ for his Client,
which was in an Action of debt upon an Obligation of 200. l. which Suit being
proceeded unto Judgment, was afterward reversed for want of this Writ to
warrant the Action; and because a sine of twenty shillings was to have been
paid for that Writ if it had been sued forth, this Attorney was therefore
called in question, before the then Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
and the matter mightily pressed as if it had been done by my direction, and
omitted to be sued forth on purpose to have shared the said fine between us, a
thing you see but of petty consideration, yet if it could have been made good
against me, an Information was threatened to have been preferred against me into
the Court of Star Chamber: but when it was fully examined and perceived that I
had nothing to do with it, presently he was let alone, and nothing done unto
him afterward for it, who at first was threatened with Imprisonment, if not to
confess me guilty with himself, yet for this supposition of an Offense, I was
bound over from time to time, from place to place, and vexed to the uttermost,
and after quit without any reparation. Then as men that shear Hoggs, you see
unto this time, here was a great cry, but little wool, yet this advantaged
Master Bullock in that he sought for at the Assizes, but never wrought that
upon him, which he was enjoined unto by the Judges, a perfect reconciliation,
that we should have lived in Peace and good Neighborhood together for the
time then to come; but the old Proverb was herein verified, The Devil being
sick, the Devil a Monk would be; But the Devil being well, the Devil a Monk
was he. For the Scene being ended, and the fetters taken off, the man was no
more a prisoner, and there was nothing that came in his way afterward that
concerned me, wherein he could do me a discourtesie, I may say a mischief, but
he embraced the opportunity as a mercy, with much gladness of heart, which I
mention not that he had power or means to do me very much hurt, but to let you
see this other Proverb herein fulfilled also, That a reconciled enemy is never
after to be trusted, for the poison will remain until the beast be killed;
and therefore beasts of prey that are by nature ravenous, and not to be
reclaimed, we kill, as Foxes we knock on the head; only to beasts of pleasure
we give Laws, as to Deer and Hares, etc. For Serpents only begets Serpents;
and in that business between Yates and me, the occasion of the ensuing
discourse, (as Coppingers Bitch, that albeit she could not turn the Hare, yet
did her good will) so he was not wanting in doing his uttermost to promote that
sentence unto what it is, brought as many sticks as he was able to bear unto
that fire; and in the interim whiles this game was thus a playing, whereof you
shall understand more in the sequel of the Story: I had several other
attempts made upon me to destroy me, and not by any men of mean and Ordinary
Rank and quality, but of the greatest always, and evermore and most especially
by those of mine own profession too, and yet by my own Countrymen more
peculiarly amongst the rest, of which I could never yet apprehend any reason
unto my self, but this, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit; for to my
knowledge I never administered any just occasion of exception to any man, if not
occasio accepta, non data; and as I have spent my years in trouble ever since I
came into the world, so it has gained me much experience I must confess, and
justly warned me to be still upon my guard; but commonly he is accounted a
pestilent fellow, that lives out of the length of his enemies sleeve, when it is
but sit for him not to trust that will not be deceived: and who is it that
desires to live well, and will not comply with times, but he shall be subject
unto much slander and reproach and opposition in the world, and then that side
which is evermore the greatest, that is commonly the worst, will blemish his
reputation, whom they oppose, who having thus gained an ill name, though but
amongst themselves: it is like an ill face, which the broader it is drawn, and
the more bright it has about it, it appears the more deformed, as a little
gold beaten into thin leaves, and a little water drawn into a thin steem and
vapor, seems wider then it was at first, so lesser Crimes, nay, some made so
but in imagination, and fictious, being multiplied through the mouths of many,
do quickly grow into a spreading cloud of infamy and disgrace, and malevolent
persons do still look upon men's actions with prejudice: and as Momus when he
could not find fault with the face in the picture of Venus, picked a quarrel
at her slipper: so envious men will ever have something to say either in the
substance or circumstance of our actions to misreport and expose to scandal,
for spiders do convert to poison whatsoever they touch; and as a stone the
higher the place is from whence it falls, it does give the more dangerous blow,
so the greater the personage is that acts for revenge, it is the more deadly
and dangerous by much: there is no wound so mortal as that which is made with
a thunderbolt, so of all hatreds those which makes pretenses unto heaven, and
which arise from Creatures of the highest nature, are evermore desperate and
mortal, and such I have met withal, nor is it a wonder if enmity grows
excessive, that has zeal to kindle it, and pretense of Religion to warrant it,
for when that which should restrain, and set limits to a passion is made a
party to manage it, and fuel to foment it, we marvel not if a passion,
which has no bounds from Religion, do impose none upon it self: they know the
lest blemish marrs a Diamond, and therefore labors to crack it, and envious
men like dogs do bark for company at those they know not too, and in this all
dogs agree, whose black months will open fast against those that cannot hurt
them, they often times wound before they understand without honesty or Charity;
as the mastiffe barks at every noise, when he knows not from whence it comes;
nothing but black drops fall from their lips, they even think the worst of a
man for his troubles, as if a cloud could make the Sun to lose his light, their
tongues are like Doegs which cut like a sharp razor, and like Gnats they sting
most in the night when they are unseen, like the Dragon, they bite the Elephant
behind the ear, where he cannot reach to help himself; enforces a man to
endure disgrace, because he has no way to prevent it; he has no eyes in his
own cause, and like the thief which comes to steal, he puts out the light, and
says there is no danger, to play with a blind man's nose; and then with the
har lot wipes her mouth, as if she were an honest woman: will be sure to rail
of a man behind his back, when he is well assured he shall not answer for
himself; and no marvel if his tongue runs glib that is eyl'd with butter, thus
you may know this bird by his feathers, his name is ill will, that never spoke
well of any man, and as that Painter, which because he could not take the
beauty of the faee, therefore only took the blemishes; will be sure to reckon
up all the faults of him against whom he has any thing to say, and the worst
enemies are those of a man's own house; a man has never worse friends we say,
Mat. 10.36.
then he brings from home, David's Companions did him the most hurt; Pual was
worst entreated of his kinsmen; and Jeremies friends cast most dirt in his
face; but it is no news to find the Devil in hell; nor for two milstones to
make the same grist together; for that the Toade and Snake agree, it is no
wonder, and herein envious men are worse then Lions, which will never war
amongst themselves, nor will Wolves fall out with one another; like Waspes
also, if you anger but one of them near the nest, you shall be sure to have the
whole swarm about your ears, they are unwilling that any thing should be seen
within, and their nature is such they will never give over the pursuit so long
as there is a sting left in any of their tails: they will then seem to be
precious stones when they are most counterfeit, will tell you an untruth as a
secret, against those they hate, that so they may make the better way for their
proceedings; and thus the Devil and mischief are ever awake: but observe and
you shall find, that there is no man would seem to deal so plainly as a Jugler,
when he means nothing less: as the thief when he goether about to steal,
would then be thought an honest man, and as he that is ready to turn Bankrupt,
will then make the greatest show: cleanly conveyance thus hiding the iniquity,
and as rotten wood in a dark night, seems to blaze, when there is neither
heat nor fire in it; but like a quag-mire has only a green sword upon the
top; thus Satan has been seen as an Angel of light, and when the stone of the
Sanctuary has been turned up, there has been a great toad found under it; in
this Alder tree you shall find much more pith then strength, many fair
feathers upon this Estridge, but much rank flesh underneath; when you think him
to be at peace with you, then he is complotting most mischief against you; thus
thunder roareth when a man would think the air most clear, the eye sees all
things but it self, he commonly finds most faults in others, when most are
usually to be found in him; and like dead men, although they smell most
loathsome, yet smell not themselves to stink; and yet this Fox will run as long
as he has feet, would hide it from the world if he could tell how: it were
well then if we could take the council of the Evangelist S. Matthew, To beware
of such men, Mat. 10.17.
lest they deliver you up to the counsels, to be scourged in their Synagogues,
their wrath being like fire, which will never cease to burn, so long as there
is any combustible matter for it to work on: It Is true, some of them are more
and less angry, as the object is upon which their displeasure acts; as, put
fire to Gunpowder, and it is soon in and soon out; a flash, a report, and away;
but when it is in a hot Iron, there it endures long: Implacable natures are never
satisfied: non amote, nec possum discere quare: They hate too, because they
will do so, and can give no other reason why: And whatsoever other cause they
pretend, their despite is against Piety; this is the fuel of that fire; and the
disagreement it has with holiness, is the contusion and striking of their
works together, which kindles the opposition: And sometimes the suggestions of
Satan: Sometimes you shall have an Haman to stir up Ahasuerus to destroy the
Nation of the Jews. But Arts agree best at a distance; and the Sun and Moon,
when furthest from one another. The Tradesmans profit is made the less by the
rest sharing with him. But this blowing of the wind more fastens the root of
the tree, and that much more which is planted by the River of waters: So that
this sea may rage and swell against the Land, but it cannot overflow the banks.
And though, with the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, they cry, Psalm.
13.7.
Down with him, down with him, even to the ground, lurking privily to destroy
the innocent without cause, and to swallow him up alive, as the grave; and
whole, Prove. 1.11, 12.
as those that go down into the pit; yet, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?
They do but kick against the pricks, swim against the stream, hop against the
hill, labor but in vain to confound him whom God upholdeth: Yet what will not
Dogs spue out, when they are set to vomit up what is within their bowels, for all
that? But Gods Saints have ever fallen under misconstruction, have still been
slighted and despised, accounted as the offscouring of the earth, Psalm. 31.22.
the fools of the Times; and most commonly too, the better man, the worse
esteem: Isa. 8.18.
they have been reckoned broken vessels, good for nothing but the dunghill;
Psalm. 69.12.
signs and wonders in Israel, the song of drunkards, the mirth of feasts: And
what names have been invented, for to brand and to disgrace them with? Psalm.
35.15, 16.
what reproaches and disgraces have been raised on them? as, That they are the
Pests of Kingdoms, the Troublers of Israel, Rebellious against the Laws: Acts
26.51 Kings 18.17.
not for the profit of the Commonwealth, that they should be permitted to draw
in the common breath. What watching for their haltings! how glad of their
faults! Jer. 20.10.
how joyful at catching at, and taking up any ill rumor of them! how
insulting over their weaknesses! how witty for to receive their old primitive
slanders! Psalm. 35.15. and 26.16.
and how cruelly and mercilesly have they been handled, if once they have but
fallen into their enemies Clutches. Pliny, in his Nature all History, says of
the Tiger, that his rage is stirred up and exasperated, by smelling the
fragrant sent of Spices. It Is true of good men: for doubtless, because they
abstain from evil, Isa. 59.1.
they make themselves a prey unto the wicked. Thus Noah was scorned by the men
of his time for preparing the ark, and for urging Repentance to prevent the
danger of the Deluge then to come; yet is he, by the providence of God 2 Pet.
2.5 2 Samuel 6.14, 16, 20, 21, 22.
chronicled unto all posterity for a Preacher of Righteousness. And David, for
dancing before the Ark, was by Michal contemned in her heart; yet was it an act
acceptable in heaven. If John come neither eating nor drinking, they say, He
has a Devil: and if the Son of man come eating and drinking, Matt. 11 18, 19.
they say, Behold, a glutton, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners:
This Estridge, having wings to cozen, not to fly withal. If Festus may be
judge of Paul's speeches, then Paul is beside himself, Act. 24.6
and said otherwhile to be a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition. Our
Savior Christ himself is said to cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils. But, Matt. 12.24.
if the Master of the House be thus abused, how can a man think that his
servant can go free? It has been the devils policy of old, and of all
Machavils children, who derive their Pedigree even from that wicked one, their
father, still to endeavor to asperse the innocent with Calumnies and
Reproaches, and to lay on load enough, that some may abide: for thus slander
makes way for violence; and do but taint men's innocence, in the worlds opinion,
and then they lie open to any usage whatsoever. We read of no good man but
has had his falls, has been foiled, nay, beaten black and blue: for no man at
all times can be wise, and no man lives that sins not: Thus the brightest
glass is stained with a little breath; and a little spot in a white paper is
quickly made; and as men love me, so they will tell my tale; and though hear
say has no security of truth, yet most men are apt to believe the worst,
though of him they know not: a false report being as one Weed in a Nosegay,
that oversmells all the Flowers: every man desiring to have that true he likes
the best, and to which his fancy moves; which commonly is according to the
first apprehension of things: and being once fixed in the understanding, Isa.
19.29, 20, 21.
it is very hardly removed from the judgment afterward; an ill stomach being
thus apt to nauseate at the very best meat, that even wise men often times do
thus their business unjustly, making a man an offender for a word, and turning
aside the just even for a thing of naught: It being the course of the children
of this world to measure every man's Corn by their own Bushel; to mete every
man's Measure by their own Yard-wand: And because their Candles shine upon their
heads, Job 29.6 Genesis 27.28.
and they wash their steps with Butter, and the rock pours them out rivers of
Oil, that they enjoy the fatness of the earth, and plenty of Corn and Wine,
Psa. 37.7
that their eyes stand out again, with that which the marrow of their bones
increases; Dan. 4.3.
being clothed with Honor and Majesty, as with a Garment, and having the
Command of the People to obey them at every beck, enjoying indeed what their
hearts can wish: Seeing the good men debarred of these pleasures, for want of
Spiritual eyes, Mal. 3.15
they make them a Spectacle unto the World, to Angels, and to Men, 1 Cor. 4.9,
10, 11, 12.
reviling, persecuting, and accounting them the filth of the world, and the
off-scowring of all things unto this day: But these good Fortunes unto them are
but as Quicksands to go upon, whereon if we stand, we sink; and these men like
Silkworms, when they have wrought out their Silk, turn into Moths and
Butter-flies: That as the Philosopher, being demanded wherein the learned were
more happy then the unlearned, answered only, Spe, in Hope; so Saint Paul
makes the Conclusion in this case, That if in this life only the Saints had
Hope, 1 Cor. 15 19.
they were of all men the most miserable. But darkest shadows follow the
brightest bodies: Diamonds have their blemishes; fair Faces, Moles; the finest
Garment soonest gets a Stain; and there is no man that has had his eyes in his
head, but he has seen clouds in the brightest day: The fairest Lawn is not
freed from spots; the Moon, in her brightness, is speckled; and it is a choice
Color that is not dimmed with the Air; and these men, whatsoever they think of
others, can find, if they please themselves, that they oftentimes do stumble,
when they think to set their feet the surest: But, a little wart or spot is
soon seen in the face, when a great Bunch is not so easily perceived in the
other parts: things ordinary, and commonly practiced, go without exception; the
custom of the evil taking away the sense of the sin; and the multitude in the
mean time warranting the proceeding, because running together into the same
excess of riot; which if any man shall but seem to cross, he shall be sure to
have more fists about his ears then his own: for, he that shall walk in the
Sun, cannot avoid the heat; that gathers thorns shall prick his fingers, that
travels in the rain must needs be wet; I have been termed a pestilent fellow,
S. Paul was so esteemed of, and yet no man will deny him to have been a Saint;
dangers past teaches men to take heed, and distrust is the sinews of wisdom,
and keeps them out, a scar does warn a man to fear a wound; and he is freest
from danger, that fears when he is safe; thus a wise man puts evils to good
use, turns virtue into necessity, and insults over the greatest abuses, and
after many shipwracks goes to sea again, and yet before the Play is done, you
will see the Philistines did put out Sampsons eyes, and then took him forth to
make thein sport, for which notwithstanding he was well revenged of them in the
latter end: but the sun is the same though Eclipst, and a Bird is a Bird though
her feathers be pulled off, only the Ape is made more easy to be caught when
laden with a clogg, and a breach is soonest made where the wall is cracked, and
a staff is more readily found for to beat a dog; it is an easy matter to abuse
any man to his face, that must not be once received for to answer for himself,
he is blind that cannot see fire in this straw; and that every coward will run
his Lance against a Sarazen of wood: make a man once obnoxious to a State and
then whether he speaks or be silent, it is all one, malice will grieve if thou
grievest not at her: it is death to a Jester, not to see his fooleries take.
Envy is a spirit-worm, and had rather burst than want her will: so that for a
man to under to with patience, to smell sweet under the pestell, not to be
daunted at disasters, but which way soever he is thrown to light upon his feet,
makes him yet more vile and odious in the eyes of his enemies; for it is a great
torment to an adversary, when he can find no in let nor advantage against him
whom he hates, so can he not endure to be opposed by him, in that he seeks,
strength then collecting and gathering it self into more excess; as we see in
winds and rivers when they meet with any thing that crosses their passage,
they roar and swell: millions of Graces too are dazelled by one imperfection;
and one hour of an Eclipse causes the Sun to be more gazed at, then in a
thousand fair days: one Vulcer in a sound body is enough to draw all the flies
unto it; yet it is not every spot that takes away the beauty of the face, nor
is it every wound that kills a man; and herein wise men deal like skillful
Musicians, which do not break their strings that jar, but by Art do bring them
to an accord again, and being rightly set, the Music is as good as ever,
though a good man once offending is never free, for he shall be sure still to
have it in his dish; then it seems neither manners nor charity, always to
lay that in men's dishes, which the voyder, a pretty while since has clean
taken away; a storm will crack in two that Cable which is never so strong, and
yet faces about again of those that did fly, and in the second charge will
obtain the day; a fault that is pardoned is as though it had never been; the
stain taken out of the garment, it is as clear as at the first, mercy has not a
breath to speak evil of another man's unhappiness, will grieve to see a
scratch in a clear skin, do not throw away its wine for the Lees and grounds,
nor the gold because it is covered with dust; nor the sword for a little rust,
but like the good husbandman, if he finds Brambels and Briars upon his land,
will slock them up, and plough and sow it afterward never a whit the less:
none so cruel then as he that murders mercy, with whom all goes for payment
but the truth, but merciless and bloodthirsty men shall not live out half
their days, and let him take heed that thinks he lives cleerest from despite,
for he may have his stomach pulled down in his days; for no arrow is shot but
it falls at the highest, as Icharus fell into the water, but to give his folly a
name, for he that casts to reach beyond the Moon, often maks wise proceedings to
be suspected, and though he may be cretp out at a starting bole, yet may have
his fooling found out, those that are best qualified for service are the worst
when turbulent; as the wind being moderate does carry the ship safe, but does
drown it being tempestuous: a cloud can Eclipse that sun which shines the
brightest, therefore let him not praise a fair day till it be night, nor the
building while it be finished: he is much mistaken that thinks of a man the
worse for his afflictions, for it is through many tribulations that we must
enter into heaven, Esaias 35.4.
yet it has ever been the condition of the best men to be thus censured, they
judged the same even of Christ himself, and of Saint Paul, saying, Doubtless
this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance
suffers not to live: Acts 28.4.
and the little Boy seeing his Mother pull the Roses and Violets to pieces, and
putting them in a mortar, and pounding them with a pestle, cried out, His
mother would spoil all the flowers, when she thereby intended to make them
more useful; by crosses we are conformed to the Image of Christ: stars which
appear not by day shine in the night; the more bitter the potion is, the more
medicinable, and the sharper the file is, the less rust it will leave behind:
Jam. 148 2.
the swetest Rose grows from a prickly stem: linen that is hardest beaten on
the block, Romans 8.10.
and washed and wrung most, looks the whiter; white has no grace without
black; the Musk smells swetest when hardest rubbed: Corn must be ground and bakt
before it be eaten, sire burns the hottest in frostie weather, Vines if they be
not pruned and cut will wax wild: straights and goodness shuts in doors
together: a Plant seasonably cut flourishes the better: the swetest Grape is
hardest pressed out, why should we then fear the Lion, when we shall be sure to
find honey in the Carcass? but a stratagem it is to charge the truth, and the
professors of it with false accusations, thereby to render them odious, either
to Princes or people; thus have I been dealt withal, and yet not discomforted;
for the Gospel of Christ has been called Heresy, and King Artaxerxes is
told, If the Jews re-build the wall, Ezra 4.
they will pay no tole nor tribute: so the Primitive Christians had strange and
horrid crimes and accusations laid unto their charges; as the Arrians charged
Athanasius with Adultery, Murder, and Witchcraft, the Jews of Persia in the
time of Sopores, Willets Pillars of Papistry.
accused Simeon Bishop of Selusia, as a friend of the Roman Emperors, that
gave Intelligence to them of the Persian affairs, which was not only an
occasion of his death, but of a general persecution against the whole Church;
thus deal the Jesuits with the Protestants at this day, and thus the
adversaries of the power of godliness charge it with Heresy, Faction,
Rebellion, and all that can wake it odious either to King or people; but a
white cloth is capable of any dye, it is the fairest silk, that is thus the
soonest soyled; the Pestilence first taints the purest breath; those that are
most maligned are not the worst, for a man is pitied for his follies, envied
for his virtues; men being most apt to hate that Goodness they can only
admire; and upon this ground the Ephesians expelled Hermodorus, and the
Athenians, Aristides, because they were too just for the rest of the people;
men's minds, out of I know not what malignity, being apt too for to suspect,
that that will not be used unto good, which might be abused unto evil, for
this is all the evil of malevolent persons, to make others to appear worse
than they are, that themselves, though they be the worst of men, may not appear
so; having Satyricall wits, which make use of other men's names as of whetstones
to sharpen themselves upon, so that he which maliciously pursues his brother,
does but snuff the candle to besmuch his own fingers, and yet so makes the
light to burn more clear, the fire never flaming more, than when the wind seeks
to blow it out, and most commonly you shall find him herein the most forward
to condemn another, that is equally culpable, if not more then him whom he thus
accuses, who never looks to pull out the beam in his own eye; but things that
bear the same impression should be bound together in the same bundle, for the
thief that escapes, deserves to be hanged as well as he that is taken, and
suffers for his fact, nor is he always the greatest thief that comes first to
the Goal, and yet this Varlet having stripped a man of all, would be thought
merciful for not murdering a man outright: but I have oftentimes seen this
Be drowned in her own honey, the man entangled in his own talk, tript in his
own play, and it is but just that Perillus bull first torments himself, that he
falls into the same pit he had dug for another; like beasts they hear music
as a sound, not as a harmony, Psalm. 5.15.
regards not goodness in another, but it is the course of this world, that if a
man be once fallen a little into disgrace, every base fellow then takes him for a
subject of their contempt and scorn, dealing with such herein as with a nosegay
which we keep in our hands so long as it is fresh and sweet, and cast it away
when it is become a little withered: all will go with our Savior into Mount
Calvery, but will then forsake him when he goes unto Golgotha: Poverty parts
good fellowship, and leaves a man forsaken as a naked tree standing in a wild
plain beaten too and fro with every blast of wind, but no cresse has ever
disgraced a wise man for all that, extremities do but exercise our trust, and
when the body is distempred, it is the best cure to take away some blood the
chafe comes not from the corn, if the ear be not beaten with the flayle;
Incense then perfumes, when it is cast into the fire: men commonly learn Gods
loveby his wrath: Achimedes had never been so famous, if the City where he
dwelt had not been so long, so violently besieged, and a long time preserved
only by his means: there is no craft like to that, to be an honest man; of the
purest seeds springs the fairest plants, whose ways though they be frozen dry,
so that no butter will stick upon his bread, yet this Lilly will grow up
amongst thorns, this fish will be in the salt Sea, and yet be fresh, this Lot
will live in Sodom free from their sins, and though this man be bowed almost
together, that his head and heels be made to meet, yet he will not break, but
like unto a twig he will come right again: water will not commix with oil,
piety, with Hypocrisy; this Be will never gather honey where the Cockatrice
has blasted; nor will any moth or worm breed in this Cedar, and who can
disclose his pace so well as he that follows him at the heels? know those
that love truth as he that practices it, and when his adversaries plays with
it as with a game at Chesse, a pawn before a King, sets their worldly ends
before this precious Jewel; there a stander by oftentimes sees more of it,
then he that plays the game; a shipwreck in the haven, we say, is grievous, to
be deceived where we trust, is most abominable, although a wise man commonly
is only over-reacht in such cases, by his too much credulity, thinking every
man to be honest as himself by whom he knows nothing to the contrary, but
ill-favored complexions the more they are painted, the worser will appear,
for frost and fraud will ever have foul ends, and this man not practicing what
he professes, shall at last be sure to have his own dung cast in his face; but
as he that has once swallowed a hedgehog, needs not to care afterward what
he eats, so he that is hardened and prepared for mischief with a brazen face,
can look upon contradiction and never blush; Popularity, the mother of this
corruption, being like that venom which makes men laugh to death, they do
advise and counsel best, that know most: then try all things, says Saint
Paul, find out the truth, and accordingly determine for that which is good,
and against that which is evil; and give the Ox hay, and Pearls to those that
esteem them, and be not peremptory to condemn any man but upon clear grounds of
pregnant Testimonies, for this the Lord teaches should be so by his own
example he would not proceed against the Sodomites upon the cry that came up,
Psalm. 105.18, 19.
but he would first go down and see, for this is to judge righteous judgment,
and not according to appearance, then hurt his feet no longer in the stocks,
now that once his cause is known, and the man found out to be innocent, I must
confess it is hard to distinguish between the precious and the vile, such as
are eminenly good, 1 Timothy 5.24.
and notoriously bad; it is hard to discern them, for some persons like the Moon
in the change, Jer. 15.19.
seems to have less light and worth in them then indeed they have, little in
the eye of the world, much in the eye of heaven; others I acknowledge seem
better than they are, like blazing stars that make a great show and look as
gloriously as any the stars in heaven, and yet are no stars but sticking
Meteors; Therefore, says one well, that in judging things, we ought to judge
Secundum quid sunt, but in judging of persons and actions it it is not always
so, in re comperta, in a case that is evident its equally an abomination to the
Lord, to justify the wicked person or action, as to condemn the just, Prove.
17.15.
but in re dubia, its otherwise, for there the rule holds dubia in meliorem
partem sunt interpretanda, 1 Cor. 13.7.
Charity to the person should sway the judgment, though not absolutely for to
determine, yet to think him good, whom we do not know to be bad, but it has
been still my unhappiness in whatsoever, to have an ill sense put upon my good
meanings, and a false interpretation upon whatsoever I have well intended, but
men must permit what they cannot remedy; Josephus relates of the Jews, that
they were very careful how they received Proselytes in Solomon's time, because
the state of the Jews then flourished, they thought every one upon base ends
might come in and pretend then, that he would join with the God of the Jews,
but good men have one and the same will, and as the eyes, one turns not
without the other, and I could wish, that in these times, all men were so just
unto the cause, and to themselves as to respect and look upon those that have
continued faithful from the beginning, and have never from the first varied
from those right principles, to which there is no exception unto this day: Neh.
2.10.
but I see very many now adays are of Sanballat and Tobiahs mind, Psalm. 59.6,
14.
grieved exceedingly when but a man appeared that came to seek the welfare of
the children of Israel, and if an man be discountenanced by a Patriot and great
Magnifico of the times, as a Deer that is once shot; all the rest of the heard
do strive to push that man out of their company, and if he be but once branded
with a crime (though salfe) when the wound is cured, his credit shall be killed
with the scar, and as great pain lies in the rubbing of an old wound, as in
making of a new, nay, he that but rubs the scar, casts fuel on the fire to
quench it, Psalm. 56.5, 6.
the very handling of it more inflames it, and makes it spread the more, there
being certain willing mistakes amongst those sons of men, that hunt after the
ruin of a man, Psalm. 38.16, 19.
in his goods or good name; that all birds of the same feather will hold
together, Keep themselve s cose and mark my steps (says David) when they Iay
wait for my soul; Nay, they willingly trust him which is known to be a common
liar, rather then they will want matter to work mischief against him they
hate, howbeit rumors we know, though they be causes of cautelous Jelousies are
no sufficient grounds to undo a man upon, being without witness, without
Judgment, malicious and deceiveable, but men deal herein with those they love
not, as the Romish Writers, who will be sure to defame them that differ from
them in opinion, speaking great swelling words, having their persons only in
admiration, Jude 16.1 Sam. 16.7.
where they can find or look for advantage, but since we cannot see as God
does, Jer. 17.10.
who looks directly on the heart and so Judges, we must find out a man by his
words and actions, as the Naturalists judge of the form of a thing by its
qualities and operations: we of the habit of the heart by its natural
inclinations, as of a tree by its fruits, Mich. 7.20.
not taking up things upon trust, but by examination, before we determine of
them, for if a man should judge of the Moon and Stars by the luster and
splendor that the sun has cast upon them, we must deem them to be far more
glorious creatures then they are indeed; and so some such turbulent tribunes
there are in every State, who out of their glorious vaing glorious humor of
popularity would be accounted Angels though it be but for stirring and
troubling of the waters; but Mirons Cow that was counterfeit, only deluded
other herds of Cattle, pretexts may color vice, and disguise it, but the
painted grapes deceive the birds, for this Nightingale being pulled out of her
feathers, you will perceive her to be sound and nothing else, it is not the
habit that makes the Monk, nor are they most guilty that are most blamed, and
such is we see the overruling Providence of the most wise and mighty God, that
every descent into a lower condition, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
is oftentimes the means to raise him higher, whom God will exalt;j Genesis 15.17.
as it was made unto Joseph a staire to ascend unto that honor which his
dreams had promised, Genesis 37.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Gods glory being most advanced, when his people are at the lowest; the blind
man being so born, Psa. 105. 17, 18.
that the work of God might be manifested in him, and it was the greater
miracle that Lazarus had layen four days dead, before our Savior restored him
unto life again: when the Patriarks bad sold Joseph into Egypt, JO. 9.3. and
11.39.
themselves were after in bondage there four hundred years, and every day in a
worse condition than other, for before they were Subjects, after they became
slaves, and after that esteemed to be such as it was not thought sit for them
to live; Exodus 1.16.
and therefore care is taken to murder them in their birth, and when Moses
came to deliver them, where before they were but dying men, now they stink in
the nostrills of their adversaries, and when they were delivered yet worse, for
where before they were scattered in the Land, and some of them might hope for
to escape, Exodus 5.21.
now all are gathered together, and thought sit to have the neck of all cut off
at once, as Nero desired concerning the people of Rome, then the Sea before
them, Exo. 14.
and the mountains on each side, and the Egyptians pursuing, and thus before
God delivered the Israelites from the Philistimes, They were come to that
lowness, 1 Samuel 13 19, 22.
that they had neither swords nor spears, nor a Smith to make them any, 1 Samuel
17.8.
and at another time God does not deliver them until one Goliath had made all
the Host of Israel run like sheep, and the famine in the time of Joram was
not removed, until the fourth part of a Cabb of Doves dung was sold for five
shekles of silver, yea, till the women ear their own children, 2 kings 25.29.
and the people of God were not delivered from the enemy in the time of
Jehosaphat, till he was driven unto such a strait as that he knew not what to
do; 2 Kings 18.3.
Hezekiah is not delivered from the Assyrians, until the fenced Cities of
Judah are taken; and Christ came not to deliver us until the Scepter utterly
departed from Judah, and that the Nation were made slaves unto the Romans: and
yet when Jacob is thus tossed to and fro, Esau is still at rest in Mount Seir
increasing in riches and power; when Saul is on the Throne, David is hunted in
the mountains as a Partridge; when Mordecai is sitting at the gate, Haman is
in favor at the Court; and when the Courtiers be at the banquet of wine,
Shusan is perplexed: mis-constructions of such men's ways, not being the least
part of their sufferings, which not only the innocent but the most deserving
must resolve to bear, till truth which is the daughter of time, make them
vanish, for though Judah play the harlot, Israel must not sin, but musT strive,
if possible, with Stephen to see a Jesus in the heavens, when the stones fly
thickest about his ears, must resolve to bear off his sufferings with head and
shoulders; for many shall follow these pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.12.
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, though it be of
such things as they understand not, wherein they must prevail, till the time
come that they utterly perish, in their own corruptions, Psa. 30.5.
and receive the reward of their unrighteousness, But howsoever heaviness may
endure for a night, yet joy comes in the morning, that albeit a man thus
becomes as a Menster unto many; Psalm. 71.5, 9.
Yet if he puts his sure trust in the Lord, he shall be like Mount Zion, that
shall never be removed; for truth has always a good face, though near so bad
clothes; will not be ashamed, when irreligious policies will never sTand; ill
doings being still guarded with bad successes: and when these men like Ducks
will dive under water at every stone that's thrown at them; truth, like a River
that's still running, will cleanse it self, and leave its filth still under his
feet; thus a good esteem maintains credit, and me thinks to a wise man, he
should not care who were the messenger of this truth, nor what he were that
were entrusted, that were known to be faithful in the things committed to his
care and charge: a Palsy hand takes nothing from the Jewel that's in it: a
seal of gold, and a seal of brass, being cut alike, make the same Impression.
I but he has been tainted, says the adversary, in the worlds opinion, and
therefore to be laid aside. But such as understand will know before they take
suspicion, our lives are mixed with sweet and sour; no picture is all made of
brightest colors; no harmoney does consist all of trebels, the base in perfect
music must be one; I may use that a bad man has, or else a good thing once
abused I cannot use: a man may slip, and cannot do withal; by chance may slip
and fall into the mud, and yet not delight for to be there: a broken bone, well
set, is strongest in that part, and the sooner set, the sooner at ease: and
thus ill luck is good for something; that Cart which is driven the best, may
overthrow, and yet be set right again, and after carry his load never a whit
the worse: after an ill crop the Land must be used: one Banckrupt makes not the
Change empty; and after shipwreck a man must sail again; a Song is not
judged by one note, nor can you know what the Comedy is by one Scene, nor the
Oration by one sentence: he never was a good man that does not mend, without
the black, the white has no grace: the Diamond is the brighter for his foil,
and he that was never crossed, thinks there was no other heaven but here, however
the Gloworm shines brightest in the dark; the Damask Rose is sweeter in the
Still than in the stalk, and a good face may be seen in a glass of Jet: good
men are gainers by afflictions, but it is the fashion of the world still to go
along with the rising sun, and to shift sails as the wind stands, and when she
sees her master ready to mount, then for to commend him above the skies; it is a
right Dequey which has for every Bird a bait, and will have his Oar in every
boat, his part in every Pageant: these Painters then express their skill the
best, when they deceive the eyes with best shadows, like rotten plums upon a
tree, they are most beautiful of the rest to look upon, but do but shake this
tree a little, and they fall presently: like empty barrels these ever make the
greatest sound, and like a whelp will bark loud and run away; and yet this
dross carries a show of silver, but these shaddows stick no where, as empty
egge-shels they evermore swim aloft, when those that are full of meat sink to
the bottom: and yet for all this, this man's joy, is but as laughter in his
sleep, and the chirping of Birds in a sunshine day; yet when these frogs croak
thus far beyond their wont, beware of a tempest; but thus then, a man may know
a Kyte by the very feathers that he wears, Bu (says Haman) he will not bow
the knee, therefore he must be destroyed: a Fox I must confess will fly at
the braying of an Ass, because he knows it not to be an Asses voice, but the
Lion will not do so, because he knows it: a fool is not to be feared for his
noise, and he that pisseth clear needs not care a fig for the Physician: virtue
is impregnable in the greatest distress; a pure fish will swim in muddy
streams: Deuteronomy. 8.5.
be not mistaken then, For God corrects every Son whom he receives, Heb.
12.6, 7.
and uses not his rod where his sword shall come; the Pillory and scourge are
made for such Delinquents as shall escape execution. O but he still out-runs
the Constable, Psalm. 94.12.
and cannot be laid hold on by any means. Who is it but will save his head
with both his hands? for his wisdom is nothing worth, that is not wise for
himself, Prove. 13.14.
Therefore Theseus would not go into the Labyrinth without a thread: to be
safe, is to keep us to that Diet we are prescribed; to flee that evil of
which we are forewarned; it is not enough to be honest, but to prevent danger
that it does no harm: and he were very silly, that would not beware that
mischief were in his eye; you cannot blame the burnt child to dread the fire,
nor to condemn him to take heed of falling that stands upon the pits brink,
that knows there is a Lion in the way, were mad to adventure; the best things
please not all men; the Scythian was angry at the hearing of music, as the
envious man is at him he hates, because he lives so that his malice cannot
reach him: but Nature teaches every thing to seek the preservation of it self,
and for that purpose has armed the very Brute Creatures amongst the rest, as
the Bull is furnished with horns, to oppose the assault of a Mastiffe Dog, the
Boar with tuskes, the Roe-Buck, the Heart, and Hare, with swiftness of feet,
to fly away from their pursuers, and with eyes in their heads to look
backwards toward them which hunt for their precious lives, for to avoid them;
the Fox with craftiness and subtilty for his escape, being encountered with
approaching enemies; and to them, and to all Animalls of that kind besides, is
given sense and motion to apprehend, and one way or other means for to free
themselves from ruin; and shall not man make use of his Reason and more NObler
parts, to quit him from the hand of the destroyer? The Patriarks, the Prophets,
the Apostles, nay, Christ himself gave it to us in example, and shall we in
this latter times be more nice than they, and think it an unlawful thing to
use lawful means, to be freed from the oppression and persecution of an
adversary? Genesis 20.
Abraham thinking that the fear of God was not in the Court of Abimilech King
of Gerar, and that therefore he should be slain for his wives sake, durst not
to own Sarah for his wife, but said, She is my Sister; which was afterward
Isaac's very case concerning Rebecca, being with Abimilech in Gerar also; And
Esau hating Jacob his brother, Genesis 20.
because of the blessing wherewith his Father blessed him, and therefore having
resolved to slay him, Did not he therefore Fly unto Laban his Uncle, from the
face of his enraged brother, until his fury should be turned away? Genesis 27.41,
42, 43
And did not Rachel put her Fathers Images in the Camels furniture, and sat
upon them, that Laban could not find them after all his search into Jacobs
stuff? Which was to prevent the danger of that hot prusuite, Genesis 31.34, 35.
which Laban made after him for those fooleries: the Hebrew Midwives too, Exodus
1.17, 18, 19
did not as the King of Egypt commanded them, But saved the men children of
Israel alive, contrary to his commandment, excusing the matter with a pretense
only, and yet it was not imputed to them for so great a transgression: 1 Samuel
18 11, 12, 13
When Saul cast his Javelin at David to smite him to the wall, he avoided twice
out of his presence, and because he was afraid of him, he departed from him,
and therefore it is said, That he behaved himself wisely in doing it; and as he
did afterward when he was let down at a window, that he fled and escaped from
his enemy, when he had sent messengers unto his house to slay him, nor do I
find Michael his wife discommended for her Stratagem used at that time, the
better to preserve her husband from destruction; 1 Samuel 19 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.
1 Samuel 20.1, 24.
that flight of his also front Natioth in Ramah to Nob at another time upon
Jonathans discovery of his Fathers intended mischief toward him; his abiding
in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood, in the hill of Hachilah, for to save
himself, nor was it accounted unlawful that he sent out Spies, 1 Samuel 23.14,
19. 1 Samuel 26.4.
to discover Saul's approach, and that thereupon he fled to Gath to secure
himself against his fury; nor do I find it spoken against, that he changed his
behavior and fained himself mad before Achish a King of the Philistims,
thereby to procure safety to himself in that time of his danger and extremity,
1 Samuel 21 13.
that child of the Prophets that anointed Jehus King over Israel, was
constrained presently to open the door and flee and tarry not, 2 Kings 9.3.
and when evil and great destruction did appear unto Benjamin out of the
North, the Prophet Jeremy had them to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, Jer.
6. 1.
as the Lord by the same Prophet commanded the Inhabitants of Hazor to do the
like, Jer. 49.30.
when Nebuchadnezzer King of Babylon had taken Council, and conceived a
purpose against them; thus Joseph fled with our Savior into Egypt, Mar. 2.13
from the intended destruction that Herod had against him; and when those in
the Synagogue of the Galileans were filled with wrath, and would have cast him
down headlong from the brow of the hill, whereon their City was built, Lake
4.28, 29, 30.2 Cor. 11.32, 33. Acts 9.23, 24, 25.
he passed through the midst of them and went his way; and so when the Jews had
taken Council to kill Saint Paul, when their laying in wait was known, and
that they watched the gates day and night to kill him, the Disciples took him
by night, and let him down the wall in a Basket: Now all these did outrun the
Constalile, and yet what offense, I pray you, was in then, for saving
themselves alive from the fury of the destroyer: but you set a detractor has
the Devil in his tongue, and he that applauds it has his teeth and tongue in
his ears; he derides what he understands not, and wrangles with the thing he
has not learned; because the Iron is too hot for his fingers, thus all is not
Malt that is cast an the Mill, and he that throws dust at the sun, it lights
but in his own eyes: O but says he again, there cannot be all this smoke, but
there is some fire; there would not be a shadow, if there were no Sun; a man
thus evil spoken of cannot be Innocent, but by your leave, an benefit man,
that will deal square and aboveboard shall be contemned of the world; Joh.
2^.13, 19, 20.
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then his
Lord, if they persecute me, they will also persecute you: and yet a precious
stone, that is cast into the mire, does not lose his beauty: Innocence cannot
protect the just, and he that is down the wind shall be sure take evil spoken
of; for when fortune fails, desert often bleeds with shame, and no good man but
shall find this measure of our Savior Christ himself; Joh. 7.12
Some said he was a good man, others said nay, but he deceives the people; But
all things are not true that we hear, and therefore wise men believe nothing
but what they see: but malicious men de the quite contrary, it is a suspicions,
apprehensive, and interpreting fancy, ready to pick out injury, where is cannot
be justly found, that its anger may be employed to frame occasions to it self;
and therefore it is a wise advice of Seneca, Non vis esse iracundus: ne sis
morosus, he that is too wise in his judgment on other men's errors, will be
casily too follish in the nourishing of his own passion, and its commenly seen
in matters of cansure and suspicion, the more sight and reason goes out, the
less uses to abide within, and as men which see through a colored glass,
which have all objects how different soever represented to the same Color, so
they examining all conclusions by principles forestalled for that purpose,
thinks every thing of what nature soever, to be dyed in the color of their
own conceits; and to carry some proportion unto those principles, like
Antipheron, Orites, and others in Aristotle, who did confidently affirm every
thing for real, which their imagination framed to it self, and yet when malice
has thus sought to put out the Candle, by snuffing it, many times it has made
it shine the brighter: as in the sale of Joseph, by his brethren, It was not so
much you that sold me, Genesis 45.8.
(says he) as God that sent me, that I might save much people alive, as it is
this day; and therefore, as one says well, God permitted this sale, he
withdrew his grace from the sellers, he restrained the sin from an intended
murder, to a bare sale; this treachery of his brethren he did not infuse, but
use, he used it not as a fale, but as a conveyance; in them 'twas a selling, in
him a sending, aiming at their relief, an end out-ballancing in good, the
evil of the sale, the saving of much people: thus look but on the corner of a
piece of Arras, and it carries no proportion until you unfold the whole piece,
and until then you see but one half of Ezekiels Vision, you see but the
wheels, not the eyes in the wheels: Ezeck. 10.12.
thus God oftentimes does twist many rags into ropes, to lift his Jeremies out
of the dungeon; my particular observed will make out the parallel, and to say
with the Prophet David, I will praise God because of his Word, Jer. 38.11, 12.
Psalm. 36, 4. Psalm. 37.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 113 6, 7. Psalm. 107.
I have put my trust in God, and will not fear what flesh can do unto me; or he
will bring forth the righeousnesse of such as the light, and their judgment as
the noon day, for he takes the simple out of the dust, and lifteh the poor
out of the mire, etc. Afflictions thus make mercies to be the more esteemed,
liberty is sweet unto, and desirable of all, but most of all, of those that
have known the hardship of a long imprisonment, as the danger and violence of a
storm, make a safe harbor the more welcome: thus the woman cured of her issue
of blood, after she had suffered many things of many Physicians, Mark 5. 25,
26, 27. Joh. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered but rather grown
worse; and he that after thirty eight years lying by the Poole of Bethesda, was
put into the waters and cured of his infirmity; prized their healths the more,
as they had the longer layen upon their beds of languishing: if the plaster
should be too soon taken off, the sore would fester so much the more; and
whiles deliverance is delayed, patience has its perfect work; it is the
bellows to blow up Gods graces. Christ hid himself from his Spouse, to make her
long after him; Samuel was the more dear to Hanna, because she waited long for
him; we would not so much praise him for his sweetness, if we had not first
tasted the cup of bitterness: that which with more difficulty we obtain, with
more care we keep: the child must pray and entreat, and open every finger of
his hand, before he gets the Apple which his father shows: We may not limit the
holy One of Israel; Psalm. 78.41.
we must expect and wait if to have the harvest: there is no ship but is
tossed upon the Sea, no Church but is afflicted; Is black, but comely: Cant. 1.5
and therefore Luther, to set forth the condition of the Church, pictured a
silly maid in the wilderness, Psalm. 90.10.
compassed about with many Wolves and Bears, and raging wild beasts, to show
the many dangers and troubles that the people of God must inevitably pass
through, in this world; so that as there is no Sea without waves, Psalm. 46.1
so there is no Saint without sorrows; and these Bees will gather honey from
the bitterest Herbs, and yet when this wind blows the most fiercely, then know
that it is about to cease; Psalm. 44.7.
man's greatest extremities are Gods opportunities, Psalm. 107.6.
when he does usually deliver those that call upon him; and things that cannot
be altered must be born, for impatience does but increase the cross, and as a
man in Irons, the more he strives and struggles, the more he hurts himself; for
we see it is easier by far to tie a knot, then to unloose it, to find faults in
a man, then to make them; a simple man can quickly make a spot, which a wise
man cannot so easily clean; it is easy for a man to fall into a pit, not so
easy to get out; and he lives the safest, we say, that pockets up his wrongs:
rough storms try good Pylots, the Mariner that then runs on his course, the
Lant horn that then keeps his light, that yields not under the burden, but
endures the cross with patience; when now you shall cast up the Cards, it will
appear what is Trump: Innocence then is the best Armor that a man can put on
against another man's fears, Prove. 28.
as Tacitus said of Caecina, Ambiguarum rerum sciens, eoque intrepidus; to be
acquainted with difficulties, makes men that they are not fearful of them,
knowing that the longest day will have an end; and in the mean time he that
suffers the Cedar to grow, permits the lowest shrub to live; and though the
Bird may now perchance have many sick feathers to keep her below that she
cannot fly up into the tree, yet the time will come, that her feathers will be
grown again, and that she shall be able to mount the skies: and what though in
the interim Shimei rail, and the Drunkards make songs of me, yet wise men will
profit by the prate of fools, and he that does not hurt me in this case too,
must yet be opposed so far forth is to beware him; for a Scorpion is not then
only supposed to have a sting when he smites, nor do all Horses prove right
from the same race, nor is all coin crurant that has the Kings stamp upon it,
and therefore take heed is a good reed; although innocence has so clear a
Complexion as she needs no painting, may endure then much hard measure, be
belyed notwithstanding: but these men that pursue her so fiercely, do but
snuff the Candle to be smuch their own fingers, and makes the light to burn
more clear at last; and like hail on a tyled house, although it makes a great
noise, yet it does little harm; he that walks with a right foot is sure to
speed; but it is rare if black be made to take any other hue: thus a good cause
consisting in matter of fact, when it is plainly told is sufficiently proved,
but a good man may complain, as the Prophet David did in his time, Ps. 102.6
That he was like a Pelican in the Desert, it shall be long enough ere they
come to assist him; nay, so far shall he be from help, That the net upon Mizpah
and the snare upon Tabor, Hos. 5.1.
shall be laid to catch him, as the ambushes which the Idolatrous Priests laid
upon those mountains, to take up all the passengers that went up to Jerusalem
toworship the true God; there will be a Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, ever ready
to oppose the Moses and Aaron, Number. 26
that seek but to work good in the Congregation; a Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy
3.8.
and Egyptians to affront them, thta work in the Lords Vineyard: but he that
fights with Cats, must endure to be clawed, that creeps through Briars, shall
be scratcht, that fights with Bears, must be paw'd; that contends with mightier
men than himself, must blame himself if he suffer wrong; for it is not good
meddling, we say, above the eyes, none ever saw the Altars of Busiris but was
posseSSed with sorrow; then for to shoulder a great man that is not sure to put
him into the Gutter, does but light a Candle to see his own nakedness, for
thus he shall cut his fingers that meddles with edged tools, and no marvel if
be then cries that is thus pincht to the quick; the Asses ears must be horns
if the Lion will have it so, but a great oppressor is the greatest thief, is
more ready to offend, because he is without fear of revenge, and no wonder if
his usage then makes a wise man mad; and if he that shall oppose one such
adversary, shall have his hands full, then he that provokes many like enemies,
must expect to be torn in sunder; but if a man must suffer for the truth, Is it
not all one to be drowned in the deepest Sea, as near the shore? A magnanimous
man must be like a four cornered stone, Deuteronomy. 1.17. and 16.19.2 Cor. 19 7.
lie upon whatsoever side he lights, must fear no colors that will attempt the
Fort, have no respect of persons injudgement; yet he that will thus do his duty
without connivance or partiality, shall be sure never to want opposition, and
the slanders of Malignant men to pursue him, and therefore must resolve with
patience, to run through both good and bad reports, and suffer the virulence of
these venomous tongues with contempt; 2 Cor. 6.8.
and amongst the rest of those enemies that I have met withal of this kind,
there is one whose eyes are so blind with popular applause, that be had rather
be a master of Error, then a scholar of truth, and this theif in the Candle
makes ill work, this moat more hurts the eye than any part, for commonly he
makes Religion his stalking horse, and under a seeming sanctity covers over a
double iniquity; like the Alder tree, he has a fair bark, but a bitter rine;
this Be brings honey in his mouth and a sting in his tail, like the Box tree,
seeming always green, yet then being full of poisonous seeds; is a Siren,
which will sing sweetest, when she intends to bite the sharpest; with the dog,
will bite sorest when he does not bark; with the Onix-stone, is hottest when it
seems most white; is a cunning Goldsmith, that will enrich his basest silver
with pure gold, then pretend the fairest when he intends most mischief: this
Fisher covers his books with the pleasantest baits, and straw his best corn
under a pitfall, the sooner to betray those with whom he has to do; this
Canker you shall always find in the fairest rose, this moath breeding still
in the finest wool, this worm ingendring most in the softest wood, this man
continually maligning the best of men, malice driving him forward, and fury
suprring him on, that he cannot stay behind, being thus riding post to hell
upon the devils back; this Scorpion has an amiable face, but a poisonous
tail; this sour crab seems an apple outwardly, as the sweetest Pipin, it is
the taste only makes the difference, his actions which are ever terminate in
mischief; these waspes have their Combs appearing fair to the eye, but
without honey; but we try gold by the touchstone, Jewels by the Lapidary:
Locusts by their faces are not known from men; this Bell having a clear sound,
but an iron Clapper, he perfumes his deceipts with the balm of Gilead, has
words in his mouth like Alder flower, very gay, more woth than all the tree
besides, like Nazianzens Country of Ozizalah, which had store of flowers, but
was barren of corn; you shall find his tongue commonly too long for his mouth,
which runs riot like a hunting whelp, goes before his wit, will quest where
every Bird and Buzzard sits, and when he does calumniate a man's good name in a
dark corner behind his back, he reaches out whatsoever comes at his tongues
end, and then like a Pecock, spreads about his tail when he would be seen,
but will not dayne to look upon his black legs for all that; with the man in
the Moon, he vies at all, for his conscience; like Sampsons shoulders, are
strong enough to bear out any act, but like the Gander, you shall ever find
him loudest amongst his Geese, telling Stories of strange things, to those that
cannot contradict him in his relations, which when rightly understood, are but
tales of Robin Hood, by him that never shot in his bow: but in this his
multiloquie it fare with him as when a stream over-sloes his bancks, which
thereby only contracts slyme and filth; he is an Hermaphrodite, begotten
betwixt Hawk and Buzzard, puts his sickle into every man's harvest, will be
meddling, what soever comes of it, albeit most times in the conclusion, he finds
little thanks for his labor; makes work to have work, and rather than stand
out, will spin his tow into a mighty length, make much ado about nothing, that
he may be seen to have imployent, when God knows those into whose society and
business he thrusts himself, had rather have his room than his Company, for
this Swan though he has milkie feathers, yet has he a black Carcass: with
Athalia you shall have him crying treason, treason, when himself is the
greatest Traitor; and like a mad dog, you shall find him as angry barking at
the Moon which he cannot reach (at him that's above him) and does but cross his
humor) as at that man whom he gets presently by the shins, and cannot
withstand his fury, like the Raven you shall have him no longer to stay in the
Ark, then he has need of Noah, for his own ends be will shake each man by the
hand, and like wax will be pliable to every Print, the sparrows feather serves
him as well as the Swans, without check he passes over his own faults, but
does laugh at all others sins, and like a child seeing his visage in a glass
thinks it another babye; like thunder, when he makes the greatest clap, he lets
all but a little stone, his discourse commonly ends in a lie: like a light
vessel that's unballanced, he rises and falls with every wave, oderunt, quos
metuit, first he hurts, and then he hates, and ever after he looks upon them
as guilty of that shame and sadness, which in the sin he has contracted, and
thus makes hatred an Apology for wrong, and out of the narrowness,
incapacity, and Antipathy of his own mind he falls to an under-valuing of
persons, even to their non entity and existence, as things utterly unusefull,
because he sees not what use himself can have of them, herein discovering as
much absurdity in so peremptory a dislike as a blind man should do in wishing
the sun put out, not considering that he himself receives benefit at the
second hand from that very light, the beauty whereof he has no acquaintance
withal he will insult over a man's sufferings, and where he finds a Cowardly
and faint resistance, will domineer like a pig in Pease-straw, and as a resty
jade will then show his tricks, when he finds his rider fearful to put spurs
to his sides; he will be sure to hold in with the Griffin, and great Leviathan,
as knowing if he can compound with the Serpent, he will soon crush the little
Adders, and yet with these he ties but a Gypsies knot, that is fast and loose
at pleasure, for as a Physician to his patient, he will then give him over when
he lies a dying, will leave thee when thou needst him most, he sails evermore
with wind and tide, and never drinks in empty bottles, non ad amissas, h3
carves a piece of his heart to every one that sits next him, because he would
he thought wise, and yet is no better than froth, which appears all above, but
is quickly gone and vanished into nothing, though in the interim and mean time
while the tale is telling, as a blazing Comes he appears more glorious than a
fixed star; like a Pedlar will show what is in his pack, though nothing but old
fashions and brarded wares be in it; he has another trick amongst the rest
too, which he learned from a Curtezan, that when he finds himsef faulty, and
likely to be accused for the fact, he will be sure to cry whore first, will
jeer at honest women, seek others where he lay himself, that if it were enough
for him to accuse, there were none should be clear: where he meets with a mean
understanding, and with one that holds him in esteem, he brings this Pan into a
fools paradise, who straightwayes thinks to be made free in Wales, for
offering a Leek unto this S. Davy at his shrine; he will never bid thee God
speed, unless he knows thou need not to care for him; Religion he uses as
women use Soape, only to wash away suspicion; he museth as he uses, will not
endure to be pulled by the ears, to hear that he has any faults: he is In
Nettle, out Dock; a fickle fellow too, will be found no where, and yet will
have his finger in every pie, will give his verdict amongst the rest, though he
comes of himself uncal'd unto Council, and then all his Geese are Swans, his
Pigeons are all white, he thinks he has a Spirit of Prophecy and cannot
err, and if Solomon were alive again, he would vye with him, which were the
wisest man, he has a populer spirit, which like a working Sea, which ever
breeds trouble in the Port, so does he make work where ever he becomes, give
him but preferment, and he has no equal, this Parish Priest presently forgets
that ever he was a Clark, as Saul being made a King, and Balaam a Prophet, with
Judas they are the worse foul stomachs turning wholesome food into gall and
corruption, put him upon business, which he has no mind unto, and like a
resty Jaae, the more he is suprred, the backwarder he goes; if Ahab had a mid
to go up to Ramoth Gilead, he will be one of them will cry, Go up and prosper;
if Ahaz will have such an Altar as is at Damascus, 1 King. 12.12.
He shall find him an high Priest, that will do according to all that the King
commands him, if a Novelty will take the people, he will be one of those will
speak perverse things, 2 King 16.
to draw Disciples after him; and with the Keilites a-gaine will give up David,
betray the best friend be has to save himself, Act. 20.30.
with the Samaritanes he will challendge kindred of the Jews; whiles their State
flourishes, but will disclaim them again when afflicted, will imbarke himself
in the Churches cause in a Calm, but with the Soldier in the Acts will fly
out of the ship in a storm, and although his Conscience be convinced of the
right that he should do, yet if any danger be in the way, he will do as those
amongst the chief Rulers that believed in Christ, yet because of the
Pharisees, dared not to confess him, least they should have been cast out of
the Synagogue; where he is to sit in Judgment he always comes prepossest in
opinion, and like a Juror embraced before hand, resolved of his verdict, before
he hears the cause, censuring before he sees, and speaking evil of what he
does not understand, he has the yellow Jaundies in his eyes, and thinks all
yellow that he looks upon, prizes nothing that's good, because it suites not
with his disposition, he is provided ad omnia quare, He has for every bird a
bait, an Apple for Adam, a wedge for Achan, a Kingdom for Absalon, an Office
for Korah, a Bag for Judas, 1 King. 22.6.
a world for Demas, a flattering Prophecy for Ahab, can awe the tymerous with
dangers, claw and blow up the proud with titles, bait the greedy man with
hopes, feed the discontented man with Complaints, melt the compassionate man
into Compliances, and like a Camelian change himself into all Colors, to
advance himself in all conditions: but how can he have a sweet breath, that
has such rotten Lungs, but this Ape though she has some touches of a man's
face, yet is still known to be an Ape, and how could I be safe to have had such
men as these to mine enemies, whose malicious conclusions concerning me, have
been like those of Logic ever following deteriorem partem, but that Rule ought
to be straight that squareth other things; yet if they could but snatch a
shadew, or shape a surmise of evil in my actions, of a molehill they have made
a mountain and raised a scandal, where there has been no cause, knowing that
the least blemish mars a Dyamond, and yet in the midst of all these clamours
and loades of slander, this has born up my heart, God knows my works, and
though ignorance and malice heretofore has set upon my skirts and censured me,
yet God I hope will at one time or o there, put them forth with the Coment of my
honest and just meaning, Psalm. 37. 6.
and dealing upon them, and not as heretofore tortured and drawn with false
expositions of mine adversaries, and that which quieted Jobs spirit in the
midst of all the mis-apprehensions of his friends has ever been and shall be
still my comfort, Job 16.12.
Behold my witness is in heaven, and my Record is on high; Act. 12.2
But Festus to do the Jews a pleasure will leave Paul bound, Herod and Agrippa
kill James, and imprison Peter under the custody of 16. Soldiers, and so the
ungodly for his own lust does persecute the poor; Act. 25.2
Up Lord disappoint him, and cast him down, and deliver my soul from the
ungodly, Psalm. 10.2, 6.
which is a sword of thine, that the men of the earth may no more oppress, for
when my foot slipped, they rejoiced greatly against me, and though we cannot
expect but that we must shift our garments, Psa. 17.3. Psalm. 10.18. Psalm. 38.16.
and sometimes wear sackcloth; yet Lord set my heart in tune, whether to
Lachrimae, or Hallalujahs: and thus you my see the discouragement and
discountenance that I have had in this world; that if any man has but chanced
to favor me, I have been spoken against as when Christ called Zacheus, Luke 19.
the people murmurring said, He is gone to be a guest with one that is a
sinner; but a Carping humor is a sign of a wek judgment; afflictions, you
may perceive then, have followed me as Jobs messengers, before the first was
dispatched, there appeared a second, before that was ansered, a third followed;
like Ezechiels Prophecy, Ezekiel. 7.
mischief upon mischief, and rumor upon rumor; but it is too late to mourn
when the chance is past, howsoever though few fair days have been in my
Calender, yet let him that stands take heed lest he falls; for the Hawk that
trusts too much unto her wings if she soar too high may so be lost, that gazeth
to catch a star too, my easily fall, and let not men be too bold to play with
other folks noses, least perchance thereby their own be taken by the end; for
he that sets his neighbors house on fire, must take heed least he burns his
own, for whoseoever will speak and do what he list, is like to have and hear
more than will please his humor; it is hard to cover smoke but it will burst
out, the tongue will bewray the intentions of the heart, and thus we shall know
how the clock goes, by the striking of the Bell; and if then being forewarned,
we be not forearmed against the ensuing danger, there is no man will pity him,
that in such case shall groan under the burden. I have in my time met with all
kinds of opposition, but with no wrath and cruelty like that which has
proceeded from weakness and cowardice, having had either jealousy, advantage,
or despair, to set it on, and yet those which as the Prophet speaks, do break
men's heads with oil, make a poison of their own merits, to kill them with
praises, are bad enough, that love not to have their bad meanings and actions
to be found out, as those also which being displeased with Mordecai think it a
scorn to lay hands on him alone, and therefore his whole Nation must suffer
with him; with Seianus the storm must light on his family and friends, as well
as on himself, and hatred is so overflowing a passion, that it will sometimes
rather strik a friend too, then not to reach an enemy, as Darius, pereat cum
inimico amicus, let my friend rather perish with mine enemy, then that mine
enemy escape by my friend, and yet again there is scarce a more hateful
quality in the eyes of God and man, then that of the Herodians, to lie in wait
to catch an innocent man, and then for to accuse him; and such I have had to
deal withal; unlimited desires also will repine to see another have that which
himself wants, as Dionysius the Tyrant did punish Philopenus the Musician,
because he could sin, and lato the Philosopher because he could dispute better
then himself, but Nemo repent fit turpe, no man becomes bad upon a sudden,
for a man may shoot and miss the mark, and yet sot his aim as straight as he
that shoots and hits the white, desire makes us what we are, and affection when
it does express its desire is to be considered, though by chance it misseth to
do what was expected: Apelles was no good Painter at the first, it is tract of
time that makes things to appear as they are indeed; the Juniper is sour when
it is a twig, and sweet when it is a tree; I but says my adversary, if his
innocence had been such as he makes show of, why then has he not in all this
time, put the matter unto trial, to purge himself; you shall perceive by that
which follows, that I have neglected no oopportunity to bring this gold unto
the touchstone, my disaster has been only in this, that the public affairs
of the kingdom, would to this hour never admit me so much leisure for the
examination of this particular, that I could procure it to be heard; besides
that, in all this time I have not wanted those that have done me many ill
Office in this matter, and that wish it never ended, but that still it may lie
as a rod over my head, or as a staff to beat me withal, upon all occasions
behind my back; besides when fury does rage and rave, we say there is no
putting of truth unto trial, for so to snuff the candle, were but to put out
the light, and every wise man knows the hen that cakles has not always laid,
will not believe every vain report, that comes aborad; but with those wise
Bereans are more nobler minded men, then those of Thessalonica, will first
search and see whether those things be so or no, so that though the Serpent
Porpherious has much poison in him, yet wanting teeth can do little hurt, and
therefore as David said concerning Sheimei, Let him alone, It may be the Lord
will look on my affliction, 2 Samuel 16 11.12.
and requite good for his cursing this day; so will I not so much look on the
lower linkes of this chain, as to forget him that has the top of it in his
hand; but will look up to God in what I suffer, and say as Eli, It is the Lord
elt him do what he will; 1 Samuel 3.18.
and with Job, the Lord gives and takes, and blessed be his Name, for it is he
that kills and makes alive, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7, 8. 9.
that brings down to the grave and brings up, that makes poor and makes
rich, that brings low, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, and set
them among Princes, and makes tem to inherit the Throne of glory, and by
strength shall no man prevail, Hag. 3.19.
says the Prophet, for in that time I will undo all that afflict thee, and I
will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out, and I will get
them praise and fame in every land, where they have beeng put no shame: And is
any man then so whole that he needs not the Physician? What part has he then
in Christ which came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance? Luke
5.31, 32.
is he ever a whit the better of whom all men speaks well, nay, is he not the
worse, for so did their fathers of the false Prophets: wool buyers, know wool
sellers; and the shoe will hold together with the sole; Luke 5.27, 28, 29,30.
flints hurt not one another, but grow orderly together; brothers in iniquity
seldom falls out: let them then be filled with madness that cannot entangle
me, nor shall it grieve me to be separate from their Company, nor be reproached
by such men, nor to have my name cast otu amongst them as evil; Luke 5.7, 22,
23.
for these busi-bodies in other men's matters, these Bishops in other men's
Diocesses, as they are great strangers to themselves, having in this time their
own gardens over grown with noisome weeds, so their tongues are no slander;
Psalm. 50.19.20.
that I care not to be judged of them according to the flesh, so I may but live
according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.15. Psalm. 112.4.
thus though the earth be moved, and the hills be carried into the midst of the
sea; though the waters thereof rage and swell, and the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same, yet will the good man hold his way, and he that has clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger: 1 Pet. 4.5 Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3.
no man loves him whom he fears most, Job 17.9. Job 36.14.
for he is afraid of him whom he has injured; Adam first eats and then he
hides, as soon as he has transgressed the Covenant he expects the curse.
Albicrades having provoked the Athenians, was afraid to trust them, saying, It
is a foolish thing for a man when he may fly, to betray himself into their
hands, from whom he cannot fly; Conscience of evil and guiltiness of mind
being like mud in water, Wisd. 17.
the more it is stirred does the more foul and thicken, therefore this man will
use all possible means to be rid of him if he can whom he fears, which is the
reason too, that when a man has acted his part, far beyond that which was
expected, or can be requited, if he be above him that is thus obliged, all his
satisfaction shall be neglect and contempt of him at the last, he then that
stands upon his own legs, can make the wheels to serve the Clock, and the Goose
to go on her own feet; provides for himself that which is sufficient, and lives
within his compass, without being chardgeable or burt hensome unto others,
when now he perceives the rain in a black cloud, revenge intended in a bended
brow, regards not the shoure to come, that has so good a shelter to run unto
in a storm: excesses commonly seldom go alone, great wits and great Errors,
but these envious men, are for the most part highly conceipted ot their own
excellence, it is a very hard thing, when great abilities and vast hopes shall
meet together, to govern them with moderation; private ends being in that case,
apt for to engadge a man's parts, and to take them off from public service,
unto particular advantage; men prize their reputations as their lives, and
though in some things too blame, yet loath they are to see it, but if faithful
and good men were provided for with employments suitable to their knowledge,
and that might yield them a subsistence to continue them in their service, it
would make men strive unto perfection, and to be enabled for duties, for the
keenest edge that has nothing to cut is nothing woth, it is meat keeps men
alive: Miners cannot work with hout mettalls, nor can wisdom thrive without
wherewith; Hercules is nothing without a club in his fist, and if they have
done well before, this must more obliege them for the future, for a dog will
not leap in his face that gives him meat; Claudius the Emperor was wont
greatly to thank such as he had provided for Offices for that they being men
worthy and capable of them, would accept them, but of late times it has been
otherwise, Offices have been provided for men, that could only receive the
profits of Offices, but unable to execute the charges with which they were
entrusted; that it is much better we see now a days to be happy then wise,
whiles these men only dance, unto whom fortune pipes; That he labors but to
graspe a running stream, says one, that expects preferment for desert; the
torch turned downwards is exteinguished with that which caused his light, the
best wine makes the sowrest vinegar, Corruption optimae pessmae, man is the
purest of all creatures yet being once dead is the most noisome of all others;
that Cambrick which is once staind will scarcely be clean, ripest wits prove
most prejudicial when employed the worst way, that it is ill driving a Cow
against the wall, enforcing men unto extremities, for when she can flee no
further, she must either turn head or dye; it is true, a bow that's long bent
waxes weak, and it may be thought a policy to weary out the best men with
expectation, but there is not one man amongst a thousand, whom much
provocation, will not alter from these first resolves which he has taken up; a
man may tire the best horse; he is a black Swan indeed that will not vary, Vnum
ex mill; but Nilus breeds Serpents as well as precious stones, and in all
Rivers there is frogs as well as fish, and we know the worst are ever the
greatest number, there is no darkness more formidable than that of an Eclipse,
no malice grows rancker then that which proceeds from the Corruption of love,
no taste more unsavory than of sweet things when they are corrups, nothing more
dangerous than a sharp wit employed the wrong way; a Lark we say is worth a
Kite, and one piece of a Kid, is worth two of a Cat: to him then that conceit
and custom has not made good and bad alike, he will choose rather to have one
fair flower grow in his garden then many stinking weeds, but I have been
beholding to some yet further for their good word, who have been pleased to
honor me so far, as to join me in the same yoke together with Master Kilvert,
and have made it as a wonder that the Parliament should be pleased to make use
of two men in their service so infamous and unworthy a concluson; you may
perceive drawn from false premises, I speak but for my self, for this
sentence given against me in the Court of Star Chamber, is both the Major and
Minor propositions to warrant this assertion, which being (manifest falsum) I
may be bold to answer so, without prejudice to their Judgments: nor are they
so well read in Policies howsoever, that shall think States must not employ men
of all ranks and Conditions; for something a man may learn from Simon Magus as
from Simon Peter, nay, a man may be counseled of Balaams Ass, Numb. 22.28.
and I am confident they shall but leap out of the drying pan into the fire,
that shall bestow employment upon such men as these, for railing at another
man, more honest then themselves; nay, by thus placing their favors too soon
upon such detractors, they may often be-saint such Serpents as will sting them to
death; for nothing but croaking Toads are to be looked for out of pudly Fens
destruction and unhappiness from such malicious men, nor can we look for water
out of an empty pot; but because these men do find it much easier to strike
than fence, therefore they are so censorious; but every Puppy will bark at a
dead Lion, so easy a thing it is to give a man a fall, when both his hands are
bound behind his back; it is enough to for him to snarl that dare not bite: but
the day and night being both alike to him that's blind; a Nettle and a Rose all
one to him that knows no difference; I shall entreat my friends for to
remember, and I hope (without scandal or prejudice to any man) I may speak it,
that Master Kilverts employment and mint, and the ways we have lived in, have
been of a far different condition; he was a Courtier, which I never was; he
solicited for the times against such as were then honest men, and averse to
their proceedings, but I had the happiness to be still on the Defensive part
for such, and had work enough to do besides, for to keep me but upon my own
legs, and he that rows against wind and tide, to be sure must have his hands
full; Psalm. 71.18, 19.
But O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me, and yet did
thou turn and refresh me, yea and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again, and comfortedst me on every side; who knows his strength that was never
tried? and how can that Virgin be said to be chaste that was never tempted;
it is the fire that purifies the gold, and afflictions that differenceth the
precious from the vile, Therefore it is good for me faith David, that I have
been in trouble, that I may learn thy Statutes. Psalm. 119.
Thus we consider the Vineyard first in the trees, but afterward we deem it in
the fruits, for it is not the rush, but the Dyamond that is in it set, which
makes it valuable; it is a man's good conversation, which makes him to be well
esteemed; and although in the winter of this workd, the good an bad tree seems
much alike; the Cockle and the Darnell grow up together with the good wheat
until the harvest, yet a piercing eye will discover vice in the habit of
virtue, for the Ass cannot dance to the Harp, nor can the Lions skin teach a
man to roar, to see a sow wallow in the mire is no news, but to see an Ermyne
to do so were rare: he may judge of colors that is not blind, and though
sometimes by accident, he may chance to be deceived in his judgment thereof,
yet it is not ordinary to be so, we see the sun cannot shine without his beams,
and that if the fountain cease, the River is dried up, and that tree withers
whose root decreaseth, and one man is known and differenced from another, by
the Actions they perform; so that although I have been unfortunate, yet I must
be content, for it is not every man's hap to attain the end of his desires, for
many bends the bow, that kills not the game, lays the snare that never catch
the foul, labors without reward, or regard many times, though his service
be never so profitable and acceptable; but the labourer must have his hire; the
Devil his due, do him right has done thee service, least bare walls drive
away good huswives, whosoever is employed in the vineyard, of common right
ought to have his penny.

Thus as with Ariadnes thread, I have led you into the Labarinth of my miserable
life, and by which you may find the way out again, after you have once viewed
and seen those many Meanders, and windings of destructions threatened, and
chambers of death opened, wherein to enclose, and to have buried a poor
innocent man alive: but can any man imagine why all this stir and much ado
should be about nothing, to hunt after such a flea; if there were not something
more in the wind then is visible; or that I can imagine to my self, what
should be the cause of my persecution, for in all this time I have had neither
power nor office in the Common wealth, whereby it has been possible for me in
a public way ever to oppose or hinder any of these men's proceedings, and
designs who have thus cried me down, and so strongly labored to ruin and
blemish me in the worlds opinion; but if I be so base a fellow, the scorn and
contempt of men, and unworthy of all humane society as I have been very lately
traduced and blanced to be by some, it is in the opinion of such assuredly, who
like cupping glasses only draw out the vicious humors of the body unto them,
and like flies that are overcome with the Spirits of wine, but nourished with
the froath, or like those worms, which receive their life from the corruption
of the dead; and with the Prince of Devils may well have their names given
them from flies, because as they resort unto soars, so these take most
pleasure in the wounds and vulcers of men; that if I am become thus a Monster
unto many, sure it is unto such as in the language of the Prophet David, made
Songs of him in the gate, or of those, which Solomon speaks of, Psalm. 61.6.
Psalm. 69.12. Prove. 1.22. and 15.12. and13.1. and 24.12. Gal. 4.16 Esaias 51.7, 8.
Mat. 5.10 11, 12. Joh. 9.28 29. Neh. 1.7. Pro. 12.13. and 13.3. and 14.33. and
15.2 and 16.13.
that delight in scorning, and loves not him that reproves, for it is not he
that tells thee the truth, that is become thine enemy; but my comfort against
this affliction, shall be that which I have received from the Prophet Esaias, Not
to fear the reproach of men neither to be afraid of their revilings; for when
they shall say all manner of evil against me falsely; it shall be the cause of
my rejoicing as the surety of a better reward, and then to be reviled for being
his Disciple, though such shall say, as for this fellow, we know not from
whence he is, yet herein shall be my confidence, the Lord knows who are his,
yea whiles the wicked shall be thus snared by the transgression of his lips,
the just shall come out of trouble at the last; and when such a fool is said to
lay open his folly, he shall be beloved that speaks right; and now would not
Rabanus tongue be clipped for telling tales and that like Joshuahs Spies brings
an evil report upon the Land without cause; you cannot make the Wolf and Lamb
to love; the Locust dies at the sight of the Polipus, and I protest it is a
miracle to me, for to conceive that men so full of State and greatness, should
waste and consum so much precious time, from their more weighty and great
employments, as once to foul their fingers, or spend their breath about so poor
and inconsiderable an object in their estimation and esteem; and it were much
more for the praise of their wisdom, and for my ease and quiet I am sure, if I
might be so much beholding unto them as they profess, that they would be
pleased to let me alone to move among the stars, that cannot attain to be as
glorious as the sun: but they know what it is to offer wrong to a Dove or
sheep, that will not resist again, though pressed to death: and I thank my God
I have no ambitious thoughts, for if I may but live to keep the Wolf from the
door, enjoy a competency to live after the way and manner in which I have been
bred, I profess seriously, I look not after eminency, and those great honors
and preferments in this life, which as Solomon says, are but mere burdens and
nothing else; Eccles. 1.18.
for that man can hardly be master of his passions, that is not master of his
employments, a mind ever burdened being as a bow always bent, which must
needs grow impotent and weary, so that our minds as our vessels must be
unloaded if they would not have a tempest hurt them; there being far more
content to be found in a mean and poor Cottage, than in a rich and stately
Palace; Pro. 15.16, 17. and 16.8.
poor quiet being the truest riches; that as the fig tree, though least
beautiful and bears no flowers, yet is far from thunder: and tell me, is not
the dog more to be praised that hunts till he be spent amongst the bushes and
briars, then he that only can run at gaze, and over the plains and Champion
fields, and cannot endure that his tender skin should be scratcht; there is no
wool so course, but it will take some dye, no creature that God has made in
vain, and therefore I shall not think so meanly of my self, as mine enemies
would have the world for to believe of me, until more than words make the
bargain, for such vain speaking is but as a shot of powder without a pellet, a
great storm and nothing but wind; for where there is only a bare report to
convince a man of an offense, though Cato were the Author of the relation, it
will not be credited of wise men for all that; he that justles another shakes
himself, and if he take snot the better heed, may have his luck that rides a
Colt with a naughty bridle, to be quickly set besides the Saddle, or as he that
walks in the dark, which stumbles and catches an ill turn ere he be aware. I
have now almost eaten up my loaf unto the pin, and cannot recall that stone
which is already cast; but if I were to begin my days again, by that woeful
experience which I have had of things, I should weigh the scale a little
better, and make the balance more even before I dealt out my commodities, for
opinion I see can travel through the world without a pasport, but truth cannot
do so, for whom fame has advanced lives uncontrol'd, and when he stands still
none must go forward, and he needs must swim that has Neptune for his guide,
whiles a strong brain without preferment must be deprest with despite as a
dangerous creature, and then to be looked upon with wonder, as the Sun in his
Eclipse, and as upon the Moon in her Wain; and if that will not serve the
turn, more ways shall be found out yet to kill a dog than by hanging: this man
having an Art like the virtue of that River in Arabia, that turns dirt to
silver, and gold to dross; but it is a blind Goose, we say, that knows not a
Fox from a Fern-bush; the man from the master, by the Livery that he wears; and
though old trees do but live to gather Moss, yet gray hayres, by a long
experience, can difference Brass and Copper from gold, and tell, that though
the first makes the greater sound, and are heard farther off, yet the latter is
the more precious metal: But for the comfort of the upright in heart, there
can never be such an emptiness in the creature, Hab. 3.18.
of those that do belong unto the Covenant of Grace, but even then it is
supplied with fullness from heaven, when it is least visible to flesh and
blood, as when there was no corn in Canaan, Genesis 41.57. and 8.42. and 2.14.
then Joseph unexpectedly sent before into Egypt, had provided sufficient for
his father and his brethren, when they were ready to famish: and Christ had
meat to eat which his Disciples knew not of, when they thought he was read to
have perished for want of food; so when David returned from Aphek to Ziklag,
and found it burnt with fire, and his two wives, and all that he had, and the
women and children of his followers taken Captives, 1 Samuel 30.
so that he and the people who were with him, Esaias 25.5.
lift up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep, and that
David was so distressed that the people spoke of stoning him, yet then he
encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 20.12.
and pursued the enemy, overtooke them, and rescued and took the whole prey out
of their hands again; and so was it in the case of Jehoshaphat when the
children of Moab and Ammon came out against him to battle in multitudes, when
he knew not otherwise what to do, his eyes were upon his God, and he delivered
him; so that though the sun be hid in a cloud, yet his glory and power is no
whit diminished, and it will appear and shine again: and though the streams be
dry, yet the fountain is still the same, and will fill the Channels: that
although in the winter of many infortunities, there be neither leaves nor
blos?somes that do appear upon this tree, yet whiles there is sap sufficient
left in the root, it will make both boughs and branches to flourish and grow
green, when the spring time of favor shall approach; Acts 3.19.
and when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: no
man knows so well where the shoe wrings, as he that wears it; a sturdy Beggar
gets no alms, because he will not acknowledge his wants: but whatsoever my
adversaries may report, or other men think of my Estate, I may not be ashamed
to inform my Necessities, and to open those sores which may procure your
Charity, and herein I will not be found a Liar, let malice and the black mouths
of detraction say what they can against it.

I have lost by the Rebellion in Ireland, in personal Estate, five thousand
seven hundred sixty nine pound; the particulars whereof I can make appear by
the Oaths of diverse, which I have ready to produce upon occasion; I lost the
possession of a Manor, and two thousand Acres of as good Land, Meadow, and
Pasture, as any in the County of Mead, there where I dwelt, which was under a
part of this stock, of which I had a Lease for forty one years of some, and
sixty one years of another part of it, and within those Leases had the Tithes
of as many out Parishes as paid the whole Rent reserved and more, and so I
enjoyed the Land free: And upon which I had built, and otherwise improved it,
in which I expended above one thousand two hundred pound, besides the
situation of the place for Markets, and every accommodation whatsoever, that
no man could dwell in a more Commodious seat.I lost the possession of another
Manor, and of five thousand twenty two Acres of Land, Meadow, and Pasture by
Surveigh, all within a hedge, being my Inheritance and Fee-simple Estate, which
did yield me in present Rent six hundred pound per annum, or there abouts, was
never improved by reason of my absence here in England, for four years
together upon the late Earl of Straffords persecution: there is above one
thousand five hundred Acres of this is as good Meadow and Meadowable Pasture as
any is in that Kingdom, two thousand Acres more of it is as good Wheat Land,
as Grain can be sown upon; the rest good land to feed sheep upon; that I am
sure, valuing the loss of my yearly revenew in Rent, but at one thousand pound
per annum, I am no Liar, let malice say what it can unto the contrary, and all
this taken from me by the Rebels, the 24. of October 1641. the next day after
that bloody and traitorous design was to have been executed at Dublin; but God
Almighty giving me my life for a prey, and the lives of my Wife and Family,
being miraculously delivered from the Enemies surprise in the dead time of that
night attempting it, has answered all these my losses, and bound me to a
perpetual thankesgiving and acknowledgement thereof unto God for this
deliverance; I lost the use of my profession also, by which I profited yearly
more than all the revenew of my Estate besides, and for all this, I shall not
be ashamed to say with the Patriarch Jacob, With my staff I passed over this
Jordan, Genesis 32.10.
by which I became those two Bands: and being dispoiled of all this again, as I
went, I returned, in a disconsolate Estate; yet with holy Job, looking up unto
heaven, from whence comes my help; after this I had no sooner set the sole of
my foot upon my Native soil here again, but I met with many Comforters, and
was offered a competent livelihood for my self and family, to have absented
this City, but was dissuaded to embrace those offers, with promise of a
sufficient supply, if to plant here and assist the common cause; and truly my
affection to the service and the assurance I had for my subsistence, was from
men so eminent in places and authority that I had no reason to doubt of the
performance, but being once engaged; God Almighty, to let me see there is no
dependence, but upon himself alone; took these men away, and left me only to
awaite upon his Providence; and having now served the State this three years
space and more, here in several Committees and otherwise, to the best of my
abilities, you will see in the sequel of the Story, what my reward has been,
for all my labors and faithful performances herein; and I have been informed
that some have not been ashamed to give out, that I have gotten ten thousand
pound in this time, in these employments, which is a thing so gross and
noteriously false, that all men that but understands what I have had to do,
will cry him down for a son of Belial, that shall have such a fiction in his
mouth; I protest upon the faith of an honest man, that I have not in this time,
had so much allowed me in the places and Offices wherein I have served for
Salary in the over sight of some Treasuries for the Irish account, as has
given me and my family bread, and more then what has been freely given me for
my pains, I defy any man to charge me with, and all which is visible and to
be seen, upon record to be much under three hundred pound, and I have spent
four hunded pound more in this time, which has been the benevolence of my
friends; and were I not bereaved of my whole Estate and fortune by that
Rebellion as I said before, I should as freely serve without reward in this
Cause, as any man alive, and shall as willingly contribute what I am able to
it, as any man whatsoever: but those that asperse me have dealt with me herein,
Jo. Paul. Herin. de Albing. l. 1. c. 2.
as the Pope anciently did with the Albingenses in France, Who having a mind
for to ruin them, entertained them in Treaties and Conferences, that in the
mean time he might prepare his great Armies the more suddenly to destroy them:
so are they such who made fair weather with me a long time, till they had
served their own turns, and gained their own ends, Ecces. 6.8.9.13.
and then have requited me with this bad language only for my labor, and now
it is but justice to do him right, that has suffered all this wrong, and but
Christian compassion now at last to take that burden from my back, which has
so long, so heavily lain upon my shoulders, but if my time of rest and quiet,
be not yet come, since vengeance is only Gods Prerogative, I shall leave Joves
thunderbolt in his own hands, and in the mean time scorn the wrong, and so
shall sufficiently be revenged of the injury, and shall thus conclude with that
of Jethro unto Moses, Blessed be the Lord who has delivered me out of the
hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hands of Pharaoh, Exodus 18.10, 11.
for thus I know, Psalm. 9.16, 17, 18. Rev. 15.3. Psalm. 31.26. 1 Pet. 2.12. Tit.
2.8.
the Lord is greater than all Gods, for in the thing wherein they have dealt
proudly, he was above them, and the needy shall not always be forgotten; the
expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever; in which assurance I shall
still labor, and by a good conversation strive to shame the Gain-sayer, that
he that is of the contrary part, may so be ashamed in the latter end, as having
nbo evil thing upon just cause to say against me: These are the mites I tender
to your Corban, the Turtles I have to offer at your Altar; and having no better
to bring, I hope my good meaning shall supply the rest, and if I have dwelt too
long upon this Subject, excuse me, it being an error of affection, that in my
own cause may thus happily mislead my Judgment, and it being in my first
entrance upon such a task, it is no wonder if you shall find me to deserve
your reprehension: he may mar many an Instrument at the first that learnes
Music, but S. Austin says, Non est multiloquium, quando necessaria, etc. But
the Judgment is, and my self

Yours, JEROME ALEXANDER.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 49. read Interrogatories, p. 7. l. 37. add they, p. 8. l. 2. omit
be, ibid. l. 27. read excessive, ibid. l. 47. read adversary, p. 20. l. 20.
read at, ibid. l. 34. add as, p. 13. l. 49. read Interrogatories, p. 23. l. 2.
read to, ibid. l. 37. read that, p. 25. in the Affidavit read is, p. 28. l. 7.
for his read this, p. 28. l. 43. for 100. l. read 130. l. p 32. l. 4. for an
read and, ibid. p. 24. for into read unto, ibid. l. 42. for me read one, p. 33.
l. 42. for than, read that, p. 35. l. 40. omit the, p. 39. l. 39. for in read
into, p. 38. should be, p. 40. l. 26. for the word for read from, p. 41. add
one in the title of certificate, p. 50. l. 37. for agust read against, p. 53.
l. 1. add him, p. 59. l. 7. for with read to, p. 66. l. 42. for recount read
account, p. 71. l. 12. for these words an Act of Common Council read an Act at
Council Table, p. 82. l. 35. for they read the, p. 83. l. 26. for all his
witnesses read all the depositions of his witnesses, p. 84. l. 25. for into
what sad a condition read into what a sad condition, p. 87. l. 26. omit to, p.
100. l. 33. for us read as, p. 109. l. 1. the first word read endeavored, p.
115. in the last line but one, for both read but.

Errata in the Epistle.
FOr oblation, p. 2. l. 37. read obligation, p. 3. l. 27. for wherein read
whereon p. 11. l. 34. for receive read review, p. 20. l. 37. for brarded read
braided.

The Case of Jerome Alexander Esquire, concerning a Sentence given against him
in the Court of Star Chamber, the seventeenth day of November, in the second
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles: Which said Sentence
follows, in these words: In Camera Stell. coram Council. ibid. Decimo septimo
die Novem. An. 2 Car. R. Domino Custod. magni Sigilli Angliae. Domino MANDEVILE
Praesid. Comite Bridgewater. ROBERTO NANTON Mil. JOHANNE COKE Mil. uno
Secretar. Regis. Archiepiscopo Cant. Episcopo London. Capt. Baro Sca^cii.
HARVEY Justic. de Comuni Banco.

THis day came to be heard, by special Order of this honorable Court of the
10 of this instant November, a very foul Offense, Practice and Misdemeanour of
one Jerome Alexander an Utter-Barrester at the Law, Plaintiff in this
honorable Court, against John Yates and others, late Defendants: which Cause
was heard in open Court on the 25 of October last: At the hearing of which
Cause, the main wherewith the said Yates stood charged, was, The threatening and
terrifying of Witnesses which the said Alexander was to produce at a former
Trial of Nisi Prius in the County of Norfolk, between the said Yates then
Complainant, and the said Alexander then Defendant; for proof of which Offense
and Misdemeanour against the said John Yates, the said late Plaintiff Alexander
produced only two Witnesses, namely, Robert Warren Clerk, and John Warren his
brother, whose Depositions were openly read in Court; and the Deposition of the
said Robert Warren was positive and direct, of his own knowledge; and the
Deposition of the said John Warren was upon hearsay: Yet the said Alexander,
for his own advantage, had blotted out and defaced the copy of the Deposition
of the said John Warren, taken in Court unto the 39 Interrogatory on the said
Alexanders part, in these two words, viz. ( that and did) and delivered the
same copy of the said John Warrens Deposition to the said 39 Interrogatory,
with the words ( that and did) so blotted out and defaced as aforesaid, to his
Attorney in this honorable Court, to be read in Court upon the hearing of the
said Cause, against the said John Yates, which was read accordingly; and by
that means, the said Deposition of the said John Warren was made positive and
absolute, as of his own knowledge: and thereupon this honorable Court, and all
the honorable Presence here sitting, were much abused and misled to give their
Judgments and Opinions to sentence and condemn the said John Yates for that
Offense of threatening and terrifying of Witnesses, and for the same to fine him
the said Yates to pay to his Majesty's use 100 Marks, and to be committed to
the prison of the Fleet, and the Warden of the Fleet had thereupon taken him
into his custody accordingly: But, upon the rising of the Court, that day the
Sollicitour of the said Defendant Yates showed to the Right honorable the Lord
Keeper the Paper-copie of the said John Warrens Deposition, which the said
Defendant had out of this Court, wherein the said words ( that and did) were
fair written, and stood in the said Deposition to the said 39 Interrogatory
without blotting, defacing or interlineation; whereby it plainly appeared to
his Lordship, the said Deposition to be but upon hearsay: His Lordship
thereupon acquainted all the honorable Presence therewith in the
inner-chamger, and, with all their Lordships consents, respited the entry of
the same Sentence, and ordered that the original Deposition should be brought
into the Court, the next sitting-day to be perused, seen and viewed by all
their Lordships, and thereupon to give their Order and Sentence; and in the
mean time the said Yates was set at liberty, and discharged of his
imprisonment: Whereupon, the Paper-copie of the said John Warrens Deposition
being obtained by Master Jones, being Attorney for the said Alexander in that
Cause, from his the said Alexanders Clerk that carried his Books, was forthwith
showed by the said Master Jones to the Right honorable the Lord Keeper, and
other the Lords then present, wherein the said two words ( that and did) were
defaced and blotted out of the said John Warrens Deposition to the 39
Interrogatory; which had been openly read in Court, and misled the Court to
sentence as aforesaid, and by that means his Deposition was made positive and
absolute, as of his own knowledge; whereas by the said Defendants copy of the
said Deposition, first showed to his Lordship, with the words ( that and did)
fair written therein, was upon hearsay. Shortly afterward, viz. before two of
the clock that afternoon, the said Master Alexander came to Grayes-Inne, to the
said Master Jones his chamber there, and then and there, in presence and
hearing of Master Hooker one other of the Attorneys of this honorable Court,
in great perplexity, as it then seemed, fell into some passions, saying, What
an unfortunate man am I! What will become of me? And then being demanded by
Master Hooker and Master Jones, Of whom he had or received his copies of the
said Depositions, (whereof that was one) answered, He could not tell whether he
had received it from the Examiner or from Henry Nevile Master Jones his Clerk,
with many bitter and heavy imprecations and oaths, vowing and protesting, He
knew not of the blotting out of those words or altering the copy, and that the
copies were as he first received them. Whereupon, the said Alexander, Master
Jones and Master Hooker went all together into the Examiners Study of this
Court, to see the Record of the original Deposition of the said John Warren to
the said 39 Interrogatory on his part; which being showed unto him by the
Examiner, the Record was fair and plain, with the words ( that and did)
therein, written, with the handwriting of Master Gay the Examiner, who died in
August last. Hereupon the said Master Alexander used the like speeches as
before he had done in Master Jones his Study, and so departed. Yet afterward
the said Alexander, desirous and plotting how to excuse himself of defacing and
blotting out of the said two words ( that and did) out of the copy of the said
Deposition, and to lay and fix it upon the said Henry Nevile, one of Master
Jones his Clerks, on the morrow after, being the 26 day of October last, came
into the Star-Chamber-Office in Grayes-Inne, and, before Matthew Goade Esquire,
Deputie-Clerk of this Court, being sworn upon the holy Evangelists, did make a
voluntary Oath and Affidavit, That he, having retained Master Jones for his
Attorney, and Henry Nevile his Clerk, to take care and solicit his said Suit:
and the Cause coming to publication, the said Nevil undertook to procure for
him, the said Alexander, the copies of the said Depositions taken in that
Cause, and for that purpose received not only the Fees and Duties for such
copies as he procured for him the said Alexander, but likewise had
extraordinary reward and satisfaction for his pains therein; and that the said
Nevile went with him the said Alexander to the Examiners Office of the Court,
and there procured other copies of Depositions belonging to this Cause, which
were delivered to the said Alexander in the presence of the said Nevile,
amongst which was contained the Deposition of the said John Warren: That done,
he repaired with the said Books to Master Hudson, being of his counsel, to be
advised, and to peruse the same Depositions: All which Depositions being
perused accordingly, as well of the said John Warren as the rest, and his said
Counsel conceiving the said John Warrens to the 39 Interrogatory to be
something doubtful, he made a mark in the Margent thereof, and wished the said
Alexander, for his better satisfaction, to go and get the same examined in the
office, to see if the same Deposition were truly copied; and that accordingly
the said Alexander repaired therewith to the said Nevile, and informed him what
his Counsel had directed for examining the copy; and the said Nevile took the
said Deposition of the said Alexander, and carried it to the Examiners Office:
but the Examiner not being within, the said Alexander did leave the said copy
of the said Deposition with the said Nevile to be examined, promising him
satisfaction and content for his pains: and shortly after, the said Alexander
called to the said Nevile for the same, who told him, That he had examined the
said Warrens Deposition in that point with the Original, and that he had then
made it to agree with the Record, and so delivered the same back again to the
said Alexander, with the two words ( that and did) rased in the said Warrens
Deposition, as it now was in the said copy; and after that, the said Alexander
gave him satisfaction for his pains and search. And the said Alexander deposed
and protested upon his Salvation, That the said several words ( that and did)
were in the said Warrens Deposition fair written, when he delivered the same to
the said Nevile; and that the said words were rased and blotted out, as they
then were, when he received the same back again from the said Nevile, showing
the same to the said Master Alexander, and said, That he had made it to agree
with the Record. And the said Alexander protested and affirmed, That the same
was not altered or blotted out, either by him or any other to his knowledge,
other then by the said Nevile as aforesaid. And the said Alexander deposed,
That the said Nevile was trusted with the charge and care of the said Cause:
and having taken upon him to draw the Bill, and part of the Interrogatory, and
took upon him the soliciting and managing of the said Cause, and over and
besides what he had received, he moved the said Alexander to promise him
further satisfaction after the hearing of the Cause. At which next sitting,
being the 27 of October last (according to the said Order) was brought into
this honorable Court the Record of the original Deposition of the said John
Warren, taken upon the said 39 Interrogatory, and was seen, read and perused by
this honorable Court, wherein the said two words ( that and did) were fair
written, without any blotting, defacing or interlineation; and thereupon the
said Master Jones made humble suit to this honorable Court, that he might be
sworn in open Court, for the clearing of himself of any manner of suspicion, or
the least touch that might have been imputed unto him thereabouts; who was
sworn accordingly, and upon his Oath delivered, That, to his uttermost
knowledge, he never saw the said Paper-copie of the said John Warrens
Deposition, before it was put into his hands to be read, at the hearing of the
Cause the last Sitting before. Whereupon, all the honorable Presence openly
pronounced the said Master Jones to be innocent and clear from the least
suspicion of being privy or consenting to the said blotting or defacing of the
said copy. And the said Henry Nevile being then likewise present, humbly
petitioned this honorable Court, that he himself, and the said Alexander also,
might be both sworn upon their corporal Oaths in open Court, and examined upon
Interrogatories or otherwise, touching the defacing and blotting out of the
said words ( that and did) and also that the said Master Hooker might be
likewise sworn to declare upon his oath what he could say, for discovery of the
truth touching the matter aforesaid: all which were sworn in open Court
accordingly. Whereupon, and upon public reading of the said Alexanders
Affidavit in open Court, wherein and some Demands then made by the Court to the
said Alexander, there plainly appeared a repugnancie to truth; wherein he had
catched himself, and discovered his guiltiness of the said Offense. The Court
was pleased to required the Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and Master
Justice Dodderidge, both present in Court, to take the Examination of the said
Alexander Nevile and Master Hooker touching the premises, who took great pains
therein accordingly; and, by the earnest solicitation of the said Nevile, on
the seventh day of this instant November, returned into this honorable Court
their certificate of all their proceedings therein; which said certificate was
openly read in Court upon the tenth day of this instant November: upon the
reading whereof, and opening the points of the same certificate by Sir John
Finch Knight, of counsel with the said Nevile, the Court was inclineable to be
of opinion, that the said Alexander himself was the man that did blot out and
deface the said two words ( that and did) out of the said John Warrens
Deposition, for his own advantage against the said late Defendant Yates: but
for that the said Alexander was neither himself in this honorable Court in
person, neither had any counsel to speak for him, the Court therefore did
forbear to give any final Sentence or Decree therein that day; but gave the
said Alexander time until the next sitting-day, to show cause (if any he had)
by his counsel or otherwise, why the Court should not proceed to sentence
against him for that Misdemeanour; or in default thereof, the Court intended to
proceed to sentence the next sitting-day, at which time the said Alexander was
ordered to be present at the Bar in person. Now this day was read in open Court
an Affidavit of Charles Bagshaw Gentleman, That he had done his best endeavor
to serve the said Jerome Alexander with the said Order, and to give him notice
thereof; for which purpose, he had sought him at his chamber at Lincolns-Inne,
and given unto his boy or Clerk (whom he found in his said chamber) a true
copy of the said Order: and the said Nevile himself offering to be deposed,
That he did, at the late Lord chief Justices, give the said Alexander himself
warning to attend the Court at his peril: All which notwithstanding, the said
Alexander made default, and had withdrawn himself (as was now informed in this
honorable Court.) Whereupon was read again, in open Court, the said Alexanders
Affidavit, and the said Certificate of the said Lord chief Justice and Master
Justice Dodderidge: Upon the reading whereof, and opening of all the parts and
points thereof by Sir John Finch Knight, and Sir Heneage Finch Knight,
Recordeer of London, both of counsel with the said Henry Nevile (who was
present in Court himself, to stand to Justice) it plainly appeared to this most
honorable Court, as well by diverse apparent contrarieties between the said
Alexanders Affidavit aforementioned and his Examination taken upon his Oath
before the said Judges, as by diverse other pregnant reasons and circumstances,
conducing to prove him guilty of this great offense; and also by the testimony
of (...) Cook Gentleman, sworn in open Court, who upon his corporal Oath
deposed, That the said Alexander had formerly been taken very foul in his own
cause, in the same kind or worse, at a Trial in the county of Norfolk, at an
Assizes holden at thetford, before the said Master Justice Dodderidge (who
bound him to the good behavior for his offense then committed) And for that
also the said Alexander was fled, and durst not abide Judgment, as the said
Nevile did, who prosecuted him for that offense; this honorable Court was
clear of opinion, that the said Alexander himself was guilty of that foul
Misdemeanour and Offense of defacing and blotting out of the said two words (
that and did) out of the copy of the said John Warrens Deposition, for his own
advantage and ends against the said Yates, whereby this honorable Court was
misled in their judgments, in censuring and condemning the said Yates, as
before is declared: And have therefore Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed the said
Jerome Alexander, for his said foul Offense and Misdemeanour, well worthy of
sharp and severe Punishment for the same; and that he shall be utterly disabled
to practice as a Counselor at Law, publicly at the Bar or privately in his
chamber; holding him not worthy to be of the Society of Lincolns-Inne, whereof
he was a member, have therefore left him to the consideration of the Governors
of that House, and to pay a Fine of 500l. to His Majesty's use, be committo the
Prison of the Fleet; and before his enlargement out of prison, shall publicly,
at the Bar of thisCourt, in humble and submissive manner, acknowledge his great
offense against God and this honorable Court, and shall show himself very
penitent and sorrowful for the same. And this honorable Court pronouncing the
said Nevile to be clear and free from committing or being privy to the
committing of the said Offense of blotting out the words of the copy
aforesaid, and gravely considering the great trouble, loss, damage and danger
which the said Nevile has been put unto, for clearing of his credit and
reputation in his service to the Court, in defense of his own innocence in
this cause, and in prosecuting and bringing to censure the said Alexander for
the same his great Offense and Misdemeanour, Have therefore further Ordered,
Adjudged and Decreed, That the said Jerome Alexander shall satisfy and pay to
the said Henry Nevile, for and toward his loss and damage in that behalf, the
Sum of 50l. of lawful money of England.

Jo. Arthur Dep.
Thomas Talbot of London, Gent. does depose, That this Writing is a true copy
of the Record of the Sentence therein mentioned, being examined by the Record
by me the said Thomas Tallbot.


Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.

EXCEPTIONS taken by the said Jerome Alexander Esquire; unto the Dismission, Decree
and Proceeding of the Court of Star Chamber against him, touching the said
pretended blotting out of these two words ( that and did) in the Paper-copie of
one John Warrens Deposition, taken in the Cause wherein he was Plaintiff in the
said Court against John Yates and others Defendants: In anno secundo Caroli
Regis.
First, against the Dismission:

1 THat it was given against him, notwithstanding good cause and proof
appearing within the Books to have sentenced the Defendant Yates for that
offense of terrifying of Witnesses and tampering with them, albeit John Warrens
Deposition to the nine and thirtieth Article had been wholly set aside; and
albeit John Warren, in his Deposition to other Articles, proves in effect the
said Yates guilty of the said offense.

2 That albeit Yates, upon the said Hearing, was once fined for the said
Offense; yet he was afterward dismissed, when sufficient matter thus appeared
against him.

3 That the Dismission was given, and costs awarded against him, when he had
proved some part of his complaint against some other of the Defendants besides
Yates, who dying before the hearing thereof, escaped a censure: for which cause
(the act of God only intervening) he ought to have had his costs, and not paid
costs.

4 That this Dismission was given, when it appeared to the Court by so much of
the causes as was already heard, that he had probabilem causam litigandi; and
therefore if he should have had no costs, ought by the course of the Court to
have paid no costs.

5 That 130l. Costs was taxed by the late Lord Coventry, then Lord Keeper,
against him, whenas by the Bill of costs it does appear, that they are very
immoderate and extreme:

1 First, by the sum and total thereof, summoned up in the foot of the said
Bill of costs, there appears to be 36l. 10s. or thereabouts, cast into the
total of the said Bill, more then (re vera) the same do amount unto, by the
particulars of the said Bill; which must of necessity be done, to give color
to tax and allow the more costs against the Petitioner.

2 That there is 76l. 10.4. set down for the Defendants traveling, charges,
and sometimes 8l. and 12l. and more in a Term, when in all that time, after the
appearance and answers put in, their cause was commonly followed by their Agent
and Attorney, who have their Fees allowed them in the Bill of costs besides.

3 That in the Bill of costs 40l. and more is set down at least, for
counsel-Fees in nine Terms, and sometimes 12l. in a Term; when, by the ordinary
Rules of the Court, the Defendants should have had allowed but one counsel in
every of these nine Terms, and but 10s. a Fee in every Term; for, what is given
more, is of the clients own superfluity, and not to have been charged upon him:
So there is 116l. 10s. and more set down for traveling, charges and
counsel-Fees.

Secondly, against the Sentence:

That it is illegal and without foundation, for the matter and manner of the
said Sentence: besides, That the Paper-copie of that Deposition in which the
words are supposed to be blotted he could never see to this day, to be
satisfied that it was so; it being taken from his servant in his absence: nor
had he perused it of near three years before that time, but were with his
Sollicitour attending for a hearing.

First, for the matter of it.

It is alleged in the Sentence to be done by him for his own advantage; which
is not so:

1 Because it appears he had no need to help the testimony of that Witness by
so indirect a course, because it appears clearly in the Books, that there is
sufficient testimony besides, for the proof of that Charge.

2 It cannot be presumed that he, who had probabilem causam litigandi, and
therefore by the course of that Court was to have paid costs, albeit the
Defendant had not been fined, would commit a Misdemeanour which would not
redound any thing to his benefit.

3 It cannot be presumed that he would have done that act, which must of
necessity have been controlled by the Defendants copy then present in Court,
and by the Record it self.

4 It cannot be presumed any such act would have been done so grossly, a mark of
eminence being made in the Margent, which would have made the thing the more
remarkable.

Secondly, 1 Paper-copies of Depositions and Records are not credited till be
justified for true copies upon Oath; which he never did do, as appears by the
Sentence.

2 The Common Law (and that Court of Star Chamber imitating the Law in that)
have never punished offenses of this nature with more then the loss of the
fruit of that thing intended in it.

3 If Offenses of this nature begin but by the tender of them to be read, it
cannot be applied to him as an Offense; for Nevile his Sollicitour in the cause
had the Books and managing of the cause at the hearing, and delivered them to
Master Jones his Master, and Attorney in the cause, to read.

Thirdly, In all causes criminal, if the supposed Delinquent deny the fact,
there ought to be no proceeding without Bill, or Information, Answer and
Examination of Witnesses, so that the party may make his Defense in this case:
He did upon his Oath deny the fact objected, yet the Court proceeded without
Information, Bill, Answer or Examination of Witnesses, whereby he lost the be
benefit of making his just Defense.

Fourthly, against the ground of the Sentence, viz. the proof of the fact
objected.

1 First, he did upon his Oath deny the fact, and there is no proof at all,
either by confession, deposition or otherwise, to convince him.

2 That testimony which is produced is then such, upon whom the crime must
have fallen in case he were not guilty, so that testimony only tended to purge
such as deposed it, Nevil himself.

3 That M. Alexander, against all ordinary proceedings of Justice, after he had
purged himself upon his Oath, was again enforced to be sworn and reexamined
upon his Oath, to have accused himself; and this his reexamination pressed
against him in the Sentence, against the truth thereof.

4 Matters extrajudicial and diverse from the thing in question, is received
and deposed against him, and inverted in the Sentence, contrary to all ordinary
Rules of proceeding, and to the truth it self.

Fifthly, against the sentence it self.

1 It is given against him without any legal notice, and in his absence,
necessitated upon real occasions, whereby he was disabled to make his Defense.

2 It was interlaced with diverse scandalous and impertinent suggestions,
thereby to render him causlesly odious, and with some untrue surmises, viz. of
proof of the crime, and of contradiction in his Examinations; neither of which
are so.

3 In case the Proceedings had been legal, and the Fact had been proved; yet
the Sentence is excessive:

1 Excissive, in respect he had suffered before, viz. the reversall of a
Sentence pronounced for him, and taxing of 130 l. costs to the Defendant.

2 Excessive in it self, disabling him to use his profession, either publicly
at the Bar, or privately in his chamber.

3 Fining him 500 l. to His Majesty.

4 In adjudging him to Imprisonment till he should make a public Submission in
Court, and confess himself guilty of the Offense whereof he was innocent.

5 In inviting his expulsion out of the Society of Lincolns-Inne, whereof he
was a Member; which thereupon was done, and his chamber seized and taken from
him, for no other cause.

6 In giving 50 l. damages to Nevile, who was the wrong-doer, and guilty of the
said Offense.

Sixthly, against the Proceedings after the Sentence.

1 That the Fine was passed under the Great Seal to one Master Humfrey Fulwood,
then Master Secretary Cokes servant, and the greatest part of it paid without
such Instalment as is usually allowed of course in such cases,

2 That by means of the late Lord Coventry, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal
of England, his great advesary, and of the late Earl of Strafford, as ill
affected to him; His Majesty's Grace and Favor for pardon, being then all the
means left to give him being in the world, was continually interrupted and kept
from him, that by many years solicitation of hisfriends in his absence in
Ireland, and of many noble Personages at Court, it could not be obtained. And
when at length his father in law, with much ado, prevailed with His Majesty
for it; yet the said Lord Coventry so prevailed with His Majesty, that he
caused a Condition to be inserted in it, That he should not have liberty to use
his Profession here in this Kingdom, to put him out of all hopes of returning;
well knowing that he was resolved to question his injustice, whereof there
needed little other proof then the very Sentence it self.

Then, to make good these Exceptions, I shall take the Sentence asunder and in
Parts, and so proceed to show the apparent Injustice done to Master Alexander
by it, and the Errors and Irregularity thereof.
1. THis day came to be heard, by special Order of this honorable Court of the
10 of this instant November, a very foul Offense, Practice and Misdemeanour of
the Jerome Alexander an Utter-Barrester at the Law, and late Plaintiff in this
honorable Court against John Yates and others, late Defendants: which Cause
was heard in open Court on the 25 of October last: At the hearing of which
Cause, the main wherewith the said Yates stood charged, was, The threatening and
terrifying of Witnesses which the said Alexander was to produce ac a former
Trial of Nisi Prius in the County of Norfolk, between him the said Yates then
Plaintiff, and the said Alexander then Defendant. Sentence fol.1. In this first
observe, The Sentence is given so soon as it is begun; and before any matter
shown to prove the Fact, Master Alexander is pronounced guilty of a foul
Offense, Practice and Misdemeanour; according to that Rule of Matchiavil, who
advises to cast dirt enough in the face, and some will stick; to scandalize
with many Reproaches, and the party, though never so innocent, shall not go
away without some stain in his Reputation. Nor was the said Yates his
threatening and terrifying of Witnesses therein mentioned the main wherewith the
said Yates stood charged in that Suit wherein Master Alexander was Plaintiff
against the said Yates and others Defendants, as the said Sentence unjustly
recites; but the said Yates, in that Suit, was likewise charged with
Subnornation of Perjury and Imbracery as well with that Charge, and which
stands proved against him in that Suit.

To make this appear, you shall understand, that in Easter-Term, 19 Jacobi,
Master Alexander preferred his Bill of Complaint in that Court of Star Chamber
against Owen Godfrey Esquire, for Perjury; John Yates, for subornation of
Perjury, and for embracing of Jurors, and for tampering with and terrifying of
Witnesses; and against Allan Lampkin, William Wacy and John Lawrence, Jurors by
Yates embraced.

The Bill sets forth, that, About the the 30 of April, anno 14 Jacobi, Master
Alexanders father, then deceased, did, together with one Edward Olifer, and for
his only Debt, cause three Writings to be made, purporting Writings
obligatory, with penalties of 10 l. apiece, mentioned to be conditioned for the
payment of 5 l. apiece to the said John Yates at three several days: which
being written, subscribed and sealed by the said Olifer and Master Alexanders
father, were delivered into the hands of one Christopher Kirby, with him to
remain as Escrolls, with this intent, That if the said Yates should deliver up
into the hands of the said Kirby one Obligation of the penalty of 40 l.
conditioned for the payment of 24 l. wherein the said Olifer stood bound unto
the said Yates, to be cancelled; that then the said Christoper Kirby should
deliver the said three Writings into the hands of the said Yates, as the Acts
and Deeds of the said Olifer and of Master Alexanders father; or otherwise not.
And further set forth, that the said Yates did never deliver up the said Bond
of 40 l. into the said Kirby's hands to be cancelled, but refused so to do; and
therefore the said three Writings remained as Escrolls and void. That shortly
after the said Kirby died; and after his decease, and after such time as the
money was to have been paid, if the said Writings had taken effect, the said
Yates, by some sinister means, gains the said three Writings into his hands,
and puts the same in suit against Master Alexanders father, as if they had
been his Deeds; who pleaed this especial matter, and concluded non sunt facta:
Whereupon, issue was joined; but before the Trial Master Alexanders father
died, and made his said son his sole Executor, who proved the Will; and after,
Yates commenced Suit against him as Executor to his father, upon the said three
Writings; to which Master Alexander pleaded the same plea as his father had
done before: And issue being joined, the said Yates had three several times
taken out the Record of Nisi prius, and warned Master Alexander to a Trial,
which he attended, to his extreme charge; but still Yates durst not try it:
Then Master Alexander took forth the Record, to try it by Proviso; when the
said Yates had secretly taken the same Record out also: And now assuring
himself that Master Alexander would be secure, first, before the said Assizes,
the said Yates, the more for to color over the matter, labored to have the
differences put to arbitration: which being condescended unto, the Arbitratours
met, and heard the differences; but did make no end: and presently afterward,
Yates endeavored to have stolen a Trial of the said Cause, before Master
Alexander and his Witnesses should have come to Town, where the Assizes were
kept; and the said Yates accordingly procured the same Cause to be called upon
within an hour or two after Master Alexander came to the Town, altogether
unexpected to Master Alexander: and the Cause so coming to a Trial, and the
Issue being, Whether the said three Writings were delivered as the Deeds of the
said Olifer and Master Alexanders father absolutely, or as Escrolls; Master
Alexander produced five several Witnesses, those whose names were subscribed
as Witnesses to the said Writings, as others also present at the making and
delivery of them to Kirby; and one of them being a reverend Preacher and the
maker of the Writings, and the rest Gentlemen of good rank and quality; all
which proved fully and clearly, that the same three Writings were delivered as
Escrolls, in such manner as Master Alexander had pleaded: Against which Yates
did produce the said Owen Godfrey, who notwithstanding did depose and swear,
that the same three Writings were delivered absolutely, without any condition.
And albeit it was further proved by Master Alexander, that the said Master
Godfrey was not present in the place when and where the same were so delivered
as Escrolls, yet upon his only Testimony this Lampkin, Wacy and Lawrence,
being sworn upon the said Jury, and friends to Yates, and by him embraced
beforehand, did draw all the rest of the Jurours to give a Verdict thereupon,
for Yates, against Master Alexander, and against the truth: For which Perjury
and Subornation and Embracery, and for Yates his tampering with and terrifying
of Master Alexanders Witnesses, to have made them silence the truth, were the
Charges of Master Alexanders Bill, and causes of his Complaint.

In Trinity-Term, 19 Jacobi, the Defendants answered.

In Easter-Term, 20 Jacobi, Publication passed.

In Michaelmas-Term, 20 Jacobi, the Cause was set down for hearing.

In Michaelmas-Term, 2 Caroli, the Cause came to be heard.

And thus it stood near four years at hearing before it was heard; so hard a
matter it was, in those days, to procure a hearing in that Court.

Then, to prove this matter of the delivery of the three Writings in manner and
form as Master Alexander has alleged, and consequently, the direct Perjury
of the said Master Owen Godfrey, see Robert Warren Clerk, li. A. fol. 23. to
the 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 15 Interrogatories, who proves it in
these words:

That he was at the Prison kept by Christopher Kirby in Fakenham, upon the 30
of April, in the 14 year of His Majesty's Reign (which was the 14 year of the
Reign of King James) the Depositions being taken in his Reign) this Deponent
being then in Durance in the said Prison) in the morning of which day the said
Christopher Kirby came to him this Deponent into the chamber where this
Deponent lodged, and gave him this Deponent Instructions to make and write four
Writings, in three whereof the said Edward Olifer and one Jerome Alexander
father unto the now Complainant, were to stand bound unto the said Yates in the
penalty of ten pounds apiece, for the payment of five pounds apiece, at three
several days in the Conditions of the said Bonds of Writings specified, and
the fourth of the said Writings to be entered into by the said Olifer alone, in
the like penalty of ten pounds, for the payment of five pounds to the said
Yates at a certain day mentioned in the Condition of the same. And when he the
said Christopher Kirby had given him this Deponent Instructions for the making
of the said Bonds, he willed him to make present dispatch of the writing of
them, so that, as he said, the Complainants father was to come that afternoon
to seal unto the same. And says, that when he this Deponent had made an end of
writing the said Writings obligatory, and hearing that the said Complainants
father was come into the house, he this Deponent brought them down and
delivered them to the said Kirby, whom this Deponent found in the Celler of the
said house, where the Complainants said father, and the said Edward Olifer, and
one Robert Dye, Peter Brown and some others were. And he says, that the said
Complainants father having perused three of the said Writings wherein himself
and the said Edward Olifer were to be bound, he the Complainants said father
and the said Edward Olifer did seal the same: and whiles they were ensealing,
it being reported that the said Defendant Owen Godfrey was come into the said
house, and was gone into the Parlour, the said Master Kirby made haste to go up
to him; and being upon the Stayers, the said Jerome Alexander the Complainants
father called to him and requested him to stay, saying, They would make an end
ere they left: and thereupon the said Kirby came two or three steps down the
Stayers; and staying there, the Complainants father and the said Edward Olifer
delivered the said Writings, the Complainants said father using these words;
Master Kirby, we deliver you these Writings to remain in your hands as
Escrolls, upon condition, That if Yates shall deliver into your hands a Bond
wherein Edward Olifer stands bound to him in 40 l. to be cancelled; then
these Writings shall be our Deeds, otherwise not. With which manner of delivery
the said Christoper Kirby found fault, and, using to call the said Jerome
Alexander Master, said, Master, I like not these conditionall-Deliveries; I
pray let me have it otherwise. And the said Master Alexander replied, Choose
whether you will have them or no, I will deliver them no otherwise; for unless
Yates deliver you the old Bond first, he shall have none of my Bonds; (or words
to that effect) therefore I charge you that you keep these Writings in your
hands until that Bond be first delivered: with some other words of committing
a trust to him in that behalf. Which being done, and the said Christopher Kirby
hasting to see the said Owen Godfrey, he carried the said three Writings in his
hands up the said Celler-stayers, and through an Entry, and so up to the upper
end of the Hall in the said house, near toward the Parlour, he there delivered
the said Writings to him this Deponent, and requested him to set his hand to
every of them as a Witness, saying, that the said Christopher Kirby should set
to his hand afterward well enough. And this Deponent further says, That in
the afternoon of the same day, after they had dined in the Parlour, he this
Deponent brought down the said Writings, with this Deponents name subscribed
thereunto as a Witness: and delivering them again to the said Christopher
Kirby, being then in the said Parlour with the said Owen Godfrey, and the said
Jerome Alexander the Complainants father, and one Matthew Lancaster, John
Allen, Edward Olifer and some others: and this Deponent laying the said
Writings before him the said Christopher Kirby, supposing he would have
subscribed his name unto them, the said Christopher Kirby first spoke to the
said Owen Godfrey then sitting at the Table, and the Complainants said father
on the bench by him; and having used to call the Complainants said father
sometimes Noble Master, and sometimes Worshipful friend, spoke to him by one
of these terms, but which of them this Deponent now certainly remembers not,
and said, I would you would give us your hand to these Bonds, beginning to make
relation of the business in some other manner and terms then the delivery of
the said Writings was done and performed, in speaking to this effect, That the
Complainants father and the said Edward Olifer had delivered them into his the
said Christopher Kirby's hands, to the use of the said John Yates. At which
words, the said Complainants father stepped up, and, seeming angry, said, How?
we have delivered them as Escrolls: if the said Yates shall deliver you Edward
Olifers oldBond to be cancelled, that then they shall be our Deeds, otherwise
not. And other sealing and delivery of the said Bonds or Writtings this
Depondent saw not at that time, but nnely a Repetition of what was done before,
in manner as aforesaid. And this Deponent says, That after such Repetition was
made, the said Defendant Owen Godfrey did, at the request of the said
Christopher Kirby, set his hand to the said Writings; and when he had done, the
said Christopher did then set his name unto them, and took them presently and
locked them up in his Desk, which stood near the lower end of the Table in the
said Parlour. And more he cannot, to his now-remembrance, certainly depose the
said Interrogatories; saving that he says, That the said Owen Godfrey was not
in the Celler of the said house, where the said Writings were sealed and
delivered, at the time of the sealing and delivery of the same; but was said to
be then in the Parlour of the said house, which is three rooms distant from the
said Celler. And says, That the said Christopher Kirby did keep the said three
Writings in his hands after the said 30 day of April, in the said 14 year of
His Majesty's Reign, until the time of his death; and he died on the 25 day of
March, in the year of our Lord God 1617. And says, That before the said
Kirby's death, all the days of payment limited in the Conditions of the said
Writings were past. And this Deponent says, That the cause which moved the
said Christopher Kirby to detain and keep the said Writings from the said
Defendant Yates, was, for that the said Yates refused to deliver in the old
Bond of the said Edward Olifers to be cancelled, as this Deponent verily
believes: and this Deponent is rather induced to believe the same, for that
the said Christopher Kirby, using many times to ride to Walsingham-Market and
Burnham-Market, where he may times met with the said Yates, did, at his coming
home, tell this Deponent and others, That he had made the said Yates and others
acquainted with his the said Kirby's having the said three Writings obligatory
aforementioned, and had offered to deliver them unto him, so he would deliver
him up the said old Bond of Edward Olifers to be cancelled; but he said, That
the said Yates did always refuse to deliver up the said old Bond, and therefore
he said, That he the said Yates should never have the said three Writings; or
to that effect. And besides, this Deponent being in company with the said
Defendant Yates, after the death of the said Kirby, and after the said Yates
had got the Writings into his hands and put them in Suit, this Depondent told
him, that sure it was his the said Yates his fault that the moneys payable upon
the said Writings were not paid unto him at the times limited in the Conditions
of them, for that the said Yates had refused to deliver up the said old Bond of
40 l. and the said Yates then affirmed to him this Deponent, that indeed he had
refused to deliver up the said old Bond, for that the said Kirby had not
followed such directions as he gave him in taking security for his money due
upon the said Bond of 40 l. or words to that effect. And this Deponent well
remembers, that he this Deponent was called by summons, with other Witnesses,
on the Complainants behalf, to be at three several Assizes, two at Norwich,
and one at Thetford in the County of Norfolk, to have testified in the
Complainants behalf concerning the said Writings, which tended to the
Complainants said great trouble and expenses. And says, That he this Deponent
was produced and sworn as a Witness in the foresaid Cause between the said
Defendant Yates and the now-Complainant, at the last Assizes holden at
Thetford, in and for the County of Norfolk. And says, That he this Deponent
was served with Process to be at the said Assizes, and to testify on the part
of the now-Complainant; and there testified the truth of his knowledge and
remembrance, giving such evidence, or to the same effect, as is mentioned and
set down in this Deponents Answer and Deposition to the fifth, sixth and
seventh Interrogatory. And says, That the said Owen Godfrey was, at the said
last Assizes holden at Thetford, produced as a Witness against the
now-Complainant, by the said Defendant John Yates, in the said Cause concerning
the said three Writings; and the evidence which he then and there gave to the
said Jury upon his Corporall-Oath concerning the said Cause, was, That the said
Olifer and the now-Complainants father did seal and deliver the said three
Writings as their Deeds absolutely, to the use of the said John Yates, without
any Condition at all, etc And says, That some time before the said last
Assizes holden at Thetford, the now-Complainant spoke unto this Deponent, and
told him, That he had brought down the Trial between Yates and him by Proviso,
and would be no longer dallied with by the said Yates: and withal the said
Complainant delivered him this Deponent a Subpena to be at the said Assizes:
the said Complainant told him this Deponent, that the matter between him and
the said Yates was put to the Arbitrament of John Marcoll and John Coot, and
therefore prayed him this Deponent to be at Walsingham on the Saturday
immediately before the said Assizes, where the said Arbitratours had a Meeting,
whereat this Deponent was present; but no end could be there made. And he
says, that at the said Meeting the now-Complainant demanded of the said John
Yates, Why he (being the Complainant) did not bring down the said Trial, but
put him the said Complainant to bring it down by Proviso. And the said Yates
his Answer thereunto (as this Deponent now remembers) was to this effect;
Because he the said Yates would not be so troublesome to the Country, for that
Thetford was a place where people could get no good diet nor lodging; or to
that effect. And says, That on Monday, being the first day of the said
Assizes, between twelve and one of the clock the same day, he this Deponent and
the now-Complainant came thither; the Complainant not thinking but that he
might have had the Cause called upon when he would, in regard he had brought it
down by Proviso: but when he came, he was told, that the same Cause had been
called upon to be tried the first or second Cause; the said Yates having
secretly brought the same down also, without the now-Complainants privity: But
the Complainant was then told, that a friend of his had caused the said Cause
to be put off till the afternoon the same day, in regard the said
now-Complainant was not come with his Witnesses when the same was first called
on, and so the same Cause was called on again in the afternoon the same day,
and then it was tried, before the now-Complainant was full ready with his
Witnesses.

John Grout Gent. li. A. Fol. 106. to the 5, 6, 7, 8 and 37 Interrogatories.
John Allen Gent. li. A. fol. 65. to the 33, 34, 35 and 36 Interrogatories.
Matthew Lancaster Esquire; li. C. fol. 1. to the 12, 13 and 26 Interrogatories.
Edward Olifer, li. A. fol. 1. to the 5, 6, 7 and 8 Interrogatories.
These four Witnesses do prove the same things with the former Deponent Master
Robert Warren Clerk; by whch the Perjury of Master Owen Godfrey rests clearly
proved without exception; and the carriage of Yates to have circumvented Master
Alexander in that Trial, and to have condemned him in his absence without
defense, does manifestly appear also.

And the Perjury being so clearly proved, the Subornation of Yates is an
infallible Consequent thereof. But to make it a little more clear.

Thus much is deposed by

John Allen Gent, li. A. fol. 65. to the 36 Interrogatory.

To which this Deponent says, That it has been generally held and reported in
and about the country where the now-Complainant and the said Defendant Yates
lived, that the said Defendant Owen Godfrey was made and wrought by some of the
said Yates his friends, to go to the last Assizes at Thetford, to testify for
the said Yates against the now-Complainant.

William Page, li. C. fol. 32. to the 48 Interrogatory.

To which the Deponent says, That at the request of John Yates he went unto
Master Owen Godfrey, and requested him to be at the Assizes, to deliver his
Testimony between the said Complainant and Jerome Alexander the Defendant;
telling him, That if the said Master Godfrey did not come, Yates could not have
his cause tried. The said Master Godfrey answered this Deponent upon his speech
with him, That he could not come, and that he could do the said Yates no good
in the said trial, because it was so long since the said Bonds were delivered,
that he did not remember how they were delivered.

And yet afterward he was procured to come, and to depose falsely, which must
be by some stronger persuasion and means used by Yates then before. All which
being added to the gross perjury of the said Master Godfrey left not Yates
excusable of the Subornation of that Perjury, which tended to his only
advantage.

Then there was this Testimony to prove the Imbracery.

John Chapman, li. C. fol. 35. to the 54 and 56 Interrogatories;

Says, That upon some speech with Allan Lampkin one of the Jurours concerning
the said Trial, the said Lampkin said to him, that the said Yates should lose
much money if the Trial passed not with him: which showed how he stood
affected to Yates his part, and was a giving of his Verdict before hand.

Richard Brampton, li. A. fol. 54. to the 19 Interrogatory,

Says, That on the Saturday next before the Assizes (being the Assizes in
which the said cause was tried) one Allan Lampkin, who was one of the Jury
summoned to appear at the said Assizes, for trial of the Issue then to be
tried between the now-Complainant, then Defendant, and the now-Defendant Yates,
then Complainant, came to the Deponent, who was likewise returned of the said
Jury, and did ask when he meant to go to the said Assizes: and this Deponent
answered him, That he meant to go next morning; saying, That if he were there
any time before noon, it would be time enough. Whereto the said Lampkin
replied, That he would ride away to Thetford that night, and wished this
Deponent to ride with him, saying, That the said Yates had brought down the
Writ of Nisi Prius, as well as the said Alexander, and that he would have the
matter tried at the first sitting, if he could, in the morning, if he could;
and withal entreating this Deponent that he would say nothing thereof to the
said Alexander, for that Yates would not that he should know thereof by any
means. To 22 says, That after the Evidence given to the Jury at the said
Assizes at Thetford between the now-Complainant and the now-Defendant Yates,
the said Allan Lampkin being one of the said Jury, did, so soon as the Jury
were gone together to consider of their Evidence, use these speeches, (viz.)
Masters, we must find for the Complainant, (meaning the now-Defendant Yates,
who was Plaintiff in the said Action) and therefore do what you will, I believe
none but Master Godfreys Testimony; and here will I lie, if ye find not for
Yates. And thus Wacy and Lawrance his companions, out of spleen to the sai
Complainant, would be of the same minds; and these drew the rest of the Jury
to give a Verdict in that cause for Yates, against the truth. Others also
testify the same carriage by these Jurours.

Upon all which matter it does appear, that Yates his terrifying of Witnesses
were not the main charges of the Bill, as the Sentence relates. And by this
also it does appear, that Master Alexander had fully proved the Perjury,
Subornation and Imbracery.

But Master Owen Godfrey the Perjurour died before the hearing of the cause,
and therefore the suborner Yates could not be fined for the Subornation: yet by
this it does appear, that the said Complainant had more then probabilem causam
litigandi, and therefore ought to have paid no costs, etc.

2. FOr proof of which Offense and Misdemeanour against the said John Yates,
the said late Plaintiff Alexander produced only two Witnesses ( namely, Robert
Warren Clerk, and John Warren his brother) whose Depositions were openly read
in Court: and the Deposition of the said Robert Warren was positive and direct,
of his own knowledge: and the Deposition of the said John Warren was upon
hearsay: Yet the said Alexander, for his own advantage, had blotted out and
defaced the copy of the Deposition of the said John Warren, taken in Court, to
the 39 Interrogatory on the said Alexanders part, in these two words, viz.
(that and did) and delivered the same copy of the said John Warrens Deposition
to the said 39 Interrogatory, with the words (that and did) so blotted out and
defaced as aforesaid, to his Attorney in this honorable Court, to be read in
Court upon the hearing of the said Cause against the said John Yates, which was
read accordingly; and by that means the Deposition of the said John Warren was
made positive and absolute, as of his own knowledge: and thereupon this
honorable Court, and all the honorable Presence here sitting, were much
abused and misled in their judgments and opinions, to sentence and condemn the
said John Yates for that offense of threatening and terrifying of Witnesses, and
for the same to fine him the said Yates to pay to His Majesty's use one hundred
Marks, and to be committed to the prison of the Fleet; and the Warden of the
Fleet had there taken him into his Custody accordingly. Sentence, fol. 1, 2.
Whereas it is alleged, that only two Witnesses were produced at the hearing,
those mentioned in the Sentence, to prove the said Yates guilty of that offense
of terrifying of Witnesses, it followed upon this, that Master Alexanders
Counsel, to whom the managing of the Cause at the hearing was left, and as is
usual in like cases, they began to prove that Charge against Yates the first;
and they called for the Testimony of those two Witnesses only to be read:
which being done, the L. Coventry would hear no more proof to that point, nor
other charge of the Bill to be proved, and so presently moved the Lords to go
on to the Censure of Yates, undervaluing the cause as petty, and almost not
worthy consideration, which showed his preparation; and thereupon Yates was
fined in a hundred Marks only, whereas, if his Lordships patience would have
heard the cause full out, this very charge would otherwise have been punctually
proved, if the Deposition of John Warren had been set aside. As first, hear the
Deposition of Robert Warren Clerk, to this Charge.

Robert Warren, li. A. fol, 23. to the 17 Interrogatory.

Who deposes, That on the Saturday next before the Assizes 'at Thetford, the
Deponent being at Walsingham, where the said Cause should have been ended by
Arbitration: and having there, before the Arbitratours, given his testimony by
speech, as this Deponent has related in his Answer to the 5, 6 and 7
Interrogatories; the said Defendant Yates came toward him this Deponent, and
with menacing words, to this or the like effect, said, That if this Deponent
should swear so much at the said Assizes, he would have him and his Oath known,
or else it should cost him a sum of money, 40 l. or 100 l. etc.

John Coot, li. B. fol. 2. to the 32 Interrogatory,

Says, That Master Warren, in the Interrogatory named, at the aforesaid
meeting of the said Arbitratours, did protest upon his faith and credit to the
said Arbitratours, That the said three Writings in the said Bill of Complaint
specified, were delivered at Christopher Kirbys house at Fakenham, in the
Celler there, upon the day of the date of the said Writings. (in manner and
form as formerly alleged, etc.) That thereupon he did hear the said Yates say
unto the said Master Warren, That if he should say so much upon his Oath, then
he would make him and his Oath known, etc. Which is a direct Proof, with Master
Robert Warrens Testimony, to convince the said Yates guilty of that Charge of
terrifying the said Master Alexanders Witnesses.

So that it is observable, that Master Alexander needed not to have helped John
Warrens Deposition for proof of this Charge, there being two Witnesses besides
him express in the Point; for, What need a rich man be a thief? And you may
observe, that two Witnesses was conceived sufficient by the Court, for to
convince the said Yates guilty of the said offense, as is proved by the very
Sentence it self; and the Court would hear no more; which was Master Alexanders
unhappiness in this particular.

Nay, if John Warrens Depositions had been made use of, wherein he stood clear
and without exception, it had further proved the same Charge against Yates: and
for this, observe what he has deposed,

Lib. A. fol. 122. to the 46 Interrogatory.

Who deposes, That he being in the Faulcon-yard, an Inn in little-
Walsingham, and seeing the Defendant Yates there, went to him, to speak with
him about forty shillings that was remaining due from this Deponent unto the
said Yates, of a debt of 14 l. or thereabouts, for which the said Yates had had
a Judgment against this Deponent, and all thereof satisfied but the said 40 s.
for the payment whereof, this Deponent entreated the said Yates to spare him
this Deponent for some short time: and then the said Yates did request and
importune him this Deponent to persuade his this Deponents brother, Robert
Warren, to be sparing in giving his evidence against the said Yates at the
Assizes then following, in the Cause between him the said Yates and the said
Complainant: And if this Deponent would so do, the said Yates promised him this
Deponent, that he would deal well with him for the aforesaid Debt due unto him,
and would do this Deponent a greater courtesy. And this Deponent says, That
since that time, the said Yates meeting with him this Deponent in
Walsingham-Market, told him, That he had been untowardly paid the debt which
this Deponent owed him: And said withal, That he did hear that this Deponent
should have gone to London the Term before, to have been a Witness against him
the said Yates, in the Cause between him and the Complainant: but if this
Deponent had gone, he says he would presently have remembered him this Deponent
therein. This Deponent thinks his meaning was, He would have renewed his
Execution against him this Deponent. And this Deponent further says, That one
Luke Banks Clerk, understanding that he this Deponent should have gone for
London the last Term, to have been a Witness for the Complainant, did wish him
this Deponent not to stir his foot thereabouts, alleging many dangers might
ensue upon it: Whereupon, this Deponent did not go to London that Term to be a
Witness for the Complainant, although he this Deponent was lawfully called by
the Complainant thereunto.

Whereby it further appears, That albeit the said John Warrens testimony to the
39 Article had not been made use of at the hearing, yet to this 46 Article he
testifies as much as proved Yates guilty of terrifying and tampering with
Witnesses to conceal the truth: And so three Witnesses clearly concurring in
the point of this Charge against Yates, without all exception; which the said
Lord Coventry, ex Officio, and according to the duty of his place, ought to
have caused the Kings Coucell to have perused and looked into the proceedings,
to see if there had been matter and proof sufficient within the Books, to have
continued the Fine set upon Yates for the King, notwithstanding any other
miscarriage in the business whatsoever, if there had been any: Which he was so
far from looking after, as it was his only strife and labor which way and how
to fasten this miscarriage of Neviles upon Master Alexander, and thought upon
nothing else: which endeavors to ruin him had another Rise, if it were
pertinent to this purpose to be here inserted.

And from all this that has been said, it will not be denied, but that, if
Yates had been dismissed, (as he ought not to have been, without censure) yet
then Master Alexander was to have paid no costs.

This then is the first Complaint of Master Alexander against the Dismission of
Yates, That Yates was dismissed against pregnant proof, and such as satisfied
the Court of Yates his guiltiness of terrifying of Master Alexanders
Witnesses, if it might have been received; and was desired and pressed by
Master Alexander to have been taken into consideration, after this question did
arise; which the Lord Coventry slightly passed over without regard, and so awed
Master Alexander and his counsel, that they, perceiving what he went about, and
the Officers of the Court laboring by all means possible to take off the
offense from one of their Members the said Nevile, and it being the Court
whereunto his counsel applied themselves for practice, not one of them would
be feed to speak a word: and whatsoever Master Alexander pressed in his own
defense, was misinterpreted, and an ill sense endeavored to have been put
upon, it and upon whatsoever he spoke for maintenance of the Cause and clearing
of his Innocence.

The next Exception taken by Master Alexander to the Dismission, is this, That
136 l. costs was taxed against him, to be paid unto the said Yates upon that
dismission, by the said Lord Coventry, whereas no costs were awarded against
him by the Order of the Court; and whereas by the course of the Court, he
rather was to have had costs, then to have paid any costs: For which observe
the Bill of Costs it self; and first its title.

The Bill of Costs of John Yates, John Lawrence, Allan Lampkin and William Wacy
Defendants, sustained by them through the wrongful and unjust Vexation of
Jerome Alexander Complainant, in preferring a malicious and scandalous Bill of
Complaint against them, for supposed Perjury, Subornation of Perjury, Embracing
of Jurours, and threatening and terrifying of Witnesses; whereof the said
Defendants stand absolutely dismissed, by Order of this most honorable Court,
upon a public Hearing, viz.
Termino Pasche, anno 19 Jacobi Regis. l. s. d. IMprimis, for the charges of
the said four Defendants in coming up this Term out of the furthest part of
Norfolk, to appear upon Process of Subpena served on them, 06 00 00 For
recording their appearances in Court, 00 08 00 For the copy of the
Complainants Bill of Complaint, 02 15 00 To learned Counsel to peruse the same,
and to draw the Defandants Answers thereunto, 02 00 00 For engrossing the same
Answers, 00 13 04 For the Attorneys Fees, 00 06 08 For the Fees of the four
Defendants examined upon the Complainants Interrogatories, 00 18 08 For their
charges in attendance there this Term, and their return home, 10 00 00 Termino
Trinitatis, anno praedicto. The Attorneys Fee, 00 03 04 Termino Michaelis, anno
praedicto. For the charges of one of the Defendants in coming up this Term,
being served to rejoyn, 01 10 00 For the Attorneys Fee, 00 03 04 For the copy
of the Complainants Replication, 00 03 00 To learned Counsel to peruse the
same, and to draw the Defendants Rejoinder, 01 00 00 For engrossing the same
Rejoinder, 00 05 00 For the copies of the four Defendants Examinations upon the
Complainants Interrogatories, and of the same Interrogatories, 06 00 00 For the
half Fee of the Commission, 00 05 06 To learned Counsel to peruse all the
Books, and to frame Interrogatories for examination of the Defendants Witnesses
thereupon, 02 00 00 For engrossing the same Interrogatories, 01 00 00 For the
said Defendants charges in attendance here this Term, and his return home, 04
00 00 For the charges of the said Defendants, and their Commissioners, and many
Witnesses, spent at the execution of this Commission, 06 13 04 For two Subpenas
ad testificand. in Court, 00 05 00 To the Clerk that took and engrossed the
Depositions of the Defendants Witnesses, 02 00 00 Termino Hillarii, anno praed.
For the charges of one of these Defendants in coming up again this Term, to
join in Commission with the Plaintiff, which was renewed at his instance, 01 10
00 For the Attorneys Fee, 00 03 04 For new engrossing the Defendants
Interrogatories, to be enclosed in the renewed Commission, 01 00 00 For a
Subpena ad testificand. 00 02 06 For the copy of an Affidavit made by the
Plaintiff, for renewing of the Commission and changing of the place, 00 02 00
For the charges of the said Defendant in his attendance here this Term, and his
return home, 04 00 00 For the charges of the said Defendants and their
Commissioners, spent at the execution of the Commission, 05 00 00 To the Clerk
that took and engrossed the Depositions of the Defendants Witnesses, 01 00 00
Termino Pasche, anno 20 Jacobi Regis. For the charges of one of the Defendants
coming up this Term, to attend the Plaintiffs Prosecution, and to take out the
copies of the Witnesses Depositions, 01 10 00 For the Attomeys Fee, 00 03 04
For the charge of one Witness Examination in Court this Term on the Defendants
behalf, being out of Norfolk, his attendance here and return home, 03 00 00 To
learned counsel to draw Interrogatories to examine the same Witness upon, 01
00 00 For engrossing the same Interrogatories, 00 05 00 For Fees of the said
Witness his Examination, 00 02 04 For the copies of all the Depositions of the
Witnesses taken in Court, and by Commission, and of the Plaintiffs
Interrogatories, 20 18 00 To several learned counsel to peruse all the Books,
and to confer of Breviats against the hearing of the cause, 06 00 00 For
writing of several Breviats, 04 00 00 For the charges of the said Defendants
in attendance this Term, and return home, 04 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these
five Terms, Termino Trinitat. anno praedicto. 00 16 08 The Attorneys Fees of
these five Terms, Termino Michael. anno praedicto. 00 16 08 The Attorneys Fees
of these five Terms, Termino Hillarii, anno praedicto. 00 16 08 The Attorneys
Fees of these five Terms, Termino Pascbe, anno 21 Jacobi R. 00 16 08 The
Attorneys Fees of these five Terms, Termino Trinitat. codem an. 00 16 08
Termino Mich. anno praed. For the charges of one of the Defendants in coming up
this Term to attend the hearing of the cause, being served with Process to
hear Judgment, 01 10 00 For the Attorneys Fee, 00 03 04 To several learned
counsel to attend the hearing at the Bar, on the day appointed for hearing, 04
00 00 For the charges of the said Defendants attendance here, and his return
home, 05 00 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Hillarii, anno
praedicto. 00 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Pasche anno 22
Jacobi R. 00 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Trinitat. anno
praedicto. 00 10 00 For the copy of an Order moved by the Plaintiff, 00 02 00
To learned counsel to move the Court for dissolving of an Injunction obtained
by the Plaintiff for stay of proceedings at the common Law, 01 00 00 For the
entry and copy of that Order, 00 03 00 Termino Michael. anno praed. For the
charges of one of the Defendants in coming up again this Term to attend the
hearing of the cause, the same being specially set for the hearing, 01 10 00
For the Attorneys Fee, 00 03 04 To several learned counsel to attend the
hearing at the Bar on the day appointed, 04 00 00 For the said Defendants
charges in attendance here this Term, and return home, 05 00 00 The Attorneys
Fees of these Terms, Termino Hillarii, anno praedicto. 00 10 00 The Attorneys
Fees of these Terms, Termino Pasche, anno 1 Car. R. 00 10 00 The Attorneys Fees
of these Terms, Termino Trinitat. anno praedicto. 00 10 00 Termino Mich. anno
praed. Forth Charges of one of the Defendants in coming up to Reading-Term, to
attend the hearing of the cause there, 02 00 00 For the Attorneys Fees, 00 03
04 To several learned counsel to attend the hearing at the Bar this Term, 04 00
00 For the said Defendants charges in attendance at Reading-Term, and return
home, 03 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Hillarii, anno
praedicto. 00 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Pasche, anno 2
Car. R. 00 10 00 The Attorneys Fees of these Terms, Termino Trinitat. anno
praedicto. 00 10 00 Termino Michaelis, anno praedicto. For the charges of two
of the Defendants in coming up this Term to attend the hearing of the cause, 03
00 00 For the Attorneys Fees, 00 03 04 To several learned counsel to attend the
hearing at the Bar two several days this Term, 12 00 00 For the entry and
copy of the Order of Dismission, 00 10 00 For the Fees of the four Defendants
Dismissions, 00 08 00 For the charges of the said two Defendants in their
attendance here this Term, and their return home, 01 00 00 For drawing this
bill of costs, 00 03 04 For the Attorneys Fee for the same, 00 03 04 For the
Warrant and Subpena for costs, 00 04 06 Sum. total. 198 19 06 Taxat. ad 130 00
00

Hamo Claxton. Tho, Coventry, Cust.
Thomas Talbot of London Gent. does depose, That this writing is a true copy
of the original Bill of Costs, remaining upon Record with Master Claxton, and
examined by the Record by me the said Thomas Talbot.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.





To this Bill of Costs Master Alexander has these just Exceptions:

First, he leaves it to judgment, if the Defendants Attorney in that Suit,
who drew it up and presented it, did give a clear and fair title to this Bill
of costs or not: for, by the Testimony and Evidence aforesaid, it appears, that
the Complaint was neither wrongful, unjust, vexatious, malicious or
slanderous, the Perjury, Subornation, imbracery and threatening and terrifying
of Witnesses being so fully and clearly proved as before.

Secondly, it appears, that in the Bill of costs he sets down in the foot
the total thereof to amount unto 191 l. 19 s. 6 d. whereas, re vera, and in
truth, the sum is but 162 l. 17 s. 6 d. being rightly cast; so that he sets
down 36 l. 2 s. more in his total, then is contained in his particulars: And
this, I may be bold to say, was not well done, nor according to his duty; for
by this means the greater costs were allowed unto the Defendants.

Nor is this all the injury done to Master Alexander by this Bill of costs; for
there are many unwarrantable particulars therein also inserted, no ways to have
been demanded or allowed: for there is set down of this for the Defendants very
travelling-charges and expenses, 76 l. 13 s. 4 d. and of his, 3 l. 6 l. 11 l.
and 16 l. set down spent in a Term; when, after the first Temr of their
appearance and putting in of their Answers in Court, their defense was made by
a Sollicitour, who, at most, had not above 10 s. a Term for his pains: Besides,
they were Yeomen, and not of any quality, that they should be so lavish in
their expenses.

Nor is this all; for in this Bill of costs there is also set down for
counsel-Fees and their Clerks Fees 46 l. 3 s. 4 d. or thereabouts, and 4 l. 5
l. 12 l. set down for counsel-Fees in a Term, when nothing is said to be done
but perusing of Books and attending at the Bar; whereas, according to the
nsuall course of all Courts, the Client, Plaintiff or Defendant recovering or
being dismissed upon his Bill of costs, is but to insert, and ought not o be
allowed more than 10 s. for a Counselors Fee, and but for one counsel in a
Term; if he retains more, or rewards them better, it is of his own superfluity,
and for his own dispatch: and all this 130 l. was demanded, upon the matter,
but for nine Terms proceedings, For though it be true, that the Cause depended
24 Terms; yet in 15 of those Terms nothing was done wherein counsel was used,
as it does appear by the Bill of costs it self.

The Attorneys of this Court, when they did enter into their Offices, did take
a solemn Oath to behave themselves justly toward His Majesty and all His
loving subjects: and that it was one part of their duties in their places, to
have drawn up Bills of costs for their Clients after Sentences and Dismissions,
wherein they ought not to have exceeded their bounds and moderation, without
the subjecting themselves to the danger of censure: so when these Ministers of
the Court did transgress, and go beyond their rules and limits, it was no
warrant to the said Lord Keeper, in whom the oversight and control thereof did
only lie, thereupon to do injury to any other: Through nescience it could not
be, cannot be presumed done by negligence, especially being at the first
entrance into his place; for some other reason then it was, which I must leave
you to imagine. Moreover, it was the course of that Court, in all cases, that
where the Defendants, or any of them, were proved guilty of the crimes and
offenses charged in the Bill, albeit, in respect of some intervenient acts, it
so fell out, as that they could not be sentenced (the same not being an act of
the Complainants own wrong) in such causes; albeit the Defendants were freed
from censure, yet did they usually pay the Plaintiffs their costs; as in the
case of one Tunstall, and of one Allen, in that Court, a citizen of London, who
had a Bond from the friends of one of his Apprentices in 40 l. conditioned for
his said Apprentices truth, and faithful carriage of himself in his Masters
service; and this 40 l. was placed in the Bond in figures: And the Apprentice
imbezzelling more from his Master then the Penalty would satisfy, he added a
cipher and made it 400 l. and upon that brought his Action; for which, a Bill
of Forgery was preferred against him in the Star Chamber: and upon a solemn
debate and hearing of the cause, albeit it was adjudged to be no forgery, but
did only make void the Obligation, and so left him remediless to recover any
thing upon than Bond, and therefore the cause dismissed; yet the truth and
allegation of the Plaintiffs Bill apearing to be proved to the Court, he was
adjudged to pay the Plaintiff his costs: And so in many other cases of like
nature it has been done in that Court.

And whether Master Alexanders case be not much better proved against the
Defendants in his Suit of crimes censurable, the act of God only preventing
the punishment of the Perjurour, and thereupon the Suborner only cleared of
that charge, and the other charges of the Bill against the other Defendants,
confessed in the Sentence to be proved by single Testimony: And it appearing,
that there was sufficient matter in the Books fully to have convicted the
Defendants guilty of the crimes laid unto their charge, and was not Master
Alexanders fault that they were not heard. Thus far he leaves it to be rightly
considered how he was dealt withal in this Dismission with costs.

Besides, as the case stood, he conceives the matter extraordinary, it was not
in the power of the said Lord Coventry, as upon ordinary dismissions, and
matters of form, to have taxed any costs, without an especial Order af the
Court, for which he had none.

And when you shall peruse the Order of Dismission, which follows, and which
was all the Ground and Warrant for taxing of this Bill of Costs; if you shall
be but pleased to remember what has been proved before, you will understand it
to be the forerunner of the resolved ruin intended toward Master Alexander in
that matter, stufft with apparent untruths, and making way for that which after
followed. The Order follows.

In Camera Stell. coram Council. lbid. vicesimo quinto die Octobris, anno
secundo Caroli Regis.
THis day came to be heard the matter of Complaint here exhibited by Jerome
Alexander Esquire; Plaintiff against John Yates, John Lawrence, Allan Lampkin and
William Wacy Defendants, for supposed Perjury, Subornation of Perjury,
Inbracery of Jurours, and threatening and terrifying of Witnesses; which by the
Plaintiffs Bill was laid to the charge of the said Yates only: Upon the
opening whereof, by the Plaintiffs Counsel at the Bar, and reading the proofs
on his part, there appeared no sufficient matter at all to convince the said
Defendants Lawrence, Lampkin and Wacy, or any of them, of the said supposed
offenses or misdemeanors wherewith they, every or any of them, stood charged
by the Plaintiffs Bill, and therefore the Court has absolutely dismissed and
discharged them and every of them, of and from any further attendance about the
same Cause hereafter. But as touching the said John Yates, for the said
offenses of threatening of Witnesses, there were read, for proof thereof, two
Witnesses, viz. Robert Warren Clerk, and John Warren, on the Plaintiffs part:
in the Deposition of which said John Warren, taken in Court ot the nine and
thirtieth Interrogatory, as the Plaintiffs copy thereof read in Courts was,
the words ( that and did) were blotted out and defaced, and by that means the
said Deposition was positive and absolute, as upon the Deponents own knowledge:
whereas the said words ( that and did) being not blotted out, is but upon
hearsay. Which blotting out and defacing of the said words ( that and did) in
two several places of the said John Warrens Deposition to the said 39
Interrogatory, much misled the judgment and censure of his Honorable Court,
who condemned the said John Yates for that offense, and adjudged him to pay one
hundred Marks Fine to His Majesty's use, and to be committed to the prison of
the Fleet. But in the Defendants copy of the said John Warrens Deposition to
the 39 Interrogatory, the said words ( that and did) were fair written, without
any blotting, defacing or interlining: Which said Deposition of the said John
Warren to the said 39 Interrogatory being showed to this Honorable Court upon
the rising thereof, it pleased the same Court to take it into consideration,
and ordered that the original Deposition of the said John Warren to the said
39 Interrogatory, on the Plaintiffs part, should be brought into this Court the
next sitting-day, to be seen and viewed by their Lordships; and if the said
words ( that and did) were in the said original Deposition fair written,
without blotting, defacing or interlineation, then this honorable Court would
be pleased to dismiss the said Defendant yates, and to discharge him likewise
of any further attendance about the same Cause hereafter: in the mean time the
Court discharged the said John Yates out of the Custody of the Warden of the
Fleet, for and upon that Sentence; at which next sitting-day (viz.) the 27 day
of this instant October, the original Deposition of the said John Warren, taken
on the Plaintiffs behalf, upon the said 39 Interrogatory, was brought into this
Honorable Court accordingly; and the same being seen, perused and viewed by
this Honorable court, the sever all words ( that and did) plainly appeared in
the said original Deposition to be fair written by the Examiner himself,
without any blotting, defacing or interlining; and so the said Deposition was
upon hearsay, and not of the Deponent John Warrens own knowledge: This
Honorable Court, therefore, conceiving they had no sufficient ground for the
former Sentence, have thereupon ordered, adjudged and decreed, That the said
former Sentence against the said John Yates shall not be entered, but that he
shall likewise be absolutely dismissed and discharged of and from any further
attendance about the same Cause hereafter.

Jo. Arthur Dep.
Thomas Talbot of London Gent. does depose, That this a true copy of the Order
above mentioned, being examined by the Record by me the said Thomas Talbot.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.





From all that has gone before, judge how and by whom that Hononrable Presence
were then misled to sentence the said Yates, as that Dismission mentions; or
rather, if they were not more misled by the said Lord Keeper Coventry to
dismiss the said Yates, and clear him from a Sentence under which he was
restrained, upon such a bare supposition of an offense supposed done by M.
Alexander nothing to the purpose, and never intending or minding the business of
his Master, the Kings Majesty, by all clear means to have supported and
maintained the Sentence as he ought; and whose duty it was to have given all
encouragement to such as nothing for their own advantage, but for the love of
justice and good of the Commonwealth so spent themselves and their fortunes, to
bring Delinquents unto condign punishment, for examples sake, that others
might not dare so for to offend.

But he thought a worm soon crushed under foot: and Master Alexander being then
but new entered into the world, and daring to question such a man as Master
Godfrey, son and heir to Richard Godfrey, that famous Lawyer in his time, of
Lincolns-Inne, but a Popish Recusant; and his son being allied and befriended
in that Country where your Petitioner dwelt, to all the great ones, it is no
hard matter for any man to believe; and for that reason to conceive, that
Master Alexander could not want adversaries. Besides, it was a fault in those
times to be too forward, though in zeal to justice, and for the good of the
Commonwealth, if such a man were touched upon: and when such as Master
Alexander, that would not comply with the times, it was high time to take
occasion to rid them out of the way. But observe this untruth alleged in the
Order. To begin withal, it says, The words ( that and did) were blotted out
in two places of the copy of the said John Warrens Deposition, which they
allege not in their whole proccedings, either before or after. But to proceed
with the Sentence.

3. But upon the rising of the Court that day, the Sollicitour of the said
Defendant Yates (which was M. Fountain the Lawyer, now with the King, and which
made him be presently called to the Bar, and thereupon made my Lord Keeper
Coventries favorite ever afterward) showed to the Right Honor able the said
Lord Keeper the Paper-copie of the said John Warrens Deposition, which the said
Defendant had out of this Court, wherein the said words (that and did) were
fair written, and stood in the said Deposition to the 39 Interrogatory, without
blotting, defacing or inter lineation; wherewith it plainly appeared to his
Lordship, the said Deposition to be but upon hearsay, Sent. fol. 2. This needs
little other Answer then what has preceded, That it cannot be presumed that
Master Alexander would do such an act, which both the Paper-copies of the
Defendants Depositions and the Record it self must infallibly have controlled
in Court, as it did: Besides, it had been a sottishness and stupidity in
Master Alexander to have done this act, which, for the reasons aforesaid, could
in no measure have turned to his advantage: which being carried along to the
end of the Case, will make it luce elarior, it was na opportunity purposely
taken to destroy him, for which there had been many attempts made and plots
laid before; and the good God, that has been evermore his Deliverer, delivered
him out of those also, though evermore upon the pits brink, that he might look
up to his Defender, and foresee the like dangers and avoid them; which, as this
case was, was not possible for him to do: but, by that which followed upon it,
it proved a greater mercy, though intended to him for a misery and his
destruction; which is neither proper for, and would be too long to relate in
this Discourse.

Again, it is not denied but that a mark weas made in the margent of that
Paper-copie, like an hand or finger, pointing to the words, intimating
something to be done concerning them; which no man, in his wits, would have
made in that place, if he had intrended to have made use of it for an advantage
by obscuring it at the hearing.

Besides, Master Alexander well understood the course of that Court, and of all
Courts of Justice, that the said Deposition must be publicly read in the face
and view of all the Officers of the Court, and therefore not possible to be
concealed from discovery: And the practice of that Court and of all Courts of
equity is, that both parties having like copies of the same Depositions, it is
the constant practice of the Attorneys of both Parties, Plaintiffs and
Defendants, that whiles the one reads unto the Court, the other observes what
he reads, out of his own copy, to prevent mistakings, and thus to bring just
things certainly into Judgment.

Nay, if it had not been a thing plotted and reserved merely for the means of
Master Alexanders ruin, Why did not Master Jones, his own Attorney, in reading
it unto the Court, make that observation thereof, as it was his duty to have
done when he came unto the place? And if the Proverb be true in any thing (that
To excuse is to accuse) it was never more rightly verified then in this, for
that it does appear by the very Sentence it self that Master Jones desired of
the Court that he might be sworn, to purge and clear himself in the business,
when he was not then at all charged with any wrong doing: And why should Master
Hooker the said Defendants Attorney, who had made so fair a Bill of Costs as
before, in his Clients behalf, now put himself further to be examined also in
the matter, so differing from all the rules of that Court, whereof sure he
could not be ignorant; and was not so candid for him of all the rest to have
been done, being the Defendant; Attorney, and therefore should rather have
forborne to have meddled in it, if to have avoided all suspicion of partiality.

And as it is altogether improbable to have been done by Master Alexander; so,
if it had been done by him, (as it was not) yet was it not a matter so
criminous and capital, as that it deserved a Censure in it self:

For first of all, it was but the Paper-copie of a Record, which Master
Alexander might have burned, rased, defaced, interlined, written in and done
with it what he pleased, without offense: and he does appeal to all that are of
that Profession, if daily and hourly they do not so use their Clients
Paper-copies of Depositions, by drawing lines and crosses, and writing in them,
and yet was it never heard that any man before Master Alexander has been
questioned for any such doing, in case he had done it: But, some men had better
steal a horse, then another man look over the hedge.

Again, Paper-copies of all Records, when they are produced as Evidences at any
hearings and trialls of causes, are no further credited and authentic then
they stand clear and unsuspected, and that this clearness to be made appear;
for before they be made use of, commonly they are first deposed to be true
copies of such Records whereof they are copies; which shows them to be of no
force nor to be used, until they be thus justified in themselves: and if at
any time they pass for current without this attestation in those Courts where
they are Records, it is because they seem to be warranted to be truly copied
under the hands of their own Clerks and Officers still, and sent in Court with
the Record thereof, and which are sworn to be faithful in their proceedings,
and still ready with the same Records to justify the same upon all occasions.
In whom then was the offense, to read and make use of such a Paper. copy
which was in any thing suspicious? and how frequent a thing is it in the course
of practice of oftentimes to meet with suspected Records, and with like
Depositions and Evidences? which if the party justifies not, or is not able to
make good, are only rejected and set aside, without more ado, and made no use
of. And if the same Deposition upon question had been justified by Master
Alexander for aright copy, he had been worthy of censure; but you see there is
no such thing in this Case, nothing made appear that he ever did or desired to
make use of it; his counsel only called to have that Deposition read, which
they might have omitted, had they pleased, there being other testimony
sufficient besides to have proved that Charge.

And again, if Master Alexander had been guilty of the doing it, (as he was
not) yet it is not a thng censurable. The Common Law does punish offenses of
this nature no otherwise then with the loss of the benefit of that thing thus
altered, or which might have accrued to the party by it in case it had not been
altered: for whatsoever Obligations or other Deeds, which by any misfeazances,
ex post facto, become void, as by interlineation, addition, rasure, or drawing
a pen through the midst of a word, by these ways such Deeds are all become void;
but no other punishment inflicted by the Law for these transgressions, but with
the loss of the fruit and benefit of such Deeds, which is punishment
sufficient of it self; and for to add another affliction, were against a Rule
of Law, viz. to punish a man double for one and the same offense: as in
Matthewson and Lideats Case, in the Lord Cooks fifth Reports, fol. 25.
Whelpdales Case, in the fifth Reports; and Pigots Case, in the eleventh
Reports, fol. 27. where there are any other yeer-Books put for confirmation of
this truth, and to prove the Law to be thus in his Case: And the Court of
Star Chamber have accustomedly followed and imitated the Rule of the Common Law
in like cases; and against whom Bills have been preferred there for like
offenses, the parties complained against have been dismissed, though the
offenses proved as in the Cases before cited of Allen and others: So that in
this case the Peitioners Dismission and loss of that Testimony had been the
usual punishment; but the loss of the fruit and benefit of his Suit had been
too much: but to be censured for this as an offense in him, without proof of
guilt, is without President or Example.

4. HIs Lordship thereupon acquainted the honorable Presence therewith in the
iuner-Chamber, and, with all their Lordships consents, respited the Entry of
the said Sentence, and ordered that the original Deposition should be brought
into the Court the next sitting-day, to be perused, seen and viewed by all
their Lordships, and thereupon to give their Order and Sentence; and in the
mean time the said yates was set at liberty and discharged of his Imprisonment.
Presently whereupon, the Paper-copie of the said Warrens Deposition being
obtained by Master Jones, being Attorney for the said Alexander in that Cause,
from his the said Alexanders Clerk that carried his Books, was forthwith showed
by the said Master Jones to the Right honorable the Lord Keeper and the other
Lords then present, wherein the said two words (the and did) were defaced and
blotted out of the said John Warrens Deposition to the 39 Interrogatory; which
had been openly read in Court, and misled the Court to sentence as aforesaid,
and by that means the Deposition was made positive and absolute, as of his
ownknowledge; whereas, by by the said Defendants copy of the said Deposition,
first showed to his Lordship, with the words (that and did) fair written
therein, was upon hear say, fol. 3. This part of the Sentence, being but a
repetition of much of this matter alleged in it before, has received an
Answer: only my Lord Keeper Coventry his forwardness to charge Master
Alexander and to discharge Yates is observable; and that albeit Yates were
sentenced by Order of Court, and in custody, yet out of Court he caused him
presently to be discharged, upon this bare Allegation, without ever calling or
hearing Master Attorney-Generall, or any the Kings Council, or Master
Alexanders counsel, what could be said more for the King to maintain the
Sentence. And you shall not afterward find, thorowout the whole carriage of
the business, that the Lord Coventry did ever so much as move any thing for
the King, or against Yates, but presently dismissed him and the other
Defendants with 100 l. costs, and with such a manifestation of their
clearness, as if they had been the most innocent men alive, when the contrary
clearly appears in the Books as before: and so the Register of the Court in
drawing up the Order of Dismission, clears the Defendants, and asperseth Master
Alexander what he can. And Master Jones Master Alexanders own Attorney labors
what possible he can to lay this as a fault upon Master Alexander; but did
never any thing of his Duty for the King, or for his Client; all the Officers
of the Court drawing in a line together, and making way to destroy Master
Alexander by the Sentence to follow, which they were resolved upon from the
first, as these things do manifest, and make it to appear: And by this, the
misleading in the Case does appear to be on that side, when thus, against all
right and rule, and all ordinary and common respect whatsoever, much more, to
have been used toward a man of the same Profession, whose credit his Lordship
therefore should have the rather endeavored to have preserved, then in the
very Bud of his coming forth into the world to have nipt him off and crushed him
to pieces, preferring the condition of a company of poor and base Mechanical
wretches, not worthy his knowledge before Master Alexander, with whose Breeding
he was well acquainted to have had the same foundation and beginning as
himself, and with as good hopes to have attained the end of his Profession as
any other of his time, had not he determined that expectation by this his
unjust proceeding against him.

5. SHortly afterward, viz. before two of the clock that afternoon, the said
Alexander came to Grays- Inn, to the said Master Jones his chamber there; and
then and there, in the presence and hearing of Master Hooker one other of the
Attorneys of this honorable Court, in great perplexity, as it then seemed,
fell into sime passions, saying, what an unfortunate man am I! what will become
of me? an then, being demanded by Master Hooker and Master Jones, Of whom he
had or received his copies of the said Depositions whereof that was one;
answered, He could not tell whether he received it from the Examiner, or from
Henry Nevile Master Jones his Clerk: with many bitter and heavy imprecations
and oaths, vowing and protesting, he knew not of the blotting out of the those
words, or altering the copy; and the copies were as he first received them.
Whereupon, the said Alexander, Master Jones and Master Hookr went all together
unto the Examiners Study of this Court, to see the Record of the Original
Deposition of the said John Warrne to the said 39 Interrogatory on his part;
which being showed unto them by the Examiner, the Record was fair and plain,
with the words (that and did) therein, written with the hand writing of Master
Gay the Examiner, who died in August last. Hereupon the said Alexander used the
like speeches as before he had done in Master Jones his Study, and so
departed. Fol. 3. Be pleased to observe, that all this interlocutory-Discourse
is but a bare repetition of this Conference, without proof or confession, and
therefore unwarrantably entered into the Sentence, and against all the rules of
proceeding in any Courts of Justice whatsoever. Howsoever, it shows thus much
in the first place, that when such things as these were suffered to be stufft
into the Sentence, and to pass for current, tending to the utter ruin of a
man, Who could withstand destruction, being in the hands of such adversaries?
and who will not conclude of the injustice that was done him? The truth is,
Master Alexander went then to Jones his Study in Grays-Inne, being his
Attorney, thinking to have had the Sentence drawn up against Yates, not
suspecting any such action to have fallen out in the interim, after the hearing
of the Cause; where he found these two Attorneys Jones and Hooker together,
consulting, as it does seem by the sequel of their actions, how they might
fasten this miscarriage upon Master Alexander: and Master Alexander desiring to
have the Sentence drawn up against Yates, they told him, It could not be; and
then expressed the Reason, which as it was sudden and unexpected, so it could
not but drive him into wonder and admiration; which rather expressed his
innocence, then any ways declared his guilt, to which purpose they endeavor to
wrest it. And the Books and Breviats having lien above three years before,
ready and prepared for the hearing, unseen by Master Alexander to that time;
for nevile his Sollicitour had them in his custody a long time together,
before the hearing, and managed them in Court; (and whether the Charge be true
or false, Master Alexander must only take it upon their credit) for he was
never admitted to see the Book in which this Charge is mentioned to be done to
this hour, albeit he has diversely endeavored for to attain that favor and
justice. Nor makes it for their purpose, if his Answers were doubtful to
their Question, of whom he had the Books; for the memory is not always so
trusty and ready, that upon such a sudden surprisall it can resolve the Demand;
it must be a work of Recollection that pofitively determines of things so long
beforehand acted. Nor was it material from thomsoever the Books were received:
and in that time of necessity they must pass many times from hand to hand, to
make such preparation out of them as were fit to be made use of by Counsel and
other2ise, at the hearing; all which was done immediately after publication,
above three years then before: But the matter was, Who committed that offense
which Jones and Hooker were thus conspiring together how to fix upon Master
Alexander, and therefore labored to entrap and entangle him in his talk, which
no fair practiser, I had almost said, No honest man would have endeavored
against his Client, nor no Attorney that had respected his credit, where his
credit was no more concerned in it then Master Hookers. Then as for their going
all together into the Examiners Study to view the Record if it were so, shows,
that all parties were doubtful how the Deposition stood; What inference can be
then drawn from thence by any in different judgment, in the least therefore to
suspect Master Alexander guilty of this Accusation? but serves to excuse him
rather, that thus labored to be truly informed the first how it should come
about: and that Master Alexanders first vows and imprecations, as they are
pleased to call them, passing in their discourse together, when they thus lay
in wait to have entangled him in that conference (if to be so as they
alleged, which was never confessed, or proved by them) and that matter which
Master Alexander has at several times declared upon his Oath for his own
acquittall, are not so contradictory, diverse, or useful to their cause, that
any thing can be drawn from thence to make good the charge against him. And
when that Point shall come to be cleared which is further contained in the
Sentence concerning it, and which Master Hooker has deposed, Master Alexander
shall give it a satisfactory answer. The Spirits of the men too may be
observed, in this their Relation, toward Master Alexander, how far they are
transported even with contempt to his person and quality, standing in an equal
degree with them every way, both in Birth and Fortune, that has no so much
addition given him by them as is due to a Gentleman, whiles themselves are
carried through with additions that become men of rank and estimation.

6. YEt afterward the said Alexander, desirous and plotting how to excuse
himself of defacing and blotting out of the said two words (that and did) out
of the copy of the said Deposition, and to lay and fix it upon the said Henry
Nevile one of Master Jones his Clerks, on the morrow after, being the 26 day of
October last, came into the Star-Chamber-Office in Grays- Inn, and before
Matthew Goad Esquire, Deputy-Clerk of this Court, being sworn upon the holy
Evangelist, did make a voluntary Oath and Affidavit, That he having retained
Master Jones for his Attorney, and Henry Nevile, to take care and solicit his
said Suit; and the Cause coming to publication, the said Nevile undertook to
procure for him the said Alexander the copies of the said Depositions taken in
that Cause, and for that purpose not only receivedy the Fees and Duties for
such copies as he had procured for him the said Alexander, but likewise had
extraordinary reward and satisfaction for his pains therein: and that he said
Nevile went with him the said Alexander to the Examiner Office of this Court,
and there procured other copies of Depositions belonging to this Cause, which
were delivered to the said Alexander, in the presence of the said Nevile;
amongst which was contained the Deposition of the said John Warren. That done,
he repaired with the said Books to Master Hudson, being of his Counsel, to be
advised, and to peruse the same Depositions: All which Depositions being
perused accordingly, as well of the said John Warrne, as to the rest; and his
said Counsel concerning the said John Warrens Deposition to the 39
Interrogatory to be something doubtful, he made a mark in the margin thereof,
and wished the said Alexander, for his better satisfaction, to go and get the
same examined in the Office, to see if the same Deposition were truly copied:
And that accordingly the said Alexander repaired therewith to the said Nevile,
and informed him what his Counsel had directed for examining the copy: and the
said Nevile took the said Deposition of the said Alexander, and carried it to
the said Examiners Office; but the Examiner not being within, the said
Alexander did leave the said copy of the said Deposition with the said Nevile
to be examined, promising him satisfaction and content for his pains: And
shortly after, the said Alexander called unto the said Nevile for the same; who
told him, that he had examined the said Warrens Deposition in that point with
the original, and that he had then made it to agree with the Record; and so
delivered the same back again to the said Alexander, with the two words (that
and did) rased out in the said John Warrens Deposition, as now it was in the
said copy: and after that, the said Alexander protested upon his salvation,
That the said sever all words (that and did) were in the said Warrens
Deposition fair written, when he delivered the same into Neviles hand; and that
the said words were rased and blotted, as they then were, when he received the
same back again from the said Nevile; the said Nevile showing the same to the
said Alexander, and said, That he had made it to agree with the Record. And the
said Alexander protested and affirmed, That the same was not blotted out,
eithere by him, or any other to his knowledge, other then by the said Nevile as
aforesaid. And the said Alexander deposed, that the said Nevile was entrusted
with the care and charge of the said Cause: and having taken upon him to draw
the Bill and part of the Interrogatories, and took upon him the managing and
soliciting of the said Cause; and, over and besides what he had received, he
moved the said Alexander to promise him further satisfaction after the hearing
of the Cause. See the Sentence, fol. 3.

This being but the Recital of Master Alexanders Affidavit first made for
clearing of himself, in nothing being yet alleged thus far on in the said
Sentence for to impeach it in any thing, I shall say nothing thereof more, till
I shall find it questioned, and then will justify it for the very truth,
against all opposition to the contrary whatsoever.

7. AT which next Sitting, being the 27 of October last, according to the said
Order, was brought into this honorable Court the Record of the Original
Deposition of the said John Warren, taken upon the said 39 Interrogatory, and
was seen, read and perused by this Honorable Court, wherein the said two words
(that and did) were fair written, without any blotting, defacing or
interlineation; and thereupon the said Master Jones made humble Suit to this
Honorable Court, that he might be sworn in open Court, for clearing of himself
of any manner of suspicion, or the least touch that might have been imputed
unto him thereabouts; who was sworn accodingly, and upon his Oath delivered,
That, to his utter most knowledge, he never saw the Paper-copie of the said
John Warrens Deposition before it was put into his hands to read, at the
hearing of the Cause the last Sitting before. Whereupon, all the honorable
Presence openly pronounced the said Master Jones to be innocent and clear from
the least suspicion of being privy or consenting to the said blotting or
defacing of the said copy. Fol. 4 in the Sentence. There has been something
said before concerning Master Jones his carriage in the particular of his thus
offering himself into purgation, being no ways accused: But I see such wise men
as himself may sometime over-act their own parts: for if this be true that he
has sworn, he has shown a great deal of remiss carriage in the managing of
his Place and Office; at least, that would refer the care thereof only to his
Clerks, and receive his Fees and do nothing for them. But, if it had been
material, I could have put him in mind that he had all the Books by him in
his Study one whole long Vacation, which promise to have perused them, and did
affirm to Master Alexander he had so done, and then declared his opinion of the
proofs; and some of the copies of the Depositions taken by Commission in the
Country, were copied in his own Office, and his hand to the Examination. But
to let that pass as impertinent: I hope he has now recollected himself better
in this time that he has been an Oxford with his Majesty, as Master Alexander
is informed. But, to examine his carriage toward his Master the King, and
toward his Client Master Alexander in this particular in that time, be pleased
to cast an eye upon the Oath which the Attorneys of that Court, whiles it was
in being, did take at their entering into their Offices: and surely himself,
amongst the rest, took it for me.

YOu shall swear well and truly, according the best of your discretion, to
execute and perform the Office and place of an Attorney, in his Majesty's most
honorable Court of Star Chamber, whereunto you are now admitted; and shall
bear and behave your self justly toward His Majesty and all His Highness
loving subjects and suitours in the said Court. So help you God. It was further
also contained amongst the Rules and Orders of that Court concerning the Duties
to have been performed by the several Officers in their several Places, and
amongst the rest, That the Attorneys of that Court were to look that their
Clients causes were duly prosecuted to the hearing, without advantage: and
that if they should be pressed by any Rules or Orders which might prejudice
their Clients in their causes, they were to inform counsel, to move the Court
therein: they were also to write the copies of all Bills, Answers, and of all
Pleadings and Examinations taken in the Country by Commission for their
Clients, To prefer their Clients causes to hearing, To read all Acts, Evidences
and Depositions before the Lords, To urge for their Clients, and after hearing,
To draw up Bills of Costs for his Lordship the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keepers
Taxations, and present them.

And whether Master Jones or Master Hooker have performed their Duties herein
required, either toward His Majesty, or there Court, or Master Alexander, by
this prospective you may perceive them, though at this great distance. It is
agreed, he read this Deposition at the hearing, for so it was his duty to do:
and had he then behaved himself justly toward His Majesty, the Court and his
Client, when he perceived the said Deposition to be marked in the margin, and
so blotted in these words ( that and did) if they were so, as of necessity he
must do, if his eyes were matches; had he then informed the Court thereof, as
it was his duty to have done, and the proper time, the most that could have
followed upon it had been but the setting aside of that Deposition as useless;
and then Master Alexander could not have been denied to have made use of his
other testimony, to have more fully proved that Charge, and by consequence, the
Sentence against Yates had been continued, Master Alexander had not been
destroyed, nor had any prejudice happened to any man in the business.

Or if, when after this accident had fallen out, merely through Master Jones
his voluntary omission and the neglect of his duty (if there were no more in
the business then so) and that Yates was censured; yet then it had been a part
of his duty, in that case also, further to have enquired into the main body of
the Cause, as well to have maintained the said Censure against the said Yates,
for His Majesty's benefit, and the common good, and justice of the Kingdom, as
for the clearing of his Client: But he was, you see, so far from doing this, as
nothing appears in him to be done afterward, but a mere joining together with
Master Hooker and Master Alexanders adversaries, to lay and charge this offense
upon Master Alexander, to undo him: An Attorney worthy to be registered unto
posterity, for an example of fidelity in that wherein he was entrusted: And,
were no Master Alexanders Witnesses now dead, after this long time of that
action, he could have proved thus much more, to have added to Master Jones his
everlasting memory of his service in this particular to his Client, that,
Immediately upon the first Rise of this question, he was pleased to make this
Protestation, That he would spend all his Terms gains, but that he would fix
the fault and blotting out of those words upon Master Alexander: (and judge if
his proceedings afterward did not make him as good as his word) for which
Master Alexander has cause to thank him for his zeal, that he would help him
unto Justice, were it right or wrong.

We have a Rule in Law, That in matters of contract between man and man
committed to writing (clausulae inconsuetae semper inducunt suspitionem) to
add unusual and unaccustomed Clauses, do beget suspicion: and it has been
found by experience in common practice, That as the devil, when he intends to
play a masterpiece of deceit, will then transform himself into an Angel of
light: so he that is about to cozen most, will use the most goodly and specious
pretenses of all the rest: but, By their works ye shall know them.

We use to say also, That Generals conclude nothing: How then is it possible
to pronounce a man innocent and clear from the least suspicion of being privy
or consenting unto a thing wherein he has acted, or was his duty to act,
before all parties therein concerned were heard for to object, and this upon no
other thing then the Oath of the party himself? If Master Alexander had had the
same justice, at the same time, in the same Court, in the same Cause, for whom
there was a great deal of more reason; he ought to have been cleared also upon
the same ground: They were the voluntary Oaths of both of them, which equally
lay before them in judgment, for the clearing of themselves: And Master
Alexander has cause to wish he had trebled so much as Master Jones his Terms
gains did amount unto, if so he could have possibly found out any way to have
put himself into the same Scale with Master Jones, for the clearing of himself.

8. ANd the said Henry Nevile being then likewise present, humbly petitioned
this Honorable Court, that he himself and the said Alexander also might be
both sworn upon their corporall-oaths in open Court, and examined upon
Interrogatories or otherwise, touching the defacing and blotting out of the
said words (that and did) and also that the said Master Hooker be likewise
sworn, to declare upon his Oath what he could say for discovery of the truth,
touching the matter aforesaid: All which were sworn in open Court accordingly.
Whereupon, and upon ublike reading of the said Alexanders Affidavit in open
Court; wherein, and some demands then made by the Court to the said Alexander,
there plainly appeared a repugnancy to truth, wherein he had catched himself,
and discovered his guiltiness of the said offense. Fol. 4 in the Sentence. Is
it not something strange, that albeit Master Alexander was a castaway, and not
worthy of like consideration with these men? (yet that the Master and the man
should not have the same measure of justice, and that which belong both to one
thing, were not put both in one Case) that Nevile too was not presently upon
his Oath also declared to be innocent and free from the least suspicion of the
blotting out of these two words ( that and did) out of the said Paper-copie of
the said John Warrens Deposition? And surely there was great reason for the
Court to have done so for the said Nevile at that time also, if this matter
alleged in the Sentence had been true, that such a plain repugnancie to truth
had then appeared to the Court, wherein Master Alexander had catched himself,
and discovered his guiltiness of the said offense; for this had made an end of
all further question about the business: the Court might then have dealt with
Master Alexander as they pleased, without more ado: But how comes it about that
the particulars wherein this guiltiness so appeared to the Court at that time
were not registered for posterity, nor do now appear to make this Allegation
good? The truth is, it is but a mere Fiction, some more of Matchivails dirt
cast in Master Alexanders face, to make him seem a little fouler in the eyes of
his beholders: for, had it been so as it is set forth in the Sentence, no
reasonable man can think that Master Alexander could have escaped the judgment
of the Court upon that instant, without more ado, and frustra fit per plura,
quod fieri potest, per pautiora. Surely the Lord Keeper Coventry, who at that
time questioned and sifted Master Alexander in Court, as Bran, with all
possible endeavor to have gained this only confession from him, would have
taken the advantage thereof, if it had been so, which had been instar mill
testium, to have convinced him; and was the thing which was afterward only
desired to have been drawn from Master Alexander by the further Examination of
him before the Judges that very day, directed and ordered by the Court for to
be done. Surely the Officers and Ministers of the Court, now banded together
against Master Alexander, would have accounted it a happiness of his pen to
have catched it the first, before it had half fallen out of his mouth, and it
would assuredly have been inserted in the Sentence with a vengeance to him,
that no public Proclamation could have so openly divulged it to the world.

But that this is in the Sentence also, it is no wonder, when the whole is but
a Recollection of Suppositions, inserted in it without ground or warrant: And
the truth is, the matter was made cock-sure, in those times, what by the power
of the said Lord Coventry, and Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Master
Alexanders like potent enemies, that this matter should never have been stirred
again, until the day of the general Resurrection; as shall more fully appear
by that which follows.

9. THe Court was pleased to require the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
and Master Justice Dodderidge, both present in Court, to take the Examination
of the said Alexander, Nevile and Master Hooker, touching the premises; who
took great pains herein accordingly, and, at the earnest solicitation of the
said Nevile, on the 7 day of this instant November returned into this
honorable Court their Certificate of all their proceedings therein; which said
Certificate was openly read in Court upon the 10 day of this instant November:
Upon the reading whereof, and opening of the points of the same Certificate by
Sir John Finch Knight, of counsel with the said Nevile, the Court was
inclineable to be of opinion, that the said Alexander himself was the man that
did blot out and deface the said two words (that and did) out of the said John
Warrens Deposition, for his own advantage against the said late Defendant
Yates. Fol. 4. in the Sentence. To what purpose had all these further
Examinations been, to find out that thing which in the Sentence is alleged
to have been publicly confessed by Master Alexander in Court before. But there
was more in it then so; they might not rely upon this reed, and therefore
proceeded further, to muster up and gather together what they were able, to
make some color at least for a Sentence: for they saw all this would not do,
nor serve the turn; there was yet but an inclination to think Master Alexander
guilty of doing this thing, albeit as much now had been done, and that which
was done had been canvased as thoroughly as was possible in Court, to gain a
belief and opinion of his guiltiness. But to proceed.

10. BUt for that the said Alexander was neither himself in this Honorable
Court in person, neither had any counsel to speak for him, the Court therefore
did forbear to give any final Sentence or Decree therein that day, but gave
the said Alexander time until the next Sitting-day, to show cause, fi any he
had, by his counsel or otherwise, why the Court should not proceed to Sentence
against him for that misdemeanour; or, in default thereof, the Court intended
to sentence the next sitting-day, at which time the said Alexander was ordered
to be present at the Bar in person, Fol. 5. in the Sentence. Surely no
Justicers will give a judgment against any man before they be resolved: And
all this while appears, that some of those Judges were not satisfied that
Master Alexander was guilty of any such wrong doing as was laid unto his
charge, and therefore gave this further time, which otherwise they would not
have done. By this also you may pereceive, into what a sad condition and strait
Master Alexander was driven, that having the supreme Judge and Officers of the
Court for his adversaries, he could procure no counsel that durst to speak or
move in his cause, though never so just: so were men overawed or related one
unto another in those days, that Justice had not his current and free passage,
especially in that Court; and that man must be sacrificed unto ruin, upon whom
the indignation and displeasure of any such as Master Alexanders adversaries
fell: And when he that would not comply with the times, ti being in any way
that might hinder their designs, it was cause enough to destroy him. And what
could Master Alexander now expect but destruction, when that thing, whatsoever
he spoke for the justifying of himself had a contrary sense and interpretation
put upon it, and was inverted to his prejudice? Counsel none would, nay durst
not, as they told me once, to speak in it: for when at first they did a little
offer some things cooly and faintly in Master Alexanders behalf, and put for
trial how it would be relished and received, they found it passed by in
silence, if material, or themselves dis-regarded for the motion: And what wise
man will engage himself in such a quarrel, where, whosoever speeds, he is sure
to get blows for his recompense? Howsoever, it was fairly offered, had it been
accordingly pursued, that Master Alexander should at least have notice of their
intentions, that they were resolved to proceed to sentence him, and that he
should be present at the Bar in person, to hear his condemnation. But now it
was well understood by Nevile, that Master Alexander was before this time gone
out of Town into the Country, near an hundred miles from London, to search for
Letters which he had formerly received, of his, about the business, in which
he hoped to find his acknowledgement of doing this thing, in manner as Master
Alexander had alleged; for which reason, all their Forces are set on work,
for to procure this Sentence in his absence, and to raise that as one argument
of guilt, which was intended to have made his more clear Defense: and this, he
takes God to witness, was the original cause of his leaving the Town, after
that he had once cleared himself again before the Judges, thinking it
impossible, in his own understanding, and so conceived by others of better
judgment then his, that any such thing as a Sentence could have been once
thought upon to have been given against him, as his case stood.

11. NOw this day was read in open Court, an Affidavit of Charles Bagshaw Gent.
that he had done his best endeavor to serve the said Jerome Alexander with the
said Order, and to give him notice thereof; for which purpose, he had sought
him at his Chamber at Lincolns- Inn, and given unto his Boy or Clerk, whom he
found in the said Chamber, a true copy of the said Order: And the said Nevile
himself offering to be deposed, That he did, at the late Lord Chief Justices,
give the said Alexander himself warning to attend the Court at his peril. All
which notwithstanding, the said Alexander made default, and had withdrawn
himself, as was now informed to this honorable Court. Fol. 5. in the Sentence.
In this it is observable, as a Ground, That in all Courts of Justice
whatsoever, the Rule is, That no man ought to be condemned, or to have
judgment given against him for any matter depending in any Court of
Judicature, but the Order or Process of that Court is first to issue, to give
him timely notice of the resolution of the Judges of those Courts to proceed to
Judgment at some certain time prefixed, that so no man may be overtaken
uprovided, or without making his just Defense; (except such party as after
notice shall wilfully absent or not provide by counsel or otherwise, for to
justify himself in his proceedings) and, without this, many an innocent man
would be undone: And in case where neither the party, by himself or by his
Counsel, shall appear to defend himself after such notice, and that the warning
does sufficiently appear unto that Court to have been given him according to
direction, that there be no delay in justice, the Court will proceed to
judgment without him; yet with such caution, as, if possible, they will not do
him injustice for his contumacy therein, nor will wrong their consciences in
the Judgment; but will try out the truth howsoever by all means, for
whatsoever lies before them: and therefore in such cases of absence, they hear
all such Answers, Depositions of Witnesses, and other matters of Record lying
before them to be read, which before that time the party has made for his
Defense, or that he has alleged for maintenance of any Charge in such an
Action or Proceeding, and will in such case be much more wary and circumspect
to promote the truth, of whatsoever side it is, appearing within the Books,
then if such party had been present: for Judges sit not to side, and make
parties, or to take opportunities to revenge themselves; but for to do justice
and judgment truly and impartially, for justice sake, without the respect of
persons. But then see if Master Alexander have received this measure of justice
in this matter concerning him: An Order of notice for a hearing has been made;
and that was well: but that this was shown to Master Alexander, or that Master
Alexander had notice of this Order, does in no sort appear: Nor had he any
notice thereof; for first, Bagshaws Oath reaches no further then unto an
Endeavor of service; he swears nothing positively, to satisfy the Court that
it weas done. And for what Nevile offered for notice, as it is far from truth,
so also it is so far out of the way of a legal notice, as it appears both to be
false in it self, appearing out of the very Sentence, and in no sort to have
been credited or believed, in case it had been true, for this Reason, Because
it was not delivered upon Oath for a Record; against which Master Alexander
might have taken his remedy for the falsity of it, being untrue. But, that it
is grossly false, be pleased to observe: Nevile offers to depose; What? That
he did, at the then late Lord Chief Justices, give the Petitioner himself
wearning to attend the Court at his peril. First, this must of necessity be in
time whiles the Judges were upon their Examinations of the business, and
before they made their return into Court, and that was long before this Order
was made; for this appears to be made at a time afterward, when the said
Judges Certificate was returned, and had been debated in Court: and for that
Master Alexander then had not appeared, by himself or counsel, to make any
Defense, as the Sentence it self shows; and therefore at the meeting before
the Judges, at the late Lord chief Justices Chamber, Nevile had no reason nor
color to give any such warning to appear, upon an Order that was not then
conceived, nor was there then any cause appearing for the making of any such
Order; nor for some time afterward was it made, as is remembered before.
Besides, there was little reason for to credit his Report in his own Cause,
that stood a visible Delinquent unto the Court, and nothing to purge himself
thereof, but his own Oath, admitted against all the Rules of justice, and
ordinary proceedings in Courts of justice whatsoever: So that Master Alexander
is condemned without Defense. And for Bagshaws Affidvait, that it was little to
the purpose, be pleased to cast your eye upon it, as it consists in all the
parts thereof together.

In Camera Stell. decimo quarto die Novembris, Anno secundo Car. Regis.
CHarles Bagshaw of Barnards-Inne, London, Gent. aged about thirty seven years,
sworn, says, That where, by an Order of this honorable Court of the 10 of
this instant November, day is given to Jerome Alexander Esquire, till the next
Sitting-day, to show cause, by his counsel or otherwise, why the Court should
not proceed to sentence against him; and that he the said Alexander should be
present at the Bar in person: Now this Examinate says, That on the thirteenth
day of this instant November, this Examinate did repair to the Chamber of the
said Master Alexander in Lincolns-Inne, and there knocked at the door: but no
answer being made, this Examinate walked a little aside. Within a short space,
the door was opened, and a young man or youth coming out, and looking about, as
it seemed, to see who it was that knocked: Which this Examinate seeing, did ask
the young man or youth if he were not Master Alexanders Clerk or man, and where
his Master was: who then confessed, that the said Master Alexander was his
Master; but that his said Master was not within, neither could he tell where
his Master was. And then Henry Nevile Clerk to Master Jones, one of the
Attorneys of this Court, came into the Chamber, and asked the said Alexanders
Clerk for his Master; who returning the like answer as he had done to this
Examinate: Whereupon, the said Henry Nevile delivered a copy of the said Order
to the said Master Alexanders man, willing him to give his Master present
knowledge thereof: which he said he would do, as soon as he did see him. And
this Examinate is persuaded, that the said Alexander has had knowledge of the
said Order, his man faithfully promising to deliver it so soon as he could:
Both this Examinate and the said Henry Nevile charged him so to do, and telling
him how much it concerned his Master to take notice thereof.

Jo. Arthur Dep. Ep. per Aylewry.
Thomas Talbot of London Gent. does depose, That this writing is a true copy
of the Affidavit therein mentioned: examined by the original Record by me the
said Thomas Talbot.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.



This Affdavit, how cunningly soever penned by Master Nevile, and that he has
carried himself in it, yet is no good service of the said Order, as has been
observed before; for Nevile well knew, Master Alexander was at this time, and
above a week before, out of Town, when he went with Bagshaw, to make this
service upon the said Order, to Lincolns-Inne. And in all cases of this nature,
where a like Order or Process is served to cause any to appear to hear
Judgment, it ought to be first made clear unto the Court, that the party to be
served, if possible, has had personal notice, before they proceed to
sentence, it being so penal as aforesaid: And if it be not a personal service
made, yet then that there be such a service made, appearing unto the Court, as
by infallible consequence the party must have had knowledge of it, in
convenient time to prepare himself for his Defense: for, in matters of giving
judgment, it is not as in other ordinary Cases, of serving Process to answer
Bills, or interlocutory-Orders; where, if by a mistake, or pressing the service
beyond the truth, the party fall into a contempt, of this he may purge himself
upon his Oath upon Interrogatories, according to the usual course, and so be
set Rectus in Curia again, and have repair made him without detriment to his
Cause: But where Judgments or Sentences are to be given, either in the Courts
of Common Law, or Equity, or Star Chamber, there, if for want of notice, or
that upon a false service of Process presented to the Court, the Court proceed
to give judgment against the party, there is no such Remedy to be had; nothing
but a Writ of Error, or Bill of review or reversall of such Judgment or
Sentence, can restore the the party again to what he has thus lost or, shall
suffer by it: and such Judgment or Sentence may possibly in such cases be so
legally founded, that they cannot be avoided by any such way neither; and yet
such parties may possibly have had such matter of fact to have shown for
themselves upon those hearings, if they had been heard, as would have acquitted
them. The service of this Order by Bagshawe, you see what it is; His repair to
Master Alexanders Chamber, unto Lincolns-Inne, where Master Alexander was not,
and who will be deposed, that he was gone out of Town, about his occasions
aforesaid, above a week before, in the Country: And though it be commonly
presumed, a man will be, for the most part, at his own house, which is his
Castle, for to manage his estate, and to provide for his family; there is no
such intendment or necessity of a man's being at his chamber in another place,
remote from his dwelling house, as this was, near 100 miles distant: and
therefore the leaving of this Order, in a case so penal, at his chamber here
in London, where he was tied to no constant residence, but might stay and be
gone again at his pleasure, without precise proof of his being there: and
personal notice, before the hearing, was no such service of that Order as did
warrant that Court to proceed to Judgment against him in his absence, and
without defense. Again observe, albeit in the Setence it be expressed, that a
copy of this Order was left with Master Alexanders Boy or Clerk at his chamber
at Lincolns-Inne; yet the Affidavit of Bagshaw says not so; for he swears
only, He gave it to a young man or youth of whom he enquired if he were not
Master Alexanders Clerk or man, and where his Master was; who then confessed,
that Master Alexander was his Master; but that his said Master was not within,
neither could he tell where he was: But his saying so, does not make him so, if
in truth he were not so; and all this does not prove him to be so: So it is
clear, Bagshawe knew him not to be Master Alexanders Clerk or man; and Master
Alexander had more chamber-fellows that had Clerks and men then in Town, to
whom it was certainly delivered by some willing mistake, to make thus much of
it in color for the hearing. And what Nevile delivered, who was this Bagshaws
setter, was still but to this mistaken Clerk or man, and therefore no whit to
have been regarded for such a service. Nor was it Bagshaws belief of notice,
nor Neviles charge to that Clerk or man to deliver the said copy of the said
Order to Master Alexander, that therefore concluded, He had notice, or that it
was delivered unto him accordingly, as it was not. And if it had been Master
Alexanders Clerk or man, Nevile knew him, and his name: for Master Jones says,
He attended with the Books at the hearing of the cause against Yates; and that
he took the said Deposition of John Warrens for him, and showed it to the Lord
Keeper Coventry: Other Clerk or man Master Alexander had not; and if it had
been he, Nevile would have caused him to have been named; for he had a
Christian-name and Surname, but was not then in Town, as Master Alexander
believes: So it is likely they set up a man of straw, and killed him when they
had done: either feigned the being of some such man or Clerk there, that was
not; or delivered the same to some man or Clerk that was no man or Clerk of
Master Alexanders, and by a willing mistake, made this use of it to condemn him
in his absence. Howsoever, it was no good service in it self, for the reasons
aforesaid: and the Court was abused by inserting in the Sentence, either what
Nevile voluntarily affirmed, clean from the matter; and that Bagshaw should
depose that the copy of the said Order was left with Master Alexanders Clerk
or man, which he did not swear at all. And of necessity must Master Alexander
make default at the hearing, when he was so long before gone out of Town, and
had no manner of notice, nor could have notice possibly of the said intended
hearing. And for his withdrawing himself, you have heard the occasion, and
when; and therefore no ways worthy of blame, or that any use ought to have been
made of it, to his so great disadvantage.

12. WHereupon was read again in open Court the said Alexanders Affidavit, and
the said Certificate of the said Lord Chief Justice, and Master Justice
Dodderidge. Upon the reading whereof and opening of all the parts and points
thereof by Sir John Finch Knight, and Sir Heneage Finch Knight, Recorder of
London, both of counsel with the said Henry Nevile, who was present in Court
himself to stand to justice; it plainly appeared to this most honorable Court,
as well by diverse apparent contrarieties between the said Alexanders Affidavit
before mentioned, and his Examination taken upon his Oath before the Judges, as
by diverse other pregnant reasons and circumstances, conducing to prove him
guilty of this great offense. Fol. 5. in the Sentence. Master Alexander does
appeal herein to all practisers in these Courts, if in their whole times of
their practice they have never known any man to be fined upon such Generals,
which imply no certainty of any thing: For, to say it was so, because it is
related that it was so, in the Sentence, without showing wherein or how, I
believe is a President without Example, to convict any man of such a crime. But
that this is a false Allegation, as you have heard the full effect of Master
Alexanders Affidavit recited almost Verbatim in the Sentence, before: so now be
pleased to read the same Certificate, which follows in haec verba:

In Camera Stell. 7 die Novembris, anno 1626. secundo Caroli Regis. The
Certificate of Sir Randal Crew Knight, Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's
Bench; and Sir John Dodderidge Knight, of the Justices of his Majesty's said
Bench: between Jerome Alexander and Henry Nevile.
ACcording to an Order of this honorable Court of the 27 of October last, we
have examined the parties concerning the blotting out of two words in the
Deposition of one John Warren, viz. ( that and did) being for the advantage of
the Plaintiff Alexander: And we have likewise examined Master Hooker, one of
the Attorneys of this Court: Gay the Examiner, that took the Examination, and
Wright the Clerk that wrote them, being both dead.

Nevile denies the altering of Warrens Deposition, and says, He never saw it
from the time it was first taken out, till it was read in Court: He denies
that either he, or any other, to his knowledge, did alter the same; and that he
never examined the copy with the Original; neither did the Plaintiff ever
leave the same with Nevile to be examined: He denies the having of any Reward
for Examination thereof, for he was never required to examine the same.

Alexander denies expressly the alteration of Warrens Deposition, or that it
was done by him, or by any other by his procurement: He says, He went to
Master Hudson, to peruse his Depositions, being of Counsel with him: And that
the Deposition of John Warren, when Master Hudson perused the same, was without
any blotting or alteration; and that the two words ( that and did) were then
fair in the same copy, not scored nor blotted: And Master Hudson told him,
upon perusal of the same, That it was but upon hearsay, and made not for him:
Whereupon this Examinate told him, That diverse were present at an Arbitrament
intended, when it was spoken precisely by Robert Warren, and not by hearsay:
And thereupon Master Hudson advised him to examine it with the Record:
Whereupon he went to Nevile, and showed him the Deposition, and what Master
Hudson conceived thereof: and then Nevile would have blotted out those two
words, if this Examinate had not restrained him. And after, they went to the
Examiners Office, to have compared it with the Original: But he being not then
to be found, this Examinate left the Depositions with Nevile, and afterward
received the same again from Nevile with those two words blotted out, the same
being done without his privity of procurement. And this Examinate says, That
the Cause was heard in this Court the same day he went to examine the copy
with the Record, and found the Record to be fair, with those two words in the
same, whereat this Examinate was much astonished.

Being asked what extraordinary rewards Nevile received from him in the
soliciting of his Cause, says, That in the Term he went to Master Hudson for
advice, he gave Nevile six shillings before he went to Master Hudson: And when
he had the Book from Nevile, Nevile demanded of him two shillings, as a Fee due
to the Examiner. But Nevile denies that he had any money of him that Term; and
thinks in his conscience, That, for the drawing of the Bill, and drawing part
of the Interrogatories, and his care and pains as a Clerk in the Cause, he has
not had above thirty shillings since the beginning thereof, being about six
years past; nor that he had ever any thing from him since the Term the Cause
was published in, which was vicesimo Jacobi, and copies of Books delivered,
saving of such moneys as he laid out for him in Court, and ten shillings in
money, he having laid out of his purse nine shillings four pence thereof before.

Master Hooker deposes, That in the afternoon the same day the Cause was heard
in court, M. Alexander met with M. Jones his Attorney and the Examinate, in
Grays-Inne, where they went together to M. Jones his Study; and seeing the
Deposition there, seemed thereupon to be in a great passion or perplexity about
the blotting out and defacing of the two words (that and did) out of Warrens
Deposition, saying, What an unfortunate man am I! what will become of me? And
being asked by this Deponent, From whom he had received the Paper-copie, said,
He could not tell whether he had it from Nevile, or from the Examiner himself;
but said and swore, He altered it not, nor knew who altered the same; but that
the copy was as he received it; and affirmed as much upon the view of the
original Examination with the Examiner: Howbeit, Alexander in his Affidavit
deposes, He left the copy of the Depositions with Nevil, to be examined, and
received them from him again; Nevil telling him, He had examined them whith the
Original, and that he had then made it to agree with the Record. This being the
state of the Cause before us, we humble leave it to the judgment of this
honorable Court.

Hamo Claxton. Ran. Crewe. John Dodderidge. John Arthur, Dep.
Thomas Talbot of London Gent. does depose, That this is a true copy of the
Certificate therein mentioned. Examined by the original Record by me the said
Thomas Talbot.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.



And now be pleased to observe if there by any such contrarieties between
Master Alexanders Affidavit and the said Certificate of the Judges as is
alleged in the Sentence. It must needs be, that the Affidavit, being drawn by
Master Alexander, after his own way, as he understood the matter; and the
Certificate, being made by direction of the Judges, who did interrogate Master
Alexander as they pleased, and so to set down things after their own order and
manner, there may be some seeming difference, in words, and phrase of speech;
but for substance, there is no manner of contrariety or variation at all. This
is more in the Certificate, then in the Affidavit, That so soon as Master
Alexander did show the said John Warrens Deposition to the said Nevil, with the
doubt in the Deposition conceived by his Counsel, and the mark applied to it in
the margin of the Paper-copie, Nevil would then have presently blotted out
those two words (that and did) if Master Alexander had not restrained him.
Which cross nothing at all in the Affidavit; but makes Nevil the more
culpable, and more clearly appear to be the man that did the fact: for he, that
would then have done it before Master Alexanders face, without ever examining
it with the Record, saying, He knew it to be but a mistake; it is more likely he
would do it behinder Master Alexanders back.

This is also contained in the Judges Certificate, more then in the Affidavit,
viz. That Master Alexander going to the Office to examine the Deposition with
the Record, and finding those two words (that and did) fair in the Record, was
much astonished: Which word, astonished, is not in the Affidavit; yet does not
this contradict any thing in the Affidavit, but the more enforces Master
Alexanders innocence of the fact: For, astonishment is rather a Compurgatour,
then an Accuser; not arising from guiltiness, but from a mere other thing: As,
that a man being surprised with a sudden Accusation, (as in this Master
Alexander was) though armed with innocence, that he cannot be pierced; yet may
he be amazed with so unexpected a charge. It oftentimes proceeds from
sensiblenesse of disgrace, ashamed, though innocent, to be within the suspicion
of such faults; or that he has carried himself so, that any tongue durst be so
impudent as to lay it to his charge. May happen from a disability to acquit
himself at the instant, his integrity wanting rather clearing then clearness:
therefore says Job, The upright man shall be astonished at this, and the
innocent shall stir up him self against the hypocrites, Job 17.8. The very
Disciples were astonished at Christ's words, Mark 10.34. and in the 26 verse it
is said, They were astonished so out of measure, saying, Who then can be saved?
showing how difficult a thing it is for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And so in many other places of Scripture, astonishment is most commonly
taken in a good sense. And thus it is plain, that upright and innocent men are
oftentimes astonished: So that upon observation of both, there is not any
variation or contrariety in Master Alexanders Affidavit, and his Examination
before the Judges in matter of substance at all; but the same is untruely
alleged in the Sentence without ground or warrant, to make for their purpose
against the truth.

And as to that part of the Certificate from the Judges which concerns Nevils
Examinations; as it is only to excuse himself of an offense wherewith he stood
first charged; and as it was unwarrantably grounded and admitted to be done at
first: so you find them not pressed, nor any use made of them at all, first or
last: And since, for reasons best known unto the Court, they set them aside as
useless and not warranted; and for which there was great reason so to do. So
they shall need no other Answer. And as sure as there is a God in heaven, so
certain it is, that what Nevil has therein said is contrary to the truth, and
so afterward did thrive accordingly; and M. Alexander could have disproved all
of it by many Witnesses, saving that only part concerning his blotting out the
words; which he did, or caused to be done, as God is true.

Then, as to that other part of the said Certificate, which mentions Master
Hookers Examinations and Testimony in this business, it makes nothing at all
to cross any thing said by Master Alexander in his own Defense: And it has
partly received an Answer formerly, as it is mentioned in the Sentence to be a
Discourse between Master Alexander, Master Jones and him, in Master Jones his
Study in Grays-Inne, the day the cause was heard between Master Alexander and
Yates: But the Bent and Scope of all that was, To ensnare and entangle Master
Alexander in his talk, and to gather from his words or carriage whatsoever
might pos2ibly make to charge the offense on him: therefore he says, first,
That Master Alexander seemed to have been in a great passion and perplexity,
about the blotting out of those words: but that which seems to be a thing, is
not the same: Nullum simile est idem. And what followed from thence? Would it
not have perplexed any man, or astonish him, on such a sudden to understand all
his business to be so changed, his adversary released, whom he left in
custody upon a Sentence pronounced against him; and upon the point declared to
be dismissed with his costs, when Master Alixander expected to have had costs
from him, and that justly? Might not M. Alexander term it also an unfortunate
thing, to be thus dealt withal on all hands; and perceiving, that those which
should have assisted him in setting things right again, went thus about for to
betray him? But fain this Gentleman would wrest or pick something out of these
words, and take an advantage of his own wrong.

To make some thing against Master Alexander out of this Discourse, so said to
catch him and surprise him, that when they asked him, From whom he had received
the Paper-copie, said, He could not tell whether he had them from Nevil, or
from the Examiner himself. If he said so, What of this? has not many a man in
ordinary discourse, and being taken upon a sudden, to answer to things done
long before, said that, which, upon second thoughts, and coming to be deposed
thereupon afterward, upon deliberation, and recollecting of himself, he has
varied from? And was this ever yet counted an offense in any man, but in Master
Alexander, to be well advised of that he swears for truth? And yet if what
passed from him in this discourse shall be rightly weighed and considered,
there is nothing in it that in the least makes against Master Alexander, or
that crosses any thing which he has either sworn or spoken in the defense of
his innocence.

It Is true, Master Hooker would invert the meaning of the words to a fained and
strained sense, as if it should imply a contrariety, that once Master Alexander
should say, He knew not from whom he had the copy, and then afterward should
depose the matter so precisely against Nevil, as to make him the offender. To
that other Answer which Master Alexander has already given of speaking words
in passion, and upon bare discourse, and after deposing to the same matter upon
second thoughts, and deliberation, add this, and consider that Master
Alexander in his Affidavit deposes, That there were two receivings of this
copy of the Deposition of John Warren: the first time from the Examiner, or
Nevil, when he took it and carried it to his Counsel Master Hudson to peruse;
and at that time it is not material from which of them he received it; for it
makes nothing one way or other from which of them he then had it: but sure he
is, that Nevil got that copy and all other copies from him, which he had of
any thing done in the Office, or otherwise, in that Cause; else what need
should Master Alexander have had of his solicitation, and to have done the
work himself? And all that were Sollicitours in that Office, as he was, did so
for their Clients; it was their duties, and for that only they had their
wages: But then when Master Alexander had thus carried it to his Counsel, who
had perused it, and directed it to be examined with the Record, with a mark in
the margin made against it; then it was delivered again to Nevil for that
purpose, and then Master Alexander afterward received it the second time from
Nevil again, with the words ( that and did) so defaced, etc. And this later
receiving was that receiving of this copy from Master Nevil, when this
alteration was committed: So that upon the first Conference the Answer was
made, as it was conceived, and according to the times and places where it was
propounded and answered, that is to say, in Master Jones his Study, and the
Examiners Office, which related to that receiving of them the first of all; and
that might be delivered doubtful, without any disadvantage, and yet Master
Alexanders Oath stands clear too, and without exception, that he did inform the
further carriage of the business to make the truth appear; and all stands very
well together: And it is against the Rule, to fetch blood out of a man's words,
and to strain an intendment thereof beyond the genuine meaning of the speaker;
and therefore in Law they are always to be taken in mitiori sensu, most
favorable for him that speaks them, where by any means they might be wrested
to a contrary interpretation. But then Master Hooker does further express
these other words also falling from Master Alexander in that discourse, viz.
That Master Alexander then should have said and swore, He altered it not, nor
knew who altered the same; and that being true, How could he say that Nevil did
it? Both are true, and contradicts nothing of whatsoever Master Alexander has
either said or sworn in this matter, when once rightly understood. For the
first, that Master Alexander did it not, that is true, and has been
continually maintained and justified by Master Alexander, both upon his words,
and upon his Oath, first and last. Then, that he knew not who altered the same,
also well stands with his Deposition: for, he deposes the manner how he left
it with Nevil to be examined with the Record; and that afterward Nevil gave it
him again so blotted as it was; and that Nevil did it, or caused it to be done;
and so Master Alexander could not know who actually did it, whether Nevil
himself, or any other, and yet received so done from Nevil, and was so his
offense equally, whether done by himself, or by his direction; and therefore
Master Alexander stands the more clear in his Oath, being made with this
caution: and he who does a thing by another, seems to do it by himself: and
in common parliance, men do use to say, I have done such a thing or such a
thing for you, when he has only caused and procured it to have been done for
him by another, assuming the act as his, that has been done by his
procurement: And so Master Nevil did say, He had made it to agree with the
Record, although he speaks this falsely, to make Master Alexander the rather
believe it; and therefore it was more safe for Master Alexander to depose the
manner how, that he delivered the copy to him fair, and received it with those
alterations; and that either Nevil did it himself, or caused it to be done,
which in effect was one and the same thing, and thus not possible for Master
Alexander to know who actually did it. There is this also more remarkable in
Master Hookers Examinations upon his Oath, and in his Relation of the
Conference which passed between him, Master Jones and Master Alexander in
Master Jones his Study: For in court, when he was demanded his knowledge of
what passed in that Discourse, not being upon his oath, he answered, and so it is
alleged in the Sentence that he should relate, That Master Alexander should
then say, That the Papercopie of John Warrens Depositionwas as he first
received it: But in his Examinations upon Oath before the Judges, he leaves out
this word, first, and says, that Master Alexander answered his question, That
the said copy was as he received it; which makes a very main and great
difference: for this word first being added, (as they had studied it) made much
for their purpose; that is to say, If it were so as when Master Alexander first
received it, then how could Nevil blot out those words afterward, especially
if Master Alexander received it from the Examiner, to which sense they would
press the meaning of the words, and then there must be a mere repugnancie to
truth in such case, and an impossibility in that, and so at first blush to a
cursary understanding of the words, Nevile must of force be clear of the
Accusation, and Master Alexander catched, as they are elsewhere pleased to call
it, in this matter. But you see God will have truth come to light, in despite
of the adversary; and therefore Master Hooker, when he only says, without
Oath, then he speaks one thing; but when he is examined upon his Oath before
the Judges, then he says another thing: And the words spoken by Master
Alexander being no other, but, That the copy of the said Deposition was as he
received it, agrees in terms with Master Alexanders Affidavit in all things,
which is, That it was as he received it the second time from Nevil, after that
it was left with him to be examined by the Record; and that he delivered it
back again to Master Alexander, and said, That he had examined it, and made it
to agree with the Record. And thus Master Hookers testimony makes nothing
against Master Alexanders testimony at all. And observe further, that even
Master Hooker himself is enforced to flee unto that common Rule of second
thoughts to be more sage and certain, and that there is a difference between
words spoken at random, and in ordinary discourse, and afterward premised,
and delivered in a solemn Oath. And observe further, that in the beginning of
the Sentence pronounced against Master Alexander, it is related as if deposed
by Master Hooker, That upon that Conference Master Alexander should affirm this
thing, with many and heavy imprecations and oaths, vowing and protesting, He
knew not of the blotting out of those two words ( that and did) in the said
Deposition: Which is inserted, of purpose to make Master Alexander seem little
conscientious of what he swore judicially, that valued oaths and imprecations
nothing in his ordinary discourse. But of this Master Hooker likewise says
nothing in his Examinations upon Oath before the Judges; (dealing in it indeed
very clearly; for there was no such matter) And yet this also shows, that
Master Hooker was not so constant to his relations, but that he knew a
difference what it was to say, and what to swear. And Master Alexander does
appeal to all men that have known his conversation both before and since, if
ever he were addicted to that abominable vice of taking the blessed Name of God
in vain. But see what the devil can do, when he wants truth for his
accusations; and observe unto what shifts and subterfuges men are brought, when
they do clothe injustice with a seeming-holinesse. And after all this, consider
yet this further, that if Master Hooker had not been Yates his Attorney in that
Cause, and had not preferred such an unwarrantable Bill of Costs against Master
Alexander as he did, and had not joined with Master Jones with his utmost
endeavors to have fixed the offense upon Master Alexander as he did, and that
he had not been a Witness for Nevile free from all exceptions, as he was not,
and had sworn something to the purpose for the clearing of Nevile, as he did
not; yet then he had been but singularis Testis, to whom nullafides in the
Cause, whereupon to have grounded a Sentence against Master Alexander in that
matter: It Is true, when many vehement and strong presumptions are coupled
together, sometimes a single and clear testimony beyond all exception, rarely,
in matters Civil, and betwixt party nd party, relief has been thereupon
afforded unto the oppressed: but in matters Criminal, where the life, many
times, and that which is always as dear and near unto a good Christian, His
good Name, has been questioned, and in danger, from the mouth of two or three
Witnesses at the least, according to our Saviors Precept; in that case the
Judgment has only been established. And before I end this part of the
Sentence, let me observe unto you one thing more, That these good Judges who
took these Examinations, one of them yet living, Sir Randal Crewe Knight, then
Lord Chief Justice of England, a man famous for his piety and justice, and that
in those times chose rather to be discharged of his place, then to serve curns
against his conscience: and Master Justice Dodderidge, known to be a learned
and just man; yet these two that made the Certificate, would neither of them be
drawn into Court to give a Sentence or an opinion against Master Alexander
therein; which they well understood must have been done against their
consciences, and against the truth.

13. ANd also by the testimony of Cook Gent. sworn in open Court, who upon his
corporal Oath deposed, that the said Alexander had formerly been taken very
foul in his own Cause, in the same kind, or worse, at a Trial in the County
of Norfolk, at an Assizes holden at Thetford, before the said Justice
Dodderidge ( who bound him to his good behavior for the offense he then
committed. Fol. 6 in the Sentence. It is an old Proverb, Admit one error, and
a thousand will follow. If one sheep breaks over the hedge, all the flock will
after. You have heard with what untruths this Sentence thus far has been
stufft out withal before, to make out something of nothing, if it had been
possible; to make this Sentence seem foul, and Master Alexander seem odious to
all that shall know nothing more but the reading of it; and so shall it appear
to be as unjust in that which follows. But what this Cook should be that has
no Christianname, I am not able to imagine: Sure he is filius nullius, filius
populi, or of some spurious Brood, that has nothing but a blank left for his
Surname, and his Christian-name set at the later end; He cannot be a Cook by
Profession, sure, and a Gentleman; although by the slovenlinesse of his
carriage in this action, he shows himself no better: So that what this Cook is,
it is yet to be understood: but, be he what he will, or what he was that made
such an Oath; I must tell this Gentleman, he has much forgotten himself, and
has much more wronged his conscience, as much as they who did him the
discourtesie to bring him into the open Court to make such an Oath, so directly
contrary to the truth, and took from him the honor to have it made a Record;
for otherwhere it is not found registered in that Court, but in the Record of
this Sentence. And because it is not said wherein Master Alexander was found
thus very foul in his own Cause, etc. and that it was in some such thing for
which he was bound to his good behavior by Master Justice Dodderidge, then
Judge of the Assize; be pleased to peruse the Certificates following, and then
judge of the truth of this Deposition.

I Have searched the Book of the Clerk of Assizes for the County of Norfolk,
from the tenth year of King James, until the third year of King Charles, and
do not find, in all that time, that Jerome Alexander was bound to his good
behavior.

23 February, 1641. Jasper Waterhouse Deputat. Cler. Assiaz. ibid.
Thomas Talbot of London, Gent. does depose, That this Writing is a true
Certificate of the matter therein mentioned, received from the hands of the
said Master Waterhouse, my self first making search with him in the Books
therein mentioned.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.



And lest it should be thought that this Gentleman Master Cook was but a little
mistaken; and that it was at some Sessions of the Peace in the said County
where Master Alexander was so bound unto his good behavior; give leave
therefore to satisfy him and the world in that also, by this other Certificate
of the Clerk of the Peace in that County, as it follows.

4 dir Martii, 1640.
UPon search of all the Sessions-Books, from primo Jacobi, till tertio Caroli,
I do not find, in all that time, that Jermoe Alexander Esquire; was ever bound
either to the Peace or good Behavior: And this I shall be ready to approve by
the said Records, whenever it shall be required.

Edmund Anguishe, Cler. pacis Com. Norf.

And that it may appear there are no more or other Affidavits made in that
Cause upon Record in the Court of Star Chamber, then what has formerly been
herein remembered, be pleased to cast your eye upon this other Certificate
following, which will satisfy that for truth.

In Camera Stell. decimo septimo die Apriliis, Anno decimo septimo Caroli
Regis.
IN the Cause wherein Jerome Alexander Esquire; was Plaintiff in this honorable
Court against John Yates and others Defendants, I find, that in Michaelmas.
Term, secundo Caroli Regis, there were but two Affidavits made in the said
Cause, the one by the said Master Alexander, bearing date the 26 of October,
and the other made by one Charles Bagshaw of Bernards-Inne London, Gent.
bearing date the 14 day of November.

Ex. per Aylwry.
Thomas Talbot of London Gent. does depose, That this Writing is the same
Certificate which was delivered to me by Master Aylwry Officer, whose name is
thereunder subscribed.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.



And thus you have an Accusation without a Witness, and a Witness without a
name, and both without truth. But, by this time, Master Alexander doubts not
but the Reader is satisfied of this Gentleman Master Cook his gross mistake,
not to call it otherwise. And Master Alexander in this case does also appeal to
all men, if it were possible for the most innocent man alive, being thus dealt
withal, or howsoever, to be free from destruction, when the Pale of the Law
was thus broken down, and all things admitted to enter, without form or truth,
to confound him that was but ooked upon with an evil eye, as averse unto those
times, and suspected might prove hurtful to their designs; and when that
power of dispensing the Laws for protecting the innocent, was put into the
hands of those which wrested it to their own ends, for the very oppression of
the subject. but Master Cook has done herein, as Nebuchad-nezzar told his
dream: He tells his wisemen that he had a dream, but never tells them what it
was.

But some will say, There was not so much smoke, but sure there was some fire;
and therefore though this Master Cook has missed the Cushion, yet there lies
some Pad hid in the Straw, which, if it could be discovered and found out,
would happily make out something which Master Cook drives at: Therefore Master
Alexander has made a strict scrutiny into himself, if possible, to find out
this man, and his meaning, and says, That he cannot remember what this Cook
should be, or what this matter should mean, if not this.

About the seventeenth year of King James his Reign, there was then one Thomas
Cook, a young man, who, by one Master Thomas Clowdsley, sometimes an Attorney
in the Court of Common Pleas, his father in law, was put unto Ryce Gwin
Esquire, after Sergeant at Law, dwelling in the same Town with Master Alexander
in Norfolk, to be one of his Clerks; with whom this Master Cook continued for
some time: And so it fell out, that in this time of their neighboring
together, Master Sergeant Gwin conceived some causlesse displeasure against
Master Alexander, and waited but the opportunity to be revenged. Master
Alexander in this time had purchased from a kinsman of his, one Master Thomas
Plandon, as much land as came to 600 l. or thereabouts, for which he had given
several Bonds for the payment of the money in time: But Master Plandon
afterward being desirous to travel beyond the Seas, entreated ready money,
and compounded to rebate for the time, to be supplied with the main Sum
presently. Whereupon they concluded, and Master Alexander paid him the money:
But because the Bonds were not in Master Plandons hands for the present, he
gave Master Alexander a particular Acquittance for the same debt, at first; and
not long after, anotyher more general Release, upon finishing of all demands
between them. Master Plandon having spent his money, and being returned, and
growing into all wants and extreme necessities, a fit time to be wrought upon
by evil Counsel; and having yet the main Obligation in his hands, undelivered
up, he made show of it to others as a real debt, and by that means wrought
himself into the acquaintance of those that were more ready to believe it
against Master Alexander, then he to utter it, and resolved to engage with him
to make it a question. Master Alexander prefers his Bill in equity, to have the
Bond delivered up. Master Plandon, and this Master Cook, then become an
Attorney at Law, do commence a Suit against Master Alexander, upon the Bond;
and with them many more join to manage the Cause, all his Master amongst the
rest, if by any means, to recover it: Their prosecution was with such speed,
and such favor, as the matter was soon brought unto a Trial. Master
Alexanders Attorney having both Acquittances in his hands, pleads in Bar to the
Action that which was more particular. Whereupon. Issue being joined, a Jury
was picked out for the purpose; and the matter came to Trial before Master
Justice Dodderidge at Thetford-Assizes, when Master Alexander proved the
sealing and delivery of the Release. But it so fell out, as there was one word
interlined in that Release, not any thing to the essence of the Deed, which
Master Plandons Counsel, and Master Cook his Attorney pressed to have been
inserted after the sealing and delivery thereof, and so, if true, the Release
void: And there being but one fingle Witness to that Release, being made in
haste at Master Alexanders house, a mile and more distant from any Town, and
between kinsmen, and on a time when Master Plandon posted his dispatch and
departure upon his occasions; and although Master Plandon, being present at the
Trial, did not deny it to be his hand and seal, though he was directed to
confess nothing more that made against him; and albeit the said Witness being
a substantial Ycoman of the Country, and without all exception that testified
the sealing and delivery thereof unto Master Alexander, as the truth was; and
albeit Master Alexander produced his other general Release, testified by many
Witnesses, though not pleaded, whereby the debt appeared to be fully satisfied:
yet, upon this device and color, and having obtained a Jury for that purpose,
he gained a Verdict against Master Alexander, for the whole penalty of the
Obligation; which they after pursued with that eagerness, and obtained such
favor by the friendship they had, and means they used in the Courts of
Justice, that presently they obtained Judgment, and took Master Alexander
immediately in Execution: And being thus restrained, and in prison, for so
great a demand, which he was no ways able to satisfy, without sale of his
Lands: And the subsistence of himself, his wife and family principally
depending upon his endeavors in the course of his Profession; and being then
in a fair way of Advancement, being employed by many noble friends, and having
many Stewardships, and other employments of like nature, which of necessity he
must have forgone, and lost the benefit of, and been ruined in all, if to
continue in restraint whiles he should in a legal way question the injustice
and miscarriages of those proceedings; and being involved in so great a strait,
was advised and persuaded by his friends (although, he must confess, much
against his will) rather to sit down under the burden, then to be ruined both in
his estate and profession altogether: And they having M. Alexander at this
advantage, as the least of these evils, he was thus enforced, for his
enlargement, to sell his Lands to pay this great debt over again, and to give
them a general Release into the bargain, (for that they would have the first
of all) or else he must lie by it, and be ruin and lost in his Fortune and
estate: And when M. Alexander, upon this Agreement, had the bond delivered up,
which by his plea was confessed, he found that his kinsman had been more just
then he expected; for he found the bond had been cancelled, and the Seal closed
down again in the old place with a little Starch; which then it was too late to
call in question: besides that, M. Alexander saw little hopes to right himself
by any Suit of Law for so great an injury, for that he understood his said
kinsman had shared and divided the greatest part of the money presently amongst
those that were his abettours and assistants; and that he had given 100 l. for
Counsel-Fees, and 60 l. or thereabouts for Attorneys Fees and Clerks Fees,
whereof this M. Cook had the greatest share, and other great Sums of money to
others that did him service in the business: And, It Is an ill wind blows no
man unto good. This Conquest thus obtained against M. Alexander, bred such
spirit in M. Cook, and gained him such applause and reputation, that he shortly
after admitted himself of Grays-Inne, and within less then three years, got a
bare Gown upon his shoulders, and became a great Practiser at Law, and
afterward fell in at Court, gained employment about the Fen-businesse in the
Isle of Ely, and recovering of Lands gained from the Sea in Norfolk and other
Counties, for diverse Courtiers to whom his Majesty had granted his Right and
demand thereunto, and was used in many Projects of like nature; gained a Patent
of the Stewardship of the Kings Forests and Chases in Essex, and thrust out a
far honester man then himself from that employment; got to be made a Justice of
the Peace. And if this be that Cook that is mentioned in the Sentence, this
must of necessity be that business which he drived at; for M. Alexander
professes he knows not of any other thing that ever happened to him of like
nature, in all his life; and concerning the carriage whereof, he leaves
himself to be judged accordingly. And thus M. Alexander has been set, for the
rising of some; and his disasters have been the beginning of the Rise of two
great Lawyers, M. Fountain being one of them, now with his Majesty, acting
against the Parliament; and the other, this M. Cook, who has not yet fully
shown his heart what it is, for want of opportunity.

14. ANd for that also the said Alexander was fled, and durst not abide
Judgment, as the said Nevil did, who prosecuted him for that offense. Fol. 6
in the Sentence. That there was no such fleeing in the Case, has been said
before; and the reason given of Master Alexanders leaving the Town, after the
business had been again examined before the Judges, viz. to find out Letters
in the Country which he had formerly received from Nevil about that business,
which he conceived might more fully inform against Nevil for this offense, and
which no other but himself could so well find amongst a multitude of papers
which he had there to search and look over: And before that Nevil did
understand that Master Alexander was gone out of Town, he stirred very little
in the business: but afterward, he procures the Certificate from the Judges
to be returned, which bears date the 7 of November. 2 Car. then the 10 of
November following, he procures it to be read and debated in Court: and the 17
of November following, he procures the Cause to be heard: So that in seven days
time, before it was possible for Master Alexander to ride down to his house in
the Country, being 100 miles from London, and return again, he had procured
the Sentence to be given in his absence, without any defense: And what justice
there was in this Proceeding, let any man judge. Thus all things, you see, are
done suitable to one another. And that it may appear to be no fiction for the
Cause of Master Alexanders journey then made into the Country, be pleased to
observe a Letter of Nevils written to him concerning this business, which he
found at that time amongst his papers.

To his assured good friend Master Jerome Alexander, at Walsingham, give these.
M. ALEXANDER,
I Never heard from you by Letter since you went down, until about a fortnight
since I received one by the Foot-Poste, by whom I did return you Answer, and
did expect to have heard from you this last week; but it seems it was not come
to your hands when you writ this last: and since that time we have had no seal,
nor shall have any till Friday next. Master Gay is not in Town: but so soon as
he comes up, I will take a course with him that shall be fit. Concerning Grout,
you shall receive your Subpena's so soon as I can get them sealed, and hear of
a fit Messenger. And so, with remembrance of my love, I rest,

September 13. 1623. Your assured friend, ever to command, Hen. Nevil.


Which Letter, you may perceive, was the Answer of a former Letter written by
Master Alexander unto Nevil: Wherein be pleased for to observe, That Nevil
answers a part of Master Alexanders said letter concerning Master Gay, which
was the Examiner of the Court named in the Sentence, that took those
Depositions: And the truth is, that Master Alexander having left this
Deposition with nevil to be examined with the Record, when he left the Town: He
promised to do it, and to write Master Alexander word thereof into the
Country: Which he having for some time neglected to do, Master Alexander wrote
unto him, to put him in mind thereof, and desiring to be satisfied how it
stood with the Record: In Answer whereof, he writes, that Master Gay is not in
Town; but so soon as he comes up, I will take a course with; which was, To
examine the Deposition with the Record; for at this time Master Alexander had
nothing more to do with Master Gay; publication being past, and the copy of
the Books taken out in the later end of Trinity-Term before: And when Master
Alexander afterward came to London, Master Nevil then delivers him the copy
of the Deposition, and says he had made it to agree with the Record, in manner
and form as has been formerly informed; and from that time, until secundo
Caroli that the Cause was heard, the Books were laid up, and never looked upon
by Master Alexander, which was for above three years space. And this is the
very truth concerning this particular. And truly you may perceive by that
which has gone before, that albeit Master Alexander did not go away for any
such reason that he had to fear the justness of his Cause; yet if he had been
tzed, as Laban did Jacob, to have fled away secretly, Genesis 31.27. he might well
have answered, with Jacob to Laban, he had just cause to be afraid. Truth it
self may sometimes seek corners, not as fearing her cause, but as suspecting
her Judge; and therefore flight is not always an argument of guilt, but there
only where the person declines his Trial altogether: for after defense made
by any person, to any Accusation, in any Court of Justice, and that an Issue is
joined upon the proceedings, and the matter made ripe for hearing; now that the
Court is thus possessed of the Cause, and have an ordinary way for to bring
such a matter unto judgment, the parties absence cannot be said to be a
fleeing from justice; for now the Law will proceed notwithstanding, and subject
both his person and estate unto such a Sentence, if there shall be found cause
to order any thing against him; this being presupposed, That, if possible, he
may have notice of the day of hearing, to make his just Defense, that so he may
not be surprised and overtaken unawares. Nor did the said Nevil prosecute
Master Alexander for this offense; but was prosecuted by him foroffending as he
did, as the proceedings manifest; unless that his surprising him thus in his
absence, and without defense, may be called a prosecution, which was a
persecution rather.

15. THis honorable court was clear of opinion, that the said Alexander
himself was guilty of that foul misdemeanour and offense of defacing and
blotting out of the said two words (that and did) out of the copy of John
Warrens Deposition, for his own advantage and ends against the said Yates,
whereby this honorable Court was misled in their judgment, in censuring and
condemning the said Yates, as before is declared. Fol. 6 in the Sentence. It
should seem their judgments, which upon the first debate of the Judges
Certificate were but inclineable to be of opinion that Master- Alexander should
have blotted out those two words in the Paper-copie of the said John Warrens
Deposition, were now brought about, without any other Reasons given the before,
to be absolutely resolved therein. A good foreman of a Jury, we say, is able
to do very much with his fellows: But if the Court were so resolved, you may
well perceive how some of them were misled therein, and how it was brought
about that they became to be so mistaken. And if the Court had been thus misled
in their judgments in censuring and condemning the said Yates, they were not
long out of the way, an hours time was the most, of their abberration, by their
own acknowledgement; for in such a space they dissolved all again that they had
done before: and for so little a time of restraint, they rewarded Yates very
well: For besides that, upon no terms the Lord Keeper Coventry would hear of
any thing that might make out to continue the Censure against him:
Notwithstanding, if the said John Warrens Deposition to that 39 Interrogatory
had been set aside; yet the Court absolutely dismissed him with 130 l. costs,
that ought to have given Master Alexander twice as much, with 1000 l. damages
that he had sustained by his means, in the prosecution of that Suit against
him, at that time, if to have done justly.

16. ANd have therefore Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed the said Jerome
Alexander, for his said foul offense and misdemeanour, well worthy of sharp and
severe punishment for the same; and that he shall be utterly disabled to
practice as a Counselor at Law, publicly at the Bar, or privately in his
chamber; holding him not worthy to be of the Society of Lincolns-Inne, whereof
he was a Member, have therefore left him to the consideration of the Governors
of that House, and to pay a Fine of 500 l. to his Majesty's use; be committed
to the prison of the Fleet, and before his enlargement out of prison, shall
publicly at the Bar of this Court, in humble and submissive manner,
acknowledge his great offense against God, and to this honorable Court; and
shall show himself very pentient and sorrowful for the same. And this
honorable Court pronouncing the said Nevil to be clear and free from
committing of the said offense of blotting out the words of the copy
aforesaid; and gravely considering the great trouble, loss, damage and danger
which the said Nevil has been put unto, for the clearing of his reputation in
his service to the Court, in defense of his own innocence in this Cause, and in
prosecuting and bringing to censure the said Alexander for the same his great
offense and misdemeanour, have therefore further Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed,
that the said Jerome Alexander shall satisfy and pay to the said henry Nevil,
for and toward his loss and damage in that behalf, the Sum of fifty pounds of
lawful money of England. Jo. Arthur, Dep. In this catastrophe and Close of
all, you may behold a Tragedy acted to the life; a poor Gentleman so destroyed,
as is without all president or example: wherein, contrary to the greatCharter,
he has suffered without mercy or moderation; his Estate, his Profession, his
good Name, his Wife and Children, and all hopes and comforts taken from him but
his life, at one blow; and that, in all outward appearance, made so miserable,
as it had been btter for him that that had been taken from him also, for then
his sorrows and miseries had been at an end: But being thus bereaved of all
Society, and means of subsistence for the future, it must needs subject him
unto the contempt and scorn of all his friends and others whatsoever, and drive
him into despair of ever looking up into the world again.

And no sooner was this Sentence past, but presently aterwards, upon that Item
thereof made in the said Sentence to theGovernours of Lincolns-Inne, they
taking all for granted and for truth that was contained therein, without ever
fearching into the cause thereof further, or hearing of Master Alexander in any
thing what he could say for himself, made the Order following.

Lincolns-Inne. Ad Consilium ibid. tent. vicesimo primo die Novem. anno regis
Caroli secundo.
At the Conncel it is ordered, That Jerome Alexander one of the
utter-Barresters of this House, shall from henceforth stand expulsed this
Society, for sundry foul misdemeanors and crimes by him committed, of which he
has been publicly detected and convinced: And the chief Butler of this House
is to cause his Studie-door to be nailed up, or otherwise to be kept fast; and
likewise his Goods in his Chamber to be seized and kept safe, until the House
be saisfied all Duties and Forfeitures any ways owing or due by him, for
Commons, Pensions, Vacations, Chapel, Cellar, or otherwise.

Edward Byshe, Custos nigri Libri.
Thomas talbot of London, Gent. does depose, that this Writing is a true copy
of the Order made in Lincolus-Inne against Mastere Alexander; being examined by
the Book of Orders of that time by me the said Thomas Talbot.

Jurat. 5 die Maii, 1642. To. Rich.



Which without delary was put in execution, and his Chamber taken from him,
albeit at that time he was indebted nothing unto the House for any Duties or
Forfeitures, Commons, Pensions, Vacations, Chapel, Cellar, or otherwise. Now
here it was not an open enemy that did me this dishonor; for then I could have
born it; neither was it mine adversaries that did herein magnify themselves
against me: but they were my companions, my guides, and mine own familiar
friends, that took counsel together, and walked in the house of God as frinds,
Psalm. 55.13, 14, 15.

Yet that God that always takes care of his, and never fails to protect the
innocent, so provided for him in this extremity, that within a short time
afterward he gave him such an unexpected being, as he must needs confess he
had perished, if he had not been undone; which no sooner was understood by his
adversaries, but they began to pursue him again afresh; and making use of this
Censure, do labor with it to crush him in the shell, that so he might not rise
up in judgment against them for this injustice, until the later day; and in
the next place, this Fine of 500 l. must be begged of the King, as by the
letters Patents thereof granted unto Mastere Fulwood, then Secretary Cooks
servant, does appear.

CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer, Chancellor, under Treasurer,
Chamberlains and Barons of the Exchequer of Us, our Heirs and Successors, now
being, and that hereafter shall be, and to all other the Officers and Ministers
of Us, Our Heirs and Successors of the said Court of Exchequer, and of the
Receipt there now being, and that hereafter shall be; and to all other to whom
these presents shall come, greeting.

Where as in Our Court before Us and Our Council in the Star Chamber, in a
Cause there late depending, by judgment of the same Court, Jerome Alexander
Gentleman, was, amongst other things, censured to pay unto Us a Fine of five
hundred pounds, assessed upon him by the same Court for certain offenses,
misdemeanors and contempts by him done and committed; which Fine has been
estreated into Our Exchequer. And being informed by the humble Petition of
Humfrey Fulwood Gent. that the said Jerome Alexander immediately thereupon made
away all his estate, and fled into the parts beyong the Seas, where he ever
since has, and still does remain; and that Our Officers having by all means
possible endeavored the recovering of the same, could never find any estate,
and since have returned the same Nichelled into the Exchequer, as by the Record
of that Court will appear; and that since the Nichelling of the said Fine, he
also to whom We had granted the recovering of all Nichelled Fines, has spent
six years thereabouts, and hitherto has recovered no part thereof: So that We,
without some extraordinary means and endeavors to be used, are likely to lose
all. In consideration whereof, and that the said Humfrey Fulwood well hops,
by his industry, pains and charges, to recover the same, or the greatest part
thereof; he hth humbly besought Us to be graciously pleased to grant unto him
the benefit of the said Fine, he paying into Our Exchequer the full fifth part
of that he shall recover.

Know ye, that We, in consideration of the premises, and of one hundred pounds
paid to Our use in the Receipt of Our Exchequer by the said Humfrey Fulwood,
whereof We do acquit, release and discharge the said Humfrey Fulwood, his Heirs,
Executours and Administratours, and every of them, by these Presents, of Our
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and granted, and
by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto
the said Humfrey Fulwood, his Executours, Administratours and Assigns, the
said Sum of five hundred pounds, and all the benefit and profit of extents and
seisures for the same Sum of money, or any part thereof, or toward the levying
or satusfying of any of them to be had or made; and also all Our Right, Title
and Interest of, in and to the same, and every part and parcel thereof; To
have, hold and enjoy the said Sum of five hundred pounds, and all Our Right and
Interest of, in and to the same, and every part and parcel thereof, to the
said Humfrey Fulwood, his Executours, Administratours and Assigns, to his and
their own proper use, freely, as of Our gift, without account, or other thing
therefore, to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, to be rendered, made, paid, or
done, other then as before is expressed. and to the end the said Humfrey
Fulwood, his Executours, Administratours and Assigns may have and receive the
full benefit of this Our Grant according to our intent and meaning in these
Presents expressed, Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do by these presents, for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, give and grant unto the said Humfrey Fulwood,
his Executours, Administratours and Assigns, and unto every of theem, full
power and athority, either in his or their own names, or in the names of Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, to sue for, recover, and have Execution of and for
the said Fine and Sum of money, to Us, as aforesaid due and payable, or any
part thereof, as well by suit, as by extent and seizure, in the name of Us, Our
Heirs or Successors, or any other lawful ways and means whatsoever: And the
same being recovered, levied, or received, to have, take and enjoy the same, to
his and their use for ever, as aforesaid.

And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, straightly charge and command the Treasurer, Chancellor,
under-Treasurer and barons of the said Exchequer, and other the Officers and
Ministers of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, of the same Court, and of the
Receipt of the Exchequer aforesaid, for the time, to whom it respectively
appertains, or shall hereafter appertain, and also Our Attorney General for
the time being, by virtue hereof from time to time to grant, and cause to be
made forth of our said Court of Exchequer, such and so many Commissions and
othere Process as shall be expedient, and required by the said Humfry Fulwood,
his Executeurs, Administratous or Assigns, for the obtaining, leavying and
recovering of the said Sum of five hundred pounds, or any part thereof. And
these presents, or the Inrolment thereof, shall be unto the said Treasuer,
Chancellor, under-Treasurer, Barons, and other the Officers and Ministers of
the said Exchequer for the time being, a suffieient Warrant and Discharge in
that behalf.

And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do by these Presents, for Us, Our
heirs and Successors, grant, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the
siad Humfrey Fulwood, his Heirs, Executours, Administratours and Assigns, to
acquit, release and discharge the said Jerome Alexander, his Executours and
Administratours, of the said Sum of five hundred pounds, and every part and
parcel thereof, by writing under his or their hand and seal; and such Release,
Acquittance, or other Discharge, shall be from time to time a sufficient and
lawful Bar, Exoneration and Discharge, to be pleaded against Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, as strong and effectual in the law, to all intents, constructions
and purposes, as if the same were done by Us, Our Heirs and Successors.

And for the further Indemnity of the said jerome Alexander, or any other that
shall satisfy the said Sum of five hundred pounds, upon acknowledgement
thereof or satisfaction therefore by the said Humfrey Fulwood, you Our said
Treasurer, Chancellor, under-Treasurer, Barons, and other Our officers as
aforesaid, whom it may concern, shall strick, or cause to be stricken, in the
Exchequer, one or more Tally or Tallyes purporting the payment of the said Sum
of five hundred pounds, as amply as if the same had been pasd into the Receipt
of the Exchequer, to the use of Us, our Heirs and Successors. And these
Presents, or the Inrolment thereof, shall be a sufficient Warrant in the
behalf: Although express mention of the certainty of the premises, or any of
them, or of any other Gift or Grant, by Us, or by any of Our progenitors or
Predecessors, to the said Humfrey Fulwood heretofore made, in these Presents
is not made; or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, proclamation, or
Restraint, to the contrary thereof heretofore, had, made, ordained, or
provided; or any other thing, cause or matter whatsoever, in any wise
notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster, the eighth day of March, in the ninth year
of Our Reign. Wolsley.
Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Thus you see how malice still pursued Master Alexander at the heels, in all
the latitude and extent thereof: Yet did that good God, who first took him into
his protection, now raise him up friends again in his greatest troubles and
extremities: And when now he was ready to be utterly undone, and swallowed up
of his adversaries, his Father in Law Master John Havors of Shelfanger in
Norfolk, to whom he owes all the observation and duty of a son, and what shall
ever rest in him to express his thankfulness, who beofre this time was
dissuaded against him, from doing any thing for him, by means of his
adversaries, who daily did instill into his ears rumors of ill behavior, and
of such things as might settle him in an ill opinion and belief of his
conversation; thus at length perceiving that it was purposely done, that they
might only gain the better opportunity to destroy him; he now better looking
into the business then before, which God only moved his heart unto, found
out, that it was a mere practice from the beginning utterly to undo him,
without cause; and therefore, of his own goodness, presently did compound with
the said Fulwood for discharging and releasing the said Fine, and paid him, and
took his Acquittance, and had the said Letters Patents delivered to him; and
paid and satisfied the said Yates, and took his Acquittance, for the said 130
l. costs, and all other demands; and in like manner compounded with that unjust
and evil man Henry Nevil, for the 50 l. given him in the said Sentence for
betraying his Client, and took his Release also; thinking now that he had
removed all impediments whatsoever, which did lie in the way of M. Alexanders
preserment in Ireland, being so far remote, and out of the eyes of those that
sought his ruin and confusion here: and when he had done all this, he sent M.
Alexander notice thereof. But this storm was no sooner thus blown over, but
another cloud arises, at first as little as a man's hand, which afterward
covered all his Fortune again with blackness, threatening a mighty shower of
destruction to follow, if not sheltered from the violence of it. It was M.
Alexanders good hap, by Gods assistance, and his good endeavors, to gain the
good opinion of many Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others in that Kingdom, and by
their countenance and employment, acquired much for the livelihood and
subsistence of himself and family, and was in a fair way of preferment and
doing good for himself, his wife and children: which his enemies here no sooner
understanding, of purpose to blemish him, took occasion to send over into
Ireland many copies of the said unjust Sentence, which they caused to be shown
to all Master Alexanders best friends and Clients there, to weaken him in their
good esteem, and divulged and published the same alsO unto all his enemies
there: as, sho can be a Practiser at Law, and be just and faithful to his
Client, and zealous in their Causes, but shall and must have an ill report of
the adverse side, who will hug such an opportunity to do him mischief? In all
places also: they made it the subject of their discourse, at Councel-Table, and
in all the Courts of Justice, But amongst the rest, they made use of one Master
Richard Fitz Gerald, as he is called; his fathers mothers Surname I know not:
But because there are many Families of the Fitz-geralds in that Kingdom, to let
you know the man I mean, he is Sir Dudly Loftus Knight his fosterbrother, and
was bred up with him a Boy at School, and maintained by Sir Dudleys father
also, to wait upon his said son in that time; by which he got so much learning,
as afterward he became Master Greenham an Attorneys Clerk in Ireland: and
having the great fortune to marry with the sister of a worthy gentleman, was
promoted to be an Attorney in the Common Pleas in Ireland: And aspiring to
attain yet to greater Offices in that Commonwealth, and Master Alexander
having then purchased the Office of the Kings Bench there in Ireland, during
the life of one Master Henry Andrews the present Patentee, and Master
Fitz-Geralds brother in law being also joined Patentee with the said Master
Andrews, but had bound himself both by Articles of agreement and recognizance
not to meddle with the same during Master Andrews his life: And Master
Fitzgerald having understood, that the way to rise unto preferment, was to
attempt something against Master Alexander; whom if he could overthrow, he was
confident of the same good success to follow him thereupon, as happened to
Master Fountain and Master Cook the Lawyers, in those brave achievements which
they accomplished against him, as aforesaid: And hereupon, that he might be
made secundary of that Office with his brother, did undertake to out Master
Alexander thereof, and therefore first preferred a Bill of Complaint in his
said brother in laws name, in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer in ireland,
against Master Alexander and his Deputies, the effect whereof was, to gain the
possession and execution of the said Office from Master Alexander; but upon
such slight and slender grounds, as there was neither law nor equity to warrant
any such Demand. Yet Master Alexander well understanding the course of things
in that Kingdom, and the alliances and dependence of one man unto another, and
how far power and greatness might possibly prevail to do him hurt; and
perceiving the inclination of the Court of Exchequer there, where the Cause
depended, to overruled a Demurrer which he had caused his Deputies to put in
for their and his defense in that Suit; made his repair over into England with
the Proceedings, to be advised here by Counsel the best he could, for to
maintain his just right and interest in the said Office: But his departure was
no sooner understood, but the said mastere Fitzgerald posts over after him
into England, for London, purposely to have caused the remain of the said
Sentence to have been executed upon him, and to have restrained him from making
his return: He gained also letters of Credence and Recommendation, from Doctor
Usher Lord Primate of Ireland, and others, to some Noble Personages and others
here in England, to assist him in such occasions and busineffe as he should
have then here to do: And being come to London, he made use of these generals,
against Mastere Alexander in particular, contrary to the mind of those from
whom he received those Letters: and first he contrives a Writing, which he
styles, An Information against Jeromy Alexander, sent out of Ireland the 12 of
July, 1633. which he delivers unto one Master Archibald Hamilton, that then
was agent here for the said Lord Primte of Ireland and others, and insinuates
unto him, that that thing was the business which he came about, and had to do,
and which was recommended unto him the said Hamilton by the said Letters of the
Lord Primate to assist Master Fitzgerald in: Whereupon, Master Hamilton wnet
unto Mastere Alexanders old friends, the late Archbiship of Canterbury, Laud,
and the Lord Coventry, then Lord Keeper, and showed them the said paper, which
was presented unto his Majesty, with all the Aggravations possible, to incense
and cause his Highness indignation and displeasure to continue, if not to wax
more hot and fierce against him, insomuch as his Majesty well knowing some of
Master Alexanders good friends at Court, who had often labored with his
Majesty in his behalf, informed them thereof, that for the time to come they
might no more solicit for him: And in the interim, Mastere Fitzgerald, or
some other for him, upon his earnest solicitation, had procured a Warrant from
the said Lord keeper Coventry, directed to the Warden of the Fleet, strictly
charging and commanding him to make diligent search for Master Alexander in
London, and wheresoever, for to apprehend him, and restrain him in safe
custody, till he should perform all the parts of the said Sentence, which
Mastere Fits-Gerald and the Warden of the Fleet did pursue with their utmost
diligence: And that this truth may yet appear the clearer, be pleased to cast
your eye upon the same Information, which follows in these words.

An information against Jeromy Alexander, sent out of Ireland the 12 of July,
1633.
IEromy Alexander an Utter-Barrester of Lincolns-Inne (being formerly an
Attorney) was censured in the high Court of Star Chamber, Mich. 2 Caroli, for a
very foul offense, in falsifying copies of the Records of that Court, to the
end he might mislead the judgment of the said Court against a person whom he
prosecuted.

His Censure was, First, to be utterly disabled to practice as a Counselor at
Law, either publicly at the Bar, or privately in his Chamber. Secondly, to pay
five hundred pounds Fine to his Majesty. Thirdly, to be committed to the
prison of the Fleet, and before his enlargement out of prison, publicly at the
Bar of the Star Chamber (in humble and submissive manner) to acknowledge his
offense against God, and the Court, and show himself sorrowful and penitent
for the same, etc. pa hereupon, the said Jeromy Alexander fled into Ireland to
avoid the said Censure, and there abides, and practices as a Counselor, both
publicly at the Bar, and privately at his Chamber, without obeying the said
Censure; in contempt of his Majesty, and of the high and honorable Court of
Star Chamber, to the great scandal of the Professors of the same.

He has lately obtained a Release and Discharge under the Great Seal of that
Kingdom for the said Fine, and is now also endeavoring to procure his Pardon
from the said Censure, without making submission to his majesty, and the Court
which censured him, and lives in Ireland very proudly and arrogantly, apt to
fall into the like scandalous offense again upon any occasion.

he endeavors to be Clerk of the Crown, and to be joint Partner with Master
Andrews the present Clerk, whereby the Records of that Court coming into his
hands, he may do a world of mischief, having so fine a trick of raising and
falsifying of Records.

It is therefore earnestly prayed, That the said hiJeromy Alexander his Pardon
may be staid at the Great Seal there, until he be transmitted by the lord
Deputy of this Kingdom, to submit himself to the said Censure; or that
otherewise there may be inserted in the said Pardon a Clause of Proviso, that
the said Jeromy be not allowed to practice or bear any Office in Ireland;
whereby others may be deterred from committing the like offenses hereafter; In
regard of his constant persisting in foul practice, having thereby done
prejudice already to some of the Nobility, and several of the Clergy, in this
Kingdom: Of all which particulars good proof can be made from hence, by the
several parties that have been injured by him.

Copia vera. A. Hamilton.

Thus you may perceive, that to reproach, is as easy as for to empty: But
Christianity is so much the better, that Nero reviles and persecutes it: Yet
see then the disposition of the man, who conceived within himself, which he
thus expressed, that the oppressions of men had taken away from Mastere
Alexander that which was descended from his Ancestors, and as natural to him
as the blood running in his veins; for he will be able to derive his Pedigree
from Gentile Families, by both sides of his Progenitors; which, if the height
of spleen and rancour had not been in the Gentleman, he would have been
ashamed, if to have been accounted civil, to have left out amongst the rest:
But disgrace being the end he aimed at in it, sought to improve that with the
most advantage, and therefore as infatuate, in the next place he adds, Being
formerly an Attorney; as if it were a shame for a man to attain a better
Fortune from less beginnings; and as if it had been a great disparagement for
to have learned the practick part of the Law the first, which, those that
better understand the study of it then himself, can inform the Gentleman, that
it was his great mistake, and that many famous and eminent Lawyers heretofore
have been first Attorneys; insomuch as in former times, he was not admitted to
be of an innes of Court, that had not first been of an inn of Chancery, living
amongst Attorneyes, to understand the course of pleadings, and practice of the
Courts of Justice; which to know beforehand, does much advance a Student in his
way, that he gains his Profession with more ease, and falls into practice the
better prepared for the advantage of his Client. But what you do observe in
this his Information more concerning the Censure, is but rolling over the same
stone again, of which you have well understood the nature thereof before; and
therefore to say no more of that, concerning the injustice of it: Yet hereby
you may perceive the good will of the creature, that upon all occasions had no
other staff to beat this dog withal. Albeit this Gentleman took upon him the
boldness to do more then any other before him had done, and to cause his
Majesty to be informed, that it was a high contempt in mastere Alexander to
use the profession he had been bred up in, to acquire livelihood for to sUpport
himself and family, and all because Mastere Alexander had crossed his
expectation by it there in Ireland: But did S. Peter and S. John, when by the
Rulers, Elders and Scribes they were commanded not to speak at all, nor teach
in the Names of JESUS, Did they forbear? What can b emore done to a man to take
away his life, then his means of livelihood? and starving to death, of all
others, is said to be the cruellest murder. But this Gentleman, your see also,
had a high and great opinion of the dignity of that Court of Star Chamber,
which he styles so high and honorable; which I believe that highest and most
honorable Court of Parliament better understood then he, when they dissolved
it for the extreme oppressions and grievances it brought upon the people. He
would have Master Alexanders practicing also in Ireland too, to be to the great
scandal of the Law, which he so little understood, as at the very first Bout
he went about to desile his own nest, to disgrace the Profession of an
Attorney, he being one him self; but bred up therein, I must confess, so far
distant and remore from these Schools of that mystery, as I believe he was
ignorant of the use and value which the law sets upon a well-practised Clerk:
ANd if it were such a scandal for a lawyer to have been fined in that Court in
those days, as he does press it, (albeit, I must confess) he that knows the
will of his master and does it not, is to be beaten with many stripes) yet they
were not all Saints in that time that sat upon the Bench; but were Judges under
whose judgments many a good and innocent man suffered, and was ruined, besides
Master Alexander, and of the same Profession too; howsoever Justice, where it
meets with those that are offenders in deed and truth, has no respect of
presons, qualities, or conditions; but he that sins must die, and without
scandal to him that does well: And in those days, who is it but does know this
Gentleman's so high and honorable a Court, as he calls it, was but a Stage or
Theater, wherein the politic Statists of that time acted the Tragedies of such
who would not comply with their evil Counsels, to have destroyed our Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, and subjected the Subject to a perpetual slavery. You see
also, it grieved M. Fitzgerald that M. Alexanders father in law had done so
much for him, as to acquit him from all those Vulture, which for the Fine and
other moneys, would have divided his coat: But that which stuck in his stomach
the most of all, was, that the feared Master Alexander should also procure his
Pardon of all the rest of the Sentence, without making submission to his
Majesty, and the Court which censured him: though that were a little more then
the Court had enjoynedto be done to his Majesty, yet see how by his good will
he would have interested his Majesty in that business more particularly,
though not more then the Sentence, and all to unfold a mystery which he, in
his high conceit, apprehended was never understood before, by all those
Apollo's and learned Judges of that Court, which, by his leave, were so well
verst, and understanding that matter, and the project they had in hand, as they
best knew where the shoe wrang; and what they had done in it, was for another
end then all the wisdom he had could reach unto; and for his eyes, he was not
so clear sighted, as to look into a Millstone further then they. But this was
not all, for he says further, Master Alexander lived in Ireland Very proudly
and arrogantly, apt to fall into that scandalous offense again upon every
occasion. It should seem by this, the Gentleman had a spirit of Prophecy, or
was well verst in Phisiognomie, that he could by a man's countenance tell him
his Fortune; or that he had some Raptures or Revelations that made him so
cunning to foretell things to come: for surely, to the eyes of those that lived
there in conversation with Master Alexander, saw no such appearance: and as for
Master Alexanders own heart and conscience, he found himself free from any such
inclination; and all the following story of his life never yet declared any
such matter. Then it must needs be, that spirit was in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets, which deceived him; which because it were a shame for the Gentleman
to confess, Master Alexander is content that he be silent; although his
experience hereof by this time shows him his error. But look a little
further, and hinc illae lachrimae: Master Alexander endeavored to be Clerk of
the Crown, and to be joint Partner with Master Andrews; for so he says; and
here the shoe wrung him: and then this Gentleman's great hopes, first to be
Secundary thereof to his brother in law, and in time to be master of the Office
himself, would be at an end. The Proverb is, that Murder will out: He
traveled till he was delivered: And I appeal herein, if these wild Gourds
spoiled not all the pot of Pottage: Dolosus versatur in universalibus: And
whiles he kept his tongue within his teeth from relating particulars, to him
that understood not the mystery of the business, would peradventure have
approved his zeal, as if it had been for justice, upon one that never offended:
But since his own interest appears now to be at stake, what indifferent man
will believe him in all the rest. But, says he, The Records of that Court
coming to his hands, Master Alexander may do a world of mischief, having so
fine a trick of raising and falsifying of Records. Surely, if the man had been
well in his wits, and not past shame, he would have blushed and trembled to
have presented such an untruth unto any man, much more unto such great Lords
and Peers of the Kingdom; but most of all, unto a King: And I wonder when he
perceived such strength of opposition to be against Master Alexander as he did,
and with whom he practiced, and thus joined to ruin him; that if he had ever
read the Statutes of England and Ireland, (which I dare say he will tell you he
has done all over, and all the Books of the Law besides, and understands it
far better then Master Alexander (which for a quiet life, he will grant him to
be so into the bargain, that he may yet be more conceited of his own worth, and
unparalled abilities) but in such case he must, I say, have found, that to
raze and falsify a Record is Felony: And if Master Alexander had committed
such an act, the Court of Star Chamber, by that Sentence, would never have
troubled themselves for to have studied out means to have buried him alive, if
they had had that nearer cut to have removed him out of the way: But on malice
be it. And now if the Prayer of this Information be well observed, this will
appear in its colors to all the world: It is prayed, That Master Alexanders
Pardon might be stayed at the Great Seal. Fond man! I see thou knew not that
the Lord Coventry had solemnly vowed before, and professed; that never any
Pardon of this Sentence should pass the Great Seal for Master Alexander,
whiles he was Keeper of it; and he made but use of Master Fitzgerald in this
kind, to give a further color for this resolution: and yet, poor man, in he
mean time, like the Fly that sat upon the Axletree of the Cart, he verily
thought it was he that raised all this dust, which was the turning of the
wheel: And he would have this Pardon stayed too, until Master Alexander should
be transmitted by the Lord Deputy of that Kingdom, to submit himself unto the
said Censure, not knowing that in this time he had made Master Fitzgerald
carry the Rod which was to have whipped his own tail; for had he prevailed to
have had Master Alexander attached here, he had instantly seized upon the
Office, as wanting one to look over a place of such eminency in the State, in
the absence of Master Alexander; and having been once possessed thereof,
neither his brother in law nor himself had ever lickt their lips after it,
should ever have been the better for it: And Master Alexander can assure him,
that if he would have parted with his interest therein unto his Lordship the
then Lord Deputy, as he was earnestly dealt withal and treated with for that
purpose, he was promised his Lordships great friendship into the bargain, and
100 l. more, ready down, then Master Fitz-Geralds brother in law gave him for
it. Then to look a little further in this Information: If all this could not be
obtained, then Master Fitzgerald would play at small game, rather then to
stand out; prayed, That there might be inserted in the said Pardon a Clause of
Proviso, that the said Jeromy might not be allowed to practice or bear any
Office in Ireland. You see how still he pleaded for his own interest, and how
maliciously he set himself to have destroyed Master Jeromy; for now he thought
him no longer worthy of his Surname of Alexander: and indeed, having
ungentleman'd him before, and taken his Surname from him now; so, if he might
have had his will in his desires, he would have left him without welt or guard,
at the last: for if he could have prevailed that Master Alexander should not
have been admitted to use his Calling, neither in England nor Ireland, niether
publicly or privately, nor to have born any Office, What course could he have
then taken for a living? dig he could not, and to beg he was ashamed; and what
other way had been left him, whereby to have maintained himself and family? And
this this worthy Gentleman would have done, to have satisfied his Spleenatick
humor. Yet, like the son of such a father, he gives this reason for it; In
regard, says he, of his constant persisting in foul practice, having thereby
done prejudice to some of the Nobility, and several of the Clergy in that
Kingdom. You well know who was the father of such untruths from the beginning:
And Master Alexander is certainly persuaded, that it was the invention of his
own brain; for wrong he never did to any man in that or this Kingdom, nor in
all the world, that he is conscious of unto himself; nor did any man there,
that was not of his Confederacy, ever complain of the least ill measure or
miscarriage done him by Master Alexander: And those Complaints wherein he had a
hand, albeit they had the said Lord Deputies best countenance and assistance,
and what he and all the enemies which he had could invent and put upon him; yet
did Master Alexander clear himself of whatsoever Accusation, and left the shame
to rest upon them all, to whom it justly appertained. But peradventure Master
Fitzgerald will answer this, in the language that he informed it in, and
whatsoever his ill meaning was in the matter, will take the words in their
proper sense; and so it is true, Master Alexander by his Practice had done some
of the Nobility and some of the Clergy prejudice: Sure it was his Profession
to do so, when he overthrew them in their unjust Suits, wherein he was of
Counsel against them, yet did them no wrong therein, nor injury; unless in
Master Fitz-Geralds esteem it was not fair for any man of Law to have opened
his mouth against a Lord or Prelate of those times: And for the Clergy, Master
Alexander can but wonder that the should make use of their names in so false a
thing as this, when it is well known, Master Alexander had no such ill opinion
amongst the Clergy. And that you may perceive that Master Fitzgerald
circumvented the Lord Primate of Ireland, in gaining this Letter from him under
such Generals, to do Master Alexander a mischief: the Information being sent
over to Master Alexander out of England, by his friends at Court, to let him
know how his Majesty was thus again possessed and incensed against him; he
went therewith unto the Lord Primate, and showed his Lordship the same;
informed him that his name was made use of, as one that sent over this
Complaint against him; which he utterly disclaimed; and, to go Master Alexander
right therein, gave him the Certificate under his hand, which follows in
these words:

AT and upon the humble request of Jerome Alexander of Dublin, practiser in the
Laws, informing me, that he is credibly given to understand by Letters out of
England, that his Majesty should be informed by Letters from me hence against
him, whereby to alien and withdraw his Majesty's favor from him, in some thing
now intended by his Majesty unto him: Therefore, to satisfy his desires
herein, and all other whomsoever, I do declare hereby, That for my part, as I
never had cause of any Complaint against him, now since his residence in this
Kingdom have never heard that he demeaned himself here otherwise then orderly
and well: so I profess that I never wrote any Letters unto his Majesty, or
any person whatsoever, against him, either into England, or elsewhere; but do
wish him much good, and would rather do him a pleasure (then otherways) if it
should lie in my way.

Given at my house at Dublin, this ninth of November, Anno Dom. 1633. Ja.
Armachanus.

Which being sent over for England, and showed unto his Majesty, begat a
little better opinion in him of Master Alexander then before: Yet whenever
his Majesty was solicited for a Pardon in his behalf, the Lord Coventry still
was advised with herein, as it was his place; who so incensed his Majesty
still again and again against Master Alexander, as for a long time he stopped and
kept the current of his Majesty's mercy from him: All which he did, fearing
Master Alexanders return, and that he would complain of the injustice done him,
which you may perceive he was no ways able to answer in this matter, the same
so grossly appearing out of the proceedings, that there needed no proof but the
Records of his own actions, to manifest the same. And now after this, Master
Alexanders father in law Master John Havers, and his uncle Captain Edward
Havers, being well satisfied by Counsel of the iniquity of the Sentence, and by
Master Noy for one amongst the rest, out of their mere goodness, could hold no
longer, but were resolved, That if the Lord Coventry should interpose in the
matter any longer, against Master Alexander, they would complain of him unto
his Majesty: yet first they attempted again to obtain his Majesty's favor for
a Pardon; which, with much ado, his Majesty granted; and for which, Master
Alexander does own very much to the Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, who
being well informed in the business, and finding with what a high hand he was
opposed by the Lord Keeper for his own ends, would not be denied of his
Majesty therein; by which means it was obtained: Yet when it came to be drawn
up, the Lord Coventry came to the King again, and would have persuaded his
Majesty against it; but finding him and resolved to have it done, when he
perceived it must pass, yet then with his importunities he prevailed to have
the Condition inserted in it howsoever, That Master Alexander should not use
his Profession here in England: and after all this, yet stopped it at the Seal
for some time, notwithstanding, till Master Noy, being then this Majesty's
Attorney-Generall, came to him of purpose, and told him reasons why it were
better for him to pass it so, then to endure a Complaint; and thereupon he
sealed it, much against his will; which follows in these words:

CHARLES By the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas in Our Court before Our Council in Our Star Chamber, the seventeenth
day of November, in the second year of Our Reign, in a Cause then there late
depending, between Jerome Alexander Utter-Barrester at the Law, Plaintiff
against John Yates and others Defendants; by Judgment of the same Court, the
said Jerome Alexander was censured, for a foul misdemeanour and offense by him
committed, in defacing and blotting out of certain words out of the copy of
certain Depositions taken in the said Cause, for his own advantage and ends
against the said John Yates; whereby Our said Court was misled in their
judgments, in the censuring and condemning of the said Yates: and therefore it
was then Ordered, Adjudged and Decreed by Our said Court, That the said Jerome
Alexander, for his said foul offense and misdemeanour, was well worthy of sharp
and severe punishment for the same; and that he should be utterly disabled to
practice as a Counselor at Law, publicly at the Bar, or privately in his
Chamber; and to pay a Fine of five hundred pounds to Our use; be committed to
the prison of the Fleet, and, before his enlargement out of prison, should
publicly at the Bar of Our said Court, in humble and submissive manner,
acknowledge his great offense against God and Our said Court, and should show
himself very penitent and sorrowful for the same; and was further Ordered to
pay and satisfy to one Henry Nevil a Clerk of the said Court, for and toward
his loss and damages sustained in that Cause, the sum of fifty pounds of
lawful money of England, as by the said Order and Decree, remaining of Record
in Our said Court, more at large appears. And whereas Our welbeloved Subject
John Havers Gent. father in law of the said Jerome Alexander, by his humble
Petition to Us exhibited, has showed unto Us, that his said son in law, being
no ways able to satisfy the said Fine, was enforced to absent himself out of
this Our Kingdom, into Our Realm of Ireland, where he has ever since
continued; and that, out of his commiseration of the distressed estate of his
said son in law, his wife and children, being desirous to put him in a way to
support his own charge, has satisfied the said Fine of five hundred pounds,
and also the said fifty pounds to the said Henry Nevil; and for that also the
said Jerome Alexander has ever since carried himself well and uprightly in
Ireland, has therefore humbly besought Us, that We would be graciously pleased
to grant unto his said son in law Jerome Alexander Our gracious Pardon for the
remainder of the said Sentence, being only Imprisonment in the Fleet during
Our Pleasure, submission to Our said Court, and disabling him to use his
Practice. And whereas We by Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster the eight and twentieth day of March last
past before the date of these Presents, as well for and in consideration of one
hundred pounds paid into the Receipt of Our Exchequer to Our use by Humfrey
Fulwood Gent. as for other causes and considerations, in the said Letters
Patents mentioned and expressed; did give and grant unto the said Humfrey
Fulwood the said Fine or Sum of five hundred pounds, and all the benefit and
profit of extent or seisures for the same Fine or Sum of money, or any part
thereof, or toward the levying or satisfying of any of them, to be had or
made, and all Our Right, Title and Interest of, in and to the same, and every
part and parcel thereof; To have, hold and enjoy the said Sum of five hundred
pounds, and all Our Right and Interest of, in and to the same, and every part
parcel thereof, to the said Humfrey Fulwood his Executours, Administratours
and Assigns, to his and their own proper use, freely, as of Our Gift, without
recount or other thing therefore, to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, to be
rendered, paid, made, or done, other then as in the said Letters Patents is
expressed; as by the same Our Letters Patents, amongst other Powers,
Authorities, and other things therein contained, more at large appears. Since
the granting of which Letter Patents to the said Humfrey Fulwood, the
Petitioner John Havers, as we are informed, on the behalf of his said son in
law Jerome Alexander, has fully satisfied and paid unto the said Humfrey
Fulwood, the said Sum of five hundred pounds, or otherwise compounded with him
the said Humfrey Fulwood for the same, as by an Acquittance under the hand and
seal of the said Humfrey Fulwood, bearing date the seventh day of April, in the
ninth year of Our Reign, testifying the same, more at large appears: And that
he has also satisfied and paid unto the said Henry Nevil the said fifty pounds
before mentioned, to be awarded unto him the said Henry Nevil by the Sentence
of Our said Court, for his damages as aforesaid, or has otherwise compounded
for the same, as by an Acquittance also under the hand of the said Henry Nevil,
dated the three and twentieth day of May, in the sixth year of Our Reign, more
plainly does appear. Know ye therefore, that We being moved with pity, and at
the humble Suit of Our said welbeloved Subject John Havers, of Our especial
Grace, certain knowledge, and mere mercy, have pardoned, remissed, discharged,
and released; and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do
pardon, remit, discharge and release unto the said Jerome Alexander, by what
Name or Names, Surname or Sirnames, or addition of Name or Surname, Mystery or
Mysteries, Place or Places, whatsoever he be called or known, or late was
called or know, all and singular Pains of Imprisonment and Submission
whatsoever, to be made to Our said Court of Star Chamber by him the said Jerome
Alexander for the said trespass and offense, and all other corporal
punishments whatsoever, in or by the foresaid Order, Judgment or Decree
imposed, ordered, adjudged or decreed against him; and all further Execution
that We have or may have against the said Jerome Alexander by occasion of the
said Sentence: Willing and Commanding by these Presents, all and every Our
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Offices and Ministers whatsoever, that the said
Jerome Alexander, for the premises before by these Presents mentioned, to be
pardoned, remissed, discharged and released, or any of them, be not at any time
or times hereafter in any wise sued, molested, vexed, attached, arrested,
imprisoned, troubled, or disquieted; but that he be from all imprisonment for
the same, and submission whatsoever to be made to Our said Court, for any the
matters, offenses, or causes aforesaid, for ever hereafter absolutely
acquitted, released, and wholly discharged, by these Presents. And if, for the
matters before by these Presents pardoned, discharged and released, or either of
them, the said Jerome Alexander is, or at any time hereafter shall be
imprisoned, arrested, or disquieted, That then, upon showing of these Our
Letters Patents, or the Inrolment thereof, he be forthwith freed, discharged,
and set at liberty, without any further or other Warrant from Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, to be had, procured or obtained in that behalf. And these Our
Letters Patents, or the Inrolment or Exemplication thereof, shall be unto all
men whom it shall or may concern, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge for the
same. Provided, nevertheless, and upon this Condition, That the said Jerome
Alexander shall not at any time or times hereafter practice as a Counselor at
Law within this Our Kingdom of England, either publicly at the Bar, or
privately in his Chamber; but shall stand and be utterly disabled from the
same, according to the Tenor of the said Decree and Sentence. Provided also,
That if the said several Suns of five hundred pounds, and fifty pounds, or
either of them, has not been satisfied, as by the said Petition is suggested,
that then these Presents shall be void; any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding. Although express mention of the certainty of the
Premises, or any of them, or of any other Gift or Grant, by Us, or any of Our
Predecessors, to the said Jerome Alexander heretofore made, in these Presents
is not made; or any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation, or
Restraint, to the contrary thereof, heretofore had, made, ordained, or
provided, or any other thing, cause, or matter whatsoever, in any wise
notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be
made Patents.

Witness Our Self at Westminster the fourth day of December, in the ninth year
of Our Reign. Per Breve de privato Sigillo. Wolsley.

And lest you should suspect, that Master Alexander has spoken much of this
without-book, and without ground of the said Lord Coventries carriage toward
him in this matter, by his continual interrupting His Majesty's grace and
mercy toward him, for some years together; be pleased to read the following
Affidavit, which Master Alexander hops will satisfy the truth of his
Allegations.

EDward Havers, of Windfarding, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, deposes;
That not long after the Petitioner Jerome Alexander was fined in the
Star Chamber by that Sentence, against which he now complains; this Deponent
heing Uncle to his Wife, and understanding that the Lord Coventry, late Lord
Keeper, was an heavy enemy to the Petitioner in that business, and desiring to
get him a Pardon of the Sentence, did endeavor, first to prevail with the said
Lord Keeper, that he would not oppose the passing of the said Pardon, in case
the Petitioner could obtain it from His Majesty; and to that purpose the
Deponent made means to the said Lord Coventry, by Sir John Hare Knight, the
said Lord Keepers son in law, who labored in it accordingly, as he told
this Deponent, and persuaded the said Lord Coventry in the Petitioners behalf:
But the said Lord Coventry, as the said Sir John Hare told this Deponent, would
not be persuaded to it, but used these words to him, saying, Son, there
shall never any Pardon pass the Seal for him, meaning the Petitioner, whiles I
am Keeper of it: which for that time, put this Deponent out of all hope to
obtain it; yet shortly after, the fine was begged, by one Master Fulwood, and
passed under the great-Seal, who was compounded with for the said Fine, and
Nevil for his fifty pounds, and Yates for the Costs. And when this Deponent
attempted again to get a Pardon of the residue of the Censure, that so the
Petitioner might have liberty to Practice, and used the Earl of Dorset, to move
His Majesty in the Petitioners behalf, to obtain the said Pardon, who did so;
and the late Lord Faulkland also joined in that Suit to His Majesty for the
Petitioner: But the Lord Coventry still opposed it, albeit the said Earl of
Dorset, begged it at the Princes birth, as a Boon from His Majesty at that
time; and so it rested till His Majesty went into Scotland; and there again
this Deponent petitioned His Majesty at His Coronation there, for the said
Pardon, and procured the late Lord Treasurer Weston to move in it for the
Petitioner: But His Majesty remembering what the said Lord Coventry had informed
him, against the Petitioner, notwithstanding all the means that could be made,
refused it. Yet after His Majesty's return from Scotland, this Deponent did
again solicit His Majesty by petition, in the name of the Petitioners father
in law, this Deponents brother; and then again this Deponent procured the Earl
Marshall, and Earl of Pembrook Lord Chamberlain, to move in it for the
Petitioner, who did so, and with great solicitation did obtain a Reference
upon the Petition, and afterward a Grant, that a Pardon should pass: And then
this Deponent labored by Master Thankful Fruen, the Lord Coventries servant,
to persuade his Lord, not to oppose it, who told this Deponent, that he did
labor his Lord, the said Lord Coventry, that he would suffer the Pardon to
pass, who as Master Fruen told this Deponent, did deny to yield to it, and
said to him again, It should not pass the Seal, so long as he kept the great
Seal, or words to that effect; and then as Master Fruen informed this Deponent,
he told his said Lord, that he would be commanded to do it against his well,
and therefore it were better his Lordship would do it willingly, but the said
Lord Coventry would not be persuaded by him, and at length Master Noy, then the
Kings Attorney, persuaded the said Lord Coventry to seal the Pardon, as this
Deponent verily believes: For this Deponent applying himself to the said
Master Noy, and telling him how the said Lord Coventry had before opposed it,
and that he would oppose it: The said Master Noy told this Deponent, that he
would warrant this Deponent the said Lord Coventry would then be of another
mind: And the said Master Noy being at the said Lord Coventries at a Seal,
when the Pardon was to be sealed, did whisper the said Lord Coventry in his
ear: and so at that time it was sealed with that Condition, That the Petitioner
should not practice as a Counselor at Law in England; as is contained in the
Pardon.

Jurat. 17 Junii, 1643. R. Rich.

And now after all this, a man would have thought that Master Alexander should
have been at some rest and quiet from further trouble in this business: But
afterward it so fell out, as that he, being entrusted by the Earl Marshall of
England in the managing of a Suit which his Majesty had given him for such
Lands in Ireland as were his and his Ladies Ancestors, and to which he could
make out a good Title for the King: which when he had waded in so far, as that
he had made it to appear unto the then Lord Deputy the Earl of Strafford, that
a good Title would be found for his Majesty to a great quantity of Land which
had sometimes been the Inheritance of the Earls of Norfolk and Shrewsbury;
covetousness, and something else, now made him the said Deputy to cast an eye
upon it for himself: and lying all not far from Dublin, within the Province of
Leinster, where the said Earl of Strafford had gotten some footing before;
first, his Lordship did labor with the Earl Marshal to have quit his pretense
unto it, alleging, that it would hinder his Majesty's designs of raising a
Revenue in that Kingdom unto the Crown, and would be otherwise of differvice to
the State; with other like Objections; with which he so prevailed, and with
other Insinuations, and promise of service to the Earl Marshal in other things,
that he had almost persuaded him to give over his Suit: And in the mean time
the said Earl of Strafford had procured Letters from his Majesty, and issued
out Commissions to entitle his Majesty to these Lands, as derived from the
Earl Marshals and his Ladies Ancestors, which M. Alexander had discovered: And
having found one Territory thereof, but not the tenth part thereof, afterward
procured more Letters for to pass the same to others at a small Rent, under a
hundred pounds per annum, which was no less in value then between three and
four thousand pounds per an. Which M. Alexander perceiving, informed the Earl
Marshal thereof, and of the true state of things: Whereupon, his Lorship
finding himself thus injured and abused by the Earl of Strafford, did labor
his Majesty that he might go on with his Suit for those Lands, and did proceed
so far, as that many of the terre Tenants, the ancient Natives, who had been in
possession by intrusions by them and their Ancestors for many Generations,
some hundreds of years, Master Alexander had so satisfied them in the weakness
of their Titles, that, without more ado, the chiefest of them began to
surrender, and did surrender their estates into his Majesty's hands, with
intent that they should be granted to the said Earl Marshal and his Heirs,
according to the Tenor of his Majesty's Letters in that behalf; and were
resolved to stand to the said Earl Marshals courtesy for new Grants to hold of
him and his Heirs: Which thing when the said Earl of Strafford perceived, and
that, the Earl Marshal having gotten this footing, the said Lord Deputies
project therein concerning himself to get those Lands, would be at an end; and
so he was not only like to have too powerful a Neighbor, but his actions
must thereupon be sifted and discovered, in that wherein he had broken both
trust and all bonds of friendship with the Earl Marshal, now he the said Lord
Deputy saw he had no other way to acquit himself, but either to gain Master
Alexander unto his party, or by crushing him altogether, that so he might be
quitted of him; he therefore attempted first by all expressions of favor
toward him, to win him; and at all places, and in all cases, where he might
show him countenance, he did it, for a time, till he perceived that nothing
could take him from his duty, or to violate the trust the Earl Marshal had put
in him, but found that Master Alexander the rather proceeded with the more zeal
and earnestness in that business then before, and by this opportunity was
able to have done the said Lord Marshals business without him; when he thought
it was high time to turn about, and that speedily, or it had been too late; for
all the possessours of those Lands were resolved to have made the like
surrenders of their estates as their neighbors had done before, into his
Majesty's hands, etc. Whereupon, spirits were raised up, to fined out other
particular interests and claims of private men, which were set on foot against
the said ancient possessours; and albeit without color or shadow of Title, yet
it was enough to embroyl the business, and for to hinder the Earl Marshals
smoother proceedings: and now a Bill was first brought against these Gentlemen,
for no other cause, but for making these Surrenders of their estates into the
Kings hands; And because it was pretended to be done in prejudice of those
claimers that had no color of right; yet for this, and no other thing, were
they grievously fined and censured in the Castle-Chamber there, for thus giving
away their own Lands unto the King: and the Court of Wards, and all Courts
there, were now filled with Suits against the Occupants, and their estates and
possessions ordered from them, and they outed of their Interests, which they
and their Ancestors had enjoyed for some hundreds of years before: and in this
time they could get no Lawyer to plead or speak for them, but Master Alexander;
for which cause, the said Lord Deputy had wrought all the Judges, some few
excepted that were just men, to disfavour him, and fix whatsoever upon him to
disgrace him, when he came in their way; also, whomsoever he was that would
complain against him, had the said Lord Deputies ears open, and his creatures
too more ready to receive, then any of them could possibly be for to petition
against him: And thus Master Alexander had almost enough to do to make his own
Defense against such clamours and false things which were thus received against
him, whereof he still cleared and freed himself; but without any recompense of
his losses and damages thereby sustained, and without all repair for the base
scandals were thereby put upon him: whereupon, he perceiving himself thus
resolved and destined unto ruin, by some one means or other, were it right or
wrong; and having understood out of his Lordships the said Lord Deputies secret
Closet, that he had assuredly purposed and determined to ruin him; therefore,
foreseeing the danger, M. Alexander prepared, the best he could, for to prevent
it: and now by the opposition that was between them, by which means those that
were in like manner oppressed did still repair unto Master Alexander for advice
and counsel, he understood the most of his wicked actions; and observing his
ways against others, and that there was no fence for him to save himself, whom
he purposed for no destroy; therefore Master Alexander came for England, and
yet without his Pass, which was the thing he stormed at; having before this
time made an Act of Common Council (which he declared should in all tings be
as binding as a Statute Law) That no Subject of Ireland should come for
England, or go elsewhere beyond the Seas, without his special License: which
when any endeavored to obtain at his hands, against whom he had any thing to
say, he must be sure to ask and go without: howsoever, if he had no fair
pretense; yet then it must be delayed at the least, so long, until some way or
other was found out to obstruct his passage; and so enthrall and trouble the
Passenger, as ruin was the end at last, against whomsoever his displeasure and
indignation did arise: And if it did so fall out at any time, that any man had
obtained his Majesty's Letters to him, requiring his permission to let him come
for England, he would notwithstanding hinder him, if he were such a one as he
had no mind to let depart, or whom he feared might tell tales at Court:
therefore Master Alexander procured the Warrant following for his repair into
England, and made use of it for his coming away accordingly.

To the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
RIght Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well.
Whereas Our Right Trusty and Our Right Welbeloved Cousin and Counselour,
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl Marshal of England, has especial
occasion for the service and employment of Our Subject Jerome Alexander, who is
now residing in that Our Kingdom; and has therefore desired Us that he may
have Our especial License for his repair hither into Our Realm of England: We
do therefore hereby will and require you to declare and signify unto him the
said Jerome Alexander, That it is Our will and pleasure that he do with all
convenient speed make his repair hither. And We do further will and require
you, That you suffer not any impediment whatsoever to delay or hinder him in
his coming: And likewise, That you take course that in his absence he may not
receive any loss or damage by any Suits, or otherwise, to be prosecuted
against him, concerning him or his estate: And these Our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf.

Given under Our Signet at Our Manor at Oatlands, the first day of August, in
the thirteenth year of Our Reign. This is examined, and agrees with the Entry
in the Signet-Book.

26 Martii, 1641. Abra. Williams.



By force of which Authority, Master Alexander made his repair over, having
delivered his Letters first: But his Lordship not being at leisure to give an
Answer, he took his Voyage, and was here in London before that ever his
Lordship thought he had left that Kingdom; whereat he was much troubled and
enraged, and therefore wrote over these ensuing Letters to Sir Francis
Windebank Knight, then one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State,
for to inform his Majesty against Master Alexander for his coming over thus,
before his Lordship had declared it to him to be his Majesty's pleasure; and
that would have been possibly ad Grecas Calendas.

SIR,
I Am occasioned, by His Majesty's Letter of the first of October, underwritten
by your self, to desire not only my Lords of the Committee, but that the King
also may understand how this Government has been of late treated, nay
slighted, in my Person; and that it may be there considered and directed, as it
has singly Relation to His Majesty's Authority, and the Public; not
conceiving it at all otherwise to concern my own particular one way or other.

You may be pleased to remember how the Earl of Kildare lately went hence, and
in what condition his Majesty sent his Lordship unto us, together with a
Command that an Information should be put in against him in the Castle-Chamber,
for his contempt in departing the Kingdom without License: Nevertheless, by
His Majesty's Direction, the prosecution has hitherto been forborne, by reason
of the sense his Lordship expressed of his error; and in hope, out of the
apprehension of his own danger, he might be induced to yield his consent, so to
settle his estate, as might preserve that ancient Family from the present
Ruins his obstinate and ill-ordered appetites will otherwise most assuredly
and suddenly cover it withal.

But it seems this gentleness and moderation wrought a quite other effect then
was hoped, and rather emboldened, then in any degree restrained that humor of
contradiction, which good Gentlemen he believes ought and can only express
the greatness and spirit of a Gerraldine.

For not long after, in a Case depending betwixt the Earl and the Lord Digby,
his Lordship found stomach to deny bringing in of certain Writings concerning
the Castle of Leigh, whereunto his Lordship is obliged, by the Award of King
James of blessed Memory; and persisting in his contempt, was, about six months
since (and so continues still) committed by Order of the Deputy and Council.

A month agone, or thereabouts, I sent my Secretary to acquaint his Lordship I
understood the Countess his Lady had been all the night before at the Rings
end, waiting upon a passage for England; but the wind turning cross, had
constrained her Ladyship to her lodging again: Thus as a friend I wished his
Lordship to call to mind the manner of his Lordships last going over, and
coming back; that I was unwilling my Lady should meet with any displeasure or
trouble, on the other side: and therefore, if I might understand what number of
servants, Coach-horses, or any other accommodations she desired for her
journey, I would instantly send her Ladyship my License for them all.

The Answer his Lordship sent me, was, His wife went against his will; that he
would be glad I staid her: And the next I heard, her Ladyship was landed at
Holyhead, rid by Posthorses through Wales to Chester, and so by Coach to London.

And howsoever, as under favor, I judge it not becoming any Subject, how great
soever he either is, or takes himself to be, thus, out of animosity or
wantonness, not to content himself to do his business, without he may also
please and magnify himself, through a preterition and scorn put upon us his
Majesty's ordinary Ministers, and the Government it self: So is it altogether
intolerable, when men of mean and defamed condition shall flatter and blow
themselves up to a like vanity and presumption.

And yet such a one there is, by name Master Jerome Alexander, a Counselor at
Law, who, by untrue surmises, I conceive, to my Lord Marshal, has procured the
Letter I first mentioned, under the Signet, That, as of a person of whose
service and employment his Lordship has especial occasion, I must declare and
signify unto this Gentleman, that it is His Majesty's will and pleasure that
he do with all convenient speed make his repair thither; am required not to
suffer any impediment to hinder his coming, and likewise to take course that in
his absence he may not receive any loss or damage by any Prosecution against
his person or estate.

Indeed I something wonder the Gentleman should do in this manner, having never
had from me in his life, either in the course of his Practice, or otherwise,
other then courteous and respective usage; and which I take unkindly from him,
I confess, thus to insinuate with my Lord Marshal, before he had ever
acquainted me with his occasions, or desire of going over, as if I should be
against his departure for his Lordships service, unto whose Affairs I have been
understood to wish as much prosperity, as any other poor servant his Lordship
has: nay, so evident a truth is this, as His Majesty, I am most confident,
will graciously remember it to have been verily so, in more particulars then
one.

I may therefore sincerely affirm, that if Master Alexander had desired, in his
own name, much more for my Lord Marshal his occasions, to have had License, it
should have been as soon granted as moved: What need was there then for him
thus to seek it, in this implicit and braving manner, as if it were to be
whether I would or no, before ever I were asked the question? And yet let me
instruct him, please or raise himself never so high by these little
Assumptions, they will not much value him, with wise men, for all that.

Next, I must confess, I am not well pleased he should wrap me under the like
Guilt of Disobedience with himself, by not admitting me so much respite as to
do my Masters will, and to declare and signify unto him the Kings pleasure,
according as I was directed: For whereas upon the receipt of His Majesty's said
Letters, and being informed from the Bearer of Master Alexanders abode in the
Country; my Answer was, That at his coming to Town the business should be
dispatched.

After I have certified you very truly, the Letter came not to my hands before
the sixth of this Month, and that he was seen in London the ninth of the same,
it will easily and plainly be gathered, the Gentleman was gone before he
vouchsafed so much as to deliver me the Letter: And yet I attribute it rather
to height of mind and stomach, then to his over-dilgence, thus first and last
to overrun the Constable.

Again, out of my Duty to the orderly and comely proceeding of these Affairs,
admit me to observe the ill consequence I fear must follow such an ill Instance
as this, as well in the general, as in this particular: In the general, we
shall be sure to have Suitors enough in this kind, if that they may thus
procure, not only leave to go over, but Protections Royal also, which may
free them not only from the Civil demands of the Subject, but from any
Criminal Prosecution against them, on His Majesty's behalf; and not only so,
but that the Kings Deputy must be enjoined to take course for every private
man's business, that has, or may have enough of his Majesty's to attend
besides: And in this particular, I know not how it might be thought His
Majesty had been informed, to give such an especial and gracious Protection
to a person that was but a few years since publicly sentenced and branded for
a foul and corrupt Forgery, in the Star Chamber of England; So as it is
truly to be wished, the Gentleman may prove more faithful to his Lordships
commands and services hereafter, then in those times it seems he was, either to
his own conscience or credit.

And lastly, give me leave to acquit my self, upon this occasion, of a severity
imputed unto me, by the ignorance and malice of some, as if this restraining of
men's going over without License, were a newfound holy day of mine own, and
first introduced by me, then which, God wot, nothing more grossly mistaken; for
it is most plain, that by the ancient Law I was penally imposed upon this
subject, which appears by the Statute in this Kingdom, of 25 of H. 6. cap. 2
and 9. which reciting, That hereafter no Liegemans Lands should be seized,
though out of the Land, if so be it were by the Command of the King his
Lieutenant, etc. implies, That before that time if they had gone, of their own
heads, their Lands were then, and still are to be seized into the Kings hands.

Next, in reason of State and Government, it has always been so declared and
practiced by many Acts of State, and all the Governors successively; it being
in truth most dangerous to the Crown of England, That this subject, so much
addicted to hold Intelligence and foreign dependances abroad, should have
liberty to be transported as they list, without giving any account at all of
themselves to the present Governor.

And in the last place, as a matter much conducing to the good and quiet of
this Kingdom, they themselves, in their twelfth Article of Graces, beseech the
King it may be so continued: And his Majesty, by his Princely Answer, assents,
and enjoins it to be so practiced and observed. So as after all this, there
must be many better tokens then any as yet I have heard, before the child can,
by any interepretation, be taken or believed to be mine.

And thus, in all humility, I submit the consideration hereof to his Majesty's
wisdom, best able to discern an inconvenience, and seasonably to apply the
proper remedy, resting,

Your faithful humble servant, Wentworth.
Dublin, this twentieth of November, 1637. Received the seventh of December.




By which you may perceive, Ovem in front, Vulpem in cord gerit: he pretends
fair, but meant nothing less then what he said: all his endeavor was, to have
Master Alexander sent to him back again with a Rod at his back, as the Earl of
Kildare was, of whom he gives instance for that purpose: But His Majesty
having read the Letters, was displeased for a time, and caused Master Alexander
to be committed to the Fleet for this, notwithstanding he had His Majesty's own
License for his coming over. And well it was for Master Alexander that he was
so imprisoned; for though it was conceived too much punishment for so small an
offense, yet it stopped the Earl of Straffords mouth from all further complaint
against him; or otherwise he would never have left, till he had gotten him to
have been sent over back again for Ireland, and left unto his mercy. You may
also perceive how willingly he was mistaken, falsely to scandalize and traduce
Master Alexander unto His Majesty in the matter of this Sentence, terming the
Accusation Forgery, which he well knew was not so, having had a finger in the
business long before; but did it purposely to lay a block in the way of Master
Alexanders preferment, fearing lest Master Alexander, by his friends, might
procure something of his Majesty's Gift that he would not have been well
pleased withal; and if he and his best friends had not bestirred themselves
quickly, and to purpose, Master Alexander had been so placed by him, as must
have offended him to the heart; which place to have been settled upon Master
Alexander, he would not have much cared either for his power or anger. For the
manifestation of this truth also, be pleased to see the Warrants for his
Commitment and Discharge.

THese are to will and require you forthwith to receive into your Custody the
body of Jerome Alexander Gent. herewith sent you, and him to keep in your
Custody, till you shall receive Order for his enlargement. And hereof you are
not to fail.

Dated at Westminster, 18 Feb. 1637. To the Warden of the Fleet, and to his
Deputy. FRA. WINDEBANK. Vera Copia, examinator per Tho. Revel, Cler. de le
Fleet.

WHereas, by His Majesty's Command, I committed to your Custody the body of
Jerome Alexander: His Majesty being graciously pleased that he shall be set at
liberty, These are therefore to require and authorize you forthwith to enlarge
and set at liberty the said Jerome Alexander; for which this shall be your
sufficient Warrant.

At my house at Westminster, the 15 day of March, 1637. To my loving friend the
Warden of the Fleet, and to his Deputy and Deputies, these. FRA. WINDEBANK.
Vera Copia, examinator per Tho. Revel, Cler. de le Fleet.

Thus far you may perceive what oppression Master Alexander still endured by he
opposition of these great Favorites of those times; yet still God delivered
dim out of all: But the said Earl of Strafford growing still into more and
greater favor with his Majesty every day then other, as the business he
labored in grew riper, and nearer execution: And Master Alexander perceiving,
that, albeit the late Lord Viscount Loftus of Ely, sometimes Lord Chancellor
of Ireland; the Lord Mount-Norris, now Viscount Valentia; Sir Frederick
Hamilton Knight, and others, had against him to be heard, in the foulest, and
most palpable, and gross injustice and wrong done them, that ever was done, or
heard of to be done in a Civil Commonwealth, and yet could obtain no right or
redress of their injuries; but, instead of relief, were crushed, by means of
his power and greatness: And knowing him to be an implacable adversary, that
never was satisfied, without the ruin of him against whom he once conceived a
displeasure: And Master Alexander therefore not being able to return into
Ireland, to live upon his estate; and having two such good friends at Court as
my Lord Coventry the late Lord Keeper, and his little Grace of Canterbury, and
their Faction, which stood in the way of his preferment here in England; and
then not being able to exercise his Profession, for the reasons aforesaid: the
case thus standing with him, he took a resolution to travel beyond the Seas,
and did so; where after he had spent some time abroad, it so fell out, that,
contrary to all expectation, this Parliament was assembled; which being sat
down and settled, he was called home, and returned, when he found the said Earl
of Strafford accused by the Parliament of high treason, and therefore
committed, and his Charge delivered in against him; who assisted in making good
those Charges, what he could, in the prosecution thereof, to bring him unto
justice, that scarce ever did any man justice himself in all his life: and then
Master Alexander also, amongst many others, then petitioned the Lords in
Parliament against him, to have been relieved for the great oppressions and
injustice which he had sustained at his hands; as by the same Petition may
appear.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the upper-House
of Parliament assembled.
The Humble Petition of Jerome Alexander:
Showing,
THat the Earl of Strafford conceiving causlesse malice against your
Petitioner, in or about the month of July, in the twelfth year of his
Majesty's Reign, being then in England; and at diverse and several days and
times, both before and since, he expressed the same toward your Petitioner, as
well by disgraceful and scandalous words and speeches uttered and spoken by
him against your Petitioner to sundry Earls, Lords, and Peers, and others His
Majesty's loving Subjects of all his Highness Realms and Dominions, with whom
he well knew your Petitioner had to do; as by his actions, and oppressions of
your Petitioner, both in his good name, Profession, Fortune and estate; whereof
your Petitioner had notice, being then also in England.

And whereas your Petitioner purchased an Estate in Fee, of diverse Lands and
Tenements, in that His Mties Realm of Ireland, from one Ever Magennise, and
others; for which he had paid great sums of money, and had as good an Estate
thereof conveyed unto him, and his Heirs, as by Law could be possibly devised
or advised, by Deeds Enrolled, Fines, Releases, and other like good conveyances
and assurances; yet after all this, the said Magennise was encouraged to
Petition the said Earl against your Petitioner, to disannull and make void the
said Bargain, upon scandalous, false, and feigned surmises, in the said
Petition suggested: Which Petition the said Earl entertained before himself;
and his Lordship granted out thereupon, an Order for your Petitioner presently,
to appear and answer the said Complaint, which your Petitioner did, and by his
answer, cleared himself, both by matter of Record, and otherwise, and therefore
prayed to be dismissed from before his Lordship, and left to the Law; yet would
not the said Earl so do, but still retained the said Complaint before him, and
ordered the said Magennise to reply, and after granted an order in the nature
of an Injunction, commanding your Petitioner not to sue the said Magennise in
any other Court concerning the premises, until his Lordship should give
further order therein. And afterward the said Earl so involved and encumbered
your Petitioner with References thereupon, and Examination of Witnesses, first
without Oath before Referrees, by his Lordship appointed to hear the business,
and upon oath before the Clerk of the Council, and otherwise; that your
Petitioner besides the loss of his time, and the neglect of his Profession,
spent great sums of money in his defense, and for the clearing of himself; and
it was a years time and more, before your Petitioner, withal his utmost
diligence and best means used, could get to be dismissed from before his
Lordship in that suite, and then not without great importunity of Petitions and
otherwise, preferred unto his Lordship by your Petitioner for the same; and yet
thus was your Petitioner only left unto the Law, without any repair for the
scandalous matter suggested against your Petitioner, and disproved in the
proceeding of that Complaint, and without damages for that unjust vexation:
and in this time, the said Magennise became non solvant, That when afterward
your Petitioner had recovered against him in an ordinary way of Justice, and
Legal proceedings; the said Magennise was not able to pay and satisfy unto
your Petitioner, his damages and losses recovered, whereby your Petitioner is
damnified 1000 l.

That the Earl convented some before him in private, with whom he knew your
Petitioner had to deal, whom he examined of matters to have charged your
Petitioner in a criminal way, but gaining nothing from them discovered worthy
of blame, his Lordship showed himself discontented thereat, both against such,
and your petitioner, branding your Petitioner with the name of a skurvey
Puritan, and threatening both him and the Party, that would not be drawn for to
accuse him: By means whereof, and the said Earls further disaffection showed
toward your Petitioner, both by words and otherwise; others also that did bear
ill will against your Petitioner, upon every slight occasion, and opportunity,
were encouraged to traduce and scandalize your Petitioner, both publicly and
privately, without hope of redress: And thus your Petitioner is damnified 2000
l. more.

That one Philip Fearnesley Esquire, wounded and maimed your Petitioner in his
face, with the stroke of a Candlestick, as they were sitting together at Supper
at your Petitioners own Table, whereby your Petitioner lost much of his blood,
and was put in great peril and danger of his life, besides what it cost your
Petitioner in the cure and recovery of himself: Your Petitioner lost also the
use of his practice for a whole Term time together, and more by that means.
For which wrong done unto your Petitioner, your Petitioner brought his Action
of assault, Maism, and Battery, against the said Fearnesley in His Majesty's
Court of Chief Place in Ireland, where Issue was joined, and a day of Trial
appointed, and the Jury returned, and summoned accordingly to appear; At which
time, your Petitioner coming to the Bar of the said Court, with his Counsel
and Witnesses, prepared for the said Trial; then and not before, the said
Fearnsley produced an order signed by the Earl of Strafford, and some others of
His Majesty's privy Counsel of that Kingdom, whom his Lordship had interessed
therein, together with him self, which was in the nature of an Injunction,
commanding your Petitioner not to proceed in his said Trial, and to refer th
hearing of the business to certain Referrees, intimate friends of the said
Fearnsleys, who were thereby appointed to hear, and end the same; and this was
done before your Petitioner was ever called to make answer to the said
Petition, or that he was ever heard to say what he could object against it: And
albeit, your Petitioner did afterward Petition his Lordship and Counsel,
showing the false suggestions of the said Petition, and desiring to be left
unto the Law, yet could not your Petitioner obtain a dismission thereof; but
the said difference was notwithstanding continued, referred to the said
Referrees, who conceived an order, which your Petitioner durst not to gainsay,
all of them being persons, before whom your Petitioner daily appeared in his
Clients Causes; which was, That your Petitioner should accept of 40 l. at
certain times, in the said order mentioned, when your Petitioner had spent
above 40 l. in the prosecution of the suite, besides his other damages and
losses, to amounting above a 1000 l. more.

And whereas your Petitioner was Lessee for years of certain Lands and
Tenements, lying in the Town of Kilmainham near Kels, in the County of Mead,
within His Majesty's said Realm of Ireland; the Parson of the said Parish of
Kels, pretending, that the greatest part of the said Town of Kilmainham, did
lie within the Limits and Precincts of the said Town of Kels, made claim to the
Tithes thereof: Whereof, neither he, nor any his Predecessors, Parsons of Kels,
within the memory of man, had ever received any Tithes there, nor had he any
color to demand the same; but presuming to find all favor against your
Petitioner, did therefore Petition the said Earl and Council for recovery
thereof; to whose Petition, your Petitioner was ordered to make answer, and did
so do; and in his answer, and otherwise, it was informed to the said Earl and
Counsel, That the same was matter of Inheritance, tryable by course of
Common Law; Whither he craved to be dismissed, and also craved in aid of his
Lessour, to be made Party with him, at least to the said suite, that so his
Inheritance might not be bound, without his own defense: but this was not
admitted, but the same Parson of Kells permitted still to go on, and proceed in
the said suite, against your Petitioner only, to Issue, and Examination of
Witnesses; by which means, your Petitioner lost much time from his Calling, and
other Employments, and was enforced to expend great sums of money for his
defense, to his further trouble and vexation, and damage of 500 l. more.

That the Right Honorable the Earl Marshall of England, on or about four years
since, procured His Majesty's Letters and License for your Petitioners repair
hither about his Lordships occasions, which your petitioner caused to be
delivered to one of the said Earl of Straffords Secretaries in Ireland; his
Lodship being then busy, and not to be spoken with, when your petitioner took
the opportunity of a ship, being then ready to set sail for England, it being
in the dead time of Winter, and no other shipping expected to go from thence of
a long time afterward; whereat the said Earl was mightily moved and enraged,
and threatened your petitioner, and by his Lordships Letters then, and otherwise
since, has informed His Majesty, and others, against your petitioner of foul
crimes and misdemeanors, whereof your petitioner is innocent and guiltless;
and for which, your petitioner was committed to the prison of the Fleet, and
lay there restrained for a long time. And thus the said Earl of Strafford has
drawn not only His Majesty's ill opinion, and disaffection toward your
petitioner, but also the distaste, and ill conceit of many Noblemen, and others,
who before time employed your petitioner in their business, and from whom your
petitioner before then, had countenance and good respect: And by this means
also, your petitioner for this four years almost last past, has been kept from
the use of his Calling and Profession, and from the comfort of his Wife,
Children, Fortune, and Estate, and spent great sums of money for the support of
himself, to his further damage of 5000 l. more.

That in your Petitioners absence in England, the Lady Anne Crosby, Widow, your
Petitioners near Kinswoman, was stirred up to Petition against your Petitioners
wife in Ireland, to the said Earl of Strafford, upon an Obligation of 2400 l.
specialty, conditioned for payment of 1200 l. with interest, which was not then
due, nor until a year after demand; at which time also, one Arthur Hill
Esquire, was also by recognizance, and other good securities, to pay then
presently unto your Petitioners said wife, for the use of your Petitioner 4540
l. Ster. and more, which your Petitioner had appointed to pay to others, in
Redemption of his Estate, then in Morgage for so much money, then to be also
paid; but upon the said Ladies petition, without every making your Petitioner a
Party, and before that your said Petitioners wife was served to make any answer
to the said Petition, his Lordship made an Order upon the said Ladies Petition,
that your petitioners wife should answer the premises, and that in the
interim, the said Arthur Hill should stay and retain in his hands of your
petitioners money 1200 l. whereawith to pay the said Lady; and afterward, the
said Lady the second time, petitioned the said Earl, to have the said 1200 l.
out of the said Master Hills hands, and to have your petitioners wife
restrained from coming over hither to your petitioner. And then albeit, your
petitioners wife answered the said Ladies petition, and did thereby show good
cause, why the said Lady ought not to demand the money, and prayed to be left
to the Law; yet the said Lady so far prevailed therein, that she gained the
said money with interest, and damages for the time; she caused it to be
deposited in the said Master Hills hands against all Law, or Equity; and had
not some other provision been made for payment of the Morgage money, your
petitioners Estate had been under a Forfeiture, and in great danger to be lost.

All which extrajudiciall proceedings, and grievous oppressions done unto your
petitioner by the said Earl of Strafford, to your petitioners utter overthrow
and undoing, and against the common and ordinary Rules of Justice, in His
Majesty's Realms of England and Ireland; he humbly beseeches this Honorable
Assembly, to take into consideration, and do therein for your petitioners
relief, as in your great Wisedoms shall be thought fit: And that because your
petitioners Witnesses are many, and some Noblemen, and of great quality, the
most of them in Ireland, whose charges your petitioner is not able to bear, to
bring personally before your Lordships hither, to be examined in the premises:
Therefore to grant unto your petitioner, that a Commission may Issue forth to
such fit Commissioners, to be named by your Lordships, for taking and returning
of their Examinations, as in your great Wisdoms shall be thought fit; and that
such as are now in Town, may be directed to be presently examined; and that
your petitioner may have your Lordships Order and Direction for fearches,
withal Secretaries, and other Officers, whom it may concern, for Authentic
Copies of such Records and Writings, as any ways do concern the premises: And
further, to grant your petitioner that privilege, That he may freely go and
come about his business, without the molestation and trouble of any.

And your Petitioner shall pray.

But the said Earl being executed for Treason, ended Master Alexanders
Complaint, and so left him, and all others that had petitioned against him,
without remedy or relief.

And least Master Alexander also might be thought to have let this matter of
his Sentence, rest without question, or desire therein for to be purged, there
being an opportunity now given by the sitting of this Parliament, to redress
such Injuries; he no sooner came home, and returned out of his Travels, but he
likewise presented his petition to the Honorable Lords in Parliament, for the
review and reversall of this so unjust and erroneous Sentence, the Tenor
whereof follows,

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the upper
House of Parliament Assembled;
The Humble Petition of Jerome Alexander:
HUmbly showing, That in Michaelmas Term, in the second year of His Majesty's
Reign, your petitioner brought a Cause to hearing, wherein he was Plaintiff,
against one John Yates, and others Defendants in His Majesty's Court of
Star Chamber; for Perjury, and subordination of Perjury, Imbracery, terrifying
of Witnesses, and other like foul offenses, and misdemeanors, in the said Bill
of Complaint appearing.

At which hearing the Deposition of one John Warren, taken in the Proceed of
that Suite, was read against the aid Yates, to convince him of the terrifying
of Witnesses only; and upon reading of another Deposition of one Robert Warren
Clerk to that point, the Court was satisfied of the guilt of the said Yates of
that offense, and thereupon pronounced a sentence against him for the same.

And as to the other charges of the said Bill, nothing was read or enforced,
for the Perjuror being dead before the hearing, though the Perjury and
Subordination were fully proved within the Books, yet for that Cause, did not
your Suppliants Counsel press any Testimony to enforce that accusation of
Subordination against the said Yates; which was indeed the main thing, whereof
your petitioner complained in his Bill.

And your petitioner says, That a sentence being pronounced against the said
Yates as aforesaid, and the Court then proceeding to other business, your
petitioner departed; and afterward, when the Lords were risen, whilst yet
they were in the inner Star Chamber, the then Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper, was
informed, That in the Paper Copy of the said John Warrens Deposition, the word,
viz. (that and did) were stricken out with a Pen, in the said Copy, and not
read in the said Deposition at that hearing; which as it was informed, altered
the sense of the Deposition, and made it to be positive and direct, which
otherwise was doubtful and uncertain: And then, that the said Yates stood
convicted but upon one single Testimony; whereupon, the said Yates was
instantly discharged, and dismissed with an 130 l. costs, adwarded against your
petitioner, or thereabouts.

This Oblituration of the said words was observed at the hearing of the Cause,
in the hands of one Henry Nevill, your petitioners Solicitour in that Court,
when he read the Deposition; but then was not informed to the Court, which had
been the proper time, but was omitted of purpose, as your petitioner
conceives; That afterward your petitioner might not enforce any other
Testimony, or matter (which he then might, and could have done) sufficient to
have convicted the said Yates guilty of the said offense, and for to have
cleared your petitioner from that accusation, as that a business might be made
of it, to ruin and undo your petitioner, as the sequel proved.

And it being observed, that the Lord Coventrey, late Lord Keeper, then
appeared therein against your petitioner, he could not afterward procure his
Counsel further to press any thing against the said Yates, to maintain that
Charge, and continue the Sentence against him pronounced, or that might clear
your petitioner from the said offense and accusation.

And the same being called into question and examination, albeit your
petitioner did thereof sufficiently purge himself upon his Oath, and otherwise,
and did truly lay the fault, where the blame ought to lie, upon the said Henry
Nevill, who was the doer of the Fact; and albeit, nothing was, or oculd be
proved, or made to appear against your petitioner to the contrary, of that he
made to appear, for clearing of himself; yet the said Nevill being a Member of
that Court, and therefore favored all that might be possible, the matter was
so carried, that in your petitioners absence out of Town about his necessary
affairs, the same was made the only proof of his guiltiness, which being
endeavored to be fortified with several mere Inferences and Suppositions, and
mistaken Observations from your petitioners countenance, and supposed personal
behavior in the carriage of himself, pressed beyond all indifferent
interpretation, and the truth it self; and upon some other extrajudiciall
matter enforced also against your petitioner without any ground, and against
the Forms and Rules of the ordinary proceedings of that Court, a conclusion was
drawn from these false premises, to charge your petitioner with that offense;
and thus your petitioner was fined to his Matie in 500 l. and 50 l. was
adwarded against your petitioner, to the said Nevill for damages; and your
petitioner was further adjudged, never to use again his Profession and Practice
of an Utter-Barrister at Law, eitehr publicly at the Bar, or privately in his
Chamber, and to remain committed to the prison of the Fleet: And before your
petitioners enlargement, it was further adjudged, That your petitioner must at
the Bar of the said Court, in humble and submissive manner, acknowledge the
same to be his offense (whereof he was innocent) against God and the Court, and
to show himself very penitent and sorrowful for the same; and withal, was
left and declared to the Society of Lincolns-Inne, whereof he was a Member, as
unworthy to live in the Society; who thereupon was expelled the house, his
Chamber seized and disposed of: And thus in an instant of time, your petitioner
was made more miserable, then if he had never been born.

And all this done (with so high a hand) that by this means your petitioner
might be utterly deprived of all support, and disabled ever to look up into the
World again, either to seek for help or relief, againsT this extremity, or to
maintain himself and Family, by any course of life, to which he had been bred.
Which when your petitioner understood, and not before, he was enforced then to
leave his Country, his Wife, Children, Friends, and Profession too, which he
had acquired with the expense of his whole Patrimony, and the whole Study of
his life then before.

Nor had your petitioner (being thus exiled) settled himself for any long time;
but the malice of his adversaries so vehemently pursued after him, That the
said Fine was begged of His Majesty, and passed under the Great Seal, to hinder
any possible Installments or Composition for the same, but what they Grantee
thereof pleased.

And further, to forestall your petitioner by any addresses to be made to His
Sacred Majesty, for pardon of the residue of the said Censure, it being the
only way then left unto your petitioner (till this happy opportunity) to gain
your petitioner so much as a Being in the World, His Majesty being so strongely
informed by the late Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper, and others, against your
petitioner, for this only Cause enforced to be so Capital, That your
petitioner was not a man worthy, or fit for His Majesty's Mercy; yet your
petitioners Friends, out of mere Charity and Commiseration of your petitioners
deplorable Estate, discharged the said Fine of 500 l. to the Grantee, and the
said 50 l. to the said Nevill, and the said 130 l. to the said Yates; and yet
your petitioner for this fifteen years now last past, or thereabouts, has thus
been debarred the use of his Calling and Profession in this His Majesty's Realm.

And now humbly beseeches this Honorable Assembly, to take the same Sentence
into consideration, and to review and reverse the same, and to proceed therein
for your Petitioners relief, as in your Wisdoms shall be thought fit, with
order and direction to all Officers, and others, whom it may concern, to have
Searches and Copies of all such Records and Writings, as concern these
proceedings.

And he shall pray, etc.

Which being so preferred, it was by their Lordships Order of the 12. of May,
1641. And of several other Orders made by their Lordships, referred to the
Lords Committees, appointed for the Star Chamber, to be heard, as the same
Order, and the rest, ready to be produced, will make appear.

Die Mercurii, 12. Maii. 1641.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the High
Court of Parliament Assembled, That the Petition and Cause of Jerome Alexander,
Esquire, shall (by virtue of this Order) be referred to the Lords Committees,
appointed for the Star Chamber, whose Lordships are to meet and consider of the
said Petition on Monday the 17. of this insTant May, by two of the Clock in the
Afternoon in the Painted Chamber: And all Parties formerly appointed to attend
the said Cause are then to appear before their Lordships.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Then that it may appear with what earnestness Master Alexander pressed the
hearing of this Cause, and to make all prepration for it, having formerly lost
all his Papers and Copies of Bills, Answers, Depositions, and proceedings in
that business: By the favor of the Honorable Lords, he also gained the
ensuing Order, and by that, had the favor to procure the same with more speed:
But for all that, the said pleadings and proceedings, cost him much money.

Jerome Alexander has Petitioned the HOuse, to review and reverse a Sentence
given against him in the Court of Star Chamber in Michaelmas Term, in the
second year of the King; all his Witnesses concerning that business are
casually lost, Prays the Order of the House, to all Officers whom it may
concern, to make searches, and to take Copies of all Records, and Writings in
their several Offices, such as he shall think sit: And that for the reason
aforesaid, That he may have liberty to write them himself, without paying any
Fees. And that Master Henry Jones, one of the Atturneys of the Star Chamber, be
required to bring into Court, the Paper Copy of one John Warrens Deposition,
taken in a Cause there, wherein the said Alexander was Plantiff against one
John Yates, and others Defendants, which is remaining in his hands, and to
deposite the same in the hands of the Clerk of the Parliament, to be ready at
the hearing, (for upon that Paper Copy the Sentence is grounded) And that the
said Alexanders Counsel may have a sight of it, the better to prepare for the
hearing.

All which being read and considered of by the Right Honorable the Lords
Committees for the Star Chamber, their Lorships do appreve thereof, and Order
accordingly.

Veneris, 5. Martii. 1640. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

But the great and public Affairs of the Kingdom increasing and growing every
day more and more; albeit, Master Alexander did labor all the ways, and
friends he had, for to have gotten his said Cause to have been heard, yet could
not procure it: So that after almost a years attendance about it, with no
effect, he was enforced to forbear the further solicitation of it for a time,
and made his repair over unto his Estate and Family in Ireland, from which he
had been absent above four years and a half before, constrained by the Earl of
Strafford as aforesaid, where he had not continued above five weeks space, or
little more, but thta horrid Rebellion there brake forth, Master Alexander
being then in the County of Mead, not aboe 24. Miles distant from the City of
Dublin or thereabouts, and within the Pale, little sulspecting any such danger;
and whereas the Tragedy should have been acted at Dublin the 23. of October,
1641. Which blessed be that good God, which so miraculously prevented it, upon
the 24. day of October, 1641. There was an attempt made upon Master Alexander,
to have surprised him, his wife, and family, which had assuredly been his
destruction, and was the immediate finger of God that preserved them: And
albeit, he escaped with his wife and family, the most of them with their
persons; yet did the said Rebels, both there, and in other places of that
Kingdom, then instantly seize upon a personal Estate of his in Goods,
Chattels, and Cattells, to the value of 6000 l. or thereabouts, and possessed
themselves of a real Estate of his in Lands, which yielded him above 1000 l.
per anaum, all which they shared and divided amongst them, and do possess to
this day.

Thus then you may perceive into what sad a condition and distress Master
Alexander was brought again upon a sudden, being dispoiled of his whole Estate
and Fortune; and by reason of the troubles, both here and there, out of all
hope or expectation any way to acquire any livelihood, and subsistence for
himself, his wife, children, and family; yet in this great straight, chose
rather to come for England, then to remain there, where he perceived he could
neither do good for himself, or the Country; and being come over, that good
God who has hitherto never forsaken him in his greatest troubles, did so move
the hearts of his friends, and acquaintance, that they gave present supply unto
his necessities, beyond whatsoever he did imagine, or could expect: And now if
he would have remained with them in the Country, might have had a competent
provision made for him and his family, by his friends; which to have embraced,
he should have lived much more free and safe from danger, then he has done
since; but he was persuaded by some of the worthy Members of the House of
Commons now deceased, rather to settle here in this City of London, to whom
they privately engaged themselves, in such case, that he should not want for
sufficient maintenance, and resting thereupon stayed, and has now for this
three years space, and more, continued here; and with his utmost diligence and
abilities, faithfully, and constantly, has served the Parliament in such
commands as they have been pleased to enjoin him; and of which, he doubts
not, but all those with whom he has had to do, but will give testimony of his
carriage, and the good demeanor of himself therein, accordingly; yet such has
been his unhappiness, still to meet with persons ill affected to his
proceedings, and maligning him, even in those services which has no way
conscerned his particular; but for his promoting the public, with more zeal
and candor then sufficient (for he calls God to Witness) that to the best
of his understanding, he has not done anything to the prejudice of the
Parliament in the least, or with any by-end or sinister respect for his own
private, but with singleness of heart, and a good conscience to this day, has
labored to approve himself just and fair in all his proceedings, both before
God and man; and he cannot help it, if those that have sought themselves, and
peradventure, have missed their ends by his more watchfulness in those ways,
and things, wherewith he has been entrusted: If some such as these men, have
aspersed him behind his back, for his labor, with falfe and scandalous
reports, and otherwife have attempted, for to destroy and ruin him, which he
shall let you see have therefore done it, not that if they could herein have
accomplished their desires, it could any ways have advantaged the common
cause, but only to have removed an impediment out of their way, which was too
quick sighted perhaps, to let those things pass unseen and undiscovered: And
therefore no sooner was he observed to be employed in any thing, that was
Parliamentary, but the malice of his enemies began afresh to display it self;
and now they labored with all those with whom he had to do, to possess them
with an evil opinion of him; sometimes affirming, that he was a Papist, and
held correspondence with Papists, intimating the Earl of Arundel to the such a
one; and alleging, that Master Alexander held continual Intelligences with
him beyond the Seas, and with his Son in the Kings quarters: And albeit, Master
Alexander conceives his Lordship, and Son, not to be of that Religion; and that
it had been no offense to have written unto his Lordship, the said Earl, or any
attending upon him, of such things as were no ways prejudicial unto the
State: And albeit, you may well perceive, by that which has been said before,
That Master Alexander and his Friends, and Kindred on both sides, have had
Relation to that Noble Family, and dependence upon them for some Generations;
and that he has in his own particular, been employed in his Lordships
bufinesse, and to have received many favors from him, and disasters for his
occasions; and therefore, that it were an Act of ingratitude in Master
Alexander, not to serve his Lordship and Family, in all lawful and just
Commands; yet was it a thing never so much as desired by them, or any about
them, to employ him in any thing concerning their Affairs, since the unhappy
troubles here begun, nor has he ever received Letter from them, nor written
Letter to them, nor any about them, since they left the Parliament; either into
parts beyond the Seas, or into the Kings quarters: Master Alexander being well
understood to be of another judgment, which he hops he has manifested by
his conversation, and endeavors in the Service of the Parliament: he has
otherwise been taxed to have held correspondence with Rebels in Ireland, (and
under that General) some have defamed him behind his back, to have held
correspondence with the Marquess of Ormond, and that he sent him a 1000 l.
which all that knows Master Alexander, as it is now with him, he was far
unable to do: And Master Alexander has been committed into custody of the
Sergeant at Arms, of the House of Commons, as by the Order following may appear.

Die Mercurii, 18. October. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the Moneys
consigned to the Lord Marquess of Ormond into Ireland, be staid and brought
back again; Master Reynolds and Master Goodwyn are to take care of this
business; Ordered, That Master Alexander be sent for in safe custody by the
Sergeant at Arms or his Deputy, and forthwith brought to the said Commons to
answer such matters as have been, or shall be objected against him.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

By force whereof, Master Alexander was not long after taken into custody by
the said Sergeant at Arms, and some of those that wished Master Alexander no
better then the rest, did earnestly press then to have had his House, Studdy,
Trunkcs, Papers, and all strictly searched, ransacked and perused, upon this
bare supposition; and he has heard Master Richard Fitz-Gerrald was of the same
opinion, which was then notwithstanding forborne, by the discreet carriage of
those that better understood Master Alexander, and his carriage, then Master
Fitz-Gerrald: But that you may more clearly understand the demeanor of Master
Alexander in this matter, concerning this 1000 l. charged by him, to have been
sent to the Marquess of Ormond; will you be pleased to consider it in the
order following.

Die Iovis, 19. Octobris, 1643. Grocers Hall. At a Committee of Adventurers for
the Affairs of Ireland, present. Sir David Watkins, Alderman Kenrick, Master
Avery, Master Featherston, Master Strange, Master Dethick. Master Laughan.
Master Moyer. Master Houbelon. Master Thomason.


Whereas at a Committee of the House of Commons and Adventurers in London, for
Irish Affairs holden at Grocers Hall, the first day of August, after a solemn
debate and treaty with Master Abraham and Thomas Chamberlin of the City of
London, Merchants, and Sir John Clotworthy, Master Avery, Master Moyer, Master
Dethick, Master Cook, Master Herring, Master Thomason, Master Houbelon, all
being of the said Committee then, and there present, that the said Merchants
should give three Bills of Exchange for eight hundred pounds, charged upon
Raphaell Hunt of Dublin Merchant, their Agent, at two days after sight, unto
Sir Adam Loftus Knight, Treasurer at Wars of the said Realm; and then it was
ordered, That the Treasurers appointed for receiving of Moneys upon
Subscriptions for Lands in Ireland, according to an Ordinance of Parliament,
the 14. of July last, should take care, not only to see unto the
transportation of the said Bills of Exchange unto Dublin accordingly, but also
to pay unto the said Abraham and Thomas Chamberlin, the said sum of eight
hundred pounds within six months, after certain notice should be given to the
said Committee of the payment of the said Money there in Dublin as aforesaid:
And whereas several other Bills of Exchange were made by, and in the names of
George Peacock, Francis Roe, and Richard Chapman, to be paid by the said
Treasurers at Grocers Hall, or to their Assigns, viz. That of Peacocks, for
payment of fifty pounds; and that of Roes, for payment of one hundred pounds;
and that of Chapmans, for payment of seventy pounds, two of them bearing date
the seventh of August, 1643. and the other the fifth of July; All which sums
last mentioned, were also directed to be paid to the said Sir Adam Loftus, and
were accepted by the said Committee for so much money, subscribed upon the said
Ordinance of the 14. of July aforesaid, in case the said Moneys should be
punctually paid: All which being then ordered and agreed upon by the said
Committee to be sent to Dublin; The said order by the negligence of the Clerk,
was omitted to be entered at large in the Book of Orders at the said Committee,
and yet the said Bills were sent to Dublin accordingly, by direction of the
Treasurers of the 14. of July aforesaid, by Jerome Alexander Esquire, their
Sub-Treasurer, who was directed to send the same to the Marquess of Ormond, by
him to be delivered to the sAid Sir Adam Loftus to be disposed of, as he should
think fit, for the service of the Army.

Now forasmuch as upon search of the Book of Orders aforesaid, we find this
omitted to be Recorded, as it ought to have been: We therefore of the said
Committee now present, being well satisfied of the truth hereof, have ordered
and directed this matter now to be entered and registered in the Book of Orders
of this Committee; for manifestation of the truth hereof, That all Parties
herein concerned, may for the time to come, find an Attestation of this matter
for their satisfaction and discharge, of what has severally been done, or is
hereafter to be performed, for, and concerning to the same.

Richard Deacon, Clerk to the said Committee.

Which matter being afterward examined by a Committee of the Honorable House
of Commons, made Die Lunae, 23. October. 1643. where Master Lisle had the Chair,
and Master Alexanders innocence and clearness, appearing unto the said
Honorable House of Commons, that Master Alexander had done nothing therein but
what he was commanded by the said Committee and Treasurers of Grocers Hall, and
what was agreed and resolved upon, when Sir John Clotworthy Knight, one of
their Members was present, he was thereupon discharged, as appears by the Order
made by the Honorable Houses of Commons upon that report.

Die Iovis, 26. October. 1643.
Upon the report frem the Committee of Adventurers for Ireland of London,
concerning Master Jerome Alexander, affirming, that what M. Jerome Alexander
did in the conveying of the Moneys to the Marquess of Ormond, he did by
directions of that Committee, and in pursuance of an Order made by them. It is
this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the said Master
Jerome Alexander be forthwith discharged from any further Restraint.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

But no sooner was Master Alexander delivered, and out of restraint, Nehemiah
10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
but presently again, to terrify and affright him, thinking thereby to make
him leave and forsake this City, if to have been afraid of his own shadow; it
was declared unto him, That he was accused strongly by some at a private
meeting, for doing ill offices between the Parliament and City of London,
wherein he was charged to have done that which he could but answer with his
life; and that he was also voted by a Committee, for to be again committed to
the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons, which was so ordered as it was
related; and if the Sergeant at Arms would have adentured to have taken Master
Alexander into custody again, upon an Order made by those who had no power of
commitment, he had been certainly imprisoned the second time, and upon like
ground as before; but when the mistake was better understood, or at least the
end thereof failing, and being disappointed, and Master Alexander therefore
walking still at large, the further pursuit of that Order ceased: But not long
afterward a new device was set on foot again for to inthrall him: And thus it
was, Master Alexanders wife having borrowed some Household Stuff of one of her
Kinswomen, here in Town, wherewith to furnish him a house, was constrained to
bring the same into her house when she could have it, in the Winter time, about
six a clock in the morning, and six at night, which was color enough to pick a
quarrel at this proceeding, and to give out, That these Goods were belonging
to Malignants, and that there was much Plate amongst them of great value: Under
which pretense and supposition, or for some other prerence, one day when Mast.
Alexander was known to be absent from home, one Master Maurice Gethin, and
Master Tempast Milner, Citizens of London, were dealt withal by some of Master
Alexanders enemies, by color of an Ordinance which they had obtained of the
16. of October, 1643. to seize upon (Papists, Delinquents, or Malignants
Estates, seizable) to come to the house where Master Alexander was lodged in
Loathbury in London, and to enter the same, and under pretense to search for
such Goods of Deliquents, Papists, and Malignants, to seize and possess all
Master Alexanders Papers, and Writings whatsoever, which they could find: And
the said Master Gethin, and Master Milner, with ten Persons more at the least
in their Company, and whom they had hired for that purpose, on or about the of
1643. having watched their opportunity, when Master Alexander was from home as
aforesaid, they forcibly entered into his house, and set a strict watch and
ward round about it, not suffering any body to go in or out, till they had
effected what they came for; they also in an instant entered severally into
every Room of the house at once, there being none of his Family within doors,
when they came in, but Master Alexanders wife, whom they thus very much
terrified and affrighted: And albeit, she desired to see by what Warrant they
did it, telling them they were mistaken, and that her husband was no such man,
as to have his house entered after that manner, for a Papist, Malignant, or
Delin quent; yet would they not show her by what authority they so came
thither: but with such Instruments as they brought with them, forced, and broke
open Master Alexanders Studdy doors, Desks, Chests, Truncks, and Cabinets, in
the several Rooms at one time, and searched and ransacked all of them, and
every Room and corner of the house; Inventoried all his Goods, and seized upon
every writing, and piece of Paper, that they found in the house, bound them up,
and carried them out of his house, toward, Cambden house; and as they were
carrying away, Master Alexander by chance coming home, met the same upon a
Porters back; and all the favor he could obtain at their hands, was to go
along with them unto Cambden House, where they were laid up until they were
viewed and seen by them, the said Mr. Milner and Mr. Gethin, and much ado Mr.
Alexander had at first to persuade so much favor, as to have them viewed over
in his presence, and it was a good time before he could prevail with them unto
that, saying that it might be others might have the sight of them the first,
and they did take advise assuredly of their setters on, before they would be
drawn to view them; and after they had viewed and perused them, and found
nothing that answered their expectation, Mast. Alexander had his writings
delivered him back again with much ado, and was enforced to clear the property
of his goods by oath; and if it had not been his good fortune so opportunely,
for to have met with the Porter carrying them away, ad they were going out of
his house, he is certainly persuaded they had been all carried to the utterest
enemies which he had; which he had not cared for, (if so they had not delivered
back more then were taken from him) and so possibly might have made something
of nothing: And albeit Master Alexander desired from them, to see by what power
he was thus used, or abused rather, they told him they had a Warrant by
Ordinance of Parliament to do it, but showed him none; to which he submitted,
notwithstanding upon their words; and thus Master Alexander had his Goods,
rifled and spoiled, and some of them lost and imbezelled, and what Papers, or
other things amongst so many as they possessed, are kept back from him, it is
not possible for him to miss at present. That the Earl of Strafford himself
never dealt worse with any man in this nature; thus to force, and break open all
his doors, Truncks, Locks, etc. without so much as ever speaking with him
before hand, and well knowing Master Alexander to be a man well affected to the
Parliament, and employed daily in their service; and this done without any
authority at all: For their said Ordinance, though it be of a very large
extent, yet it extends no further, but that they the said Master Gethin, etc.
or any one of them assisted with one of the Committee of Sequestrations, shall
have power and authority to procure to be inventoried and secured to be forth
coming, any Money, Plate, Jewels, Goods, Chattels, and personal Estate, in the
Custody of, or to any Papists, Delinquents, or Malignants, whose Estates are
seizable, etc. And Master Alexander was not in the compass of this power; was
yet never Papist, Delinquent, or Malignant; howsoever he does not understand,
that they had any color to take away writings and evidences, nor thus to deal
with him, when they were informed what he was, yet thus has he been dealt
withal; and when he desired from them, but to be informed who were their
setters on; their answers were (that if they had not done it, others would)
whose names they would not discover for a 100 l. all which also, he has
hitherto endured with patience.

And it was not long after, that because he was so much favored of some of his
friends, in commiseration to him, having lost his whole estate by the Rebellion
in Ireland. That he had his dwelling given him there in a manner gratis, that
upon an instant, he was enforced to remove and leave the place, to satisfy the
desires to some that thought it too much charity for him to enjoy such relief,
when others that have less need, want it not, and enjoy what their hearts can
wish.

All this not yet working that effect, so eagerly pursued after to destroy him,
and it being understood that Mr. Alexander had obtained the favor and good
opinion of many worthy Lords, and others of the Scottish Nation; And it being
feared by his Pursuers least it might turn to some employment, or other matter,
which might advance him further in their estimation; therefore scandalized and
traduced him to them behind his back, and labored to be made as odious, as if
he were a monster, and a man not worthy of their acquaintance; insomuch, that
it could not be withholden to be told some of them, that matters of their
public Affairs did receive prejudice by him, and would not receive dispatch,
until revenge had been had of that Knave Alexander, giving him that Livery,
and using that expression of him, which he has passed by in silence too,
amongst the rest.

But malice has no end, but in the ruin of its object, or of it self, he has
escapt our fingers, says some afterward, twice already, but if he does it the
third time, he shall have good luck, and then again was convented upon the
supposition of high contempts, which ended in smoke. and vanished; a threatened
man lives long: And thus when the innocent are minished, and brought low, says
the Prophet David, through oppression, through any plague or trouble, though
God suffers them to be evilly entreated through Tyrants, and let them wander
out of the way in the Wilderness; yet helps he the poor out of misery, and
makes him Households like a Flock of Sheep; the righteous shall consider this
and rejoice, and the mouth of all wickedness shall be stopped; who so is wise
will ponder these things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord, Psalm. 107. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.

But this yet rested not here; he must be exasperated and provoked further to
impatience, to gain advantages if possible against him, whereby to enthrall and
trouble him; and having a public employment to attend, he is there reviled
with uncivil and approbrious speeches, and has the lie given him, but for
telling the truth, and was termed a base Fellow to his face, of him that was so
indeed, (and by a person of far inferior rank and quality to him himself) and
all to have stirred him up to that which has been heretofore accounted the
reward of such fowl language; nay he had his Desk with all his Money and Papers
in it, in his absence taken out of the Office where he waited, without any
cause or provocation given; but the intent was the same of Mr. Milners, and Mr.
Gethins, thinking to have made mighty discoveries of Correspondencies holden
with persons ill affected to the Parliament; and do you not think that such a
burnt child as this, has need to dread the fire; to be very wary and
watchful over his ways: But to proceed, When all these things would not serve
the turn, nor any other aspersions unjustly cast upon him, almost every day at
public and private meetings in Parliament, in the City, and every where, to
make him odious, not only to his friends and acquaintance, but to all good men
that should come but to hear of him, then (Canis ad vemisum) this old censure
is again revived to blanch him now in the opinion of those with whom he had to
do, both in public businesses, and concerning his own particular; and if
possible thus to bury him alive.

Sir John Clotworthy Knight, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, is
without cause incensed a against Mr. Alexander, and labors his ruin by all the
ways and means he can; and now at a public meeting of the Committee for Irish
Affairs in London, whereof Mr. Alexander is a Member, the said Sir John
Clotworthy speaking contemptuously and disgracefully of Mr. Alexander unto many
others of the Members of the Committee, uttered these words and speeches to
them, of him, saying, That Mr. Alexander was a perjured person, and that he had
been fined for Perjury and Forgery in the Star Chamber, further saying, That he
was unworthy to sit amongst them, and wondered that they would so much as admit
him into their Company; whereupon at the next meeting of the said Committee at
Grocers Hall the 18 of November, 1643. the said Committee informed Mr.
Alexander thereof, and entreated him, that he would forbear sitting amongst
them, until he should have purged himself of the said Accusations, and withal
sent unto Sir John Clotworthy, that he would be pleased to produce the said
Sentence, by which the truth of his Allegations might appear, or otherwise they
should have no reason to out Master Alexander of the employment amongst them,
and thereupon the said Committee conceived this Order following.

Die Sabbati, 18. November, 1643. At the Committee of Adventurers of the House
of Commons, and Adventurers chosen in London, for the Affairs of Ireland.
FOrasmuch as Sir John Clotworthy Knight, a Member of the House of Commons, and
one of the Members of this Committee has accused Mr. Jerome Alexander, one
other of the Members of the said Committee to several persos of the said
Committee yester day at a meeting at Goldsmiths Hall, to be a Perjured person,
for which and for Forgery, he has been fined in the Star Chamber, and
therefore a thing dishonorable to this Committee, to have him any longer to
continue amongst us; all this matter against him being but yet alleged, we
have not thought fit, so far to proceed against him herein, until we shall be
further satisfied of the truth hereof: It is therefore Ordered, That Sir David
Watkins, and such others of the Committee, us he shall think fit, be desired to
entreat Sir John Clotworthy, that he will be pleased to produce unto this
Committee such Records, or proof of these things against Master Alexander, as
may satisfy this Committee of the truth of these Allegations, and then we
shall proceed, to do therein as shall be fit: And because these are matters
trenching so deeply upon the said Master Alexander, as we conceive his very
being depends upon it, we shall forbear to declare any opinion in the matter,
but do entreat him in the interim, to forbear sitting with us, of Who credit
and reputation, we shall be very tender for the good service he has done at
this Commit.

Richard Deacon, Clerk to the said Committee.

Thus you may perceive how violently he was prosecuted; but the said Order
being accordingly delivered unto Sir John Clothworthy the Committee for Irish
Affairs at Westminster, whereof Sir John Clothworthy is one, appointed a
meeting for those Irish businesses at Goldsmiths Hall, whether some of the said
Committee of Citizens, Adventurers in London, for Lands in Ireland, of Grocers
Hall went, directed purposely to hear and see what Sir John Clotworthy could
produce for making of that Charge good, against Master Alexander, where the
Copy of the said Sentence was then read in their presence, and the Fait of the
said pardon, so procured by his Father in law as aforesaid, which when those of
the said Committee of Crocers Hall had heard, and well understood; they
declared their opinions, That there was nothing in that Sentence which did make
good any such charges against Master Alexander, as he had spoken of him; yet
was it then pressed, That they would have joined to have voted out Mr.
Alexander from sitting any longer at Grocers Hall, as a Member of that
Committee, which they refused to do; and afterward at another meeting of the
said Committee of Grocers Hall, they made the Order following.

Die Martis, 28. November, 1643. At the Committee of Adventurers of the House
of Commons, and Adventurers chosen in London, for the Affairs of Ireland.
Whereas by the Order of the 18. of November instant, for the Reasons therein
alleged, we entreated Master Alexander (being one of our Members) to forbear
sitting with us, being then accused by Sir John Clotworthy Knight, to be a
Perjured person, and that he had been fined for Perjury and Forgery in the
Star Chamber; And whereas the said Sir John, was by us enterated to produce
such Records and proofs of these things as might satisfy this Committee of the
truth of these Charges against him; but instead of such proof and Records, the
said Sir John and other, sitting at Goldsmiths Hall, as a Committee of the
House of Commons, for Irish Affairs, (where some of us were then present, as
private men) did cause the Copy of a Sentence given against Master Alexander in
His Majesty's Court of Star Chamber, in Michaelmas Term, in the second year of
His Majesty's Reign, for to be produced and read, with the Copy of a pardon of
some part of the Sentence, procured by Master Alexander Father in law, in his
absence in Ireland, which Were then moved to satisfy the truth of the former
Charges, and further pressed as a Crime, for which he was unworthy to be of the
said Committee, and pressed us to have joined with them to have voted him out,
for sitting any longer amongst us; but having heard the said Sentence read, we
find no such thing as Forgery or Perjury in the business, if the Sentence
were just; but is for the supposed defacing, and blotting out of two words
(that and did) out of Paper Copy of a Deposition used against one Yates, at a
hearing wherein Master Alexander was Plaintiff against the said Yates in that
Court: And albeit, we will not take upon us for to judge the said Sentence, yet
we conceive it founded upon very weak grounds, there being neither Bill,
Information, or ore tenus, for the manner of the proceeding, nor proof against
Master Alexander, to convince him of the Fact, for which he is sentenced, and
his Oath three several times sworn for his purgation in the very sentence
appearing, and many other miscarriages in the Sentence by him alleged, which
we leave to be judged in his proper place. But for this cause, and fora much as
we do conceive it, not to be in our power, that one Member should vote out
another, being first established by the same Election of the body of
Adventurers with our sleves, and settled with us, by the Ordinances of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, which we conceive not in our power to alter; and
because we hold it not agreeable to justice, that any man should be condemned
before he be first heard to answer for himself, and the matter be tried,
whether it be right or wong. And forasmuch as upon the producing of the pardon
of the main part of the Sentence, we bold it not agreeable to the Rules of Law,
or Religion, That if the Sentence had been just, yet that afterward, the same
thing should be objected again against him, as a transgression; upon all which
matter, We do for our parts declare, That we have no just cause any longer to
restrain Master Alexander from sitting amongst us, according to the lawfulness
of his Election, and the rather because nothing appears to us to prove him
guilty of any those heavy Charges, Sir John Clotworthy has laid against him,
nor of any crime or offense Whatsoever, deserving our ill opinions, of whose
good demeanor and great service amongst us, we are well satisfied; And have
therefore Ordered, That the said Master Alexander shall again take his place
amongst us, and sit, and Vote, and Act together with us as formerly he has
done, any former Orders to the contrary by us made heretofore, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Richard Deacon, Clerk to the said Committee.

All this brings to my remembrance, that story of Darius that Great King of the
Medes and Persians, and the Prophet Daniel, who much against his willingness,
being enforced to cast the Prophet into the Lions Den, for to satisfy the
breach fo that Law, made by his Presidents and Princes, who when they could
find no occasion or fault against him, concerning the Kingdom, forasmuch as he
was faithful, made his Royal Statute and Decree, to catch him in things
concerning his God, who crying out, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy
God whom thou servest continually, abloe to deliver thee from the Lions?
Answered, My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths, that
they have not hurt me, forasmuch as before him innocence was found in me; and
also before thee O king, have done no hurt, for he delivers and reserveth,
and he works signs and wonders in Heaven and in Earth, who has delivered
Daniel from the power of the Lions, Dan. 6. Master Alexander endured this great
scandal also with silence, until that the Irish Affairs might be settled, that
so he might give no disturbance to the proceedings, with resolution afterward
to seek his remedy; and this failing to work that effect, for which it was
intended, the prosecution seized not here, for then he must be yet again
convented, but for executing of that power given to the Committee of Grocers
Hall, whereof he was a Member, by the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, to
do service for the State, in finding out, and sending away for Ireland, such
Goods as had been bought and paid for some years before, with the Adventures
Money and lay here and there in several Stores and Houses spoiling, which were
worth 5000l. or thereabout; and which at last, the said Committee sent for
Ireland, to the Forces in Vlster, after a great deal of opposition. But in the
performing of this duty, both Master Alexander, and all the rest of the
Committee at Grocers Hall, have been accused to the Honorable House of
Commons, for to have disobeyed the Orders of the Honorable Committee of both
Kingdoms, as does appear by the Order following.

Die Veneris. 19 July, 1644.
WHereas the Committee of both Kingdoms, at Derby-House, Ordered on the 13. of
this Instant, That the Arms and the rest of the Provisions, claimed by Sir Joh.
Clotworthy, should not be removed, or shipped away, until the Committee should
be further satisfied concerning the same; this House being informed, that
contrary to the said Order, the said Arms and other Provisions, claimed by Sir
John Clotworthy, are either shipped, or ready to be shipped away in the Blessing,
Master Ashmore Captain: It is therefore Ordered, That the said Captain and
Store-keepers, or such others whatsoever, as are entrusted with the keeping, or
shipping of any Arms, or other Provisions now to be sent for Ireland, do
deliver the said Arms, and provisions claimed by Sir John Clotworthy, according
to the Note given in, unto M. Maurice Thomson, or M. William Pennoyre, or such
as they shall appoint for the same, who are to reserve them in their custody,
until further Order be given them from this House therein.

Hen. Elsynge, Cl. Parl. D. Com.

By force of which Order, after that the Arms and Goods therein mentioned, were
on shipboard, and safely stoed, amidst many other Goods, Arms, and other
things ready to be transported for Ireland, according to the Order of the
Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, the Ship was Rummadged, and the Goods
tossed to and from, and much spoiled, to find out such Arms and Provisions
which had no such Marks, as informed, and thereupon so many in quantity were
taken from off a shipboard again, and it may be more then demanded, and what
is become of those Goods, the Committee of Grocers Hall knows not: But that
the said Committee of Grocers Hall, and M. Alexander amongst the rest, may
appear to be free, and clear from any such disobedience to the Orders of the
Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, will you please to understand the
carriage of that business also, from first to last, and then to judge where
the fault lies: For this, be first pleased to peruse the first Order given by
the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, to the Committee at Grocers Hall,
concerning this business.

At the Committee of both Kingdoms, at Derby House. Die Mercurii. 17. Aprilis,
1644.
Ordered,

THat the Committee at Grocers Hall, be desired to send a particular to the
Sub-Committee appointed to meet at Gold-smiths-Hall, on Friday next, of all
such Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, Victual, Clothes, or other Provisions, which
have been made for Ireland, and not yet sent, and shall have power in the mean
time to examine any persons whom they shall conceive to have any such
Provisions in their hands.

Ex. Gualter Frost, Secretary to the same Committee.

In conformity and obedience unto which Order, the said Committee at Grocers
Hall did make a Return accordingly, which consist of so many particulars, as
it were too tedious to insert herein: but thereupon the Honorable Committee of
both Kingdoms did make this other Order following.

At the Committee of both Kingdoms, 20. Aprilis, 1644.
Upon reading of the Certificate of the Committee of Citizens Adventurers in
London now produced, conform to the Order of the 17. of this Instant April,
it is now further Ordered, That they be desired to collect, and take into their
hands whatsoever of the said Arms, Artillery, Ammunition, Victuals, and
Provisions, which they can receive from any of the said person named in the
aforesaid Certificate, and whatsoever other the like Goods, and Provisions they
shall hereafter find in the hands of any other person, or persons formerly
provided for Ireland and not yet sent: And to send for, and examine all persons
therein concerned, and to take care, and provide for shipping them away
presently, and to make return of their doings to this Committee from time to
time upon occasion, that so they may receive further Order and direction in the
premises as shall be fit.

And it is further Ordered, and the said Committee are desired to hold such
intelligence and correspondence with the Commissioners and Treasurers in the
Low Countries, employed about the Collections of Benevolences for the poor
Protestants of Ireland, as formerly they have done, and to inform this
Committee of their proceedings from time to time, that such Order may be given
them for disposing of those provisions as shall be fit.

Ex. Gualter Frost, Secretary to the same Committee.

By force of which Orders, the said Committee at Grocers Hall sent for such
persons as had these Goods and provisions in their hands, acquainted them with
these Orders, and desired their conformity in the delivery of the said Arms and
Goods; who taking time to consider thereof, thereupon, as it should seem,
acquainted the Committee for Irish affairs at Westminster therewithal:
whereupon the Order were conceived which follow.

Committee for the affairs of Ireland. Die Veneris. viz. 10. May, 1644.
IT is thought fit, and Ordered by this Committee, that Sir David Watkins
Knight be desired to be present at this Committee, on Wednesday next in the
afternoon, in the Exchequer Chamber at Westminster, to show by what Order and
Authority the Committee of Citizens Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, have by
their Orders and directions by him subscribed, required the Store-keepers
belonging to this Committee to detain, and otherwise to dispose of the
Victual, Clothes, Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, and other Provisions, which
have been committed to their Custody for the service of Ireland.

Joh. Goodwin.

Committee for the affairs of Ireland. Die Veneris. 10. May, 1644.
THis Committee being now informed, that M. William Dobbins, Ralph Hardwick,
and others, trusted and employed by this Committee, for keeping the stores of
victuals, clothes, arms, ammunition, artillery, and materials for the train of
Artillery, provided by them for the service of Ireland, been required by Order
of a Committee of Citizens Adventurers for lands in Ireland, signed by Sir
David Watkins, not to dispose of, or deliver any of the beforementioned
particulars in their respective charges without further Order from them; and
that the said Committee of Citizens Adventurers as have by other their Orders
required Officers of their own to demand and receive those goods and provisions
out of the hands of the persons trusted with the custody of them by this
Committee: It is now thought fit, and Ordered by this Committee, that the said
Master, Dobbins, Master William Gilbert, George Wood, Ralph Hardwick, and all
others who have in their charge and custody any Victual, Clothes, Arms,
Ammunition, Artillery, or materials for the Train of Artillery, for the
service of Ireland, or any other goods or commodities whatsoever, by the Order,
or within the Account of this Committee, be hereby required and enjoined
respectively, to detain and keep all such goods and other provisions in their
safe and sure custodies, as they will anser the contrary at their perils; and
that they carefully preserve them from loss and damage, and not to deliver
them unto any person or persons whatsoever until this Committee shall give
further Order for the disposal of them.

Jo. Goodwyn.

And Master Alexander being not particularly named in the last preceding
Orders, afterward the Orders following were thereupon conceived.

Committee for the Affairs of Ireland. Die Mercurii, viz. 15. May 1644.
THis Committee having by their Order of the tenth of this instant May, desired
Sir David Watkins Knight, to be present at this Committee, this day in the
Exchequer Chamber, to there show by what Order and Authority, the Committee of
Citizens Adventurers for lands in Irelands, have by their Orders and directions
(by him subscribed) required the store-keepers belonging to this Committee, to
detain and otherwise to dispose of the Victual, Clothes, Arms, Ammunition,
Artillery, and other provisions, which have been committed to their custody for
the service of Ireland: forasmuch as Sir David Watkins has not appeared here
this day, according to the said Order; which this Committee conceive to be a
cotempt toward them, who are Authorized by the Houses of Parliament, to send
for parties, and to exercise other powers, conducing to the service of Ireland;
as in other Cases other Committees are. And for that Master Jerome Alexander,
as one of that Committee of Citizens Adventurers for lands in Ireland, has
since the Order above said sent unto Sir David Watkins, required of some of the
store-keepers belonging to this Committee, the delivery unto him of fundry
particulars in their charges, and within the care of this Committee: It is now
Ordered by this Committee that the said Sir David Watkins, and Master Alexander
be hereby required to appear personally at this Committee on Saturday next in
the afternon, in the Exchequer Chamber in Westminster, to Answer such questions
as shall be demanded of them, whereof they are not to fail.

Jo. Goodwyn.

Commit for the Affairs of Ireland. Die Veneris, viz. 7. Julii. 1644.
THis Committee taking notice of a Warrant dated the fifth of this instant
June, signed by Sir David Watkins Knight, by order of a Committee at Turners
Hall, by virtue of an order of the Committee of both Kingdoms to them
directed, whereby Ralph Hardwick, who has for a long time by the Command of
this Committee, kept the stores of diverse provisions made for Ireland, but not
thought fit, as yet, to be sent thither; requiring him to deliver all such
Goods and Provisions as are in his custody, unto Francis Smith, and William
Jennings, or to appear before the said Committee at Turners Hall, to show cause
of his refusal so to do: This Committee, as they have formerly, so now again
have thought fit to require the said Ralph Hardwick, not to deliver those goods
and provisions to any person whatsoever, without their special Order and
direction. And Sir David Watkins, Master Alexander and such others as were
present at the Committee at Turners Hall, when the above mentioned warrant was
Voted and signed, be required to appear personally at this Committee, on
Tuesday next in the afternon, in the Exchequer Chamber at Westminster, to show
by what Order and Authority they have required those goods and provisions, and
to give Anser to some further Questions that shall be demanded of them,
concerning the same, whereof they are not to fail.

Jo. Godwayn.

And now the Committee at Grocers Hall finding the going on of the business
thus opposed, acquainted the Honorable Committee therewithal, not adventuring
to proceed further, without their direction, who were resolved to acquaint the
Honorable House of Commons therewith, as appears by their Order following.

Die Martis 11. Julii 1644. At the Committee of both Kingdoms.
Ordered,

THat it be reported to the House by Master Crewe, that a Warrant has issued
from the Committee for Irish affairs (taking notice of a warrant of this
Committee, for the sending of certain Goods to Ireland, that were formerly
provided for that purpose) having given out their Warrant contradicting it.

Ex. Gualter Frost, Secretary to the same Committee.

And afterward, as it should seem, Sir John Clotworthy addressed himself unto
the said Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms with a particular demand of
some of those Arms and Goods, which was presented in this manner.

There being an equal proportion of Arms for recruting every of the British
Regiments all of them have received their full proportions, only these
following parcels of Sir John Clotworthyes, which were brought back from aboard
the ship the Honor, there being no room for them.

Nubm. 1. Muskets 33. Belts 60.
Nubm. 3. Muskets 33 Nubm. 3. Belts 60.
Nubm. 4. Muskets 33. Belts 60.
Nubm. 8. Bandeleirs 200. Knapsacks 070.
Nubm. 11. Knapsacks 280.
Nubm. 4. Arms 30 Back 30. Breasts 43. Pots 33. small Saddles.

These five first pieces are marked thus,

Sr. J. C.

There were moreover brought by Sir John Clotworthy, and left in that store
only, to be kept there until he should send for them, either 7. or 8.
Carbines, with Belts, Swynels, and Cartriges, and two Dragoon Snaphances.

Whereupon the honorable Committee of both Kingdoms conceived an Order, and
sent the said particular therewithal unto the Committee of Grocers Hall, to
make answer to the said demands.

Die Martis 25. July 1644.
Ordered,

THat the Note of Arms, etc. Desired by Sir John Clotworthy be sent to the
Committee at Grocers Hall, and that they send a Certificate to this Committee
of their knowledge touching these Arms, if they do belong unto Sir John
Clotworthy, upon Thursday at 3. of the Clock in the afternoon.

Ex. Gualtur Frost, Secretary to the same Committee.

In Obedience to which said Order last mentioned, te Committee at Grocers Hall,
made this return following.

Grocers Hall 28 Julii. 1644. To the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms.
ACcording to your Honors Order the 25. of this instant June, we have
considered of Sir John Clotworthies demands in the paper annexed, and do find,
that there are in the Irish stores of goods now in our Possession, 3. chests
which are marked 1.3.4. wherein there ear so many Muskets and Belts as are
specified in the Note; and that in another chest, number 8. there are the
Bandeleers and Knapsacks which are also mentioned in the Noate, and the letters
I. C. also made upon them; and we also find that in another chest, number 4.
there are so many Backs, Breasts, and Pots as are also mentioned in the Noate,
but no letters of I. C. appears upon them; there are also many Saddles in the
stores, and Carbines, Swyvels, Cartriges, far exceeding the number mentioned in
the Noate, but no such letters of I. C. or mark set upon them as is expressed.
And we humbly certify, that aout this time twelve month, the Committee at
Grocers Hall were very much persuaded by Sir John Clotworthy to provide Arms,
Ammunition and Victuals for 5000. Foot, and 500. horse, of the British
Regiments then in Ulster, assuring the said Committee, being thus furnished,
they would march out of that Province, for to fall upon the Irish Rebels in the
Provinces of that Kingdom; all which were provided and sent accordingly,
saving the particulars aforementioned, which were left behind, because the
ship that carries those provisions, could not stow them in her: Sir John
Clothworthy caused the same Arms to be divided here before they went, and
every Regiment to have his proportion allotted; which he caused a servant of his
own to see put up, and sent away; but we have not from that time understood
that the said design has been since pursued, or that any thing has been since
done in that service, albeit all those Arms and provisions sent were delivered
accordingly; whereof we the rather remain ignorant, for that since the said
ship went away, the said Sir John Clotworthy came little amongst us; but the
Committee did put themselves 3000. pound in debt, to make those provisions over
and above 6. or 7000. pound more, which the said Arms etc. cost. We leave it
to your honors consideration, if now Sir John can pretend to the Arms that
design for which they were provided, not being pursued: Howsoever this
Committee crave leave for to inform your honors, concerning your former
Orders to us directed for gathering in such Arms and Goods as were formerly
provided for Ireland, and not sent away, That Alderman Bunce had borrowed out
of the Irish stores at Grocers hall, 126. Snaphaunce-Muskets, and there was in
the hands of our Officer Francis Taylour, 20. Snaphaunce-Muskets more, which
were paid for with the money that was brought in by the Adventurers for lands
in Ireland: These we demanded according to your Honors Orders, and 40.
Hand-mills of one Moreton, which were provided for the Army in Ulster; and to
pay for which, and for 70. pair of Holsters, Sir John Clotworthy did receive
of the said Adventurers money 144.1.10. s. (which hand-mills and Holsters are
in Sir John Clotworthyes hands (as we are informed) for Moreton affirms so
much to us concerthe hand-mills: and thus we humbly conceive that Sir John has
now received 47. Muskets more than his share of the 5000. Foot-Armes: We find
no special direction of them for him; but this we know, that he received 24.
pair of Pistols, or thereabouts, and 65. Carbines and party-peeces more then
any other of the Troops of Horse had there: and howsoever he was pleased for to
inform us at that time, that he had a Troop of horse there in pay, yet since
we are given to understand, that one Sir William Brownlow Knight, Commands that
Troop to which he pretends, and is one of those Troops appointed for to be
Commanded by the Scottish Army there: so that we leave it to your Honors
consideration, if in this Case the said Horse Arms by him demanded do not more
properly belong to the said Sir William Brownlow. All which we leve to your
Honors graver Judgments.

Vera Copia. Ex. Rich. Deacon, Clerk to the said Committee. David Watkins.
Samuel Avery. Jerome Alexander. George Thomason, James Houblon. Samuel Langham.
Michael Herring. Jo. Dethick.


And that Sir John had money for those 126. Snaphaunce-Muskets, mentioned in
the said return, will appear by the certificate following, under the hand of
Alderman Bunce, who paid him, or caused the money to be paid unto him.

I Do acknowledge that Sir John Clotworthy received about May last, of the
Treasurers sitting at Weavers Hall London, by direction and Warrant from the
Committee of the Militia for London, about the sum of one hundred forty and
four pounds eighteen shillings, which was in satisfaction for 126.
Snaphaunce-Muskets borrowed by me out of the Stores, belonging to the Irish
Committee at Grocers Hall. by Order of the said Militia of London. Witness my
hand this 8. day of July 1644.

Ia. Bunce.

All which the said Committee at Grocers Hall for the Irish affairs did make
appear unto Sir John Clotworthy to be as informed, and afterward, the 13. July
following, the said Sir John did obtain the Order which follows in these
words.

Die Saturni, 19. July 1644. At the Committee of both Kingdoms, at Derby House.
Ordered,

THat the Arms and the rest of the Provisions clayed by Sir John Clotworthy,
and concerning which there has been controver sie between him and the
Committee at Grocers hall, shall not be removed, or shipped away, or otherwise
disposed of, until this Committee shall be further satisfied concerning the
same.

Ex Gualter Frost, Secretary to the same Committee.

But before the delivery of this Order to the Committee at Grocers Hall, all
the said Arms were informed unto them by the Officers, to be shipped, and the
Ship falling down, to begin her Voyage from this Port; and the Committee at
Grocers Hall, humbly conceived, it had been much better for Sir John
Clotworthy, and the service, if the said Arms had been transported with the
rest for Ulster, where he might vbery well have received them, to have been of
present use, by any Order for that purpose to have been made; but afterward
he did obtain the said Order of the Honorable House of Commons herein before
mentioned of the 19. of July 1644. and took such a quantity of Arms from
shipboard again, after they were laden and safe stowed in the said Ship, as
aforesaid: And the Committee of Grocers Hall, do humbly conceive, with
submission unto judgment, whether or no they have herein done any thing
contrary to the said Order of the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, or
whether they have herein in anything offended, contrary to the trust reposed in
them, concerning these affairs, howsoever they have been charged so to have
done. But this Wave was no sooner over, but another Billow tumbled after upon
the neck of it; And because Master Alexanders care and pains with the rest of
the Committee, in that wherein they were thus employed, brought to pass what
they were commanded, therefore he was complained against, and traduced to
persons of great power, and quality, as not fit to be trusted in any business;
but for what Reason he could yet never be informed: but this sentence still
made up the foot of the Son in all, for other things to this hour he could
never learn that any man was able to object against him: And if he may but be
heard to anser for himself, he doubts not but to manifest his innocence in
it, and in whatsoever else, to all the world. And M. Alexander has in all
places, and with all persons with whom he has had to do, still met with this
sentence laid in his dish, and in the way of his preferment; and, as if all
that went before were not enough to make him sufficiently miserable, and
unhappy, this old sore after all must be rubbed, this sentence informed and
published yet again, to make against him, and these other things charged
against him for transgressions, whereof he is so clear and free; and after a
long Debate, in the Honorable House of Commons, this Order is conceived there.

Die Martis 20. August. 1644.
ORdered upon the Question, by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Alexander shall be suspended from his Treasurership for the moneys of Ireland,
until he has past his Account.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Which being informed unto the Committee at Grocer Hall, and upon Debate of the
matter between them, they were pleased for the Vindication of themselves, and
to do M. Alexander right in the premises, to prefer the Petition following
unto the Honorable House of Commons, viz.

To the Honorable House of Commons, in this ptesent Parliament Assembled. The
humble Petition of the Committee of Adventurers in London, for Lands in Ireland,
SHOWING,
THat where as by Order of this Honorable House, of the 20. of this Instant,
it is Ordered, That Master Alexander shall be suspended from his Treasurer ship
for the moneys of. Ireland, until he has past his Accounts; This Committee
craves leave to inform, that the said M. Alexander is one of the said
Committee, but is no Treasure for any moneys of Ireland, bit jath been employed
by the Treasurers upon the Ordinances of the 30. of January 1642. and of the
14. of July 1643. (themselves having more weighty employments for the State to
attend) in their absence to over see the businesses of the said Treasuries; but
the Cashiers of the said Offices, have only meddled with the Receipts of
moneys, and not be: And the said respective Treasurers have put in their
respective Accounts, for their Receipts of moneys upon those Ordinances, upon
their Oaths, now above three Months past, before the Committee of Accounts,
as by the several Certificates thereof hereunto annexed does appear, to which
M. Alexander also has subscribed and been sworn, rather to satisfy Sir John
Clotworthy Knight therein, who importuned it, and to manifest M. Alexanders
Candor, und cleernesse in those proceedings, then that he is any ways liable
to an Account: Besides Sir John Clotworthy and others, by Order of the
Committee of Adventurers, have had the said Accounts delivered unto them in
January last to peruse, before they were put in to the Committee of Accounts,
which was not till April following.

And for as much as Sir Joh. Clotworthy Knight, has many times, at the
Committee of Adventurers, and otherwise, given out, in words and speeches, as
if the said Accounts of the said Treasurers were liable to exceptions; and for
that himself has received many great sums of Money, Wares, Goods, Arms, and
Ammunition out of these Treasuries, and out of other Moneys that have been
provided for the Affairs of Ireland, to the valne of 20000. pouud, and yet
challenges an Arrere of 20000. pound to be due unto him, for the entertainment
of himself, his Officers, and Soldiers of his Regiment, and Commands in
Ireland, us we are informed, of which likewise he has put in certain
particulers to the said Committee of Accounts to which he has been sworn;

Your Petitioners (some of them being the said Treasurers) that they may stand
clear in the opinion of this honorable House, and to all the world, do humbly
pray that you will be pleased to direct the said Committee of Accounts
presently to fall upon the examination as well of the said Sir John
Clotworthies Accounts, as of the Accempts of the said sever all Treasurers, and
that all exceptions whatsoever may be taken that can be to any of the said
Accounts: and that this honorable House will be pleased to give it especially
in charge to the said Committee of Accounts, to make return unto this
honorable House, how the moneys have been employed, that have been paid out of
the said Treasuries, and what has become thereof, and how the same has been
husbanded for the benefit of the State, and all other matters, and things
concerning the same.

And forasmuch as Master Alexander, on of our Members, haib been unjustly
charged, to have sent the Marquess of Ormond 1000. pound, as of himself, to
an enemy of the Parliaments. The truth is, your Petitioners (with the advice of
Sir John Clotworthy, before the Cessation in Ireland, and upon a design, laid
principally by Sir Joh. Clotworthy to have sent out 5000. foot, and 500. horse
of the British Regiments out of Ulster against the Rebels, upon which your
Petitioners disbursed 10000. pounds and upwards, and nothing done) at that time
to encourage the said Marquess, to have given all assistance to that
proceeding, and when he stood clear, and then right unto the Parliament, for
ought known unto your Petitioners, they did direct M. Alexander to write over
to the said Marquess, and enclose Bills of Exchange for a 1000. pound to be
paid to the Treasurer at Wars there for his Lordship, and Officers, to
encourage them, which miscarried by the way; of which M. Alexander having been
formerly accused, and restratned of his liberty, yet upon the truth thereof
informed to this Honorable House heretofore, he has been acquitted: and
therefore your Petitioners do humbly pray, it may not be imputed unto him for a
transgression, or be therefore hlemished in the opinion of this Honor able
House, wherein he has acted nothing but by your Petitioners order.

And for as much as we can witness, that he has performed his duty, with a
great deal of care and induslry for the Public, no with standing much
opposition, and with little benefit to himself, and having done many acceptable
services for that Kingdom, and behaved himself in all things with that Candor,
and cleernesse, that we conceive him worthy of all encouragement; We are
therefore humble Suitors for him to this Honorable Assembly, that he may be
taken into consider ation accordingly.

And to remove all obstructions which hitherto have much hindered the
proceedings concerning the affairs of Ireland; It is your Petitioners further
humble Suit to this honorable Assembly, That you will be pleased, with what
speed your more weighty affairswill permit, to take into consideration that
Draft of an Ordinance which your Petitioners have lately presented to this
honorable House, that it may receive such allowance, or denial, as in your
wisedoms shall be thought fit, which howsoever, is only well meant and
intended by your Petitioners, to relieve the present wants and necessities of
the Forces there in Arms, for defense of the King and Parliament.

And they shall pray, etc.
To which Petition, the Certificates and Order of the honorable House of
Commons hereafter following were annexed, for making good of the same, in the
particulers alleged.

WE of the Committee, appointed by Ordinance of Parliament, for taking of the
Accounts of the Kingdom, sitting at the House, late of Alderman Freeman, in
Cornhill London, do hereby certify to all whom it may concern, That on the
sixth day of April last past, Sir Paul Pynder Knight, John Kendrick Alderman,
Bejamin Goodwin, Maurice Thompson, William Pennoyer, and Michael Casteele
Merchants, Treasurers appointed for the Receipts of moneys and goods, etc.
brought in, and to be brought in, upon the Ordinance of Parliament of the 30.
of January 1642. and Jerome Alexander Esquire, and Richard Warburton Gentleman,
brought in, and delivered unto us, upon their corpor all Oaths, an Account of
all money received and paid by virtue of the said Ordinance, for the relief of
Ireland, as witness our hands,

this 22. day of August, 1644. Anth. Biddulph. William Prynne. Lawr. Brinley.
John Langley. Edward Mead. Tho. Andrew, George Wytham. Joh. Gregory.


WE of the Committee, appointed by Ordinance of parliament, for taking of the
Accounts of the Kingdom, sitting at the House, late of Alderman Freeman, in
Cornhill London, do hereby certify to whom it may concern, That on the sixth
day of April last past; James Bunce, Thomas Foot, John Kendrick Aldermen, and
Samuel Avery Esquire, Treasurers appointed for the Receipts of the moneys
brought in, and to be brought in, upon the Ordinance of Parliament of the 14.
of July 1644. and Jerome Alexander Esquire, and Richard Warburtion Gentleman,
brought in, and delivered unto us, upon their corpor all Oaths an Account of
all moneys received, and paid by virtue of the said Ordinance for the relief of
moneys brought in, and to be brought in, upon the Ordinance of Parliament of
the 14. of July 1644. and Jerome Alexander Esquire, and Richard Warburton
Gentleman, brought in, and delivered unto us, upon their corporal Oaths an
Account of all moneys received, and paid by virtue of the said Ordinance for
the relief of Ireland, as witness our hands

this 22. day of August, 1644. Anth. Biddulph. William Prynne. Lawr. Brinley.
John Langley. Edward Mead. Tho. Andrew. George Wytham. Joh. Gregory.


Upon Debate, and Reading of all which, the Order hereafter mentioned, was by
the Honorable House of Commons made, and conceived very justly; For by it, it
is very evident, that the same Petition was objected against, as brought in by
some indirect means, as denied by those that seemed to be the Petitioners,
which when they understood, they all went to the place at the time appointed,
to make good, and avow theit Petition to the said Committee, who not sitting in
a full Number, the Petitioners presented them selves to such of the said
Honorable Committee of the House of Commons as were present, ready to justify
the framing and presenting of the said petition to the said House, by the said
M. Spurstow; and afterward the Committee of Grocers-hall, to clear themselves
from that imputation, framed the Petition following, to be presented to the
said Honorable House of Commons.

Die Veneris 27. September. 1644.
The humble Petition of the Committee of Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, was
this day Read, and Ordered to be Referred unto Master Hollis. Sir William Lews.
Master Recorder. Master Bond. Sir Walter Earl. Sir Tho. Dacres. Sir Hen.
Mildmay. Master Vassal. Master Maynard. Master Lisle. Sir Hen. Vane, jun. Sir
Christopher Wray. Master Ellis. Sir Will. Massam. Master Ash. Master Prideaux.
Master Blackston. Sir Philip Stapleton. Master Jephson. Master Stroude. Master
Weston.
to examine the manner of coming in, and exhibiting this Petition, and what
persons will avow it: And are to meet to morrow at 3. of the Clock in the
afternoon, in the Exchequer-chamber: And have power to send for Parties,
Witnesses Papers, Records, etc.

H. Elsynge, Cler, Parl, Dom, Com.

To the Honorable House of Commons. The humble Petition of the Committee of
Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, sitting at Grocers-Hall.
SHOWING,
THat whereas they have heretofore presented their humble Petition unto this
Honorable Assembly, by the delivery of Master Spurstow one of your Members;
and that by your Order of the 27 of September, 1644, you have been pleased to
refer it to a Committee of this Honorable House, for to examine the manner of
coming in, and exhibiting of that Petition, and what persons will avow it: They
humbly crave leave to inform this Honorable Assembly, That your Petitioners of
the said Committee, whose names are hereunto subscribed, will and do avow the
said Petition; and that it is their sense and humble desires to this Honorable
Affembly; and that you would be pleased to consider the Demands of the said
Petitioners, and to give such Answer thereunto, as in your judgments shall be
thought fit. And they humbly inform further, That they did never disavow the
said Petition, at any meeting whatsoever; but do confess, Some of them, being
demanded at an Assembly of the Adventurers, Whether they had preferred any
Petition to cross the passing of the Ordinance intended for levying and
raising of the 80000 l. for the affairs of Ireland, did deny to have preferred
any such Petition: But for the Petition which they have presented by Master
Spurstow, they never did deny the presenting of the same, nor do deny it. All
which they leave to the consideration of this Honorable Assembly.

Sir David Watkins Knight, Jerome Alexander, John Strange, Michael Hearing,
Samuel Langham, Samuel Moyer, Richard Hill, George Thomason. John Dethicke,
James Houbelon, Richard Leader.


And Master Alderman Bunce and Master Deputy Avery, because they could not
attend, with the rest of the Committee of Grocers-Hall, at Westminster at that
meeting, did, by their Letter written to the said Committee of the House of
Commons, avow the presenting of that Petition by Master Spurstow, and offering
to make it good, with the rest of the said Committee of Grocers Hall. And
Master Alderman Kendrick and Master Featherston, albeit they were not then
present at the presenting of the said Petition, yet will also avow the said
Petition, and, with the rest, desire it may be considered by the House of
Commons.

And lest it may not be believed, that Sir John Clotworthy Knight had the
Treasurers Accounts of the Ordinances of the 30 of January, 1642, and of the 14
of July, 1643, made for raising moneys for the affairs of Ireland, because he
so confidently averred the contrary, and that Master Alexander was a Treasurer
for the receipt of moneys brought in upon those Ordinances, be pleased to
consider the Order follwing.

Grocers-Hall, Die Martis. 9 Januarii, 1643.
REsolved upon the Question, by the Committee and Body of Adventurers for
Ireland,

That Alderman Foot, Alderman Kendrick, Sheriff Bunce, and Master Avery, the
Treasurers, and Master Alexander, be requried to bring in to this Committee, on
Thursday next in the afternoon, a perfect List or Note of the names of all such
persons as have subscribed, or given Moneys or Provisions for Ireland upon the
Ordinance of Parliament of the 14 of July last, as well by way of Adventure, as
Benevolence; with the Sums of money by each person adventured or given, how
much each person has paid in thereupon, and how much thereof is yet unpaid;
and that the said Treasurers and Master Alexander de subscribe this Account.

Resolved, etc.

That Sir John Clotworthy Knight, Captain Methwold, Master Flood and Master
Dethick, be desired to receive this Account, and to put it into an
Alphabeticall-way, for the names of the said Adventurers and Givers, to be
presented to this Committee.

Resolved, etc.

That Sir Paul Pyndar Knight, Alderman Kendrick, Master Maurice Thomson, Master
Pennoyer, Master Casteele and Master Benjamin Goodwyn, the Treasurers, and
Master Alexander, be required to bring in to this Committee, on this day
sevennight, a like perfect List or Note of all Moneys and Provisions that have
been lent or given toward the relief of Ireland, upon the Ordinance of
Parliament of the thirtieth of January, 1642; and that the said Treasurers and
master Alexander do subscribe the same.

Jo. Goodwyn.

You see the time: These Votes or Orders were made the 9 of January, 1643; and
so fierce and pressing he was, that they must be finished in two days; A hard
Task: But, to avoid all blame, or suspicion of delay, they labored day and
night to finish the said Accounts, to clear themselves from those Objections
which had been made, and cast upon Master Alexander at those meetings, albeit
they no otherwise did concern him then as aforesaid. Be pleased also, amongst
the rest, to peruse the Letter and Warrant following, and it will satisfy all
men of Sir John Clotworthy's having these Accounts in his hands in January
last, four months before they were put into the Committee of Accounts.

To our very worthy friends, Alderman Foot, Alderman Kendrick, Sheriff Bunce
and Master Avery, Treasurers appointed by the Ordinance of the 14 of July,
1643, for Subscriptions for Ireland.
Gentlemen,
ACcording to the Resolution taken by the Committee and Body of Adventurers on
Tuesday last, we have now attended here to receive the Accounts which concern
the moneys and Provisions subscribed and come in for Ireland, upon the
Ordinance of Parliament of the 14 of July last: And understanding that the
Accounts are prepared, but no yet subscribed by all the Treasurers, we desire,
for the better speeding of the business, and satisfaction to the Adventurers,
that the said Accounts may be such, as shall give a full Charge, and be
subscribed by you all, and delivered by to morrow morning unto Sir John
Clotworthy, to the end we may forth with proceed to do that which is required
on our part, and the Adventurers be satisfied in what they will expect at their
next meeting: And so we rest,

You may please to send them by the Officer of this House, to Sir John
Clotworworthy's house in Queens-street.


Grocers-Hall the 11 of January, 1643. Your affectionate friends and servants,
Jo. Clotworthy, William Methwold. Charles Lloyd. Jo. Dethicke.



WE who are appointed to supervize the Account brought in by Master Alexander,
etc. do desire the Adventurers to meet at Grocers Hall on Thursday next, by
nine of the clock in the morning, to consider of some particulars in the said
Account, that all men may have sat is faction thereof, that are interested
therein.

Goldsmiths-Hall, this 23. January, 1643. Joh. Clotworthy. Will. Methwold.
Charles Lloyd. Joh. Dethick.


And by all this does it not seem strange, that such a charge should be laid
against Master Alexander, concerning these Accounts, which he had thus clearly
performed in, though, as you may perceive, he is not so concerned in them,
that he is liable to give any Accounts, but to the Treasurers only, and they
are answerable unto the State, as they have often told him? But will you not
think it more strange, that these proceedings should be, and things thus
carried, and yet these Accounts of the thirieth of January before these times,
and from time to time, being put in before the Committee of the House of
Commons for Irish affairs at Westminster, whereof Sir John Clotworthy is one,
and that continually attended that Committee, nay these Accounts examined, and
audited by Master Collins Auditor for the Irish Accounts, and by master William
Hawkins, the Secretary unto the said Committee for Irish affairs at
Westminster? and if any errors, or miscarriages had been in the said Accounts,
surely they would have quickly found them, and I cannot believe, they would
have concealed any thing that might have made against Master Alexander, if any
thing had appeared in them worthy of blame: But is it not to be more admired,
that all this ado should be made about these Accounts, and Master Alexander of
all the rest, and none but he called upon, and thus questioned concerning them,
when that Honorable Committee of the House of Commons for Irish affairs
sitting at Westminster, whereof Sir John Clotworthy is one, as is said before,
in December 1643. had by their Order discharged Master Alexander from meddling
in the Officer, and had placed another in his Room, as appears by the Order
following?

Committee for the Affairs of Ireland. Die Veneris, viz. 9. December, 1643.
THis Committee being very sensible of the prejudice which does already, and
may hereafter come unto the service of Ireland, by the continual neglect of
master Jerome Alexander, who is appointed by the Treasurers at Guild Hall,
nominated in the Ordinance of Parliament of the 30. of January last, for a new
Loan and Contribution toward the relief of that Kingdom, to attend that
Receipt, their Orders being by him slighted: and he refusing to attend this
Committee, as he has been often required, they have now thought fit, that the
said Treasurers do appoint Master Richard Warburton, who is well acquainted
with the business, to take into his charge and custody, the Books and Papers
belonging to that Ordinance, and to state and perfect the Accounts concerning
the same, and that he attend the Receipts and Payments upon that Ordinance for
the time to come, by the order and directious of the Treasurers, so as the
service may not suffer by any neglect.

Joh: Goodwin.

Thus you may perceive, that whether Master Alexander were in the office, or
out of the Office, all is one, his quiet is never a whit the more: and yet
since this Order, all the Orders that have come from that Honorable Committee
for Irish affairs at Westminster to the Treasurers, they have been delivered to
Master Warburton, who, with one Master Benjamin Goodwin, one of the said
Treasurers, has carried on the bu2inesse with him; and yet Master Alexander
must still be called upon for Accounts. And whereas this Order mentions
neglects, and contempts, Master Alexander was ever obedient to their Orders,
and caused the Accounts to be delivered in punctually from time to time, as
they were required, or else he had been worthy to have heard of it to his
cost; and I am sure you believe he should have heard of it in another kind: And
how he has behaved himself, amongst those with whom he has had to do in
these affairs, you may be pleased to understand in the Certificate following.

WE of the Committee of Adventurers in London for Lands in Ireland, sitting at
Grocers Hall, do certify, and will be ready to make it appear, when we shall
be called, that Master Jerome Alexander was freely and unanimously chosen by
the Body of the Adventurers in London, to be one of the Committee for Irish
affairs at Grocers Hall, and was at another meeting afterward confirmed by a
like consent; That ever since he has peformed his duty, with a great deal of
care and industry, for the Public, and has in this time done many acceptable
services for Ireland, with that Candor, as we conceive him worthy of all encour
agement. And we further conceive (and by experience have found) that if he had
not been amongst us, we could not have gone on so well in this Affair as we
have done, in regard he is better acquainted with the state and condition of
most parts of Ireland, and the several persons there employed, then we are,
or can be.

David Watkins. Jam. Bunce. Joh. Kendrick. Sam. Avery. Hen. Fetherstone. Rich.
Hill. Michael Herring. James Houblon Joh. Dethick. Joh. Strange. Sam. Langham.
George Thomason. Sam. Moyer. Rich. Leader.


And Master Alexander is confident, if he would have desired a Certificate from
the Committee of Goldsmiths-hall, of his carriage amongst them, he could have
procured a like manifestation of his good demeanor in that service; but
because it concerns another employment, he has been silent in it: But thus
you may perceive further, what ill measure he has had, and what opposition
he has undergone; and for no other cause or reason that he is conscious of
unto himself, if not for acting his part in the affairs wherein he has been
trusted, with that fidelity and zeal, that becomes an honest man: And to the
best of his understanding, in all the course of his life, the malice and
prosecution that he has met withal, have been for no other cause, but that
he would never be drawn to betray any trust committed to his charge, for any
gain, or tender of preferment whatsoever.

But why should Master Alexander think much at this usage, seeing it is but the
same thing which others sufer with himself; and is that has been, and it is
that which shall be? And that which is done, is that which shall be done, and
there is no new thing under the Sun, Ecclesiastes 1.9.

But after all this, it has been objected surther; But what has been done for
Ireland, since Master Alexander has been of that Committee for Irish affairs?
It is not possible for any man to think that it lay in his power, to do more
then his own personal endeavors could contribute: and that he may put the
question, in answer of this demand; What has he left undone, that any ways
lay in his power to do, and promote for the good and welfare of that Kingdom,
or of any His Majesty's Dominions? Nay, ever since his coming for England,
after his escape from those blood-thirsty Rebelsin Ireland, he has spent his
whole time, and that means which he has received from his friends, in that
service, and both publicly, and privately has labored by all the possible
ways he could, to have relieved it: and Ultra posse non est esse. Let any man
instance in any thing that he has done, to the least prejudice of the
proceedings, and if he cannot answer for himself, let him be condemned; if
that be not so termed wherein he has opposed those things which inall likely
hood and appearance, must have left the Forces, and poor Protestants there, in
a far worse condition, then (blessed be God) now they are in. It is a Rule,
that Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt; By telling you peradventure,
what he has not done, you may happily give a guess, at that which has
followed upon his endeavors.

First of all then, he does profess, That he has not carried two faces in one
Hood, but in whatsoever Debates, where he has had the freedom to deliver
himself, and his opinion, he has done it with singleness of heart, clearly
without respect of persons: he has made the cause of Reformation both in
Church and State, the sole aim of his intentions, and Byas of his actions, and
in the prosecution hereof, has never swerved to the right hand, or to the
left, and for his part has still inclined that way which his judgment has led
him unto, and that might promote this the best, and bring it unto perfection
with most expedition; and has been ever of this opinion to love truth, though
in the coursest garments: he has never been so far wedded to his will, but
that he could submit to any one when convinced with reason; and if upon good
grounds, he has conceived any one, of what Nation soever, better able to do
the work, then his own Countreyman, he has preferred him in his esteem, as
fittest to beimployed in such a time as this, all punctillio's of honor, and
by-respects whatsoever notwithstanding: he has not clawed any one with
Court-holy water, smooth language, whom he has understood to have been an
enemy to this Cause of God, of what quality, or condition soever, but has
delivered his sense freely in those things wherewith he has been trusted,
whosoever has opposed it, though veritas odium parit: he has not acted for
his own interest wherein he has been employed, otherwise then involved in the
same general Cause, with all others; knowing, that if the Public suffers, it
is not any man's private interest that can be considerable: He has not been
craving the employment wherein he has labored all this while, nor has had
other Reason to move him to it, but a free Calling, and his earnest defires and
affections to advance the business: He has not been led to this by a popular
spirit, or from a desire any ways to lift himself up in the opinion of the
world; and shall be as well content to rest from his labors, as he has been
for to perform his duty, if he shall be once by the same power set aside, as
useless and unserviceable, by which he acts, and by which he was called to
it: he has neither gained, nor claimed 40000 l. for his service, but has lost
a Fortune, by the Rebellion in Ireland, worth half that same, and all the
Estate he had, and therefore has deserved some consideration; and yet whereas
others have tasted liberally of the bounty of the Parliament, out of those
Collections made for the relief of the poor distressed Protestants in Ireland,
he has yet never received penny of that Charity, nor has in the least been
burdensome to the Parliament, but has lived by that which he has truly
labored for, and spent as much more in their service, that has been given him
of his friends: He has not been Linsey-Wolsey in his Religion, nor has
professed to more sides then the right, so near as he was able to apprehend the
truth, for to support him in any action, or thing, that has not been just and
equitable; nor has he by a specious and seeming sanctity, endeavored to cover
over a double iniquity, he has not filled his purse with unlawful gain, nor
has kept from others that which is their due, when power and menas, and that
which has been rightly belonging unto such, has been put into his hands, for
their satisfaction; nor has complained, nor made use of the necessities of
others, to supply his own occasions, whiles these indeed have been in a
starving and perishing condition: he has had neither place nor Office, under
color whereof he could fill his Coffers, and yet never do duty, nor wait upon
the service: He has hated to be accounted a common liar, or a slanderer of
his neighbor: He has not maliciously endeavored any man's ruin, nor has
whispered in secret that, of any man behind his back, which he has been
ashamed to justify unto his face; he has not been like a wild Asses Colt,
that has kicked the dam, that has given it suck; he has not deceived the
trust reposed in him, nor been but what he has seemed to be; he never was
accused to have labored for the enlargement of any Rebel, under color that he
should do service for the Parliament; he never held Intelligences with any the
Parliaments opposites in Oxford nor elsewhere; he could never fawn like a
Spannel, flatter like a Fox, imitate like an Ape, change like a Camelion, nor
devour like a Lion; and if it were not that he hates to be the Trumpet of his
own praise, he could say something of himself, which he will therefore forbear,
only relate all in this one general, that he has never been wanting to
contribute whatsoever has lain in his power, and within the Verge of his
profession, to promote the welfare of that, and these Kingdoms; and has spent
many hours, and days, and months, some years in managing those affairs, and
amongst others has served the Parliaments commands therein faithfully and
constantly, and with so much success as the distraction of the time, the
Cessation of Arms there in Ireland, and the great opposition which he has met
withal in these proceedings, would permit and suffer: and because he has been
charged, that he has endeavored heretofore to have drawn over the moneys
collected for the poor Portestants in Holland hither, thereby to have diverted
that charity into another channel, and by the employments of the moneys here,
to have advantaged some man's private interest; he does profess, he has been
so far averse to that way, as understanding from the first, that it was the
intention of the Donours of that liberality, that it should be only sent over
for Ireland in Victual, that with the rest of the Committee at Grocers Hall,
he has labored to keep a right understanding therein, with the States and
Classes of the Low Countries, and to prevent all suspicions of mis-applying
their bounty, otherwise than they intended it, and when some letters were
written over by some from hence to that purpose, which staggered them in their
said proceeding, the said Committee of Grocers Hall so carefully waded in it,
with them, as they took off the jealousies thus raised, and have procured a
large collection and contribution there, which has been sent in Victual to
the poor Protestants in Ireland, amounting unto near 30000. l. which has been
such a Reviving unto them, as some of them of Ulster have professed, that they
had not otherwise been able to have subsisted all this while: and if any such
thing has been done, surely it has not been by the Committee of Grocers Hall,
or Master Alexander, as the ensuing Order may possibly manifest, which was
directed to Master Deacon, Clerk to the said Committee of Adventurers, to have
taken the business out of their hands.

Committee of the Affairs of Ireland. Die Jovis, viz. 29. February 1643.
Whereas the Letters, Orders, and other Accounts, and Papers which concern the
Contributions for Ireland in the United Provinces in the Low Countries, and the
disposal of those Contributions have been by former Order of this Committee
required to be brought unto them, but are not yet produced to give that
satisfaction, which upon many occasions is requisite: It is now again thought
fit and Ordered by this Committee, that Master Deacon (in whose custody they
are alleged to be) be hereby required peremptorily, forthwith to deliver unto
Master John Goodwyn, now of the chair for this Committee, all such Letters,
Coppies of Letters, Orders, Accounts, and other writings; either sent from
hence, or received from thence, which concern that affair, to the end the
Committee may from time to time make use of them, for the advantage of the
service: whereof the said Master Deacon is not to fail.

Jo. Goodwyn.

But what was meant by this, Master Alexander professes he knows not, but he
conceives well, and that it was to have managed the business in a better way,
than they at Grocers Hall have done; but he hops it has excused him from
that Accusation, and to those that have blamed him in this particular, who has
no ways been advantaged by it in the least farthing, but has contributed all
his endeavors, that might possibly promote the business; and whosoever wrote
to that State, to draw over the moneys hither to be employed here, he can wash
his hands in innocence, he has had no finger in it; indeed he remembers
something has been written from thence to the said Committee at Grocers Hall,
informing such a thing to have been done, and admiring the desire of it, for
that the States and Classes had Ordered otherwise from the beginning; and that
whatsoever moneys should be thus Collected, should be only employed to buy
Victual, and to transport thither, which has been since done to such a value
as formerly mentioned.

And now if you please, you may observe from all that has gone before, the
state and condition in which Master Alexander has lived ever since he came to
Act in this world, that as it is said, Revel. 12.4. The Dragon stood before the
woman, which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child so soon as it
was born: so he came no sooner abroad to trade and traffic amongst men, but
he found the stream and Current of the times, immediately to run very strong
and violently against him, and ever since he has been enforced to sail both
against wind and tide, that he could never yet with Saint Paul attain to the
fair Havens, unto the desired place where he would be, Acts 27.8. Psalm.
107.30. yet has God many times made these storms to be calmes, so that the
waves thereof have been sometimes still and quiet, but like a Ram fallen
backward, to give the greater Butt in their coming on again; and the stormy
winds and tempests, which has lifted up these waves on high, have brought him
to his wits ends, and have even melted his spirits, because of the troubles;
yet he does confess, when he has cried unto the Lord in these afflictions, he
has saved him out of these distresses, Therefore does he praise him for his
goodness, and for the wonderful works which he does unto the children of
men: you may also perceive Master Alexander has still been upon the defensive
part and has labored under the oppressions of those with whom he has had to
do, and it has been his ill hap evermore to be pursued by such as have been
too strong and mighty for him, that he can truly say with Israel, Psalm. 129.
Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not prevailed
against me; the Plowers plowed upon my back, and have made long furrows, but
the righteous Lord has hewn their snares in pieces: you know the report of
great ones, must render a man suspected at least, though never so innocent, if
not distasteful to that sort of people, who believe things as they are informed
of them by their superiors, whom they trust, who carry authority with them to
cry down any man's merits, though never so worthy, and can stick upon him
scandalous imputations, though undeserved; and if it be thus, how much sooner
will things be credited, which are done by color of Justice, and as if they
had the stamp, and an impression of truth set upon them, by the powerful hands
of Authority, which in those times admitted of neither dispute or
contradiction, nor was there any way left to repair innocence thus abused: and
for a close of all, be pleased to re-collect these observations from the whole
matter.

1. That this Sentence thus given against Master Alexander, was an occasion
taken, as for a thing long waited for, and resolved upon beforehand to be put
in Execution with the first opportunity; and then see how easy a thing it is
to find a staff to beat a dog.

2. That Master Alexander attempting now at his first coming into the world,
to repair himself against the wrong done him by Master Godfrey, as aforesaid,
he being a Popish adversary; yet of great esteem and account in his Country, as
descended from so famous a Lawyer as his father was in his Generation, allied
to many Ancient families there, befriended by all the Gentry: Therefore, and
for not complying with the times, and refusing to betray the trust reposed in
him; and by reason of the many Stewardships which he had, and therein having to
deal with very many of the best Gentry of that County, that held of those
Lordships by Service and Rent, the performance and payment whereof, he now more
strictly required, the same being almost extinguished by the connivance or
negligence of his predecessors exercising that Office; and having therein also
to deal with a rude multitude of the poorer sort of people, who for small and
petty debts, were daily sued in those Courts, whose very necessities did raise
clamor, though justly proceeded against, and Mr Alexander in the course of his
calling, in the very beginning thereof, being much employed for the inferior
sort of people and most commonly against the greatest, wherein he did evermore
perform his duty with all the power and faithfulness he was able, and
evermore with good success, which he has continued to do unto this day, he
doubts not but all indifferent men will judge, that it was not possible for
him to live without being envyed, scandalized, and questioned: though in all
you may perceive he still acquitted himself; For he that does truth comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God,
and the truth shall make him free, Joh. 31. and 8.32.

3. That this Sentence was then given with a spirit of prejudication and
resolution beforehand, taken howsoever to condemn Master Alexander in this
matter, does appear by the said Lord Keeper Coventrys proceedings in it, from
first to last: wherein all the Officers in that Court acting under him, and to
free one of themselves, carried on the same more smoothly, and so made it a
thing almost impossible for Master Alexander to escape their fingers: birds of
one feather, flying altogether to the prey; which is more remarkable in the
particulars following.

4. By the Lord Keeper Coventry his readiness to embrace the least hint and
occasion offered to charge M. Alexander with this Accusation, whereof it has
appeared unto you herein before that he was innocent.

5. That upon the first Motion, though out of Court, his Lordship instantly
released Yates, who stood fined in Court, and was then in custody upon a
Censure, appearing to have been justly given against him.

6. That the said Lord Keeper, being the supreme Judge of that Court, and in
order unto his place, directing all Causes in the manner of their proceeding
unto Judgment, his Lordship gave Rules and Orders in this matter, against all
the Rules and Orders of that Court.

7. Thus he irregularly admitted of an Oath in this Cause for to confront an
Oath, contrary to all practice and the duty of a good Judge, for that where an
Oath is once received, and upon Record in a Court of Justice, an other Oath in
the Negative, has never been admitted, point blank in opposition to the
former; The only Remedy in such Cases being by Bill, or Information, that all
parties concerned, may interplead the matter in difference, and thereupon right
and justice to be done, where the fault is found.

8. That where the Accusation has been once answered upon Oath, in the
particulers of the Charge, it is against the ordinary rules of all Courts of
Justice, for to re-examine that party again, upon those very things to which he
has precisely answered; yet did the said Lord Keeper Coventry, you see,
enforce Master Alexander twice to answer that thing over again upon his Oath,
which he had punctually answered once before, nay once publicly in Court
interrogated by himself, and after that again by examination of the Judges, by
him principally directed, which was only done to have drawn from him some
guilt, if possible, whereby to have ruined and undoned him.

9. It has been never seen in any Court of Justice, that the party
complaining, has been bound up in the matter complained of, by the Oath of any
Defendant, without his own consent; yet in this Case Nevill being legally
charged with committing of the said offense, was received by the said Lord
Keeper Coventry, for to purge himself upon his Oath, without any consent had,
or sought for of Master Alexander, and in an extrajudiciall way also, and made
use of it afterward as a testimony upon which to ground the Sentence, having
nothing more to support it withal.

10. In all Bills and Informations exhibited in that Court, the Cause being so
penal to the party complained against, the matter ought to have been set down
truly, and as precisely as in an Indictment, that so the party accused, might
have certainty to what to answer; for if one offense be charged, and another
proved, in such case there is no ground for to warrant a Sentence, nor has it
been seen that any man, in any Court whatsoever, has been concluded by
generals, nor by offenses proved which are heterogenia, and not of the matter
in question; for so to judge, is to judge part inandita ultera; for if this
should be admitted, no man possibly could be safe, if to be judged for that,
which he has been never received to answer, yet the said Lord Keeper Coventry,
admitted of both these proceedings to condemn Master Alexander: For first, he
received the said (...) Cook to depose matter in Court against Master
Alexander, diverse, and from the things in question, and caused that to be
inserted in the Sentence, as convincing testimony, which you see is a thing
false in it self now it comes to be defended; He admitted of diverse generals
also not proved, nor before alleged, to be inserted in the said Sentence, as
matter of testimony to support it, which were far otherwise in truth, and
deed, then they stand therein urged, and pressed; and which are so many of
them, as that in effect the whole Sentence is founded upon nothing else, most
illegally and unwarrantably.

11. Whereas no man after his Answer in Court, but is lawfully served with an
Order, or Process, to join issue in the matter controverted, or depending,
and after issue joined, is called by Process, or Order, for to appear at a
certain day, and time, to hear judgment pronounced, and to make his just
defense, that so innocence may not suffer, if possibly to be prevented: but in
this Case of Master Alexanders, the said Lord Keeper Coventry proceeds to
judgments, without doing of either of these; and yet to give some color for
this wrong doing, and to make quick work of it, he overshadows it with another
thing, an error of as high a nature, and receives that for a service of Master
Alexander to hear judgment, which has appeared to have been no service at
all, and that in seven days time, from the day that the Judges certificate was
first produced, and read in Court, and then Resolved upon the first to draw
this matter unto a formal hearing, it is concluded to be proceeded in, is
debated, and Sentenced, and M. Alexander destroyed without defense; and what
needed all this post-hast, if not to have made it only the advantage of
destroying him in his absence? In which way, they were sure to bring about
their ends.

12. That upon the matter, he directs in the Sentence, the Governors of
Lincolns-Inne, whereof Master Alexander was a Member, to expel him the
Society, fearing lest he should not be otherwise made miserable enough, and
that they might without that hint or direction, by the way, have forborne to
have proceeded against him, with a like severity, but by this Weathercock, you
may see where the Wind blew, and that malice when it rages, is without
bounds, or restraint; and now with holy Job, Chap. 19.7. I might cry out of
wrong, but I was not heard; I cried out aloud, but there was no judgment.

13. That the said Lord Keeper Coventry, after the question was once stirred,
never so much as once endeavored afterward to support the Sentence given
against Yates, though upon so good proof appearing in the Books, the said
Deposition of John Warren, being set aside, but absolutely dismissed Yates,
without more ado, contrary to the duty of his Place, and Office; whereby it is
further manifest, it was not for his love and zeal unto justice, but revenge,
that he herein more aimed at, was the cause that he persecuted M. Alexander
with so much extremity.

14. That he was not ignorant, that the crime objected was in it self petty,
and without consideration, in case it had been the Act of M. Alexander (as you
find him cleared of it, in that which has gone before) and therefore it
further shows the inveteracy of his rancor, and for what cause he was so
violent in the persecution of M. Alexander, thus unjusty unto Sentence.

15. That the said Lord Keeper Coventry was resolved, you may see by the
excessivenesse and immoderation of the Fine, and other things required to be
performed by the Sentence, to make it final and irrecoverable, and so heavy
and burdensome, as that Master Alexander should never again be able to rise
from under it; for thus he disinabled him in his estate, in his profession, in
his good name, in his friends, and made whatsoever uncomfortable to him which
this life could afford; that thus upon the matter he had buried him alive,
which to have completed, there wanted nothing but execution, an Officer, to
have cast him into the grave, the prison appointed, from whence he should have
been sure, in his time, never to have returned, till he should have paid the
uttermost farthing, and performed whatsoever he required to have been done.

16. That he seconded Yates his dismission with another Act of injustice, as
grievous as any of the rest: he received a Bill of costs from Yates his
Attorney, which had a foundation answerable to the building, false glosses upon
the Text, a Title appearing as untrue, as the particulars therein were unjustly
multiplied; with an addition too in the Summa totalis, more then justifiable,
or contained in the Sums that went before, another brat of the same breeding;
thus rolling one stone more over his grave, that so there might be weight
enough to have kept him under ground.

17. That by his means no installment of the Fine must be in Master
Alexanders Case, which was a mercy admitted to all others in like condition,
and to such whose offenses were proved Capital, and transcendent indeed, and
this Fine must be begged, and paid, and all other sums of money which he had
adjudged to be paid by M. Alexander in that Court: and was not this yet more
grievous and intolerable, and done out of malice to him?

18. That he vowed, he would not admit of any Pardon to pass under the great
Seal for Master Alexander, of the said Sentence, so long as he was Keeper of
it, which in part he performed, and with much trouble to his patience, and
grief of his heart (as you see it prooved) it was, that he permitted any thing
to pass at all, and if his power had not been employed for a cloak of his
maliciousness, 1. Pet. 2.16. what had it been to him, had he stood
indifferently affected, that after the Sentence past, and that the Law had had
its course, that his Majesty should not be as merciful to M. Alexander, as to
any other of his Subjects, you may understand the cause of his fear, was the
palpable injustice in these his Actions, and that if M. Alexander should
acquire any means and liberty for himself, he conceived his spirit too great to
put up such an injury at his hands, when any opportunity should be offered to
attempt the same.

19. That he gave the said dismission for Yates against Master Alexander, and
awarded 130. pound Costs against him, when it appeared unto him by such proof
as had been made, that M. Alexander had probabilem causam littigandi, and much
more, and therefore by the course of that Court ought to have paid no Costs,
which further answers that objection; That the Petitioner should commit the
fact for his own advantage, when no benefit could have accrewed to him by it at
all, there being sufficient testimony besides to prove the Charge, and it had
been an Act of great folly in M. Alexander to have done such a thing, which
must of necessity have been controuled in Court, both by the Record, and the
Defendants Copy of the said Deposition, and who can believe he would do that
Act in secret, which he had endeavored to make public, by the mark like a
hand set against it in the margent of the Copy for examination of it, and which
of necessity must discover it.

20. And if the said Lord Keeper Coventry had not been more engaged in it than
ordinary, why would he have pressed a matter of no more importance or damage,
either to the State or any other person than this was, and carried it on with
so high a hand and such violence, especially against one of his own coat, whose
infirmities, if he had found any in him, he should therefore the rather have
endeavored to have concealed in the birth of his profession in hope of
amendment, than thus for to proceed without mercy or moderation, I am sure
herein he did not immitate his heavenly Father in mercy, who forgiving
thousands of Talents, does expect we should not for Pence, take our Neighbors
by the throat, Luke 6.36. Mat. 18.32, 33, 34, 35.

21. He suffered the Sentence to be interlaced with much scandalous and
impertinent matter, merely suggested to render M. Alexander causlesly odious,
to all that should only read it and understand no more: and we say it is an
easy thing to make a man of straw, and kill him when we have done; and if it
may be admitted to insert without proof or warrant, what a man's Adversary, and
his Council can invent, to make something of nothing, whereby to charge his
enemies; I wounder who it is in such case can be safe from destruction, or that
can think his life and estate is not every minute in danger, and when the said
Lord Keeper Coventry, who had first the perusuall of all Sentences given in
that Court, did permit this Sentence to be stuffed up with such untruths: Is he
blameless herein for doing to Master Alexander an intolerable injury and
oppression?

22. When he observed no Order, in this proceeding, which is the life of
Government; and where there is no Order, there is confusion, it is a Rule then
in all Cases criminal, if the supposed Delinquent deny the fact objected, no
prosecution should be made against him, without Bill or Information, Answer and
Examination of Witnesses; so that the Party accused might make his just
Defense: of all these Master Alexander was deprived and debarred, and yet the
Sentence supported by his only power and greatness, as if it had been the most
just one, that ever was pronounced upon earth.

23. You may also perceive what use of it has been made from time to time,
against Master Alexander, by all those his opposites, with whom he has had to
do, perverting it to serve their own turns for his disgrace; and though it be
penned with as much asperity, and disadvantage unto his Case; and filled with
as many falsities as there are lines, yet because it came not high enough, it
must be reported to be far otherwise, and worse then it is in it self: which
the late Earl of Strafford, and now, Sir John Clotworthy, have been pleased to
extend far beyond whatsoever is contained in it: and all which you see Master
Alexander has hitherto suffered with a great deal of patience, but does now
hope the time is come that his Case is known, and if yet he shall not find
redress of his sufferings, he is so well inured to bear the burden of these
Calamities, as he will yet rest in hope, that, that God which has all this
time protected him, and kept him from destruction, will either here, or
hereafter, or in both, satisfy him with his goodness.

24. That Court of Star Chamber it self in the exercise of it in those times,
was not so pure, and clear from question and exception, both that it was by
this Honorable Parliament found to be a great grievance, and vexatious to the
Subject, and therefore dissolved it, the Judges of that Court not keeping
themselves to the points limited by the Statute, by which it stood principally
founded and erected, but did punish where no law did warrant, and made decrees
for things where they had no Authority and did inflict heavier punishment then
by any law was warranted and contrary to the great Charter, and was a means to
introduce an Arbitrary power and Government, And therefore no wonder, if he
that was an honest man, and lived in any way averse unto those times and their
proceedings, extremely suffered under its censures, but we have seen the end of
these blazing and falling stars, who having deceived us all this while, have
been resolved into their Elements of earth and self respects.

Thus a man that is constantly carried by true principles, though the compass
may through infirmity or Temptation sometimes admit variation or wavering yet
it recollects it self again, and will promote to the true pole, what waves or
winds soever beats against the ship, perseverance in good things goes never
without its reward in the latter end, it did Judas no good that he was of the
twelve, when once he fell away; for it cannot do any man good to lay a good
foundation, if he build not a fair structure upon it, for to begin in the
Spirit and end in the flesh; to set out good wine at the first and then that
which is worse, is the Devils banquet: I am confident of my innocence, I have
produced my evidence, let the Reader judge, and I appeal to the searcher of
hearts too; who will one day acquit me, and punish their uncharitableness,
that have condemned me by the measure of my sufferings, and nothing else; but I
hope that God who in justice has laid on the burden, will in mercy still
strengthen my shoulders to support it, and what my prayers and endeavors
cannot prevent, my patience shall undergo; yet let me crave this one thing at
your hands, that if you find herein, as Festus did of Paul, Acts 25.18.19.
That his Accusers stood up against him, and could prove no evil accusation;
you will with Paul's Judges (between your selves at least) say of this man, That
he has done nothing worthy whereof he has been accused, Acts 26.31.

Voluntas Dei secreta sit nunquam injusta: the cause why God punishes may be
hid, but it is never unjust, Therefore will I bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, Nehem. 9.33. Mich. 7.9.

FINIS.

