
A BREVIATE of the BILL for Relief of Ancient Tenants of Church Lands.
THat diverse persons of great Loyalty, held several Church Lands by Lease
before the Wars, and paid rents in time of wars to the Clergy, and many of them
were forced to purchase their own Tenements.

That his Majesty in his Declaration from Breda, promised to such, some
reasonable satisfaction, And by his Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury
requires, that the Ancient Tenants of the Church be favorably dealt with in
renewing their Leases.

That the King Commissionated diverse Lords and others to Effect those purposes,
and himself has often interposed, but the Obstinacy of some of the Clergy have
refused to obey him.

Therefore it is Enacted

But if the Churchmen resuse to comply with Orders of the Commissioners, then
the Case to be reported to the King and Council, And the Judgment there to be
final to all parties.

If Churchmen will not obey, the King may under the Great Seal, Privy Signet,
or Sign Manual, make Leases for 21. years, or three Lives, of the Lands,
according to such Order which shall be good and available; And if such Lessees
be impleaded, he may plead the General Issue, and minister the Special Matter
in Evidence, And if verdict go for him, shall recover Double Costs.

All Concurrent Leases since 1643. are made void, except the same were made to
the Old Tenant, or to others with his Consent, or which is or shall be approved
by the Commissioners, or the King.

Provided the Fine upon the Lease to be made shall be paid to him whose Lease
is avoided, if it come short the Lessor shall make it up, if it be more the
Surplus shall be paid to the Lessor.

All rates of Fines and Covenants in Leases to be made by virtue of this Act
shall be subjected to the Approbation of the Commissioners, and the King and
Council, with particular regard to be had to such Tenant as paid his rent any
two years in the time of Wars.

Where several Persons were Joint Lessees, whereof One or More do not merit the
benefit of this Act, and the other do, the Lease shall be renewed soly to him
that stands upright.


