A CATECHISM FOR COMMVNICANTS.

Set forth for the benefit of the willing to be well prepared for the receiving
of that great Mystery of the LORDS SVPPER.

By a Wel-willer unto all the children and servants in this great Cities, and
the Suburbs, but most especially those of the Parish of Dunstans East London.

Sicut speculum pulchrum in Fabrica aurea, in Domo caecipositum, Sicut lyra
surdo, sic favus in ore mortui leonis, sic Sacramentum non credentibus, non
praeparatis, etc. The Lord our God made a breach at first upon you, because you
sought him not in due order, 1 Chro. 15.13. I am come to do sacrifice to the
Lord, sanctify your selves, and come with me to the sacrifice, 1 Samuel 16.5.
London Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1645.

TO The Right worshipful, and others the inhabitants of the Parish of Dunstans
East LONDON.
Gentlemen,
IF you and I, and all that love light, bad ever cause to bless God for the
same, let us now begin to think of our duty: none of our least thanks surely
is due for the Catechism; Candles lighted and burning bright, one after
another, and all from the great Torch of Gods holy Word. The dimnesse (to my
knowledge) is yet very great, yea even here where so many fired Beacons now
burn out. Now because some, perhaps, will read such a Catechism, because such
a one writ it, though for nothing else; I have adventured to set on fire this
little Candle also. Some lights I know are of Tallow, and pleasant enough for
light, but the sent unsavorie, this is wax, and gathered with some diligence
too, and if it may make any heart like melting wax as David speaks, Psalm.
22.14. or become a Taper serving for a light to feet and a Lantern to paths;
as every thing of truth gathered out of Gods Word ought to do, it will be
well for you, and for me not amiss, your integrity shall surely redound upon
your own heads, and if (I help you) some of your weldoing shall be put on
mine account. All knowledge does, and indeed ought to tend to practice, but
catechisticall knowledge, most especially, concerning which, Exodus 12.26. And
such knowledge in these (seeming knowing, but indeed) ignorant times, is I
believe, the best Pilot, guide, and usher, unto godly practice; Divinity
propounds three noble ends unto her self.

The 1. is Gods glory, the highest and most supreme.

2. Is man's sanctification here, and salvation hereafter.

3. Is the edification and conversion of our neighbors, and those that relate
unto us; to all these ends such knowledge, as is drawn from catechisticall
principles, looks directly. Wolphius.
He said sweetly, God gave not man his Laws to preserve only; for then he
might have committed them to iron Chests or marble Pillars: nor only to talk
of them; for then he might have given them to Geese or Parrats: nor yet only
for contemplation; for then the Owls in Ivy woods, or the Monks in Cloisters
had been fittest to have received them; Gods purpose was and still is, not to
make trial of the wits of men who could sharpliest conceive, nor of their
memories who could faithfulliest retain, nor of their eloquence who could
roundliest discourse, but of their wills who would most obediently do that
which he commanded them. These directions (Gentlemen) intend your practice
only, and as in all things, so especially, in your approches unto God in his
most holy things; that his Table be not made a snare unto you. One Apple of the
tree of life is better then ten of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil;
though we, in our longings, fondly prefer these before the other, ever since
our first parents teeth were set on edge therewithal. Some of the maine heads
of Divinity are here handled, as our misery and our mercy; Nazian: (...). Syst.
Theolog. p. 212.
our disease and the cure, as he said well, The remedy you have here, in the
means prescribed, to the Fall in the effects; I pray you still remember, that
the purpose of all is for, and the profit will be found in practice, that as
he said excellently, The Faith of the ears and that of the hands may go
together, I find of old four great complaints, Vid. Ruffin. Eccl. hist. lib.
2. cap. 10. Moses Lucio, Arr. Episcop.
(by no small men neither) fitted for their several times, but indeed, too too
suitable unto ours also. The first (Seneca) says Malint disputare quam vivere,
Men had rather fall to disputing down one another, then endeavor to live up
to God: too true, God wot. The second says, men know, only that they may be
known by it, Sciunt ut sciantur, Bernard. The third says of the Athenians
thus, Nummis ad numerandum, et scientia ad sciendum utuntur; They use their
money to count withal, and their knowledge to know withal. And the fourth
says of the Philosophers of his time, Cum Philosophorum vita, miserabiliter
pugnat oration Tully.
That their lives and their discourses did most miserably cross one another.
Such as any of these I would by no means have, either you or my self to be,
but active, and doing Christians; in this, much of light, lest peradventure,
that of our Lord, Joh. 15.22. or that Joh. 9.41. be applied unto us
unavoidably. Indeed I must needs tell you Gentlemen that though few in these
times be troubled with deaf and dumb spirits, yet abundance have withered
hands, and dried arms, and lame feet. The blood (under the Law) was appointed
to be put upon the lap of the right ear, the top of the right thumb, and
upon the toe of the right foot, you know, and why so? That the hearing,
practice, and progress of Gods people might be sanctified: and indeed then
are we like to prevail with God, and to prepare men for him, (...) Theo. in
Iud.
when like Gideons Soldiers we bear in the one hand the Trumpet of
preaching, piety, profession, and in the other the burning lamp of Godly
conversation. And ye Fathers, and Masters of Families suffer a little I pray
you the word of exhortation; Let not all these Catechismes rise up in judgment
against you, whilst either you or yours continue uninstructed, and unexcusably
so (as you must needs be) in these times, Miserrimi omninum illi sunt, qui
fidem in domo Fidei non habent. Cypr. De mortalitate.
unbeleevers (as the Father) in Faiths house, and grossly ignorant, under all
means of knowledge; The condemnation you know what it is, Joh. 3.19. And I
know on whom it will lie, if it be not prevented, even on you in this City,
and yours too; One I remember brings Children in complaining of their relations
thus, Alas! Perdidit nos aliena perfidia, parents sensimus parricidas.
other men's untrustinesse has undone us; we have found our parents our
overthrowers; I beseech you in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, be not content to
run altogether after your earthly business, but mind a little the one thing
necessary. Erasmus tells us of a certain carnal Gospeller, He calls him
Cyclops Evangeliophorus in his Dialogue of a carnal Gospeller.
who carried on one side a bottle of rich Sack, and on the other the New
Testament of Erasmus Translation, fairly bound and bossed, with gilt leaves as
fair as his life was foul, and his conditions base. He carried it always
about him, that was observed, and once had knocked it about the pate of a
Franciscan, for railing against Erasmus, and the new Gospellers. To convince
the man he is asked, what if he were tied ever to carry the bottle at his
girdle, and never to taste of it, or if to taste only, and never drink it
down; his answer is, That were a punishment just Tantalus like; but what if he
did (as his manner was) drink deeply thereof? He then answers, it would warm
his heart, refresh his spirits, and cheer his countenance; So, oh so, says
he that spoke to him, would that little book thy soul, if thou did eat it
down, concoct, digest, and turn into nutriment, in thy life and practice. I
know you will soon apply this; taste a little, and see how excellent it is to
be able to serve the Lord, and save your own souls. You have here two things
in general which are driven at for your direction.

1. Why you ought to let your profiting appear to all men in this knowledge,
namely, because we are all most miserable by nature, and have to do with a
most merciful God, who had thoughts of our recovery from everlasting by free
grace.

2. What is to be done of those, that this may come to pass in their souls?
viz. To have a most especial regard unto the holy use of, and wholesome profit
by the Word and Sacraments. The Maxims and Sanctions of things to be done and
believed, are very few, and contained in brief Summaries; but the incentives,
motives, directions, reproves and such like things, for practice, these make
volumes swell, these lengthen Sermons, and multiply books of all sorts. Surely
the sins amongst us in these times, do not proceed from ignorance all, but
many of them from incontinence; some from the despising of knowledge; others
because men withold the truth in unrighteousness, and not a few from that.
That so many things are in despute, and so few in practice; Great lights burn
and give light, it is true: But hold forth so many questions, that many, yea most
men, will not be troubled to read or attend the answers. A woman there was,
not far from this place, and lately living in a professed doubt of the Deity;
after illumination and repentance, she very hardly received comfort. Now she
professed often that the vicious and offensive life of a great learned man in
the town where she lived, occasioned those damnable doubts; If a stranger
should come here and see our books, hear our Sermons, view our Ministry, and
but a little attend unto the tatling part of our windy professors, which are
all tongue, he would surely think our Theory to be unparalleled, and our Land
and City in special to be knowing of all things which are knowable. But if
he should go into many families, and see them at home, if he should view our
Suburbs a little, and but make a step into the Villages round about London; if
he should walk our streets and hear our Porters, Carmen, etc. their oaths,
idle, yea and evil speaking, verily the ingenuous Traveller would say of this
City, as once was said of one greater then it, Here are 600000. which know not
their right hand from the left; notwithstanding both Press and Pulpit do so
abound with knowledge, and the labors of learned men; for the sakes of these,
and such as these, the ignorant and willing to know, your children and servants
I have drawn these Sermon notes into a way of Catechism, and do entreat that
they will, not only find leisure, but make some opportunity to read and
practice. Socrates.
The great learned man was wont to say, that he that would be an honest man,
shall soon be so, and is indeed already past the hardest part of the work;
not much unlike to what Solomon says, Wisdom is easy to him that will
understand. Linacer.
It is said of one that reading the 5.6. and 7. Chapters of St. Matthew, he
began to compare those rules presently to his own and unto other Christians
lives also, and when he had so done, throws down the book, and says,
Either this is not Gods Gospel, or else we are not Christians and Gospellers;
holy application, Gentlemen, will bring forth holy indignation; holy
indignation I say, such as, 2 Cor. 7.11. I conclude with some rules of
direction for the use of this and such like better works. First, to Catechize
is to teach the principles of Religion, See Heb. 5.12. and 6.1. and is used in
Scripture to train up, as Children and Servants ought to be, Prove. 22.6. to
instruct, Luke 1.4. It is the duty of the Minister, Ezekiel. 44.23. But not of
him only, as too many think, see Deuteronomy. 4.10. and Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Secondly, take
heed I pray you of two destructive principles, one of the Courtier, Religion he
says must not go too high, Amos 7.13. Prophecy no more at Bethel, for it is
the Kings house; the other of the Countreyman and Citizen too, Let not Religion
go too low, what need we teach it our children or our servants? See Psalm.
34.11. and silence such words for ever; 1. The duty is, children to be
taught; 2. The manner of their teaching, to be by way of Catechize. 3. What
they to be Catechized are to perform, that is, to come and hearken thereunto.

Thirdly, observe well what is the cause of the want of public profit to your
children and servants at Church, even their rudeness and unpreparednesse at
home: you send them to school, and prepare them for men's service, but they
come to Gods service ignorant utterly of the goodness and necessity thereof,
come to Church without preparation, and go away without profit.

Fourthly, the Countryman went to the Physician for Physic, to whom the
Physician gave a bill, which the patient put into his pocket safe, and wore it
there a great while, but finding no ease of his trouble comes again, and the
Physician bids him take it in Posset Ale, he goes home and puts the bill into
the cup, but never suffers the ingredients prescribed to come within his body.
Now look how much good his Physic did him; just so much will Divinity do
you, unless you let such words as these sink down into your ears, unless
you receive the Word with readiness, and search the Scriptures whether these
things be so, that many of you (and yours) may believe, see Act. 17.11, 12.

Fifthly and lastly, men's Catechises are all nothing unless you be also taught
of God, therefore weigh well the promise, Act. 2.17. and be sure you cleave
close to the performance he requires of every gracious man. If you look into
Heb. 1.2. Christ is said to be heir of all things; then look into Psalm. 2.8.
and there God says, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, etc. You may conclude hence that what God means to give to his
natural Son, he yet means he shall ask him; How much more does be
require of his adopted ones? Therefore, Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Brethren, pray
always, with all manner of supplications in the Spirit, and watch thereunto
with all perseverance, and supplication, for all Saints: and for me

Your servant in the Gospel, and a suitor at the Throne of Grace for you all
Walter Bridges.
Minchin Lane, Novem. 23. 1645.
A CATECHISM for Communicants.
Question.

WHat is God?

Answ. God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. and such a Spirit as has life in himself,
Ioh. 5.26.

Quest. What do you think concerning the holy Trinity?

Answ. That there is a Trinity of Persons I undoubtedly believe, namely God
the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; because the Scripture
tells me so plainly, as in many other, so in these places, Matthew. 28.19.
Matthew. 3.16. Ioh. 14.16. Ioh. 15.26.

Q. But I bear some Divines expressing themselves in strange terms, Trinity,
unity, essential, coessentiall, etc. how shall plain people understand?

A. They are grounded on the holy Scripture, for example, 1 John 5.7. There are
three and these three are one, a Trinity in unity. Essence of God means the
being of God, showed in the Scripture, Exodus 3.14. I am, and Rev. 1.8. he was,
is, and is to come. Coessentiall means one being together with another, Joh.
14.10. For the being or essence of God is considered either without distinction
as it is perfectly in God himself, or with distinction with respect to the
Persons in Trinity, absolutely or relatively, so is the expression.

Q. What ought I distinctly to believe concerning God?

A. These two things; first, That God is only one, in power, nature, essence,
deity. Secondly, that there are three persons, Father, Son and holy Ghost.

Q. Where do you prove that these three Persons be all of them God?

A. The Son is proved to be God, Romans 9.5. the holy Ghost proved to be God,
Act. 5.3. lied unto the holy Ghost, and ver. 4. thou have not lied unto man but
unto God. The Father to be God who doubts?

Q. Where do you prove that these three are one God?

A. In that before mentioned, 1 John 5.7. And these three are one.

Q. What similitude would you use to make this plain by?

An. By this: the Sun has three things in it, heat, light, and motion; every
one of these is separate from other, and yet all together make up one Sun,
the heat is not the light, neither is that the motion: so in the Trinity; the
Father is not the Son, nor the holy Ghost, but the Father, Son and holy
Ghost make up one God.

Qu. What similitude would you express the being in God by?

An. By the very same: As in the Suns light there are degrees, Morning,
Noone, Twilight, and yet all make but one light: or as in the heat of the
Sun, there are degrees too, and yet all make but one heat; so the persons of
the Trinity, or diverse manners of being in God, do not multiply the divine
essence.

Qu. What is the sum of that then which you think meet for private people to
learn concerning the Trinity?

An. The essence or being of God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. The manner of being in three
persons, as is said before.

Qu. What more should I understand concerning the Trinity?

An. That there is something common to all the three persons of the Trinity,
as the Godhead, power, and nature, and so the Father, Son, and holy Ghost are
God.

There is something proper to them also, as the several properties of the
three Persons; for example, it is proper to the Father to beget, to the Son
to be begotten, and to the holy Ghost to proceed.

Qu. What short expression would you use, to express the Trinity by to a man
which you would have understand you?

An. Such as this:

1. God the Father is God understanding.

2. God the Son is God understood.

3. God the holy Ghost is God loved.

Qu. What works of the Trinity am I to give regard unto, in every sever all
Person?

An. These: 1. The Creation, which is the Fathers work, and that of government
too.

2. The Redemption, which is the work of the Son.

3. The application or sanctification, which is the work of the Spirit.

All which a Christian is to raise his affection with all that he may be the
better stirred up to the due praise of the Lord, Psalm. 136.

Qu. In what estate is all mankind?

An. In a very sad, because sinful, estate.

Qu. But why was our estate of innocence mutable? and why was man left to fall?
and to a changeable estate?

An. 1. That God may be known to be the only immutable one; see the
Scriptures, Romans 3. James 1.17. I am God, I change not, Mal. 3.6.

2. That God may be just in punishing sin.

3. That a way may be made to the salvation of a lost world, wherein God had
appointed to show himself as just and merciful in our recovery as we had
showed our selves unjust and miserable in our fall. See Romans 3.26. Romans 9.22.23.

Qu. How long stood men and Angels in their estate of innocence?

An. We cannot tell, but certainly they stood so but a very short time.

Qu. Was there a condition annexed to this estate?

An. Yes, and it was this: So long as you continue holy by obeying my word, so
long only you shall be happy by enjoying my presence. See Genesis 2.16.17. with
Genesis 3.24.

Qu. But what were the causes of, and the manner of man's fall?

An. God certainly neither commanded nor yet counseled it: Let all be
expressed to you (to avoid tediousness) by this similitude: a wise father
purposing to let his son see his own wilfulness and intemperancy, together
with his love and fatherly affection toward him, resolves with himself to
make him fall into some mortal sickness, out of the which he knows
himself to be able to recover him: this he will effect, not by giving him
poison to drink, for then he should be the cause and justly bear the blame
of that evil, but by laying it in his way, as it were a bait, in some sweet
meat, which he knows that his Son loves, and will eat as soon as he
feels it. And lest he should plead ignorance, and so avoid the blame of
wilfulness, the father forewarneth him of that kind of meat, charging him very
instantly to abstain from it, as being unwholesome, and hurtful unto him, yet
he does not tell him what he intends. This young man coming where this
pleasant meat is, remembers his fathers counsel and commandment, yet is by
the entisement of evil companions, and his own appetite moved to eat of it,
persuading himself, that there is no such danger in it as his father would
make him believe, and therefore no cause he should obey him in that matter. So
he eats of it and poysoneth himself. Now no man will deny, but that both
the father and the son have a hand in this, yet not the father who gives the
occasion only, but the young man himself who does willingly, or rather
wilfully, take that hurtful meat, is to be blamed, and counted the cause of
this evil. See Genesis 3. and apply this to the fall of mankind.

Qu. But who can be persuaded to think, that Adam in the state of his
innocence especially, could be deceived with such a thing as an Apple?

An. That which the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2.14. must carefully be, first
marked, and secondly expounded, for Adam was not deceived, (that is not so
soon, or not so thoroughly) but the woman was in the transgression. And as for
the sin of Adam, there was in it more of wilfulness then of blindness, and
indeed he will rather disobey God then displease his wife. Thus of the fall.

Qu. What did man lose in the fall?

An. Two things; 1. The purity of his person, inherent; and what he lost, he
lost not only for himself but for his posterity also: See Romans 5.12. For as
if treason be committed against a King, we know it taints and defiles the
blood and posterity also, so in treason spiritual against the King of Kings
it is; See Romans 5.12.

2. The justice of his person also, for the Scripture is plain, That whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all,
Jam. 2.10.

Qu. But how lost he these things?

An. It was not by any work of God, but, as it is said before, by a work of
his own, and such a work of himself, as was not out of a wilful desire of
renouncing God and all holiness, but surely it was,

1. By the craft of Satan that old Serpent, 1 Pet. 5.8.

2. By the nature of sin, expressed in the Word of God to be like leaven,
which leavens the whole lump, and like a fretting canker; See 1 Cor. 5.7. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17.

Qu. With what success or event?

An. Alas! a most fearful one, that is to say, original sin came, and like
a deluge overflowed both him and all his, so that now in sin we are all
borne and in iniquity our mothers bring us forth, Psalm. 51.6. the issue
whereof is, that we neither do nor can, know or believe, love or fear, obey
or honor God as we ought to do; nay more, the effect of our fall from God is
a separation from God, fraught with rebellion, and deformity, and what not
that is evil? See Romans 3. tot. So much of the effect of the fall.

Qu. But how is this made visible and demonstrably plain unto us? if a man
fall into poverty, his rags, craving of alms, yea his very looks do show
it; if into sickness, there are signs thereof: so of madness, or any such
corporal perplexity; but how is the spiritual misery in the fall of mankind
made plain and discoverable?

An. Thus it is made plain and easy to every one that is able and willing to
see. That soul that was before holy, excellent, illuminate, heavenly, is now
quite contrary and repleat topfull with those sins in their visibility,
whereof you have here a particular enumeration.

Qu. What is the first?

An. Infidelity;

Of which we have two remarkable instances or examples in holy Scripture of
the first unbeleevers, Devils in their, and Adam in his infidelity: both whose
sins were in this particular alike, to trust in something beside God for
their happiness: Adam trusts the Devil, the woman and the apple, and the
Devil seeing no creature more excellent then himself, thought it best to
trust himself for his happiness too. And this sin is ordinarily practiced,
and so common that the Lord shows us the very marks of our misery every day
therein.

For victory, men trust the Arm of flesh; for health, the Physician; for life,
the necessaries of life, meat, drink, etc. for wealth, our own industry, or
that of our parents; for honor and glory, Kings and great ones in our
preferment.

Hence comes it to pass that the difference between the state of the godly
and renewed in this world is no less then thus big, the godly have an affiance
in God, the ungodly a defiance of God, which is a sad difference. See Exodus
5.1, 2. Job 21.14, 15.

Qu. What is the second sin?

An. Desperation

Is another sin, which is visible in man after the fall, and indeed it is the
next in order, for the root of the tree being taken away, what remains to the
body and the branches too, but death and withering? and if you take away the
foundation of a building, what will be the end but ruin and overthrow? So is
it surely in the soul, for Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

Desperation once prevailing upon the soul, hope must needs be taken away,
and indeed all grace, but especially hope, because of the nearer conjunction it
has to faith, then any other grace, either has, or can have.

Qu. What does desperation leave a man to the thoughts of?

An. 1. Nothing, and indeed some men surely think they shall die like the
brute beasts, and there is an end; See 1 Cor. 15.32.

2. Something: and so such men as have some knowledge of the holy Scripture,
and of another life after this, and yet wanting faith in the pardon of their
sin, are in Scripture reputed to be but men without hope. See Ephesians. 2.12. 1
These. 4.13. See also, Prove. 11.7. Job 8.15.

Qu. What are the signs of desperation?

An. I shall give you a few of many of them.

1. The want of all other grace; where any radical grace is in truth, there
all grace is in some measure, Act. 24.16.

2. No desire of glory to come, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

3. Immoderate care after things present, Luke 12. and 16. See Matthew. 6.32.

Qu. What is the third sin?

An. Want of the fear of God.

In the innocence of Adam, he had the fear of God, which if a man want, he
lies open to all manner of sin; an universal security falls upon him, then
he cries peace, peace, where there is none, 1 These. 5.3. and indeed the reason
of every enormitie is, there is no fear of God before their eyes, Romans 3.18.

Qu. What is the fourth sin?

An. Want of Son-like subjection.

All the other creatures which are in the world were created to be the servants
of God, but man only was to become his Son, that he might receive the
adoption of children, and the Spirit being bestowed upon him, he might cry
Abba Father: but in the same fall of mankind,

1. He changes his father, and is of his father the devil, yea and the works
of his father he will do, John 8.41.

2. He changes his refuge, dependence, supplication too.

See a godly man, and he will seek to God his Father, trust him, pray to him,
and have his dependence on him; so does a wicked man to his, as you may see in
Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15. to the witch.

Qu. What is the next sin?

An. Servile rebellion.

Man since the fall is according to the Scripture sold under sin, Romans 7.14.
He does all the drudgery of Hell, Joh. 8. his throat is an open sepulcher, Romans
3.13. and as in those places where they buy servants and slaves for money, the
masters look that they should do any thing that he commands, and they
perform it: So it is between the devil and his vassals, they are taken
captive of him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. last. Yea, as the servant delights to do
what he knows will please his master, so these not only do such things, but
have pleasure in those that do them, Romans 1. last.

Qu. What is the sixth sin that discovers a man to be in a sad condition now
after the fall?

An. Rebellion against God as a teacher.

Of which you see such large complaints in the first Chapter of the Proverbs,
despising knowledge.

Now whereas men may object and say, God is a consuming fire, and for us there
is no more coming near to God, then combustible matter may come near a great
fire. See Exodus 20.19.

1. The Lord stoopeth to this, and therefore gives man a ministry of men like
himself, and takes away that objection, 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. How men receive it then, is to be seen in holy Scripture: Moses, the
Prophets, John Baptist, yea Christ himself had their several portions; for
men have several exceptions against them. Either they are no Scholars, or
they use not the Fathers enough, or they are covetous, some they say are too
sociable, others that will not come to them they are precise, they want good
manners. See Act. 7.51. resisters, some say in their hearts there is no God,
Psalm. 14.1. and of others see the complaint, Romans 10.21. all day long have I
stretched forth my hand to a rebellious and gainsaying people.

Qu. What is the seventh sin?

An. Rebellion against God as the Creator.

That whereas God made all things for his own praise and glory, these though
they know him to be God do not glorify him as God, Romans 1.20. Nay all the
glory God gets amongst these, he is feign to pluck it as it were out of their
throats, Levit. 10.3.

So much of the effects, and fearful fruits of the fall of mankind visible
and external.

Qu. But now what use of all this is to be made for our practice?

An. Many, and those exceeding useful too, as first in the fall.

First, I learn never to be troubled, that God has made all things in the
world to be of a changing condition, as wife, children, riches, estate, peace,
health, and the very means of grace themselves, fleeting and uncertain, now
here, and now again no where, I am not troubled at it at all that God has
done so, nay rather I rejoyee in it. For if neither the world nor any thing
therein be stable, but all tottering, I know it is because the Lord would both
bottom me and all his even upon him own self, which I shall with all my
heart desire to do, for I know whom he loves, he loves to the end, John
13.1. and the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. I hope I shall
cleave unto him who has promised never to fail nor forsake.

And take his Sons wholesome counsel, not to lay up my treasure any where,
but there where I am sure neither rust, nor moth nor thief can come.

And for my grace, and final perseverance therein, I bless God that it is out
of my hand, for I should have lost it and all, and been as very an unthrift as
ever he was: but now,

1. I am kept humble, dependant upon God.

2. Experienced by my falls and risings, of humane misery, and divine mercy.

3. I set Christ before me for an eternal refuge, unto whom I fly in all my
failings.

Secondly, whereas Angels and men stood so short a while in so excellent a
condition, we may learn that there is no hope of station without an Almighty
hand, in what condition soever we are placed; heavy things do not tend
downward with a more ready inclination then all our souls do to destruction:
It is not all to get up into this or that estate, but to stand when we are
there, and not to fall fearfully, 1 King. 3.10, 11. Solomon's prayer may put us
in mind of our practice, to get up into a high estate is not all, but to stand
fast in God and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.12. To which purpose we
must understand the three things in order here to be observed.

1. The sin of Adam: Sin only is a man's overthrow.

2. The shame of Adam: Shame follows sin as the shadow the body.

3. The deliverance: Only by Christ is the Churches salvation.

Thirdly, as Adam committed his great sin, even so do we all ours, rather
then we will displease man, our selves, our wives, our friends, yea our lusts,
sometimes we will basely disobey our God, and hazard our eternal
condemnation: So Judas, Achan, Ahab, Esau.

Corruption gets above conscience, and sin grows strong by graces
weakness: besides, sometimes we are overpowered with a temptation, and do
that on a sudden which we repent at leisure; at all times something or
othergets into the place where God should be, whom we should love with all
our hearts, and with all our souls, Matthew. 22 37. And this comes to pass by,

1. Satan's strength in opposing, for we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but
with principalities and powers, with spiritual wickedness in high places,
Ephesians. 6.12.

2. The Christians weakness to resist and to defend himself in any measure
without a great measure of strength from the Lord; which is to be seen in
Adam, Genesis 3. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.21. Peter, Luke 22.34. David, 2 Samuel Lot,
Genesis 19. Noah, Genesis 9. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7.

And out of the second part which is the effect of the fall, there is something
to be learned also* as,

First, that Adam was a loser in the fall of both his righteousness and
inherent purity, that no man shall ever be a gainer in a sinful course: it
may be gain may be propounded to him, both by himself and others, but he
will never thrive under it; Judas stands up still for an example, Matthew. 27.3.
and Ananias with Saphira Act. 5. Remember Ahab: Have thou killed and got
possession? 1 King. 21.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Secondly, that there is much to be lost in sin at one time, at one stroke,
in one moment, at one throw at dice, I have heard of them that have lost great
matters, venture much at a cast; Adams loss is grievous in the fall, and so is
every poor sinners in every sin he commits, Mark. 8.36.

Thirdly, the devils subtlety may here be observed, and his prevaylings over
a poor soul, he shows us the Apple, but not the curse, the bait, but not
the hook, the seeming gain, but not the certain loss, the beginning, but
not the end of sin.

Fourthly, the nature of sin, Satan, and all our spiritual adversaries is
hence most plainly discerned, what a craft sin catches us with, what a
curse it curses us with, a spreading curse; we read Psalm. 109.9.

Propagation; Imitation.
And out of the third part, which is the visibilitie of the fearfulness of
the fall in the several characters thereof, there may be seen

A rule for trial and examination of every one of us, whether we be yet in
our fallen estate and no further.

We must do in the understanding of the fruits of the fall of man, even as
men do when they see filthy water run down the kennell, the question that men
ask is, from whence comes this? So will we.

Qu. Whence comes all this infidelity, desperation, rebellion and the like in
man?

An. From the loss of Gods image in the soul, wherein man was created; for as
from the Image of God, while man bare the same, and the character of the
Creator was lively stamped on him, flowed all the testimonies of a full and
free communion with God, in Scripture expressed thus; Thou have made him a
little lower then God, and crowned him with glory and worship, Psalm. 8.5. So
from the loss of that Image comes a similitude and likeness unto sin, Satan
and all such deformity; the liker God we are, the more good; the liker Satan,
the more evil we must needs be.

Qu. But is all this Image of God lost?

An. No: A picture of some beautiful man, is (suppose) in some of your houses,
but all blotted, blemished and defaced, yet so as that we can tell whose
picture it is: so is the Image of God in our souls something left, but so
defaced and blemished with our sin, that we can scarcely discern it, like
the ruins of some stately palace, or a dead child wherein though you may epsy
the likeness of the father, yet it is but a vile and rotten carcass.

Qu. What are those relics which are yet left?

An. 1. Something in the body.

2. More in the mind.

Qu. Whence else come these sad effects upon the soul after the fall?

An. The mind is sinful, depraved and corrupt, in captivity and thraldom to
every lust.

Qu. Wherein does this appear?

An. Thus positively, there is neither actual nor potentiall knowledge of God,
See Ephesians. 4. without knowledge the mind cannot be good. Comparatively thus:
tell them a tale, and they will understand, rejoice, assent and believe, yea
and remember too: but in things of God, no taste, no savor at all. And the
reason is as plainly rendered by God also.

1. That within them, Jer. 2.13. they have rejected the word of God, and what
wisdom is therein them?

2. That which is in the word it self, which the natural man does not savor,
neither can he, for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.13.

Qu. But whence comes this mischief to man else after the fall?

An. His conscience is corrupted, he carries about with him continually a
false witnessse, which gives him an ill and indirect testimony on all occasions.

Qu. Wherein does this appear?

An. By a due consideration of the offices of conscience on this manner.

1. It falsely excuses when it inform, that to be no sin which is a sin,
and it may be a very great one too. See Luke 18.20, 21. he is not ashamed to
say (no more are many of our ignorant people) that he had kept the
commandments ever since he could remember; See another, John 16.2. they that
kill you will think (their conscience so informing) that they do God good
service.

2. It falsely accuses when it informs that to be a sin which is not, as in
the things indifferent, many dare eat no flesh in Lent, dare not but keep such
a holy day and the like.

Some other things might be observed, but I omit them; See Matthew. 6.7. they
think to be heard (conscience tells them so) for their much babbling. Some
think they fulfill the Law of God, because they keep the Laws of men. For
gesture at Sacrament, Oh how fearful are some people, whether kneeling,
sitting, etc. eating such meat or the like! a brother or a sister is not in
bondage in such a case.

Qu. Is there then nothing left in the conscience now after the fall?

An. Yes: there is something left in all the faculties, and in conscience too,
as we may see in Romans 2.15. where God speaks of natural conscience and of
natural men, whose consciences yet do accuse or excuse; and when God will
make it his scourge, we see how it can open his mouth and speak, how it can
terrify, torment, and become intolerable, Matthew. 27.3. Judas for example.

Qu. Whence moreover comes this to man after the fall?

An. From the sinfulness of his memory: For let a man come to Church
constantly, sit under the means of grace, hear and understand many things,
yea and seem to be affected with them at the time of hearing, and yet of all
this he remembers nothing, nothing becomes profitable.

Qu. What is the reason?

An. 1. The mind does not fully conceive of things.

2. They do not remember, because they do not regard, wicked men are not
persuaded how excellent it is to be as Scribes instructed for the kingdom of
God, and to bring out of our treasury things new and old, Matthew. 13.52.

Qu. Whence else is this great misery?

An. Man's will is sinful: and if the blind lead the blind (that is to say, a
blind understanding lead a more blind will) both must fall into a ditch as deep
as damnation.

The will is more sinful then all the rest of the practical faculties, yea
the cause of all sinfulness in them.

There is in the will an actual and potentiall inclination of it only to
evil; See Genesis 6.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. John. 6.44.

Qu. How shall this appear?

An. By art, and labor, and industry, men attain to the knowledge and
practice of other skils and knowledge, but never to the knowledge and practice
of Christianity, it is God there that works the will and the deed, 2 Phil.
12.13. See Psalm. 51.10.

Qu. Whence else comes this great misery to fallen mankind?

An. Man's affections since the fall, are all out of order, and those if not
guided are like strong and unruly horses without a bridle, or like a ship
without an anchor in the storm, without a cable, etc.

Thus we read of haters of God, Romans 1.30. lovers of pleasures more then God,
2 Timothy 3.4. rejoicing in a calfe, Exodus 32.6. grieving at, etc.

Qu. What are the uses of this point also.

An. I will declare them in order, and so there are two general uses.

Qu. What are they?

An. First, that if all be thus out of frame in man, he should repent. For
the time of ignorance God winked at, but now admonishes all men every where to
repent, Act. 17.30, 31. Light is come into the world, and if men love darkness
because their deeds are evil, they lie under the great condemnation, John
3.19, 20.

Secondly, and sound repentance will require of you sound heart-humblings,
expressed in Scripture by the pricking of the heart, together with a diligent
and indefatigable inquiry after that which yet you do not know, yet above all
things ought to desire to know, that is, what shall I do to be saved. See
Act. 2.37. Act. 16.31. These are the general uses.

Qu. What are the particular uses?

An. These: and 1. Forasmuch as man has lost the Image of his God, we learn
1. How unlike a man may be to his father, we see some children much
derogating from the honesty and religion of their parents; Scripture teaches
this, and our own experience too.

2. We learn that the only remedy is that which the Apostle sets down, 2
Cor. 3.18. to gaze upon him with open face till we be transformed into the
same Image with him from glory to glory. Moses you know had his face shone by
conversing with God, and so will our faces.

Qu. What is the second particular use?

An. That it is a sad thing for the mind to be in a spiritual captivity, if
the heart be not right, no help unless from heaven, Psalm. 51.10. Prove. 23.26.

2. That we must have great regard unto the language of holy Scripture, to be
renewed in the spirit of our mind, Romans 12.2. and 2 Timothy 1.7.

Qu. What is the third use, from the conscience?

An. That man has a conscience; and the reason why it rouses not, and flies
in his face is not because it is not, but because it wakes not; a Lion asleep,
if he waken once, can bite and roar, so will conscience.

2. That no man can have a good conscience, till a work of grace be
vouchsafed him from God.

And this appears to be a good conscience.

1. When its accusing is according to the Word.

2. When its excusing is according to the Spirit.

Qu. What is the fourth use in respect of the memory?

An. That there is as well an art as an use of memory; many complain that
their memory is naught, now here is a help, the Lord gives remedy for this, a
present remedy.

Qu. What is that?

An. To love heartily the things which God sets before us; Oh how I love thy
Law! Psalm. 119.97. No man can love that which he knows not, nor have that
which he loves not.

Qu. What is the fifth use in point of will?

An. That the cause of all our misery is the wicked will. That the cure is
here, and here only to be discerned, when God gives us a will, or a mind to
know him that is good, 1 John 5.20.

Qu. What is the sixth use?

An. To know where the work of grace is in every good and sound Christian in
his actions? yes surely, but that is not all, in his affections too, there to
the life, Matthew. 22.37. Mat. 10.28. Luke 10.20.

And thus much of the first part of this Catechism, viz. the fall of mankind.
Now for the second part, namely, his recovery by Christ out of that miserable
condition.

Qu. What purpose had God toward the creature in the fall?

An. No purpose of the final destruction of the creature, but the illustration
of his own justice and mercy, Romans 3.26. and Romans 9.22, 23.

Qu. How may the mercy of God to his elect be herein considered?

An. Thus: If he be compared to the Angels which fell, they had no means of
recovery out their fallen estate, Jude 6.

2. If with the reprobate; they had means indeed, but they had no grace to use
them, Romans 11.7.

Qu. Is the estate of man better in the estate of regeneration, or of
innocence?

An. It is better in the estate of regeneration surely; which appears to be
so,

1. Because it is immutable and not to be changed.

2. Because his happiness, and holiness is greater.

Qu. What is the first part of the mercy of God to man in his recovered estate?

An. Man's happiness which is, 1. Partly in this life; 2. Partly, or rather
perfectly in the life to come.

Qu. Wherein does this happiness of man consist?

An. In the vision of God; so Romans 1.20. So the natural man sees God in the
creature. Again, Heb. 1.1, 2. Spiritual men never behold him but in the face
of Christ, which vision is operative, 2 Cor. 3.18.

2. In peace, pacification, and access, Romans 5.1. for he that sees a King, a
King I say as his enemy, and one ready to fall upon him with an act of anger
and justice, had rather never see him.

3. In expectation, for eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared for those that
love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. A believer sees God as the son sees his father
providing for him.

Qu. What is the second part?

An. Man's holiness, wherein the principal agent is God, and the principal
patient is man: for man can stir no more to the working of his own holiness
without God, then tools can move without a workman to do any piece of work,
1 Pet. 1.23.

Qu. What are the considerations of man's holiness?

An. These and such like.

1. The miracle of it; for it is no less in the apprehension of every natural
man, John. 3.

2. The means of it, which are to be seen, Romans 10.14.

3. The manner of it, 1 John 3.8. as God dealt with Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9. so does
he with all his people, he gives them another spirit, Number. 14.24.

4. The time of it, Matthew. 20.3.5. Men do as Herod did, they keep their
birthday, but the day of our new birth and the time thereof is not regarded.

5. There are signs of it too in holy Scripture not to be neglected.

Qu. What is the third part?

An. Man's faith: which is an affiance and trust in Christ Jesus for happiness;
and is set purposely to repair what infidelity has ruined in us.

Qu. Whereby may this be set forth?

An. By this similitude: A King or monarch has many thousands of his subjects
rebelling against him, and refusing to perform obedience to his just Laws;
the King seeing this rebellion, purposes so to deal in revenging of it, as
not only his justice, but that also, and especially his mercy and love toward
his natural subjects may appear, and therefore he means to punish their
offense in himself, by putting to death his only son, who is of his own
nature and essence, yea who does reign jointly and equally with him, being
partaker of his riches, glory, kingdom and honor: The death of this Prince
being thus decreed by the King his father, it is needful that for the
suffering of the course of Law, together with the sentence of death, he should
debase him to the condition of a subject, yet retayning all the aforesaid
privileges; so that there is in one person the condition, and as it were the
nature, both of a King and of a Subject; the one makes that he may be put to
death, the other makes, that this death, though it be but the death of one
person, is more then a sufficient ransom for the offenses of 10000. of his
Subjects. Even so did our great King with the Prince of peace in the work of
our redemption.

Qu. What is the benefit that we reap by Christ's death?

An. 1. By his merit we have perfect righteousness.

2. By his spirit we have perfect holiness, here in part, hereafter in full
and perfection; See 1 Cor. 6.11.

Qu. How is the excellent faith of a Christian known?

An. Thus: 1. It is a part of our regeneration.

2. The subject thereof is the will of man.

3. The means of working set forth.

4. It cannot be lost.

5. Signs of it are as many as we have graces.

Qu. But how is it that faith only has the power of justifying?

An. That question is worthy of our knowledge.

1. Faith gives glory to God, takes away creature boasting; if for our love,
holiness, etc. we had been saved, man might have imputed something to
himself, but now all boasting is excluded.

2. Another reason, see Romans 4.16. that it might be sure to all the seed, and
not be of works at all.

Qu. What is the relation betwixt faith and other graces?

An. It has this quality to join us unto the Lord Jesus, from and by whom
we come to be partakers of the spirit of Christ, and of the increase of all
spiritual graces; See Col. 2.19. Gal. 2.20.

Qu. How does faith and justification bring forth holiness and sanctification,
especially seeing that to man's reason, it is rather a motive to a wicked and
dissolute life? see such objections, Romans 3.7. and Romans 6.1.

An. 1. From the sense of the love of God, in the pardon of sin the heart is
inflamed with an exceeding great love of God again, which the believer desires
to let appear in the keeping of Gods commandments; See Job. 14.15.

2. God does work upon the faithful, not as stocks and stones, but acts and
moves them, and then they do work out their salvation and add grace to grace,
as is to be seen plainly, Phil. 2.12, 13.

3. Sanctity and holiness is the only and clear evidence of a sound faith,
without and separate from which it is dead. See Jam. 2.26.

4. Faith without the rest of sanctification, is not sufficient to attain
salvation, for nothing shall be perfect in the other world, which is not
carefully begun here, and glorification is but sanctification perfected.

Qu. What is the fourth part of the mercy of God to man in his recovered
estate?

An. Man's hope, of which the use is to cure all our despair: For though it be
true that God deals with his sometimes as David did with his son Absolon, 2 Samuel 14.24. to turn him aside and not let him see his face, though indeed he
love him dearly and does intend to forgive him too; yet sometimes God brings
his to believe above, yea against hope, for faith cannot lose his nature which
is to be the ground of things hoped for, etc. See Heb. 11.1. Romans 4. Job.
13.15.

Qu. What is the use of this grace in a believing Christian?

An. Threefold, 1. God says it is an anchor, the use whereof at Sea we know
well enough, namely, to hold the ship, that riding out the storm, it may be
kept from splitting; so hope keeps the soul among the rocks of impatience and
distrust, etc. See it called a helmet too, Ephesians. 6.

2. God says it is a preservative against sin, 1 John 3.3. He that has
this hope purges himself as he is pure; See Job 2.

Qu. What is the fifth part?

An. Man's holy fear of God. For whereas it may be objected, that fear seems
to fight with and to be contradictory to faith and hope, even in the estate of
regeneration more then in the estate of innocence, for there the estate was
changeable, and here it is not so, yet it is a grace of great estimate and use,
as is to see Deuteronomy. 19.20.

Qu. What use is this grace of now in the state of regeneration?

An. 1. To show us that a great deal of corruption rests in us now after grace
and believing, and that we had need not only to be constrained with the
love, but restrained also with the fear of God. See Prove. 3.7. Prove. 14.16.
and Prove. 16.6. with 2 Cor. 5.14. 2. To keep us from stripes, for as it is
said of the Lion that he always spares those that fear and lie prostrate
before him for mercy; so the Lion of the tribe of Juda: Let us (says the
Apostle) labor to please God with reverence and fear: For even our God is a
consuming fire, but fire never burns the ashes that lie under it, Heb.
12.28.29.

Qu. What is the sixth part?

An. Man's filial subjection to his God, or man's son-like obedience to God as a
father, wherein the Lord does for the sons of men, two great and especial
things.

1. He recovers them to the dignity of sons and heirs too, Gal. 4.7.

2. Endues them by the spirit of God with a disposition sanctified, and suitable
thereunto, viz. they call him father, Romans 8.16. they love him, Psalm. 116.1.
fear him, Genesis 42.18. imitate him, 1 Pet. 1.15. in trouble run to him, Psalm.
73. ult. and most patiently abide his chastisement, Heb. 12.5. let him do what
he will.

Qu. What is the seventh part?

An. Man's servile fear and subjection to God as his servant, which grace the
Lord gives to his, and of this the Scripture speaks under a twofold
consideration.

1. Some are such servants as are more eminent in the Lords service, like
Vessels of Gold and Silver in the great house; serving him always and in every
thing faithful in all his house. Moses, Noah, Daniel, were such, yea and the
Lord Jesus himself. Behold my servant, Esa. 42.1. See Number. 12.8. Such Iosuabs
now as lead his people.

2. All believers are such, they that serve him in any thing; I find that
Divines delight to express it by that in the Epistle to Philemon, Verse. 10,
11, 12. to the 20.

Qu. What more does the Lord give unto his people?

An. Subjection unto the Lord God as to their teacher, in which the Lord does
these two things. 1. Himself teaches all his people (though not without the
ministry too) the ways of God and godliness, and therefore in Scripture we
read such places as these, Mat. 23.8.10. and that excellent place in Job 32.8.
There is indeed a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives
understanding. And therefore believers are called Disciples, Act. 11.26. And 1
These. 4.9. ye are taught of God to love one another.

2. And he is pleased so to indue them with a dependence upon him for
instruction that they hear his voice, and a stranger they will not follow,
Ioh. 10.5. their hearts burn within them while he opens the Scriptures, Luke
24.32. they believe what God says because he says it.

Qu. What is the ninth part or consideration of Gods mercy in our recovery?

An. Man's subjection to God as his Creator, which is in seeking his glory, and
living to his praise, whose he is, and whom he ought to serve.

Qu. What did Adam praise God in innocence for?

An. For his wisdom, power and goodness in the creation of the world, for
his justice in rewarding the holiness of his reasonable creatures with life
and happiness, etc.

Qu. Is there any difference between the causes of praising God in the state
of innocence, and that of regeneration and recovery?

An. O yes: God has put a new song into our mouths, which you shall read the
ditty of, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. and that whole Psalm, Psalm. 136. for the mercy
that endures for ever and ever. Yea and the place of praise and the person of
praise too is blessed, Psalm. 84.5.

2. The people of God desire to live in their God, and move only to their
Godward, to be ordered by his word and inspired by his Spirit.

3. They desire to wink and believe, be content to be something or nothing,
even as the Lord will. See Job 13.15. and that remarkable speech of David, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

Qu. Is there yet any more?

An. One demonstration of mercy very high, and which Adam had not in his
innocence; man's subjection to God as to an husband. For the purpose of God in
our recovery is not only to tie and knit us to him as subjects, sons,
servants, Scholars, and creatures, but also as his espoused wife, married unto
him in holiness and righteousness, Hosea 2.20. which is the great mystery of
mercy, Ephesians. 5.32.

Qu. Wherein does this appear?

An. A contract is made, Ez^k. 16.8. downry agreed, 1 Cor. 3.23. a kingdom,
Luke 12.32. the conjunction no less then that, Matthew. 19.5. in the incarnation
of our Lord Jesus. And as the wife expects and attaines to have more done for
her then any friend, kinsman, or other whatsoever, so the believer may look for
more love, and riches, and protection, from her Christ, and husband.

And upon this ground of such an especial love, two especial duties of love
we find in holy Scripture taught us.

1. She that is married, cares for worldly things, how she may please her
husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. so ought the believer.

2. Hear O daughter, incline thine ear, forget thy people and thy fathers
house, so shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty, for he is the Lord thy
God, and worship thou him, Psalm. 45.11. To renounce all and cleave fast to God.

Now for the uses of all that has been heard, in their order.

First then, we may learn that sweet lesson from hence; that in the fall of
mankind, the Lords intent was not destructive, but that therein man might see
himself and seek his God offended, which is indeed the proper end of Gods
desertion and castigation of all his own.

Secondly, we learn that there is a rest, recovery, renovation, regeneration,
for the Lords people, which the election do obtain, and all the rest are
hardened, as is to see Romans 11.7.

Thirdly, that this recovery, out of the snare of the Devil, (wherein till
then we are taken captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.) it is in order and
according to all the parts of the fall, lest that the medicine should be
shorter then the disease, and the salve not suitable to the sore.

Fourthly, that all the means of grace, viz. preaching, hearing, reading,
prayer, reproof, etc. are all intended by God, and should so be by man, to
recover us out of our fallen estate.

Fifthly, that whosoever will thrive under the means of grace must only use
them to that end unto which God has appointed it and all which is only his
glory and the salvation of mankind.

Sixthly, that for as much as the speculative or knowing only of any thing is
not that which is or can be useful, that therefore our recovery graces be
known of us in experience and practice.

Seventhly, and that such a thing is easy to be done to him that will
understand and be diligent, the question and answer following does make plain.

Q. How shall I know whether I am recovered to any estate of happiness?

A. See the particulars in the part, Happiness.

1. Do thou descrie a God clearly in the creature? the workman in the work?

2. Do thou see him more clearly in his own Image the Lord Jesus?

3. Have thou persuasion of thy peace, and adpropinquation of drawing nigh?

4. Then thou art happy and may expect from God with comfort, that which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to
conceive; and so of holiness and all the other parts in order.

Q. How shall I know whether I have attained to any measure of holiness?

A. See the particulars in that part, Holiness.

Was that mercy a miracle to thee? do thou remember the time (with joy of
heart) when God wrought it? have thou any evidence, sign, seal thereof? 1 John 4.13. and so of all the rest.

Now as the Jews once asked of our Savior, Whence has this man this
learning, etc. So will we also of a Christian recovered out of the fruits of
Adams fall,

Q. Whence are all these parts of his recovery? out of what fountain were
these streams derived?

A. In our Saviors own language, Matthew. 6.23. If the eye (that is, the mind
of man) have light in it (that is, be illuminate from God) it does enlighten
the whole body, but if it be dark, there is nothing but darkness in the
body: that is in sum, as is the eye seeing to the body to guide and govern
it in actions, so is the mind inlightning to all the parts and faculties of the
soul, to govern it.

Q. Whence comes all our obedience unto, believing in, and dependence upon God
in the estate of our recovery from the fall?

A. From that, because our minds being enlightened, we know our God to be
just, holy, and good and merciful, etc. and therefore do perform acts of
love, fear and obedience to him: For as the subjects of a King do therefore
love and fear him, because they know him to be grea and good, so do the
subjects of the great King also.

Q. By what signs or otherwise do we discern this mind-inlightning?

A. Thus; 1. It is the first work of our regeneration or recovery, as is to
see, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Col. 1.9. Light in the creation was the first
work, so in the redemption it is also, Act. 16.14.

2. It is the most apparent and convincing testimony of regeneration, either to
our selves or to others that can be in the world, Ephesians. 5.8. dull, rude,
unlearned, and ignorant men to be by Gods holy spirit enlightened and made to
understand and live in the great mystery of our salvation, yea to discern all
things, 1 Cor. 2.15. as our Savior said to Peter, Flesh and blood never
revealed this to thee, Matthew. 16.17. So say I, this is no work of nature, but
from our Father which is in heaven.

3. It is yet but in part only in this life, for we see now through a glass
darkly, but then we shall see face to face, 1 Cor. 13.11.12.

Q. What is the second thing or part in our recovery, whereby our deliveranee
from the fall is made clear and visible to us?

A. The conscience amended and renewed in both the parts or offices thereof,
that is to say, both accusing us, 2 Samuel 24.40. then David's heart smote him;
and excusing us also now after our recovery, 1 Job. 3.2 Cor. 1.12.

Q How may this be opened unto us now that it may be plain?

A. Thus: 1. Every faithful man has true knowledge of sin by the renewing
of his mind, and also sin it self by the infirmity of the flesh, and
therefore they have an accusing conscience, heart-smitings, weeping bitterly
for sin, considering their ways, and acknowledgments, such as that of David,
I have done very foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.

Hence arise in the most faithful; 1. Fear of temporal punishments. 2. A
great increase and daily practice of self humbling, self judging and
condemnation: And 3. This is a restraint to the godly to keep them from sin.

2. The faithful have an excusing conscience also, which does excuse them
before God; and this must be thus understood.

1. The conscience does excuse them in regard of their own inherent
righteousness, not as being perfectly holy, but as being sincere and unfeigned:
see David often, Psalm. 119.1.

2. The conscience does excuse them also in regard of the imputed
righteousness of Christ unto the believer, for he is made unto us of the
Father, wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and in him ye are complete,
Col. 2.11.

3. This excusing conscience has two especial things to be marked therein.

First, that it dare not look upon the judgment seat of Gods justice, for
then it would be but as a filthy clout; and indeed none excuser dare peep in
here but Christ's righteousness only, but flies to the court of mercy, and
love, and to a throne of grace to find help in, at a time of need, Heb. 4.16.

Secondly, that here hence arises to the faithful ones all their triumphant
persuasions of Gods love, their salvation, and a full and final victory over
sin, hell, death and judgment, Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies, who
shall condemn? and who shall separate us from the love of God, etc.

Q. What is the third part?

A. A sanctified memory, which may be discerned thus:

1. The Scripture says of such people, that they do ponder and lay up in their
hearts: the word would be observed (lay up) in their hearts, Luke 2.51. For as
he that lays up a thing for his use, when occasion is to use it, can go and
fetch it out again: So faithful men bring out of their treasury things new and
old, Matthew. 13.52. See more to this purpose, Matthew. 12.35. and see the practice
of David what a piece of experience he brings forth laid up long before, 1 Samuel 17.34.

2. The Scripture says of such men, that they lay up truth in their hearts,
the holy Scripture which is the fountain, and such choice streams as that, 2 Timothy 2.8. Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was crucified
according to my Gospel. And the Scripture discovers the purpose of Gods people
in so doing, Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy promise in my heart that I might not
sin against thee.

3. The way and means which Gods people use to lay up these things, viz.
hearing, reading, remembering, comparing the Scriptures together, applying them
to our daily use and whetting them upon our families, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

Q. What is the fourth part?

A. A renewed will, seen in one man in the holy Scripture, in two remarkable
circumstances.

1. What a monster the will is, bent in violent persecution against God and
godliness until the Lord renew it: the instance is Saul, Acts 9.1, 2.
breathing out slaughter, etc.

2. What a miracle of mercy God can and does sometimes work upon such a sinner.

By what things may I know whether my will be renewed?

1. Holiness and the things of God will be made natural to thee as it were,
thou will walk in the Spirit, a godly man though indeed goodness may be
contrary to his corrupted nature, yet to his regenerate part it is very
suitable, Romans 7.22, 23.

2. It does, the will of a regenerate man does I mean, actually incline it
self to that which is good (though imperfectly and impurely) and that because
it is so, Psalm. 16.3.

3. It cannot totally and finally decline what is good, though a believer may
fall and that foully, yet he will recover, there is a principle of heaven, the
holy Spirit, and fire from God, which cannot but ascend, and be active, yea
restless till it come to his own place. See 1 John 3.9. Act. 4.19.20. Psalm.
119.59.

Q. What is the fifth part?

A. Excellent affections, such as love, hatred, etc. In which regeneration
keeps his Court, Throne and especial residence. For as a ship without sails
or wind must lie still, not stir and be becalmed, so Religion, Faith is dead
without works, and it is the labor of love (above all) which will be
rewarded, Heb. 6.10.

Q. Wherein may this be opened?

A. In this. 1. God-love is in the regenerate according to the commandment,
Mat. 22.37. with all the all in some measure; 2. Man-love is in them too,
good man love, by this they are known to be Christ's Disciples, because they
love one another, Joh. 13.35. See also 1 John 4.3. Selflove, that is, a renewed
love to himself, that is the better part of himself, his soul, in the be^^
things, Mark. 8.36.

Yea and to them that are near him and in relation to him for soul service,
Genesis 18.19. See Psalm. 101.

Secondly, by the contrary also, as 1. Devillhatred and resistance. See Matthew.
4. So ou^ Savior, Matthew. 16. Ephesians. 4.27. Ephesians. 6.12. etc. 2. Man-hatred: Do not
I hate them that hate thee? Psalm. 139.21. 3. Selfe-hatred, that is, o^^
natural, sinful, yea and spiritual self too, tha^ is, our best works, if
seeking to stand in competition with or to dethrone the Lord Jesus Christ see
Phil. 3.7, 8.

Some use of all this must be remembered, and so we have done with the two
things propounded to be handled in this Catechism, viz. Man^ recovery out of
his sinful and lost condition.

Q. What are the several uses of this doctrine?

A. The 1. that there is a recovery for the people of God: Devils have no
means, and reprobates no grace to use any though they have them, but to you it
is given, as our Savior said to his Disciples, to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God, Matthew. 13. If thou have tasted, prais^ thy God, O praise him,
in his Sabbaths, in his Sacraments, remember him and think of this, Can. 3.11.
Psalm. 9.13.14.

The 2. that this recovery of ours is no work of nature, (do not sleep your
selves into destruction) but of grace, a mighty work of grace, wrought by
God, at a time whereof no man (that ever tasted) was ignorant, but knows,
remembers it, and admires God in it, yea and can say, I was a blasphemer, etc.
but God had mercy on me: so 1 Timothy 1.

The 3. that it is not of yesterday, to have men 1. think carnally and
grossly of the work of our regeneration, so did Nicodemus, otherwise a great
Scholar, and a man in great place and preferment too: alas it is not that
sends a man to heaven the faster, nay it is well if it do not send him the
faster to destruction, Act. 6.9.

2. Yea and scoff and scorn at it too, as many Atheists now adays do, so did
the Universitie men, Act. 17.18. for these men were great traders in learning,
but had dealt for no grace at all, which is the condition of all such
(whatsoever they think of themselves) which are such as Saint Paul speaks of,
1 Timothy 1.7.

3. And therefore to understand and not to be led by any thing in the world as
example, but to take courage, Josh. 24.14. yea and to make conscience too of
hearing the Shepherds voice and not following a stranger. See Ioh. 10.5.

The 4. is, that thou tell others, (when thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren) when thou art recovered, O seek to pull others out of the pit) O you
can tell others the fearful estat^ of the fearelesse and secure carnal man,
that he that cries Peace, peace, where there is no peace, the certain (if not
sudden) destruction is coming and the Lord will not be merciful to such a^
one: see 1 These. 5.3. Deuteronomy. 29.19.

You can tell them the comfort and joy tha^ you had in believing, the sweet
felicity in a comfortable walking with God, and the more happiness which is
in the conquering one sin then in committing a thousand; you can discover to
them the fare which Christians have a^ their fathers table, even the wine and
the milk in the garden of grace, to which the beloved of God are invited, Can.
5.1. whereof whosoever eats and drinks shall never hunger and thirst more,
and whosoever tastes not thereof, he may feed deliciously every day here, but
the time comes (and God only knows how soon) when he shall not have (no
though he had a heart to ask it, which is impossible) a drop of cold water to
cool his tongue, Luke 16.

The 5. is, that he that desires to know his spiritual estate, do examine,
prove, and try himself by the aforegoing evidences, after this manner and as
is before directed.

Q. How shall I knew that I am in the estate of recovery?

A. Thus, 1. Is the eye open to the mind? and does it do that same office to
thy soul which the eye does unto the body, viz. keep in the way and out of the
ditch, in obedience and out of sin, in the way of God, out of the way of the
devil?

2. Why does a Christian love, fear, trust God, but because he knows the
justice, mercy, etc. in our God? And they that know thy name will put their
trust in thee, for thou Lord have not failed them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10.

3. The first principle in the world before the Spirit of God moved thereon,
was darkness, darkness moved upon the face of the deep; so is it in worldly
men, all is darkness, they love darkness, they do the deeds of darkness,
and their reward will be the blackness of darkness, if God do not give them
light.

4. And for the convincing of our selves and others of the work of grace
thoroughly, do as the poor blind man did, draw thy argument so, Ioh. 9.25. One
thing I know, that I was blind and now I see: so I would have every one of us
do and say, I was in woeful misery and he relieved me: Psalm. 116. and so of
the rest of the particulars.

Of the fall of mankind and his recovery, thus much be spoken, now let us to
the third point, which is the gracious means whereby this recovery may through
Gods blessing be obtained, that is to say, the Word and the Sacraments of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

First, of the Word of God.

Q. Whether all the Word of God be necessary to be preached to the elect of
God before, in and after their actual conversion?

A. Yes surely, and if he be an approved workman which handles the same, not
without an especial benefit with Gods blessing. The Law, for by it comes the
knowledge of sin: so the Apostle, I had not known sin but by the Law, Romans
7.7. And the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Thus the other
Laws, as the ceremonial and the judicial, are useful too, for they serve to
show sin, though not directly, yet by accident, Col. 2.14. This was the
course of old amongst the Preachers of the Gospel; Gal. 3.10.13. and so it must
be now.

Before we preach promises, we must preach threatenings.

Therefore the Law is resembled to the seed, the Gospel to the fruit, and the
preaching to the breaking up of the fallow grounds, Ierem. 4.4.

The Law is like the needle which pricks and enters to bring after the thread
which closes the feame, rent or breach.

And as for preaching the Law, and exact obedience thereunto, even after
justification of Gods people, it must not be omitted, for it is the rule of
life, Psalm. 119.195. has both its coactive and directive force upon believers:
It is perpetual, because moral; lasts in the Church Militant to them, to
whom through Gods mercy the commandment is not grievous, 1 Job. 5.3. For they
desire not better testimony of their love to Christ than the keeping of his
commandments, John 14.15. It lasts in heaven the Church triumphant, for
obedience shall there continue; and why should we think the Law, which is the
rule thereof, shall there be abolished? Many excellent and indeed extaticall
admirations thereof read all over the 119. Psalm.

Qu. Under what consederation is the Word of God when it is the means unto the
salvation of our souls?

An. It must be preached. For though the reading of the Word of God has its
particular and private, and indeed excellent use to them that make conscience
thereof, yet preaching is the ordinance of God, 1 Cor. 1.21.

Q. What is the thing which you call preaching?

A. You may take the Apostles description of his own pains thus, Act. 20.26,
27. I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have kept nothing back, but have
showed you all the counsel of God. The Ambassadors duty is to deliver the
mind and will of his Master that sends him, so is it the duty of the preacher,
Gods Ambassador, 2 Cor. 5.19.20.

Qu. What is required of him that is a Preacher of the Gospel?

An. Four especial things; the first is the right dividing of the Word of
God, 2 Timothy 2.15. a twofold similitude there is in that one word, one taken
from the cutting of bread for children, before whom if we set the whole loaf
they will rise hungry, or it is taken from the husbandmans cutting and lopping
off the superfluous branches. See Matthew. 24.45. and John 15.

The second is a distinction betwixt the precious and the vile, the clean and
unclean, a distinction between Sheep and Goats, such a skill as the Lord
complains of the Shepherds of Israel for want of: See Ezekiel. 34.1, 2.17.

The third is a holy courage, boldness, and resolution in the things of God,
and the work of God, and ways of God: see Jerem. 1.17, 18, 19.

The fourth is an holy ability for consolation and satisfaction: we must be
like the Oracle of heaven, like our Master, Esa. 61.1. not break a bruised
Reed, Matthew. 12.20. to strengthen the weak, to heal the sick, to bind up the
broken, to bring again that which was driven out of the way, Ezekiel. 34.4.

Qu. What is required of him that is a hearer of the Gospel?

An. Two things. 1. Attention, which is the applying of the understanding to
perceive the will of God. Act. 16.14. God opened, and then she attended. It is
in Scripture called the seeking after God, Esa. 58.2. A wisdom goes, or at
least should go along with it to know and approve the good will of God, Romans
12.2. yea and if the Lord please to work this in us, then we consult not with
flesh and blood, but with him and his truth, Gal. 1.15, 16.

2. Intention, which is the applying of our will to the will of the Lord our
God, Psalm. 119.106. this is called in Scripture obeying from the heart, Romans
6.17. and in regard of this the Law is said to be in the heart, Psalm. 40.8.
Such a resolution should be in the hearer, as Jerem. 42.5, 6.

There are four resemblances unto which the hearers of the Gospel are likened:
1. To a Sponge. 2. To a Water pot. 3. To a Strainer. 4. To a Sieve.


Qu. What are the works of God upon his elect in hearing?

An. Very many, but four especially: 1. The heart opening, so Lydia, Act.
16.14. 2. The heart pricking, so Act. 2.37. 3. The taking away the veil, 2
Cor. 3.16. 4. The teaching of God, Joel 2.28.


Qu. What are the dealings of God toward the reprobate?

An. In the hearing of the Word of the Gospel, thus it fares with the
reprobate.

1. They hear, but understand not; see, but do not perceive, Esa. 6.10.

2. God describes the hearing of the Gospel by the four grounds, Matthew. 13.

3. Stumbling at the Word of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.23.

4. Foreordained thereunto, 1 Pet. 2.8.

Qu. Is there not some particular and peculiar work which God does upon his
people in hearing more then on other men?

An. Yes, and it is that of which God speaks, Jerem. 31.33. the inscription
and writing of his Law in our hearts, which work is indeed no other thing but
the very finger of God ingraving in the heart as in a table, his Law and our
obedience thereunto.

Qu. What are the effects of ordinance using comfortably?

An. Many, such as these: Joy in believing, In whom 1 Pet. 1.8. after, etc. ye
rejoiced; it is set forth, Matthew. 13.44. The Eunuch went on his way rejoicing,
Act. 8.39. And there are two both infallible and indeed inseparable companions
joined together, namely sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth,
2 These. 2.13.

Now for the use of this point.

Qu. What is the first use of this point?

An. An information in the true, sober and evangelicall use of the Law of God,
which is that before, and in, and after conversion it be preached unto Gods
people.

Qu. What is the second use of this point?

An. An information, that preaching is the soule-saving ordinance, the
faith-begetting means ordinarily, as is to see Romans 10.14. Whence these two
conclusions follow.

1. That the chief business of that day, which is set apart for the soul to
be wrought upon, I mean the Sabbath day, is preaching, that is the work of the
day.

2. That the reason why few of our people attain to measures and good degrees
of grace, faith, and godliness, is their despising of the means, neglect, or
loathing, or contempt of sound doctrine: this is complained of Romans 10.16.

Qu. What is the third use?

An. An information when the minister is discharged and the people may be truly
said to die in their sin. The canon is Ezekiel. 13.19.

Men that are wicked having once been warned, and of the wrath to come, and do
not come in to God nor repent, must die unpitied and unlamented.

Qu. What is the fourth use?

An. The Preachers duty, divided into particulars, the Preachers
looking-glass, wherein he may see the rule of right preaching, and cutting the
Evangelicall loaf amongst the Churches children.

Qu. What is the fifth use?

An. The hearers direction, O you that desire to hear with profit, and to do
your souls some advantage in an holy ordinance, look to your guidance, take
your direction with you.

1. Understanding, 1 Cor. 10.15.

2. Will must be both present, 1 John 5.20.

Qu. What is the sixth use?

An. Trial of that great thing; the maine question is here decided whether the
Lord deal with me as an elect one, or as a reprobate one under the means of
grace; see the trial here plainly set forth unto you.

1. Does the Lord open my heart, etc.

2. Does he pass by my spirit, etc. And so of the rest.

Qu. What is the seventh use?

An. The 1. Prayer of a Christian for heart-inscribing, that the Lord would
please with his own finger to write.

2. Practice of a Christian, to observe our Lords direction in hearing him,
that is, Christ Jesus the great Prophet. Waiting on the ordinances of grace.
Depending on the word for all of a Christian, 2 Timothy 3.16.

Qu. What is the last use?

An. Proof of Soul-rejoycings have we any at all? Psalm. 63.5. What and whence
they arise, Luk 10.20. Joy in heaven for the conversion of a sinner. From
heaven for, Psalm. 4.6. Psalm. 106.4, 5, 6. a place worth the remembering.

Thus much for the first means, the word of God; now for the second means
which is the Sacrament.

Qu. Do we read of such a word in the holy Scripture as a Sacrament?

An. No: nevertheless we read of something that is of equal signification,
that is to say, a Sign, Genesis 17.11. a Seal, Romans 4.11. a Figure; 1 Pet. 3.21.
so Heb. 8.5. it is called a Mystery too.

Qu. But what is a Sacrament?

An. An outward and visible sign, of an inward and spiritual grace, so
plainly, and in that language. In which description I shall look upon these
particulars: 1. The sign, and there we shall speak of the signs that are
Sacramental, and of them it will be very needful to know,

1. That in respect of the thing signified a sign is either of things past,
and then it is called commemorative, that is, a sign wherein something past is
remembered; or of things present, and then it is called demonstrative, that is,
wherein something present is showed forth; or of things to come, and then it is
called prenunciative, that is, foretelling some things to come; or else a sign
is that, that shows forth all these, or at least partly things past, and
partly present, and partly to come.

2. That these signs in the Sacrament do either serve the understanding, and
then they are called showing signs; or the memory, and then they are called
warning signs; or the faith, and then they are called sealing signs; or of
these, all three together; and this is that which is needful to be known
concerning signs.

Thus of the sign. Now 2. of the word (outward.)

Qu. What means that by saying outward and visible?

An. That which may be seen by the bodily eye, and in this place the question
is concerning the signs in the Sacrament of what force and power they are: In
which I find the opinion of former times to be threefold.

1. They said and taught that the Sacramental signs did confer grace, now
this by no means is to be admitted for the reason expressed afterward.

First, they give to the signs that which is to be given to God alone, and
then the people understand not what God, and what the signs do severally
perform.

Secondly, they give all unto man in the conferring of grace, and nothing to
Christ; and from thence arises the Priests forgiveness of sin, the tyranny and
lording it over men's consciences, and that desperate point of denying heaven to
the Infants that die without baptism: a great deal of these dregs do yet
rest and stay amongst our people, that in the very sign, there is some more
then ordinary holiness.

2. They spoke of the signs dispositively, that is to say, that signs were
instituted of God, not only to signify grace but to dispose it, and so they
say that whosoever was baptized, and did receive confirmation, did bear the
badge and character of a Christian.

3. Another opinion they had whereby all was taken from the signs, and they
reputed to be no more then other things in a profane use.

For the right understanding therefore of the doctrine of these outward signs;
the truth is, the signs do offer, but in their own nature they do not
confer grace; they are not without grace, for God has instituted them, but
presently, and of themselves they do not, indeed they cannot give it.

For conclusion then of this point, observe these things or considerations
following, that is to say:

1. It is only of God to give that which these signs do represent and show
forth: so Esa. 43 25. I am he which blot out thine iniquity, and Jer. 31.34.

2. By a necessity of the means, the signs are helpful, and not to be
neglected, no more then the looking up to the brazen Serpent, of that Israelite
which would have cure, but the Spirit blows where it lists, John 3.8. By
grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.8.

3. The Scripture speaks plainly, that grace is given before the receiving of
the sign, Romans 4.11. and after also, as is to see Act. 2. and 8. and 10.

4. Instances are given which clear it, and put it out of question, that many
have received the signs without ever receiving grace, it was the case of Simon
Magus, Act. 8.23. John 13.27. 1 Cor. 10.

Thus of the second part, the word (outward) sign; Now of the third part which
is grace.

Qu. What is that thing which you call the grace or the inward grace of the
Sacrament?

A. Here we shall see the difference now between a Sacrament and a testament;
all the whole Scripture is indeed Gods testament, but the Sacrament is the
Seal of the Testament.

Now in this Testament of God, there were two Covenants, unto which the Lord
did set the Seals or the Sacraments, as is to see in holy Scripture.

1. In the Old Testament there was a Covenant of works, which ran thus with
Adam, As long as thou continuest holy in obeying my word, thou shall so long
continue happy in enjoying my presence; And to this Testament or Covenant there
were two Seals put, the tree of life, which was the Sacrament of their
immortality, if they persisted in their obedience to God; and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, which was the Sacrament of their obedience, or of
their trial rather, whether they would abstain from eating of the forbidden
fruit.

2. In both Old and New Testament, there is one Covenant of Grace, which runs
thus, What the Law could not do in as much as it was weak through the flesh,
God did, by sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8.3, 4. That the righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us, and that whosoever believes in him might not
perish but have everlasting life; See Jerem. 31.33.34. Gal. 3.10.13. John 3.16,
17, 18.

Now unto this Covenant, God sets his two Seals, the white Seal of Baptism,
and the red Seal of the Lords Supper. And thereby does ascertaine every
faithful man and woman (using the Sacrament rightly and faithfully) that the
Covenant of grace in Christ, and all the benefits which are promised therein
do not only belong to the whole Church, and all the faithful in general,
but unto them and their souls in particular; And not only so, but,

1. They using the Sacrament according to divine institution, do hope for it.

2. And do also profess themselves bounden by that Sacrament to show forth all
possible holiness of life before God, his holy Angels and all good men. See
Tit. 2.10, 11. See also Luke 1.74.75.

And to draw to the conclusion of this point also, corcerning this Testament
and Sacrament, or Covenant and the Seals thereof, let these things following
be observed.

1. That the Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace, are only instituted for the
faithful; for as it is said of the Word of God, that it profited not them (of
whom the Apostle speaks) because it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4.2. in
those that heard it: So it must be said and thought of the Sacrament also.

2. That therefore the most excellent things of God, may and do (in some cases)
lose their power of profiting the soul. See Romans 2.25. Thy circumcision is
made uncircumcision, Jer. 9.26. not a penny difference between thee and a
heathen in the heart. 1 Cor. 11.20. three notable places.

3. That likewise the profit reaped and the benefit gotten out of the
Sacraments is not by the work done, as the Papists say, and too many of our
people think, but another way surely.

4. That one and the same thing is given to, and received by the faithful both
in the Word and Sacrament, namely Christ with all his benefits; no difference
in the thing, that is all one, nor in the manner of receiving, for that is all
one, namely by faith, only the difference is in the outward form, for in the
word preached God only deals with the ear, but in the Sacraments with the
ears and eyes too, for he adds Signs and Seals to them.

So we have done with the third part, which is the Grace of the Sacrament. Now
of the fourth part, inward and spiritual grace, or invisible.

Qu. Why is this grace called inward?

An. It is so called (amongst other) for these two Reasons.

1. With respect unto the Sign, for that is but merely external and
altogether outward, is received with an outward part, the mouth, digested with
an outward part, the stomach, and gives nourishment only to the outward man,
the body; but the other is received with an inward act, to wit Faith, and
yields spiritual nourishment to the inner man, in which respect it is called
Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, John 6.55. and the Manna and it sweetly
compared together, 1 John. 6.49.50.

2. With respect unto the Seat, for this has place in the heart, and soul,
and inner man; See Romans 10.9. Believe with the heart, called the heart-answer,
Psalm. 73.7. and the answer of a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. not the washing
away the filth of the flesh.

Qu. Why is it called spiritual?

An. From the quality of it, for the more of grace any thing has in it, the
more spiritual it is; which may be showed by that speech of Ioshna to the
people, Josh. 24.19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is
a jealous God, etc. what is the meaning? ye cannot serve him, 1. as you ought;
2. as he will accept, unless you be very spiritual and leave your idolatry.
See John 4.24.

The quantity of it, for grace fits the Spirit unto the greatest services, and
fills it with all abundances and satisfaction therein too, Psalm. 63.5. Psalm.
90.14.

Qu. Why is it called invisible?

An. It is so called; 1. In regard of others, the eye of man cannot see the
provision, that God has made for his, both in grace and glory, 1 Cor. 2.9. the
persuasion, the satisfaction, the heart-raysings, and soule-quicknings, which
God in an ordinance or Sacrament feeds and fills his people with which the world
sees not; as our Lord said, John 4.32. I have meat you know not of, so can the
Christian too say to the world and to every unbeleever, There Is meat for me in
the word and Sacrament which you know not of.

2. It is called invisible in regard of us too, for the time was, when the very
believer came blindfold to the Sacrament. We were darkness, though we be now
light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And it is by faith only that we see
invisibles. See Heb. 11.27.

Some uses must be made of this point, and first of the first part in order;
wherein these two things in order.

Qu. What is the first?

An. To learn, what a Sign, any Sign, but especially a Sign in the
Sacrament is; viz. a thing instituted by God in that holy business of our
souls, unto that end.

1. That I might see what things God intends by it to put me in mind of in the
Sacrament, which are the things past, those are Christ's death and suffering,
and satisfaction for me and the sins of all the elect.

The things present, those are, the grace of persuasion and obsignation, or
sealing that all these belong to me, I being a believer and rightly using the
Sacrament.

The things to come; namely, that I shall in glory have a full, and free
communion with him there for ever, Ioh. 6.35.40.58.

2. That I might also see what parts of my soul, or faculties thereof these
Signs in the Sacrament serve to benefit whilst I am receiving and after: that
is to say;

1. As they show me any thing, and so they serve to my understanding; for when
I see those Sacramental actions of breaking bread and pouring out of wine, I
am put in mind of the breaking of the body and the pouring out of the blood of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. As they do warn me of any thing, and so they do serve my memory; for in
the receiceiving of the Sacrament I am put into remembrance to be thankful
for and to preserve the remembrance of the death of my Savior until he come,
as one friend gives another a book or a piece of gold.

3. As they seal any thing, and so they do serve my faith; for as I do
receive bread and wine into my body with which I am secretly, yet certainly
nourished and grow up to the things of a man, so I do believe that I have and
shall receive the Lord Jesus into my soul, that holding the head, whereof all
the body is knit together, and having nourishment ministered, I may increase
with the increases of God, Col. 2.19.

Thus of the first part.

Qu. What uses are to be made of the second part, that is to say, of the
doctrine of the Signs in the Sacrament?

An. They are sweetly useful to a discerning receiver.

1. To try his obedience whether he will with reverence use them, in obedience
to the command of the great God, and with a heart so disposed that if the Lord
had bidden some greater thing he would have done it, 2 King. 5.13.

2. To try a Christians wisdom, for he has more of heavenly grace and
direction in him then to depend upon any thing under God for that which he
knows must only come from God, for it is God that works the will and the
deed, 2 Phil.

3. It serves greatly to make a man fitted for his acknowledgments of the Lord;
for if the Spirit blow where, when, and on whom it lists, then it is not of
him that runs nor of him that wills, but of God that shows mercy, Romans
9.16. And see Romans 11. last verse.

4. It puts a Christian into a trembling posture all the time of receiving to
remember Judas his sop, Ioh. 13.27. and Magus his Baptism, Act. 8.23.

Thus of the second part, Sign outward.

Qu. What is the use of the third part, which is the Grace of the holy
Sacrament?

An. It serves for many sweet purposes: as for example.

In that the first Covenant of works could not save, I learn to remember the
misery of man: Oh woe unto us for ever if we were put to our own desert at the
hands of God!

In the second Covenant of Grace I learn to remember the exceeding great, and
bottomless, yea indeed boundless mercy of God, who when we were lost was
pleased to recover us again in the Lord Jesus.

For the Sacraments I do desire to esteem them no otherwise then the Seal of
the Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore think my self bounden
unto these things following.

1. The most sober and sanctified use of them that possibly I may or can, that
God be not provoked to curse that to me which to others is a blessing, 1 Cor.
10.1, 2, 3.

2. That I am strictly tied by them to perform my service in all possible
holiness to God, as ever I desire to receive from him the Sacraments benefit.
For otherwise,

First, I show that I have none of Christ's Spirit, and if so, then I am none of
his, that is most clear, Romans 8.9.

Secondly, I deny the end, fruit and purpose of the grace of the Gospel, which
is set down clearly, Tit. 2, 10, 11, 12.

Thirdly, I deny that power to be in the flesh and blood for spiritual
nourishment, which is in bread and wine for corporal growth and strength.

3. That I understand that this bread was and is appointed for the children to
be food for them, dogs must not eat it, and therefore must look that I can
cry Abba father, if ever I mean to be received into Gods favor or family. See,
Matthew. 15.22, etc. Matthew. 7.6.

4. I am to know that to the unclean all things are unclean, yea even the very
consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15.

So for the uses of the third part.

Qu. What uses now are to be made of the fourth part, that the grace of the
Sacrament is called inward, spiritual, and inward?

An. These in order. 1. That God in spiritual things, has and indeed desires
to have to do with hearts, souls, and insides, whose purging, pardoning and
the like, God does and indeed we should in these holy things chiefly aim at.
See to this purpose, Prove. 23.26. Heb. 16.22.

2. That a man had need to be very spiritual in the drawing nigh to God, were
it for no other reason than this, that the benefit is a spiritual benefit, aad
indeed the natural man does not perceive, 1 Cor. 2.13. old men must have
spectacles, all men must have grace, and the Spirit of God, which do either
perceive or receive benefit in a Sacrament.

3. That the Faith of a believing Communicant is a certain wonderful kind of
Grace that can pierce into the secret of salvation, and be able to see the
hidden things of God.

No wonder carnal men care so little for the best things of God, they are on
the dark side of them, Exodus 14.20.

No wonder believers are so affected with them on the other side, for the
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16.

Thus much for the general consideration of a Sacrament, yet more clearly and
we go further to ask,

Qu. Who is the author of a Sacrament?

An. God only, who did institute and ordain the Sacraments both in the Old
and New Testament, and unto them annexed the promises of grace and glory, which
was in the power neither of man nor Angel to perform.

And therefore the holy Sacraments are by the Ministers of God only to be
administered, and of these also as in the name and stead of Christ.

Qu. Why cannot man be the author of a Sacrament?

An. Beside that one great reason aforenamed, there are two more to be
observed; the 1. Man gives, he can give neither promise nor reward to any
service; the 2. God will not be served according to man's appointment, but as
himself shall set down and determine, Matthew. 15.9. Esa. 29.29.

Qu. What is the matter of a Sacrament?

An. It is a point of doctrine and divine knowledge, that concerning which the
learned have discovered themselves diverse ways.

1. They have said that the matter of a Sacrament is twofold, one in the
sensible and terrestrial sign, another in that thing or truth, which is by
the said sign set forth and signified unto us.

2. Thus they have taught, that the Sacramental element, as water in Baptism,
and bread and wine in the Lords Supper, that is the matter, (yet not without
some higher thing therein, and thereby set forth and signified as was said
before) of the Sacrament.

Which said Matter, though it be corporal, yet it is also spiritual, as is to
see, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. spiritual I say, not in regard of the substance, for that
is not all changed, but in regard of the end; upon which a wise receiver is to
look with this fourefold consideration.

1. That the bread and wine is not now profane and common, but holy, that is
to say, by God ordained and instituted to a holy and spiritual use.

2. That it is the instrument of the holy Ghost, by which he is spiritually
efficacious in the heart of the believers.

3. That by them the spiritual good things, are both signified, given, yea and
sealed up to the believers, 1 Cor. 10.16.

4. That to a wise receiver these things do not so much serve to the body as
to the soul, 1 Pet. 3.20.

3ly. They have called the matter by a distinction, that is to say, the earthly
matter, and the heavenly matter, meaning the sign, and the thing signified,
and therefore they taught that it behooved those which came unto the Lords
Supper to think that there they should receive two things, to wit, an earthly
thing after an earthly manner, that is, bread and wine with the mouth of the
body, and a heavenly thing after an heavenly manner, that is, Christ Jesus by
faith.

4ly. If you shall say briefly, Christ is the matter of a Sacrament, it is
sound doctrine, and indeed it is useful for these two purposes.

1. To try all false and spurious Sacraments, for such they are all where he
is not found to be the matter: by which rule if five of the Popes seven
Sacraments be tried, they will be found too light.

2. To try all true receivers, for thou may receive the matter of the
Sacrament and yet not receive the matter, the bread of the Lord, and not the
bread the Lord, the outward but not the inward matter.

In a word, when Christ did deliver to his disciples the bread, and said, This
is my body, and when we in his stead do the like to you, it is such a speech
as if a Prince should when he had given one a fair Manor, bring him the
Grant or Letters patents thereof, and say unto him, Lo there is your Manor,
etc. Which serves for the understanding of the words we speak to you in the
delivery of the matter of the Sacrament.

Qu. What is the form of the Sacrament?

An. Of this also you shall hear what was taught of old; 1. They said that the
form of the Sacrament were those rites, ceremonies or usages in the Sacrament,
which were agreeable to Gods Word, and so to primitive institution. Hence that
assertion is amongst the Schoolmen, that the word of God is the form and
soul of a Sacrament: from which two things were concluded.

1. That the words of our Lord in the institution ought only to be used,
without any addition or diminution.

2. And that therefore it ought so to be done, because every receiver ought so
to receive as if the Lord Christ himself were present to give the Sacrament.

Secondly, they did distinguish of the form of the Sacrament, and truly
taught that this form of the holy Sacrament was twofold.

First, the manners of administering the holy Sacrament, that is to say, those
rites and orders which were agreeable to our Lords institution, which they
truly called the outward form of the Sacrament: Therefore the Apostle
desiring to show the Corinthians how the Sacrament ought to be administered, 1
Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. repeateth the words of our Savior only.

Secondly, the sweet analogy, similitude and resemblance between the sign
and the thing signified. As for example.

Qu. Wherein is this fitness in bread to signify and set forth Christ's body?

An. See this: 1. The bread is broken.

2. The bread nourishes.

3. The bread strengthens. So,

1. The wine is poured.

2. The wine reviveth.

3. The wine makes glad. So,

The Lord was broken and his blood shed, that he might nourish and revive, yea
that he might strengthen and make glad the drooping consciences and sad hearts
of such whose consciences are pressed with sins guilt and fear of damnation
all their life long, and this is the inward form of the Sacrament. See Heb.
2.15.

Thirdly, one thing more they noted worthy of our observation, which is, that
the consecration of the elements was either, 1. Constitutive, that is, that
which is set down and appointed of God, to be the words of the same, so those
words, This is my body, etc.

2. Invocative, that is, such as is to be performed by the prayers of all the
Congregation together, which in Scripture is called blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. and
see that place, Act. 2.42.

Qu. What is then the form of the Sacrament we have seen, but now tell us
only the end of the Sacrament?

An. Of that much must be said, for as it is very true that the end of a thing
and the good of that thing are so convertible, that until the end and use of a
thing appear, there is no benefit of that thing to me: So is it in the
Sacrament surely, for by the clear understanding of the Sacraments ends, we
shall as clearly see the end and use of the Sacrament also, wherein is the
benefit of the same.

Qu. What then are the many and maine ends of the Sacrament?

An. These following, that is to say,

1. That it may be a monument, Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace and of
our communion with Christ in all the benefits of our salvation which are given
already, or are hereafter to be given to the Church.

So the Passover was a remembrance not only of their deliverance past, that
is to say, out of Egypt, but also of the future deliverance which they were
also to have in, by, and through the Lord Jesus Christ. And our Passover is a
sweet memorial not only of the redemption of Christ made upon the Cross, but
also of that which is to be perfected when Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, and fully to deliver his people from sin and death, and
all the enemies of their salvation, Luke 21.28. 1 Cor. 11.26. John 6.35.40.50.

2. That it may be a warning to us of that obligation wherein we stand bound
to become the people of God by covenant and agreement. This is like the boaring
of the ear under the Law.

3. The Sacrament is the bond of mutual charity, concord, and love between
the Church and people of God, 1 Cor. 10.17.

4. The Sacrament is as it were the very sinews of our public meetings, and
the preservation of the work of the Ministry, Exodus 12.16. 1 Cor. 11.20.

5. These badges do distinguish the people of God from all heathen and
strangers; the Church of God is distinguished from unbeleevers, and idolaters,
see Exodus 12.43. No stranger shall eat thereof.

6. The end of the Sacrament is, that those of the household may eat thereof,
and no other. Men prepare their meat for their servants, and for their family.
So God, Lev. 7.20. And all the family come together and expect their meat from
their master, or from him who is by the Master appointed to give them their
meat in due season, Matthew. 24.45. So the Sacrament in the constant and
conscionable use thereof does discover us to be of the society of the Saints
and family of the faithful.

7. God does intend hereby that we should in the reverent and sober use of
this ordinance give others occasion to inquire and learn what it is, and so
bring them to be acquainted with the ways of God, Exodus 13.14.

Nor for the uses in order.

Qu. What is the first use?

An. That if God be the author of a Sacrament; 1. We labor to see God in the
institution of them, and so with reverence behave our selves both in hearing
and receiving. The Minister to come with Paul's authority, 1 Cor. 11.23. the
people with Jacobs behavior, Genesis 28.16. And no man to go out from the holy
things as he came in, but bettered either in judgment or affection, Ezekiel.
46.9.

Secondly, that we labor to stir up the gift of Faith and our dependence
upon God, Heb. 10.23. for he is faithful that has promised, and all the
promises are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. we desire to trust solvent men for
great matters, so to believe the truth-performing God.

Thirdly, that we may and ought to expect Gods power from, and his presence in
the holy Sacrament. Gods Sun, when it shines it does heat and enlighten all the
creatures below: so to see whether Gods Sacrament and the Sun of righteousness
does shine upon, heat, qualify, and quicken our cold, earthly and frozen
hearts.

Qu. What is the second use?

An. That if Christ be the matter of a Sacrament, then; First, we labor to
take heed to the Sacraments which we receive, and indeed to the word we hear;
for no preaching where Christ is not preached, 1 Cor. 2.2. No Sacraments where
Christ is not received; and therefore the servants of God must learn to refuse
all other Sacraments besides the two only.

Secondly, we learn that he must needs be a happy man that receives the
Sacrament aright, for he receives the Lord Jesus Christ; See Romans 8.15. Ye
have received not the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of
adoption; Ye are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. and that one place, Romans 8.32. how
shall he not with him give us all things?

Thirdly, that we have an eye upon two especialls; 1. The preparation, or that
which is the Instrument of our receiving Christ, namely faith, see Heb. 4.2.
and therefore desire the Lord to show us the impediment of our comforts in the
holy things, see Mark 9.23, 24. that we may behave ourselves humbly under all
our wants and weaknesses.

2. The persuasion, fruit, benefit, advantage, accrewing to the soul out of
the Christ-giving ordinance, Gal. 2.20. what power, Phil. 4.12. contentation
and acquiescence, Psalm. 16.5.6.

Qu. What is the third use?

An. That if the form of the Sacrament be the Word of God,

1. They do well that have regard unto the sure word of prophecy as unto a
light shining in a dark place, see 2 Pet. 1.19. For in vain he worships God,
that brings for doctrines the traditions of men; and as in all other things, so
in this especially, me thinks the Lord should appoint the rule of his own
worship; so then we learn to take up David's resolution, I will hearken what
God says, Psalm. 62.11.

2. If we would be prevailed withal to examine our selves, from the form of
the Sacrament we might learn to try whether there be that union between the
Sacrament and us, which is between the sign and the thing signified: the bread
is broken, so Christ, but for me? Gal. 2.20. the bread nourishes, so does
Christ my soul? The bread does strengthen, so does the Lord Jesus me? yea
Phil. 4.12. I can do all things through Christ strengthening me; and so of
the rest, he that will make conscience of examination of himself and
self-judging thus, shall doubtless find the comfort of it.

3. We learn that when we come to a Sacrament, it is our duty not to sit
senselessely there, or gazing after this or that vanity, as too many do, but
to help with your prayers mightily that the Sacrament may be effectual and
very powerful. You complain of ineffectuall and livelesse ordinances, you are
in fault, you bring indisposed and livelesse souls; the word of God would run
and be glorified, if you would like brethren pray for us. See 2 These. 3.1. You
must help to consecrate and set an edge upon the ordinance, the element, the
Sacrament.

Qu. Whereby may a Christian do this?

An. Thus: 1. The capacity of a Christian must be looked unto. Art thou a
believer? a convert a Christian. You force us to lay the plaster upon a dead
man's sore, if you come to the Sacrament in your unbeleefe; Wicked men come to
the Church, to the Sacrament, but the Church, the Sacrament, never comes to
them: such places as Psalm. 50.16. and Tit. 1.15. and Esa. 1.

2. The care of a Christian must be regarded, his care I say to do at a
Sacrament time with his soul as David does in a time of praise with his soul,
Psalm. 57.8. Lord awaken my faith, love, repentance, zeal, meditation,
judgment, all: graces will be asleep, the devil busy, desertion it may be
appearing, to stir up therefore the gift of God, blow up the fire, and seek
new inspiration to every new action. Our best duties, alas, are for the most
part worst performed.

Qu. What is the fourth use?

An. That if there be so many excellent ends of the Sacrament, we labor
earnestly, 1. To be informed that there ought to be no rest in a Christian
heart, until we see some of these ends in our hearts, lives, and spirits,
appearing evidently both for our comfort and others good example: the end of
eating, the end of studying, the end of trading, gain, nourishment, knowledge,
these are those we look at in natural things, and such should be our care
also in things spiritual. See Phil. 3.8, 9, 10.

2. To see two names we read of old given to the Sacrament which I entreat may
be marked.

1. It was called an Eucharist or a work of thankfulness answerable to that,
1 Cor. 11.24. Do this in remembrance of me: and so a Christian should think
when he is called to the communion; Oh I am called most thankfully to remember
him that forgot not me when I was in my low estate; the God that delivers the
Church from all her sins, how much more from all her sorrows? Psalm. 130.8.
and to say of the Lord Jesus as David said of his Church, If I forget thee, let
my right hand forget her cunning, Psalm. 13.7.

2. It was called a Love-feast, and so they that were called to the Sacrament
did use to give something to the poor, that so they might testify how that by
the use of the Lords Supper, they were obliged to perform works of charity
to the poor according to that of Nehem. 8.10. and so a Christian should think,
I am called now to remember the members of his body who is the head of the
Church, and what I do to them he will account to be done as unto him, Matthew.
25. A cup of cold water given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple shall not
lose his reward.

Qu. But what more particular uses are to be made out of the ends of the
Sacrament?

An. In a word, all the uses of the ends of the holy Sacrament may be well
reduced to these following particulars, that is to say:

1. In regard of Christ, and there is a work of commemoration to be done, and
that is to fill our hearts with the remembrance of him, the fullness of whom
fills all things. Neither can this be done without thanksgiving, if ever we
have tasted, Psalm. 118.21.

2. In regard of our selves, and there is a work of trial and strict search,
what confirmation, nourishment, pacification, we get; Luke 24.32. Psalm. 63.5.
Matthew. 13.51, 52. Psalm. 27.8.

3. In regard of others, and so there is a threefold duty that we are to
desire to be exemplary in, and to make others witnesses of.

First, the offering of our selves; and all that we have to him which has
offered himself to death for us, to deny our selves, and all that we have for
Christ, which is a duty every where pressed.

Secondly, the acknowledgment of our selves to belong to the company of the
faithful, in and under these badges of our profession, and so to be ready to
render a reason of the hope that is in us with meekness and fear, 1 Pet.
3.15. Not forsaking the assemblies, Heb. 10.25.

Thirdly, the fellow-feeling of the miseries of our brethren, to be like
affectioned, to bear one another burden, and if one misery befall one member
that the rest sympathize.

Qu. Are there not some cases of conscience to which a Communicant ought to
have an especial regard in these Sacrament duties?

An. There are very many, but I shall only commend these two unto you.

1. How often a religious Christian ought to make conscience of receiving? Very
often; surely much might be said in this point: The Scripture seems to leave
it to the discretion and understanding of the wise believer.

The primitive Church used it very often.

In the times of the Apostles, Act. 2.42. it seems they did it every time they
met: Some have followed the old course of superstition and determined, three or
four times a year, at least it ought to be done, and that for such reasons
as these following, that is to say:

First, Because thanksgiving is comely, Psa. 33.1.

Secondly, our Saviors words, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Thirdly, we owe to our faith and assurance, care of increasing them.

Fourthly, it is said, 1 Cor. 11.30. for this cause many are weak, etc. Out of
which it is inferred that if God punish a wrong use of the Sacrament, he will
also not bear with a rare use thereof.

Thus have men ^aught concerning this case of conscience.

Something more I shall entreat to warn you of in this point for the true
knowledge of this how often we ought to receive.

1. To tie a people at such times, at set times to receive the Sacrament, is
both superstitious and absurd; men were wont to be excommunicated if they did
not receive, but never questioned if they were not fit.

2. All men are not to receive it alike often, the strong Christian may and
ought to receive oftener then the weak, his senses are exercised, Heb. 5.14.
But there is fear that the other may eat doubting, Romans 14.23.

3. The obligations are very binding for often receiving, where men are fit and
qualified, as God to have his praise, our souls their peace, quickening,
raising, etc. and our profession its ornament, with our brethrens example and
charitable respect.

4. The dictate of a man's own spirit, I say of a believers own spirit, will
be best for this point, to whom I say as in another case was said to Saul, 1 Samuel 10.7. When these signs shall come unto thee, do as occasion serves, for
God is with thee. Mark the dictate of thine own spirit.

The second case is, how worthily a religious Christian ought to receive the
holy Sacrament?

To this point exceeding much ought to be be said, and I will say something.

First, it is not indifferent whether a man receive well or ill, I say it is
not indifferent or arbitrary.

1. Not in respect of God, for 1 Cor. 11.27. his prescript.

2. Not in respect of man, for 1 Cor. 10.3. his profit.

Secondly, that the Scripture seems to include it all within the compass of
that duty of examination and trial; so that he which knows what belongs to
that duty of examination, and practically falls upon the service of
self-tryall, seems to perform the whole work of preparation.

Qu. What is then the duty of examination of trial?

An. In it I shall observe these things.

1. There must be knowledge presupposed, and so idiots are not at all fit.

2. There must be will to amend too, otherwise to what purpose is examination?

3. An exact rule for trial, otherwise is not any thing to be tried.

4. Such a trial as God will have, and the things, to be tried will bear.

5. Reason of this.

Qu. What kind of knowledge is required of them which come to the duty of
examination and trial?

An. This will be best understood by considering what the Scripture says of
knowledge, which is said to be either natural knowledge, Romans 2.14.15. Esa.
28.26. or it is legal knowledge, Romans 3.20. and Romans 7.7. or Evangelicall, 2
Cor. 2.14. which is called elsewhere spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9. Now
all these three kinds of knowledge are necessary unto examination. By the first
a man shall see that there is a God, and that he ought to be served; by the
second a man shall see how far he has been from the serving of God aright;
by the third he shall see the only way to bring him into the state of
salvation: for this is eternal life, to know God and the Lord Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, John 17.3. and see Gal. 3.10.13. So that unto true trial
and examination, a threefold knowledge is necessary as you see.

Qu. Why all this knowledge?

An. For great reason: as first, our way of teaching, for it is possible to
convince nature out of her own principles, Act. 17.

Secondly, the Laws vindication, that it is a rule of life, according to which
the trial must be both for present and futurity, Matthew. 25.

Thirdly, the Gospels dignity, that when all means of safety failed, then
Gods love in Christ shone brightly.

Fourthly, the justifying of an old rule in Divinity, this it is, The worship
of God is from nature, the manner of worship is from the Law, but the virtue
and power is all from Grace.

Qu. What distinct things am I to look upon, and set before me in the duty of
my examination and trial, before and at the Sacrament in way of knowledge?

An. These in particular, that is to say:

1. Misery, which is either general, in the fall of mankind, and consists in
sin and punishment, those two inseparable companions, Genesis 4.7. and is seen
daily in the propagation and imitation of sin.

Or else special misery, and our own personal sad estate, which is seen in
the commission of innumerable evils, in the omission of innumerable goods,
which might have been done to others, and received from them, with the just
vengeance of an Almighty God due against these things.

2. Redress thereof, either by justification, where we are to see how we
have behaved our selves toward the whole doctrine of the remedies of our souls
out of our sin and the curse; and so John 1.12. Matthew. 23.37. John 15.22.

Or else by sanctification, where we are to see how far short we come of
either being able to do or willing to suffer according to the will, how unable
to pray to God, or praise him.

Qu. Are there not some choice Scriptures to be read, at or before the time of
receiving, which would be useful to a willing Christian in this case?

An. For the doctrine of misery read, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 28. read Psalm. 51. or
Psalm. 38. The doctrine of Mercy read, Esa. 53. John 17. and 18. 1 Pet. 2. The
doctrine of purity read, Matthew. 5. and 6. Heb. 12. and 13. 1 Ioh. all the
Epistle.

Now if such kind of knowledge be required in examination,

1. Oh the great condemnation which lies upon our people! and why? Joh. 3.19.

2. Oh the great lamentation! here is required so much knowledge, and I bring
with me so much ignorance.

3. An exhortation, Oh seek, Prove. 19.2. and 1 Cor. 15 34.

4. A direction, 1. To your duty. 2. To your danger, Esa. 5.13. Hosea 4.1.6.

Qu. What is the second thing which is supposed in examination?

An. A will to be amended, otherwise, to the Physician we go, because we would
have cure, there we draw our purses, no cost is spared. See Hos. 7.8.

Without a cordial intention of cutting off right hands, etc. no right
examination; As God said of Coniah, Jer. 22.24. So should we say of our
sins; as Saul of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.44. So must he that examines do and
say concerning sin, if the nearest or dearest, I will part with it, that God
may not part from me.

Here also this point will put us into a sad condition; do not we draw near
with our lips while our hearts are far from God? Do not we do thus with
our sins? Confess them to day, and commit them to morrow?

2. Cor. 7.11. See the companions of godly sorrow, and take heed to your selves
in this point.

Qu. What other thing is it fit we should understand in this doctrine?

An. These following, that is to say:

1. Divines help us with this distribution; some sins are in the will, but
not of the will, that is to say, original sin; some are in the will and from
the will, so are the sins of unregenerate men; some sins again are partly
from the will, and partly against it; so are the sins of all regenerate men;
And this last they express by a similitude thus, as the Merchant in the storm
casts his goods into the Sea, partly with his will and partly against it.

2. They distinguish of the will of man and say, that there is a desire, or a
wish and a will, of which see, Prove. 13.4. vult et, etc. Many desire amendment,
with lazy and heartlesse desires.

3. The denomination of a Christian is and ought to be from the better part,
as for instance, a Blackmore is not called white because his teeth are so.

A shield which is white on the one side and black on the other, cannot be
called black or white properly, but partly black and partly white.

Qu. Wherefore serve these distributions, distinctions and similitudes?

An. They are excellent for the duty of exaamination and trial, which is the
business in hand; For hereby,

1. Men may see how sin is of their wills and in their wills, which is worth
the observation, See Romans 7.18.

2. Men may see the difference between, wishing for grace, and willing of it
with industry, pains, abstaining from appearance of evil, and the like.

3. That we ought to call and account of men as God does, with charity, and
yet care and conscience too, not calling good evil, or evil good, Esa. 5.20.
Psalm. 10 3.

4. Besides, a weak Christian ought not to be discomforted, because of
little. God gives thee a name from that little, because it is the better, part
Zach. 4.10.

Qu. What is the third thing supposed in examination?

An. A rule for to try a thing if it be metal presupposes a touchstone, if
moist a measure, as pint, quart, pottle; weights are trial for some things you
know, God throws men into the balances and finds them too light, Dan. 5.27.
Now here we must agree to two things.

First, that the Scripture is the only trial, the alone rule, to try men by,
to try I say, men, matters, and every thing by in the Church of God: this is
plain, Rev. 22.18.19. see the definition of a rule.

Now because I would confirm this and deliver it out of the hands of Papists,
see these arguments.

1. The testimony of God depends not upon the witness of man, but the
Scripture is the testimony of God, 1 John 5.9. therefore needs not man.

2. That which the authority of Scripture depends upon ought to be before it
surely, but the Church is after the Scripture.

3. The Scripture has the properties of a rule for trial, which are these; 1
independent, 2 sufficient, 3 plain.

Secondly, that all the Scripture is so, that is to say, both the Law and the
Gospel, both the old and the new testament. There is distinction and difference
in holy Scripture, it is true, thus, In respect of time revealing, so it is
called the old and new Scripture.

In respect of authority proving, so the Canonical and the Apocrypha.

In respect of matter handling, so the Law and the Gospel.

It is true that the Law has his office and purpose and place, as the Gospel
has his yea, and even those Laws which now under the time of the Gospel,
seem to be useless, as the Ceremonial and Judicial, do serve excellently to
show sin by accident.

Qu. Does the Scripture speak distinctly of any rule for examination?

An. It does, as for example:

1. In things material or corporal, Esa. 44.13. there it is a rule, a line, a
red thread, a direction without which you know, they cannot work.

2. In things doctrinall, 2 Cor. 10.13.15. there it is the measure, and
whatsoever is not agreeable to it is out of square.

3. In things practical, and there it is the path, the road way, Gods highway
for his people to walk in, Gal. 6.16. and herein they find a lantern be it
never so dark, for Gods word is such, Psalm. 119.105.

Qu. Why ought we to be so careful of a rule?

An. For many, and indeed those are exceeding great reasons; as for instance,
these.

1. The comfort of it; it is sweet to a Christian to think, I have in my trials
looked to that rule by which I am sure the Lord will try me.

2. The conscience of it, it is the evidence of sincerity to a believer, yea
and his persuasion too that he shall not be confounded while he has respect
unto all Gods Commandments Psalm. 119.6.

3. Hereby we reconcile the Law and the Gospel, establishing the Law by Faith;
see Romans 3.21.

4. Hereby we take hold of those horns of the Altar for sure refuge, mercy
and truth together, the rule and the refuge, the Law and the Gospel, and desire
to make our ways like Gods waves, Psalm. 25.10.

Qu. What is the fourth thing supposed to be in examination?

An. Such a trial as God will have, and the things to be tried will bear,
for both these must be regarded in our examination.

Qu. What is the former of these?

An. Such a trial as God will have is this. 1. That we may try our selves,
not other men, that we suspect, examine, judge and proceed against our own
spirits, which the Scripture commends unto us as a duty, see 2 Cor. 13.5.
under a danger, Luke 6.41.42.

2. That we try and proceed against that of our selves which we know God will
be sure to try and proceed against, that is to say, all of our selves, our
words, Matthew. 12.37. our works, our thoughts, Ier. 4.14. for such a trial God
will have.

Qu. What is the latter of these?

An. Such a trial as the things to be tried, will be able to undergo and
bear, that is to say, a legal trial and evangelicall.

For the further clearing of this point, we must know that Divines do help
us with a distinction.

1. There is a trial of things perfect, whereby they are not made to be
better, but found to be what they are, with which kind of trial man is said
to try the Lord, and his word too, See Mal. 3.10. Prove me now and try me, if
I will not pour you out a blessing without measure: By this trial if a man
fall to try the Lord, he shall find him what he has declared himself to
be; see the same place, Mal. 3.6. So if a man try Gods Word, he shall find it
to be the power of God, etc. see Psalm. 19.7. etc. see Romans 1.16.

2. There is another trial, whereby things imperfect are so tried, that they
are found to be evil, frail, faulty and sinful, and are made better and in
time come to be perfected: with which kind of trial God and his Word do and
should try men, yea and with this trial man should try himself also, see Mal.
3.3. The Lord shall fine the sons of Levi as Gold and Silver, that they may
bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness, see Heb. 4.12.

From this distinction therefore I shall draw for you these conclusions. 1.
That no man ought to be discouraged because new trials find out and do
discover new corruptions; for this is Gods purpose, and should be man's
practice to mark misery and move toward mercy, Phil. 3.14.

2. That our perfection in this present world is to spy out our imperfections,
that is our glory.

3. That no man is or ought to be exempted from trial before the Sacrament
and an examination, but he that is quite free from any corruption, which
either God, or his Word or Spirit can find out.

4. That if ever there were Mystery and Mercy interwoven and sweetly knit
together, it is here; God brings a man to own his sin, and then ownes him,
for he came not to save the righteous, but to call sinners to repentance, Luke
5.31. etc. The whole need not the Physician, but the sick: under the notion of
a sorrowing sensible sinner, we draw nearest to a supplying, succouring
Savior.

5. That we may see the use of both these trials sweetly in the Sacraments. 1.
God will try thee there, and he shall find thee, alas, an unprepared,
unbeleeving. Job 42.6.

2. Thou will try God there, and thou shall find him (if thou will but cast
all thy care upon him) no less then ever he was to any: Come to him I charge
thee, and press him with that prayer, Psalm. 119.132. No less then ever he
promised to be to thee and such as thou art. Come therefore with those words
of Paul in thy mouth, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of sin! (which by trial I have found out) Oh I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, see Romans 7.23, 24. see also 1 Cor. 15.55.

Qu. What is the fifth part?

An. Even the reason of all this, which may be gathered out of all that which
is before delivered, and something more added thereunto, viz.

1. That the knowledge of a Christian may be complete, his knowledge of things
I say which are of soule-concernment. See how the men of God bear themselves
upon their knowledge, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. And I
know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. A right man in his receiving ought to
be like old Jacob in his blessing, Genesis 48.19. I know well my Son, I know
well, and therefore not to be diverted. I require you therefore to see that
your knowledge in the holy Sacrament be, 1. speculative, discerning and
direct, which is in these three things following in the Sacrament.

1. Every thing in the Sacrament to be taken after his own kind and nature,
that is to say, figurative speeches, figuratively, and others otherwise: as for
example; This is my-body, that is, the figure of my body; no more. Again, this
bread is now no common bread, but by Gods appointment, an Eucharist or
Sacrament; no less: For as wax stamped with the Seal of a King, differs not
in substance from other wax, and yet in value is much more excellent, and may
not be unreverently handled without the contempt of the King, so is this
bread, and so the wine in the holy Sacrament.

2. The Sacrament to be used of us according to Christ's holy institution, that
is to say, as he commanded, and so only without either perverting, or
altering, or adding or any thing. And so Popery will be overthrown, 1. Which
gives the bread without the cup, and 2. Profaneness which desires bread and
cup too. without due preparation and promiscuously.

3ly. No other ends propounded in receiving but those of God, which are:

1. A due commemoration of Christ.

2. A true communication of Christ.

And this ought to be our direct knowledge, without which no right receiving.

1. A practical and reflect knowledge, a conscience which is a knowledge
together with God, for if our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness
with God, 1 John 3.21. the triple testimony to be sealed up unto a believer, 1 John 5.8. the spirit, and the water, and the blood, to go sealed from the
Sacrament like those, Romans 7.3. before the hurt come upon the world.

Qu. What is this sealing of a Christian? for of this the Scripture speaks
diversely.

An. The Scripture speaks of a Seal, which is the foreknowledge of God
concerning the safe custody of those that be his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and again, it
speaks of a Scale which is the effectualnesse of the ministry in the
conversion of men, 1 Cor. 9.2.

To Seal, which is to establish civilly, so Ester 3.12. which is to establish
spiritually, so Ephesians. 1.13. which is to take a deep impression, Can. 8.6.

The Seal which is that earnest of our inheritance and of Gods Spirit, 2 Cor.
1.22. which is not as a pawn or pledge that may be taken up again, but part
of payment, binding the bargain between our God and us, and making them to be
the sure mercies of David, Esa. 55.3.

Qu. What then is that which is to be learned from hence for our practice in
the Sacrament?

An. First, I learn to examine my persuasion of comfort in my safe custody, my
souls resolution for an everlasting God dependence.

My conversion also in the effectual co-working of the Word of God, and the
Spirit of God, and the Sacrament of God.

Mine establishment, so that heart-triumphings do arise out of the same. I know
whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. And I am persuaded that nothing shall
separate between me and the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.38.
The deep impression which this has taken and ought to take in my heart, and
all them that ever tasted, Psalm. 103.1, 2.

The certainty, (because I have received part of payment of Gods unchangeable
love toward me) for whom he loves, he loves to the end, Joh. 13.1. and the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

So much for the first reason of examination, that there be knowledge.

Qu. What is the second reason of our examination?

An. Will to be amended, whether the receiver bring with him a sted fast
purpose of amending whatsoever shall be found to be amiss upon our examination.

The great question between God and man in holy Scripture is that, if not
only, yet in a great part surely, when man comes to God that is his question,
If thou will thou can, Matthew. 8.2. when God comes to man that is his question
too, Will thou be made whole? Ioh. 5.6. So then in an ordinance we must look
at and pray for this concurrence; namely 1. The Lord to be willing to do for
us; for it is not of him that runs nor of him that wills, but of God that
shows mercy.

2. Our selves to be willing to suffer the word of exhortation, the work of
sanctification, etc.

For these two things are ever to be observed in holy Scripture.

First, the hinderance of our holiness and happiness, which God says is ever
in the will; See Matthew. 23.37.

Secondly, the help which is only in the power of God our Lord, for it is God
that works in thee both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. even of his good
pleasure: In which I desire may be observed, that Grace is the work of God,
therefore there can be no power of resistance; And Grace is also the work of
man, therefore there can be no shadow of violence.

Again, to work with a danger of not bringing to pass agrees not with the
power of God, whose will is not will, unless it be omnipotent, that is to
say, unless it work whatsoever it will.

To work by constraint and compulsion agrees not with the nature of man, whose
will is not will, unless it wills what it works; so then this is all for the
conclusion, Lord let Grace in me be thy work, then I am sure there can be no
resistance, and let it be my work too, then I am sure there can be no violence.

Qu. What is the third reason of our examination?

An. His acknowledgment of Gods Word, (which ought to be in every Christian)
for the rule of trial, for the rule of life, for the rule of obedience also;
and indeed there are but two things which Scripture presents us with.

1. A sure rule, which is the Law.

2. A sure refuge, which is the Gospel; concerning both which, see one
excellent place of Scripture, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them; here is
the corrasive of the Law, but then Verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us; there is the comfort of the
Gospel.

Qu. What is the reason that such regard must be had to a rule in our
examination?

An. This, 1. our submission and casting down, so comes the knowledge of sin
and the bringing of us all unto our kees before God.

2. Our certainty, for we are not left to try our selves by custom, example,
Laws of man, opinion of others, etc. but the never failing truth of God.

3. Our satisfaction, for herein we find a sure word of prophecy; yea indeed
that which will make the man of God complete, 2 Timothy 3.17.

4. The Scripture is declared to be that precious antidote or preservative by
which Gods people are kept from the paths of the destroyer.

5. All men are sent unto the Word of God for their trial and amendment:
Wherewithal shall a young man amend his way, but by taking heed thereto
according to thy Word? Psalm. 119.9.

Qu. What is the fourth and last reason of our examination?

An. It is twofold, first, drawn from God; he will have a trial, and such a
trial as he will have: for our God looks both to the matter and to the
manner of all his peoples performances, as is to see every where, Esa. 58.

Now in every trial that God requires of his people, there are these things
supposed and included.

1. Detestation of sin, for herehence arises all our in quiry after sin,
its pursuit, judging, confession, condemnation.

2. Amendment of sin, which indeed is and ought to be first in the
intention, so David, Psalm. 119.59. consideration and turning.

3. Approbation of our selves, both unto God, and to the rule also, Psalm.
119.6. a respect to God and to his Commandments.

4. Example of our brethren too, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2 they which obey not the Word,
may without the Word be won if they many behold your meek conversation
coupled with fear.

Second reason is drawn from the things themselves which are to be tried,
which can be no other but either good or bad, perfect or imperfect, and
therefore must come within the compass of those two things which the rule will
exactly help us unto, that is to say;

1. Justification; if so be thou be good, perfect, and preparing only
(with an honest heart) though not prepared, the weeping faith-wanter may come
near to Christ, Mark. 9.24. Men have said somewhat of themselves, 2 Timothy 4.8.
I have fought, etc. I have desired to try, judge, confess, condemn, from
henceforth there is mercy for me with a merciful God; and God desires that
his servants may go from some of their duties with a Well done good and
faithful servant, Matthew. 25.21.

2. Condemnation, which is and cannot but be the portion of all ignorant,
unbeleeving, unexamining receivers; for as counterfeit Gold may go for true,
till the touchstone come, and then it is discerned, and rejected too, so it is
here in the Word, there is the touchstone, balances, weight, measure, furnace
and all for all, which (will they, nill they) shall thereby be examined.

Qu. What is the condemnation under which unworthy receiving falls?

An. It lies under, 1. The condemnation of Gods Word, for as long as all the
Scripture is Gods Word, and some particular places are not blotted out, the
rash and unprepared must needs be concluded guilty, as it is to see 1 Cor.
11.26. etc. 29. this condemnation receiving unworthily lies always under.

2. The condemnation of Gods people, for all those, as well the people, as the
Pastors come tremblingly and truly, and thereby condemn ignorance and
rashness; examples are pregnant, 1 Cor. 10.2 Chron. 30.3. 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
Scriptures very plain as before.

3. The condemnation of conscience sometimes it lies under, surely (it would
always if conscience were awake) men's hearts tell them that they are not fit
for such holy mysteries.

Qu. How do men usually behave themselves under such condemnation?

An. Some ignorantly and affectedly, so 1 These. 5.3. Esa. 28.15. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Some carelessely, and desperately, so 1 Cor. 15.32. Some contradictorily and
scoffingly, so Act. 13.45. Some are convinced but relapsingly, so 2 Pet. 2.22.
Some mournefully, and beleevingly, so which as soon as they believe, Act. 12.
and inquiringly, so Act. 2.37. and succesfully, so Act. 16.33, 34.

FINIS.

