THRENODIA.

On the DEATH of the High born Prince HENRY, DUKE of GLOUCESTER.

By Arthur Brett, Student of Christ-Church.

-- HENRICOS ostendunt fata, nec ultra Esse sinunt. -- Oxford, Printed by H:
Hall, Printer to the University, for Ric: Davis, 1660.

THRENODIA.
WHat ails the Town? what is it it bemoans?
I can meet naught but doleful tones,
Naught but sobs, and sighs, and groans;
Each Lady Niobe appears;
And as for the Philosophers,
They Are Heraclitus's all by their Tears.
Now Warlike Trumpets cease to pierce our Ear,
Look we the last Trump to hear?
Do we a Dissolut' on fear?
Is th Universal Fever nigh?
Is the Earth-An'mal like to die?
And is it for mankind, mankind does cry?
Either the World is like to be undone,
Or one that is worth the World is gone,
Brother to Monarchy and Son.
Y' who from the two great Cities come,
Of these sad tidings gi's the sum;
Mutes! high astonishment has struck 'um dumb.
But what is not heard from others may be read,
The joy of Englands joy is fled,
CHARLES's beloved Gloucester dead:
Fate has given a dismal stroke,
The Royal Three sh' has basely broke,
And lopped a Bough of Britains stately Oak.
Infinite Worlds! Where are they? give'um me,
I Will soon draw out their siccity;
Water alone each Globe shall be:
That they being turned all Sea, all Wave,
Drops big enough I thence may have,
Wherewith to moisten this too early Grave.
Thy Whirlwind Bottles Ae'lus hither send,
A Bottle on a Sigh I Will spend,
Till their whole store come to an end:
Till death more boisterous then they,
With fear look paler yet, and say
She is resolved no more Dukes to slay.
Thus, thus would I my sorrow testify;
For as for Verse or Elegy,
Who should me 'nspire does breathless lie;
They that have seen the Corpse, declare
It is Apollo lies dead there,
They knew him by his ruddy Face and Hair.
With smaller losses we can be content,
Slight-bottom'd Passion's quickly spent,
Such stripling sorrows find a vent:
But, Giant grief, where is one for thee?
Rivers may roll into the Sea:
But whither shall the Ocean emptied be?
Lachesis shunned the Palace formerly,
Such was her Maiden modesty,
She seemed afraid to come too nigh:
In at the Window she did look,
But now she has the boldness took
The House to enter, and find out the Duke.
Then to appease the incensed Deities,
We saw't with overflowing eyes,
There bled a Royal Sacrifice:
But now behold another Urn,
The other could not serve the turn,
A Royal Holocaust must also burn.
In this Fort-Royal glowing, burning hot,
A Fever had possession got,
Although a Fever, killed him not:
That meant to Come, and See, and slay;
But coming had no power to stay,
The Mar'us looked his Murderer away.
Thou dealest subtly, most hard-hearted Fate,
The Sickness is we know not what;
It seems this, it seems that:
When at White Hall thou come to kill,
That which does perform thy will,
The Executioner is muffled still.
But he is now expired, and in his Face
We see too plain, too plain, alas!
Which of thy Assassines it was:
The best corrupted, worst does grow,
Cursed Ax'ome, you are too true we know,
Even in Royal Blood it holds so.
In th'Purple Stream some putrid Matter bred,
Which having got to the th'Fountain-head,
There Life it has smoothered:
Thence to th'Surface it has run,
As if the death it brought 'twould shun,
Where now it blushes for what it has done.
Fate you are unjust, and so thy deeds evince,
And so I take thee ever since
Thou dealedst thus with such a Prince:
Thou did betempest him before,
And when we thought thou had given over,
Thou throw'st him on a rock instead of shore.
How diff'rently the Isle does entertain
Its exiled Lords, returned again?
It gives Two ease, gives the Third pain:
It proves Their Country, His long home;
Yields Them a Court, but Him a Tomb;
Opens to Them her Arms to Him her Womb.
Had he been with his Sister taken away,
And gone with her the self-same day,
In the Elys'an Fields to play:
Had then unripe, imperfect he
Acted this his Tragedy;
Imperfect too had been our misery.
But now he is ripe, complete, and perfect quite,
Now for to take him from our sight,
This is the Quintessence of spite:
There Is on thy Dart a point of Steel,
And poison on that point, we feel;
This wound is double, and so hard to heal.
Bold as thou art, thou have not feared to do
What Prov'dence scarce was consc'ous to,
Of which the Powers above never knew:
Had Heaven been conscious to the deed,
'Twould not have struck with so much speed,
But would have warned, and bid us first take heed.
Some fiery tail had hovered in the sky,
Wounding our hearts, thence through our eye;
And made us weep proaem'ally:
Some blazing gellies in the Air,
Had given us notice to prepare,
That, what we looked for, we might better bear.
Compared with Death, while it it is prey does seek
Lions are tame, and Tigers meek;
Their teeth are blunt, their stomachs weak:
Therefore we fear what may betide,
We fear what yet remains beside,
The ravenous thing may not yet be satisfied.
Where Is highborn YORK? o, where is the Hero? Where?
If he is on Land, he is sick we fear;
If he is at Sea, he is sinking there:
We fear the Beast, seeking its food,
Makes at him through his Wall of Wood,
It knows the sweetness now of Royal Blood.
Is this the entrance-fee that CHARLES must pay?
Must he wear Cypress with his Bay,
And loose a lim to win the day?
Though undervalued of late,
They Are costly things, these Chairs of State;
Three Crowns are dearly bought at such a rate.
States soon take fire, and they are quenched as soon;
Empire (unconstant as the Moon)
Is won and lost, and lost and won:
For here an armed General,
Heaven dropping shield, and man and all,
Our exiled King may help us to recall.
But when a brother deadly heats accost,
If He Is once lost, He Is ever lost,
We can but follow 'm at the most;
The flame burns in, and so burns sure,
All we can do is to endure,
For there is no Aumarle can work this cure.
No wonder, when he first to sing began,
Henry was liked by every man,
Alas! it was the dying Swan;
To him the Sisters did combine
To spin for thread a silken line,
Which was the sooner broke for being fine:
Who Will ever seek by noble deeds to rise?
Who Will care to be val'ant or wise?
When he should enjoy't he dies;
We mount up Glory's hill in vain,
The highest top whereof t'attain
'S but to be ready to fall down again.
Ah! dearest DVKE, I ask it with regret,
Why have so soon thy Coffin met?
Why did thou only rise to set?
Where are thy acts of Chivalry!
Why must we a Chasme see
In the Great STEWARTS growing History?
What will become of that so glor'ous Name?
Who shall now bear up the same,
And with it fill the roules of Fame?
That Name which to Three Nations deer
We loved in thy Uncle here,
And in thy Grandfather the world did fear?
True bud of the Imper'al Family!
The Roses strive again in thee
For the superiority;
Thy ruddy Flower it self did spread
All over thy cheeks, but now thou 'rt dead
The White has got the better of the Red.
Thy Sire, when as he say his destiny,
When Monarchs wept and peasants we
Groaned for him as now for thee,
Something he left in charge, what was it?
Child, mind my words, they are my last,
And make not to a Di'dem too much have;
Until thy Brothers first are served, stay;
Thus did he urge, thus did he say.
And thou did promise to obey;
Now what is this that thou have done?
Thou take before CHARLES a Crown,
His Mortall's making, thy Immortal's on.
Old Bards would wonder, should they live again,
To see performed what they did feign
Of the three Brethrens equal reign;
To one the land does homage owe,
The Second swayes the ebb and Flow,
The Third now rules the blessed shades below.
But stay, he has not yielded yet to fate,
Me thinks it is not yet too late
Men of Art to invocate;
Mes'e and Solomon arise,
Royal Physit'ans, and devize
A Rem'dy ere this Royal pat'ent dies,
Old Galenist, new Paracelsian,
Conceited Rosi-crucian,
Do what you should, do what you can:
What? is there no Riverius
Will earn a Mosque from thankful us,
And go into an Aesculapius?
Who e're thou art, fix this bright planet here,
Couse him not yet to disappear,
Not yet to mount his upper sphere;
Thy sure reward it shall be this,
Even take that Apotheosis
Of which through Thee he shall at present miss:
Comfortless man whose comforters are these,
These poor, poor factors for our ease,
Disciples of Hippocrates!
Fond they their fonder hopes do feed,
Thinking to find there-in and read
What never wat carved on root, nor writ on weed;
Whose Art indeed it does for Physic go,
Called Practical, but is not so,
Whose sons do at their best but know;
Time Twenty of their years devoures,
While they get skill in stars and flowers,
Which to their lives ca'nt add half Twenty hours:
We Will make our gally-pots in pieces fly,
Let Rec'pes unconsulted lie,
And lay The Justitutions by,
A volume which prolongs our breath
As it its Author keeps from death,
It owes a figure all the force it has.
Death, thou will enter, do we what we will,
Thy last years empty weekly-bill
With this great personage to fill;
September see's his obsequies,
Since May's cool brightness testifies
That English Kings Sans pestilence can rise;
Thou did not lay the crowded city wast,
'Twas a still air the Summer past,
That stillness brings a storm at last;
Thou 'rt kind, but after such a sort
We give thee no Grammercy for it,
A city plague's less than the Smallpox at Court:
When Worcester for her self and master grieved,
And men in iron were deceived
Missing what peace has since atcheiv'd,
Life was a petty, worthless thing,
Men for a wall themselves did bring
Twixt hateful thee and their beloved King;
They saved their Prince by being breathless made,
Thy passage with their corpse was staid,
Thy thirst was with their blood allaid;
We know who then in danger stood,
Though HENRY be not quite so good,
We Will give as many lives, and better blood;
Slaughter the commons, mow the Gentry down,
Rage both in country and in town,
But come not thou so near the Crown;
So they may blunt thy arrows head,
We I let thee strike whole 1000's dead,
And in their blood die thy white-facet horse red;
But there is no Incus in this set of bones,
It has no ear to lend our groans,
Hears nor for poor, nor mighty ones,
It neither place, nor person shuns,
To cottage and to palace runs,
And puffs out smaller stars, and blows out Suns:
Hold, Tyrant sickness, hold thy hand a while
Till Princess Mary tread our Isle,
And take her brothers last sweet smile;
He Is dear to heaven, to earth he is dear,
Seraphims expect him there,
A mortal Angel comes to see him here:
Stay then, but thou art used for none to stay,
No not a week, no not a day,
But this nights Duke's to morrowes clay:
Thou will be ferry'ng men of note
Over the Lethaean moat,
Though with their weight they break thy Charon's boat.
We would prevail: but since we know not how,
We Will beg no more, weel dare thee now,
Dismalnesse, bend thy horrid brow:
An 100 times more ugly be
Than we do pourtract Tragedy,
His father taught him not to care for thee:
He Will die as mighty Hercules did die,
When he did in mount Oeta fry,
Fier'd into a Deity:
It Is chymick heat in's blood does swim,
T'wil sublimate terrestr'al him
And so make of a Duke a Cherubim:
Fiat was lately spoke, and t^end our wo^^
Spite of false friends and real soes
Three Luminaries there arose:
Eclypse ye one (...) crew,
Extinguish him, fell sisters d^,
This World by 'ts self may be conte^^ with two
But let it not be talked of every where:
Would that the Mar-Clarsum were
To stop the news and keep i^ here:
For as it passes over the Seas
It Will take fromthence new bitterness
And make some hearers greive unto excess.
Others will scoff, and say to our disgrace
The Land cannot brook the Royal race,
But like Inhabitants, like place,
They Will turn old Proverbs into new,
They Will say what they may well think true
VVee'r mala gente, mala terra too:
Let not the tidings get into the Port,
Lest cruel mirth possess that court,
And our disaster prove their sport:
He that to shine himself alone
Stabs younger brethren though his own,
At such a story'l rather laugh than mourn:
He Will full those Horns which for his Arms he bears
When of Britains loss he hears,
Christ'ans will own the Cross for theirs:
If it be to the Austr'ans told,
Philip will weep in showers of Gold,
Sorrow will make young Leopold look old:
If it be known unto the Palatine,
'Twill breed new troubles, sour his wine,
Draw down his cheeks another Rhine;
To France whoever travelleth,
While he relates of Gloucesters death
He Will blast the Flowre-de Luces with his breath;
And then the afflicted mother cannot choose
But her infant joys refuse,
When she understands the news
Of such a separation
Wrought betwixt her and her son,
Separate before but in opinion;
Some think the road to heaven through Italy,
Climbling seven hills they 're nigh
In their conceit unto the sky;
Some think the road as far from thence
As it may be thither hence,
To Europes center from 'ts circumference;
The Prince had been allured for Rome to make,
And bid the Latin way to take,
But did the Latin way forsake;
He bravely kept the Golden Mean,
And has nor changed nor shaken been
By an enticeing Woman, Mother, Queen:
We safely may our dearest friends neglect
When they the truth it self reject,
The virtue here is Disrespect;
Since to believe what Parents say
Where Sacred Oracles say Nay,
Were to adore whom we should but obey:
Mighty Henretta of her aim must miss,
She has her Zeal, and He has his
Dutiful in all but this;
What though the Hug'notte are or'e-run?
What though new-Doctrin'd R^chell's won?
She finds an 100 Rochell^s in her Son:
Morneys may faint, and throw down sword and shield,
Reformed Cittadels may yield,
Protestant Armies loose the Field:
But CHARLES's race will stand it out,
Being at Twelve or there-about
In judgment Clear, in resolut on Stout:
He was not to be won by force or art,
But from his mother did depart:
That stuck not much unto her heart:
But this unto the quick will touch,
Exceeding the other wound as much
As not to be 's worse than not to be such:
But she and we the loss must kindly bear,
We ours therein, sh' her greater share:
What Heav^n has need of Earth must spare:
Earth, which if no change it knew,
If its darlings never withdrew,
What Is Heavens free gift would look upon as due.
No matter then what cruel critics guess,
Who judge of Virtue by Success,
By outward chance of right ousnesse:
The Laws of Charity they will break,
They will most learnedly mistake,
And on so black a text black comments make:
I, they must be profoundly curious,
And know why things are thus and thus;
Lend 'um thy Tube Hevelius,
Not to behold with rare delight
Dark spots in Sol's Meridian light;
Or Insects crawling in the Moon by Night.
They Will look beyond the Sun, and Saturn too,
Heavens Councel-Chamber they will view,
And see what the All in All does do:
They will their Makers thoughts descry
Who cannot their Fellow Creatures spy,
Which one would think more obv'ous to the eye.
If hence they gather signs of Heavens hate,
And from so soon-snacht GLOVCESTER's fate
Another fall Prognosticate,
I find at Court a Motto fit
To answer their presumpt'ous wit,
Honiscit qui mal y pense 's it.
When the wise Ptolemy's first course was done,
In came the ghastly Skeleton,
That was the next to be set on:
That King by feeding so their sight,
By blending Horror with Delight,
Taught his Attendants how to feed aright.
Thus with our Lord does boundless Wisdom do
(And what is that to me or you?)
Here Is a sad spectacle to view:
Here Is a Memento at the least,
Here is served in his dearest guest
At this his glor'ous Restoration Feast.
If Storms affright the Land, and vex the Seas,
Shake our Towers, o're-turn our Trees,
Let 'um go judge even what they please:
But here is no tempest'ous day,
No massy Elmes lie cross the way,
It Is the still voice that calls him away.
When purer Matter's upward, heav'n-ward bound,
No rumblings in the Air are found,
It passes without stir or sound:
Whilst what does to the Center tend,
Earths bowels in its way must rend,
And therefore cannot but with noise descend.
Dying the world he never troubled,
Nor troubles it now he is dead,
By being richly buried:
His worth's to him a Hearse alone,
A stately and a lasting one,
It makes a Mausolaeum of one Stone.
Each English heart to his memorial
's a Monument Pyramidal,
CHARLES's breast an Escurial:
He needs no solemnity,
But like his Sire entombed may be;
Who gave ignoble Graves Nobility?
Those Coats of Arms we on the dead bestow
Are richest which no Art do know,
On which no Pearls, no Gold they throw:
And he who is plainly, meanly clad,
Is owned such luster to have had,
That Art and Nature thereto could not add.
Lay but a piece of Marble where he lies,
Marble for its qualities
Hard to the touch, white to the eyes:
If any ask for what intent,
Of him an Emblem 't may be meant,
Who was so Constantly so Innocent.
If this be done, well done! ye Overseers;
Monuments whos'ever rears
Gives Death a Triumph, Wo's our Tears:
And Tears already are too rife,
See who it is that mourns in Chief,
The same is King of England, and of Grief.
Muses, if e're you showed your dainty Art,
Now put on Verse and play your part,
And dance bout pensive CHARLES's heart:
Take Horaces sweet Lyre awhile,
And Virgils high majestic Style,
Augustus 'twixt these two may chance to smile.
Go, visit him as you are used to do,
When thoughts what thoughts have spent renew,
And wee'r his Care, his Solace you:
Upon his Meditat'ons wait,
His Mirth increase, his Grief abate,
Which cause it fills his heart is very great.
Tell him, unless he quickly comfort take,
Our Comfort and our Health's at stake,
We suffer while our head does ache:
There Is much to tell him, but in sum
Tell him of's Brother what is become,
Something of that must be the Medium.
If Souls turn Stars when they from hence are flown,
Of the first Magnitude he is one,
And shines in the bright Northern Crown:
If the renowned Philosopher
'Bout Transmigration did not err,
He Is now some new born Eastern Emperor.
If Spirits departed from their Earthly Cell
In the Air like Genii dwell,
We Have one more Guard'an-Michael:
If they whom shades of Death enwrap
Do but sleep, he takes a nap
In the Elys'an Sultanesses lap.
But why relate I Whimsies such as those?
Why do I pret'ous minutes loose,
One or the other to suppose?
Stellification, fancy is,
And so is Metempsychosis;
Gen'i are Dreams, Soul-sleepers all men hiss.
Show him who you and us protect on gives,
Show him how without cause he greives,
For why, in bliss His HENRY lives;
The Dukes of Gloucester, signify,
Are so near kin to Majesty
Like English Kings themselves they never dye:
His Corpse indeed have had their Burial,
As all His Royal Kindred shall,
In the Abbey (ah! too) near White Hall;
The Cover's here interred, true;
But the Jewel upward flew,
And has new-cas't it self in yonder blue;
Yonder Is a building of a stately'r frame,
My thoughts are light with sacred flame,
And to themselves describe the same;
New-Jerusalem it is called,
With Chrysolite and Berill walled,
And with our highest Church Steeples pedestall'd:
The Architect was he of whom it is said
An Artist he Bezal el made,
And taught Vitruvius his trade,
Formed craggy rocks and fertile feilds,
And all that land or water yields,
He bidd's mater'als be, and builders builds;
A court it is wherein none die, none mourn,
A Senate which does never adjourn,
Where joy for scarlet robes is worn;
Therefore it was that HENRY died,
Thither in fiery Coach to ride,
And change his Brothers for his Fathers side;
There Gloucester's coronetted, crowned with light,
Thick glory makes him all over bright,
No Cromwels keep him from his right;
And now he has begun to Reign,
Now he has once possess'on taken,
No Pustulae do force him thence again.
Hail, Prince Triumphant, and excuse our love,
Which greives at what the Quires above
Sing so much for, so much approve;
VVe've done, we will no more complain,
Because thou dy'dst in no great pain,
And endless ease with little smart did gain;
We Will end our Th^^nody, and dry our tears,
Because thou dy'dst well struck in years,
As by thy well-lead life appears;
Thou livedst long in little space,
Condensing time as it did pass,
Each Hour a Month, each Month a Lustrum was:
And now shall we those happy times behold
Which were the Silver Age of old,
And had thou stayed would be of Gold:
The Norman Aera's out of date,
We Will ill events count from thy fate,
From CHARLES's reign successes fortunate:
He Will be obeyed to Europes utmost strand,
And o'r more Nat'ons have command
Than thou possessest feet of land;
And under him shall Ovids rise,
And Ovids such as may suffice
Fit Aen'ids and fit Il'ads to devize:
Let them Sing CHARLES's day, and HENRY's night,
Let them for him new Fasti write,
For thee new Elegy's indite:
Let them be what I would have bin,
Let them complete what I begin:
These sheets are too too scant to wind thee in.
FINIS.

