Trading Spiritualized. Or, Certain Heads, Points, or Positions, On which
Tradesmen (And Others) MAY (O that thy would!) enlarge in the Meditations.

By W. Baghaw. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Threee Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1694.

To the Right Worshipful, and Deservedly Honored Sir Thomas Abney, Alderman
and Sheriff of the City of London.
THem that honor God, 1 Samuel 2.30.
God will honor; and should not Men do it? Blessed be You and Yours of the
Lord! As your Heart is (by his Hand) set on promoting his work elsewhere, and
in this County, Hundreds in this poor Hundred of the High-Peak, bear you on
their hearts, that have extended your care to it and them; So is he eminently
bound to do, who is,

Right Worthy, Sir, A Willing (tho weak) Friend and Servant, W. Bagshaw,

To the truly Honored Mr. Thomas Hodsdon, Mr. Charles Yarwood, and other
Worthy Friends in, or near Macclesfield.
IN my Youth, from others in your parts, and in mine Age from you, have my weak
hands been strengthened in the Lord. If to any Tradesman, that will use serious
and spiritual Meditation, these poor Papers be useful, I shall (if the Lord
will give me leave) present something more on this Subject. I humbly beg your
Acceptance of this slender Token of my Love and Thankfulness, and a blessing on
yours; as also on all that shall vouchsafe these sheets a reading, is begged,
by,

Dear Sirs, Your Obliged, W. Bagshaw.

Trading Spiritualized.
The First Position is,
HOly Scripture represents the Communion that is between God and Man, under
the Notion or Resemblance of Commerce or Trading.

To prevent mistakes, I premise two particulars.

The First is, Mr. Vines.
A Divine of the first Rank well distinguished betwixt some Commerce which
Hypocrites may drive, and that sweet Communion which sincere persons have with
the Lord. Mat. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
May not those of the former Character, after Duties, expect some sort of
Reward from God? Whereas only they of the latter do in Duties draw near to God.

The Second is, Far be it (yea, Luke 17.10.
far is it) from an humble holy person to count his Services Meritorious, or to
expect a Reward of Debt; as in Trading, Money answers, and deserves the
Commodity purchased. See the Ark of the Cove nant, par. 2.
Will some allow, that Adam could in strictness merit?

And now for Proof of the Position, I argue as follows.

1. Has not God, who has condescended to transact, and hold Communion with
Man, done it in a See the Confession of Faith. Genesis 17.7,
Covenant-way? And do I need to tell sundry, that there are Covenants of
Commerce and Trade?

2. Is not a truly gracious Christian compared to a wise Merchant, Mat. 13.45.
seeking (and trading) for goodly Pearls?

3. See the excellent Durham on Rev. 3.18. Isa. 55.1, 2. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Does not God offer to Man rich and precious Commodities, and invite him as to
a Mart or Market?

4. Are not God's Promises as Bills of Merchandise for the importing of the
Treasures of Heaven?

5. Phil. 1.11.
Do not the sanctified in their Services expect and carry forth the Fruits of
Righteousness to Heaven?

6. Are they not said (and called) to buy of the Lord? Rev. 3.18.
Tho Heavens Goods are too rich, and Earth's Chapmen too poor, that these
should think themselves worthy of those, yet they think 'em So worthy Sedgwick.
most worthy of their acceptance. And do they not part with the Love of their
sins, and Confidence in themselves, that they may attain 'em?

And hence I first infer, That I am in hope that a great Man, and Learned
Debater, has by this time wished that he had forborne reflecting on words
fathered on a late Mr. Bridges.
grave Divine, and that he had not styled Trading in Promises, a paltry Phrase.

1. When the Apostle says, We have our Conversation in Heaven; Phil. 3.20.
(...). Vide Leighs Crit. Sac.
do not Worthies read it, We are free Denizons, or Burgesses, that trade
thither as Freemen? Are not Promises Helps to, and Promoters thereof?

2. Are there not in Scripture, Isa. 55.1, 2. 1 These. 5.23
Laws styled Municipal, that speak of good VVares that will pass, and of ill
Ones that are prohibited?

3. Mar. 25.16. Luke 19.12, 15.
Does not the Gospel (or Christ in it) oftener than Once speak of Christians as
Occupying or Trading?

1. Are not Talents committed to 'em?

2. Are they not to be accountable in the Case?

3. Are not the Promises great encouragements in their Trading?

The 2d. Inserence is, The goodness of God is great to a wonder.

Is it not a stoop in him to behold Angels? Psalm. 113.4, 5.
How low then stoops he in holding Converse and Commerce with poor man?

The 3d. Inference is, They forsake their own Mercy, Jonah 2.8.
that prefer holding Communion with base lusts before that with the Blessed
Lord: O! how full are all places of such?

The last Inference, They who are managers of the Spiritual Trade, should do
it. 1. Humbly. 2. Diligently. 3. Sincerely. 4. Believingly. 5. Constantly. The
Lord direct and assist 'em!

The Second Position is, (The first Man (or Man in his first Estate) was
entrusted (and set up) with a very good Stock.

Tho, Eccl. 7. last
alas! he too soon played the Prodigal, he had a very large Portion from his
Fathers hand. When the Eldest Son of Wisdom, Solomon, was at a loss as to other
points, he found this, and set a Remark on it, Quovis modo rectum. Dr.
Arrowsmith.
that God made Man upright, every way right (as some read it). We may set some
of his Goods and furniture to view, in some following pages (and that as by
parcels, or retail.) At present, we will present or point at 'em as considered
in the bulk, or by Wholesale. May we not write on this?

1. Man excelled in, See Mr. Barret on the Covenants.
or as to his Constitution; and therein as to that Image of God, which is
styled Natural.

1. Surely, what St. Psalm. 139.14, 15.
David said of his Body, may with advantage be said of Adam's, Fearfully and
Wonderfully was it made. Besides the Glory which his Soul shed on (and showed
through) it, was it not (if we speak of visibles) a most curious and rare
composure? where was its Match, as to some instances?

And then 2ly. As to his Soul. Did it not give some representation of the
Deity? Genesis 1.26, 28.
Was it not an Immaterial, Immortal and Intelligent Being? Have not some styled
it a Glass, wherein there is some representation of the All-blessed and
undivided Trinity, or Tri-unity? Dr. Wallis.
That ancient and excellent Professor, who has lately written on this Subject
(tho he owneth that no instance or comparison used by Ancient or Modern Divines
does adequately, and to the full express this Mystery, yet to show that the
Socinians are far out in their asserting that the Notion of Three in One is
inconsistent with Reason, and that such a Being cannot be, shows, that
Understanding, Will and Memory, are found in one and the same Soul. Was it not
an honor to Man that he had an apprehending, Embracing and retaining Power?

Again, Dr. Bates.
was it not Man's great excellency that he bore, what is called the Moral Image
of his Maker? Was he not enriched with Spiritual Qualities, as well as endowed
with Natural Faculties? does not a profound Doctor Write, that he was Created
with Perfection of Grace.

1. Was not a clear powerful Light set up in his understanding?

2. Was not his memory (on which wonderful, By acute A. Burgess.
is Written) firm fixed and faithful?

3. Was not Conscience (styled the Seat of Moral Principles) pure, active for
God, and wholly on his side?

4. Was not his will in the best sense free, to wit, from sin, and for God and
Goodness?

5. Were not the Affections both liking and disliking in all points regular.

In the next place, Ps. 8.3, 4, 5.
was not Man when Created partaker of what is called the Relative Image of God?
Was he not Lord over other Creatures?

I add, was he not as Holy, so happy, and that completely? See Dr. Bates his
harmony.
Did not his happiness carry the Image of God's Felicity, as his Holiness did
of his Purity? Were not his higher Powers and lower Parts gratified with
Objects suitable to them?

And now I first infer, Miratur. alia, etc.
Surely God's goodness shone fair into Adam's Eyes. Is it not rightly said, He
who wonders at other things, was himself a greater wonder? Was he not a little
(what if I say great) World, a Representative of the whole World! Did he not
contain in himself more of the generality, as to that, than Angels did? See
Armilla Catach.
Having Being, Growth, Sense and Reason, resembling inferior Creatures in what
was seen, and superior ones in his unseen part?

Was not Man's Righteousness in a sound Sense Natural? I do not say, Vide D.
Prideaux Fascic, and deep Jeans
it was so, as to its principle object and end.

But 1. Was it not Created together with his Nature?

2. Was it not capable of propagating it to Descendants from him?

And 3. Considering the relation in which he stood, and the exact obedience to
which he was engaged, it suited his Nature.

It Is a thought worthy of God and his Goodness, Idem.
that he should be so made. Are not two Parties found opposing this great Truth?

1. The Socinians (who will not own Man's great loss by his Fall) say, he had no
great excellency in his first estate.

2. The Papists (who say that Concupiscence is not sin) say, That it was in
Adam, and was Natural to him.

The Second Inference is, Psalm. 8.4, 5.113.5, 6.
Man was (as now he is not) meet to Transact and Covenant with God, in an
immediate way; and it was on God's part a wondrous Condescension, he would
Covenant with him.

1. As to Covenanting; Had not Man power within himself to have stood? Posse
sivel.
And was not that Power lost through abuse of his Free Will?

And 2. As to God's so dealing with him, was not his goodness displaced? Might
he not have given him a Law, without a promise of Life?

The 3. Inference is, Romans 5.12.7.24, 25,
All that derive from Adam in the ordinary way, have abundant matter for
Mourning. May not every Son of his be named Ichabod? Is not the glory departed
from Man? Are not the Tables of the Law which were in Man's Heart broke in
pieces?

The last Inference is, It is meet we should remember whence Man is Fallen.

1. To promote brokenness of Heart. O that more groaned on this score.

2. To cause breathings after Christ, the Second Adam.

Through him the image and favor of God are restored.

The third Position is, Luke 3. the last.
Adam whilst innocent had his understanding well furnished with knowledge. Was
not this Son of God a child of light! was not his upper room full of the best
goods? Go not this well argued?

1. From his being made in his Makers Image. Does not a proper Image resemble
that whereof it is an Image, in some excellency? And is not this one of Gods
excellencies? So blessed Buroughs 1 Jo. 1.5. Col. 3.10.
He is light; Does not the Scripture (the best interpreter of its self) speak
of Gods Image as Consisting in knowledge?

2. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Is not Regeneration styled a New creation? And when God carries on this work,
does he not say, Let there be light?

3. Fiat Lux.
Is not knowledge a leading grace? Does not God open their eyes whom he turns?
Acts 26.18.
Had Adam been perfect, if he had wanted sight?

4. Could Adam without light have been guided in full obedience?

5. Had man been every way right if he had wanted a right Eye?

That it may appear that Man's apprehending power excelled, Dr. Bates.
I Argue, first, A Master of sentence has well said, Nature was unvailed to
man in his first estate. Was he not a rare Philosopher?

1. See F. Fullar's Words so give knowledge.
Did not the large book of the Creature open to his view? Was not the door of
that sanctuary open to him? Could he not readily have resolved what to us are
riddles? Did he not see into the inside of several things, whereof great
students see little more than the outside?

2. Had he not the useful knowledge of that little world himself? Did he not
understand the frame of his body and all its parts? Had he not the knowledge of
the nature of his Soul, and all its powers?

3. Did not his knowledge ascend from (and through) the several orders of being,
Exodus 3.14. (...)
unto God who is the Being? Had he not that knowledge of the nature and
perfections of God, that whatever concerned his duty and felicity was familiar
to him? Did not the wisdom, power and goodness of God shine into his eyes when
he first opened them, and looked on himself and other creatures?

4. Was not Adams knowledge attended and adorned with the most commendable
qualities and properties.

1. Was not his knowledge clear? Prove. 10.27
Did not the candle of the Lord shine bright into his eye? Was any thing like a
cloud (or mist) before him?

2. Was not his knowledge affectionate? Did it not carry the purest heat as well
as the clearest light in it.

3. Was it not practical? Was it not a Light to his Feet, and not to his Eyes
only? Was it not a knowledge joined with acknowledgment? Did it not guide his
affections and actions? Had he kept it in its due use, Had he made or taken one
false step?

And now I first infer, That Adam was very meet to maintain converse with God,
and to drive a trade with (and into) heaven. Was any degree of defections in
his skill? Did he not thoroughly know?

1. Ephesians. 2.12. See Mr. Love on that.
By way of exporting, to carry up duties and dispositions thither?

2. By way of importing, to fetch down all graces and privileges thence. Oh!
How it should touch and tender hearts that through the want of wisdom in the
most, and weakness of it in the best, Commerce with God is little held?

The Second Inference is, Vide Pelt. harmoniam.
We have all reason to differ with and keep a distance from the followers of
Socinus. Do not they (after him) assert that Adam had but a poor pittance (and
no store) of knowledge? Do they not represent him as a great Body? Or to use
their own terms, as a little child or Infant as to his understanding

When our Divines instance in his giving names to many Creatures agreeing with
their Natures, Genesis 2.20.
they will nor allow this to stand for a signal Sign of Knowledge; and this is
forced to favor their Supposition, that Man was no great Loser by his Fall.

O that some, D. J. T.
whom we do not call Socinians, did not too much socinianize! When an admired
Person had wrote, that if Adam had had any considerable Knowledge, he would not
have sold himself and all his hopes so cheap, out of a greedy Appetite to a
little (then) for hidden Fruit; does not his acute Answerer well say that that
Appetite was sinful; and could not be in Man whilst sinless. Did it take its
rise from Ignorance or Error? Did it not a rise from Incogitancy, and not due
using his Knowledge.

Certainly, Solomon in all his Glory (and with all the Philosophy and
Understanding, 1 Kings 4.32, 33, 34.
from which he wrote on diverse Subjects) fell far and far short of Adam.
Solomon's Knowledge was no little owing to hard Study, and so was acquired; but
Adam's was infused, and his Soul was enlightened at once, as the Air is upon the
Sun's arising. How little do Men now, after many years beating their Brains,
attain, in comparison of what he was endued with.

The Third Inference is: All of us should (and no doubt the best of us do) take
up a Lamentation, and write it for a Lamentation; that Man's Sun is turned into
Darkness; Ephesians. 5.8.
that Men and Women, considered in their mere Naturals, as to what is
spiritual, are Darkness itself in the Abstract.

The Last Inference is: They are to be commended, who though Knowledge be now
hardly common to, do seek after, and cry for that sort of it, Prove. 2.2, 3.
which will further their trafficking with and into Heaven. O that Persons took
the nearest way to it! and had recourse unto the blessed Jesus, that he may be
made unto them Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and they may be made Light in him, his Merit obtaining, and his Spirit
applying to it.

The 4th. Position is. That Man in his first estate might move (and better)
hold Converse and Communion with God: See Rev. Burgess of Orig. sin. p. 250,
etc.
his Memory was richly fraught.

Was it not a most precious Cabinet and Storehouse of sacred Verities? Was it
not as that Holy of Holies, the Ark of the Covenant, wherein God's Royal Law
was laid up and kept?

What Man's Memory is, is not easily defined. Have I not in this poor Paper
hinted, that there is in it what bespeaks Wondering? Do we not rather feel than
know what we do, when we remember things?

If I was meet to engage in a Philosophic Debate about its Nature, I should
not judge it meet to do so: Evident it is that the great Soul of Man has a
Power, Memoria est praeteritarum.
as of apprehending things present, so of reminding things past, to which
Memory has much reference. I do not say, that the Memory is a distinct faculty
from the Understanding; nor do I gainsay those that hold it is contained in it.
Vide Morneum de ver. Relig. p. 251.
Does not their Arguing receive Encouragement from what the Apostle speaks of,
stirring up pure Minds by way of remembrance. A noble French Divine (tho no
Preacher) writes to this sense, that the Memory is Reason employed in
recounting; or the Receptacle into which the Mind pours its Notions.

That Adam had a Power of remembering, flowed from his having the Nature (and
not only the Shape) of Man; That Brutes have a sensitive Memory, is not denied;
that Man has an intellectual Memory, Isai. 46.8.
(it denved) is (a Worthy's Phrase) denved against Reason. Of what av^il had
Understanding been to Man, if he had not had Memory? Have not some said that
all useful Knowledge lies in Remembrance?

That in Adam, when he came out or God's hand, Memory was perfect, Genesis 1.28.
is argued from his being made in the Image of God. Did not that take in the
Perfection of all natural Powers? Had he been in all other Powers sound, and
had either Falsehood or Frailty in his Memory, he had not been thoroughly happy,
either as to Temporal or Spiritual Consideration.

That the Perfection of Adam's Memory furthered his Communion with God; is
proved from our weighing the Objects about which it is exercised. Was not God,
who is (as he is styled) the most signal Object thereof, still fair and afresh
presented to (and by) it? Was it not ready to suggest to Man with what a
glorious God (even the God of Glory) he had to do;

1. Glorious in Holiness, being at the greatest Remote and Distance from Sin,
Exodus 15.11.
of purer Eyes than to behold it, without utter Dislike; Habbak, 1.13. See
acute Norton. Jer. 17.10.
and being in every Point and Degree conformable to himself.

2. Glorious in his Omniscience, which is joined with his Omnipresence; Does he
not search and see the Heart, and the Grace which he has wrought in it?

3. Glorious in Goodness; Sui diffusivum.
which is for diffusing and communicating it self. Having made Man a large
Vessel, had it been kept clean and open, he would have filled it.

Again: Did not Adam's Memory present to him God's whole Will, and his own
whole Work? Was not the Royal Law written in legible Characters on his Heart?
Had he not in his first Estate presented before and to him the right Object,
Matter, Manner and Time of special Worship? And withal, all due respect to the
Person, Chastity, Goods, good Name and Quiet of his Neighbor?

And now, I First infer: That Adam when in Innocence was a thrice happy Man.
Witness what follows. O terque, etc.


1. Was any Forgetfulness of God's Mercy, or his own Duty, incident to him?

2. Did he not remember together with the Notion, the Importance, and
Excellency of Truths?

3. Did not his Memory fully serve its end? Was it not an holy Repository and
Treasury?

A 2d. Inference is. We that (if not past feeling) feel that we are in a fallen
state, cannot want matter for Mourning. How are the Vessels of our Memories as
broken Vessels? Are they not rightly compared to Iron Grates, that let pure
Water pass through, See worthy Mr. Hodges on this.
whilst Mud and Filth sticks in them? What loud Complaints do good People make
of their short, frail, and defective Memories? If others make less moan, they
have more cause for it. Alas! how is Trading with (and into) Heaven hereby
hindered.

The last Inference is. They whose Hearts are for driving an Heavenly Trade,
are to praise God.

1. So Wollibius.
Though through the Fall, the Faculty of Memory is endamaged, it is not taken
away.

2. Provision by free rich Grace is made for the penitent.

1. On account of Christ's Merit, notwithstanding their Infirmities, 1 John 1.7.
their Sins shall be pardoned.

2. Jo. 14.26.
On the same Account the holy Spirit, as a Remembrancer, shall be poured out on
'em, and Trading into Heaven maintained.

The 5th Position is: When Man was created through the thorough Goodness of his
Conscience, he was fit for Communion with God.

Thus much (or little) I will at present say of Conscience. Of Liberty of Conje.
Very high things are said of it. The late learned Rutherfoord calls it the
Apple of the Soul's Eye. He further says, that though it is not a part of the
Deity, (which has no Parts) it smells more of God than the Heavens, See his
Harmour.
the Sun, Moon, or other Stars; and so than the Saphirs, Rubies, or any of the
precious things of the Earth. Profound Dr. Bates has not stick'd to call it a
subordinate God, giving Laws, and exacting Obedience.

1. If Respect be had to the original Words, whereby it is set forth.

1. The learned tell us, 2 Samuel 24.10.
that the Hebrew Word for Heart (by which in some Scriptures Conscience is
meant) points at a Conspersion, 1 Jo. 3.21.
or at Meal mingled with Water. The Soul in regard of it is watered with
Notions, which we call common; and hence has it been styled a Storehouse of
Moral Principles.

2. (...).
The Greek Word, used as some reckon, about 32 Times in the New Testament,
denotes,

1. See accurate Sheffi^id on this.
That it is a Knowledge; a Light, by Reason whereof Man's Soul is the Candle of
God.

2. This Knowledge is not found walking in so large a Field, as that of the
Understanding: Its Eye has much for its Objects; 1. The Will of God as its
Rule. 2. The Souls Case with reference thereto.

3. This Knowledge is of a joint conjoined Nature. It is (say some) a Knowledge
together with Angels, with Men, 1 Jo. 3.21, 22.
with ones self. To be sure, God who is greater than the Heart and Conscience,
knowing all things, knows together with it.

Having thus spoke of the Words, it is time to touch on the Thing: And Poor I
am as little willing as able, Vide Therap. Sac.
to engage in a Dispute, whether we shall call it a Distinct Faculty from the
Mind, or rather the Mind self-acting, and Rev. Ryther.
by way of Comparison, or Reflection.

Cannot this Eye look as backwards, so inwards? Whether as one (and not he
only) conceives, it takes in the Will. Or whether it is more fitly called an
Act, or a Power whence Acts flow (it continuing in persons when asleep) I leave
to my Betters to determine.

Certainly it is rightly said to be a very busy thing; as ingenious Dr.
Burthogg's Expression is. De causa Dei.
An Instinct impressing on Men's Minds a future Judgment. Sundry fall in with
the excellent Amos, De Conflantia.
who styles it the Judgment of Man, as subjected to the Judgment of God.

Who that is of worth makes it a question, whether in Adam at first Conscience
was perfectly good?

1. Honest bona Iacate.
Was it not good both in point of Honesty and Peaceableness? Did it not
perform its whole Office, and therein find Ease and Solace enough? Quoad statum
Exercitium.


2. Was not Man's Conscience good both as to State and Exercise? Was not
Holiness to the Lord written in fair Characters (as on its Nature so) on its
Actings? See Mr. Sheffield on this.


3. Was it not good 1. As a Minister to instruct. 2. As a Magistrate to
injoin. 3. As a VVitness to attest, and 4. As a Judge to pronounce guiltless?

That whilst Conscience was right, Man's Communion was very sweet, is very
evident. Does not much that I have said tend to give in full Proofs thereof?

1. Did not its pure Principles incline Man to act for God, and to receive from
him?

2. 2. Pet. 1.3.
Was not Grace and Peace multiplied through the Knowledge it had of, and
exercised about him?

3. When as God's Deputy it judged as he did, did he not communicate himself
to it?

I add 1. Did not Conscience then fence against Sin, Isai. 59.2.
the Interrupter of Commerce between Heaven and Earth?

2. Did it not fit for Duty, wherein there is an exporting of Graces, and so a
fitting for the importing of Grace?

And now, I first infer: That if Man had kept his first Estate, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah, had been much his Language; was he not as to his Conscience a
Vessel, as of Honor so of Mercy.

The 2d. Inference is. Fallen Man has great Cause to fall on his Knees (or
Face) in a way of Humiliation. Is not his Conscience, ^^tus 1.15.
which seems to have escaped better than some other Powers, defiled?

Oh! Quantum ^^^tatur.
How much for the worse is it altered? It was tender, but is hardened; it was
inoffensive, but is contrary.

The 3d. Inference. All that hear of should, as feel the Want, Hos. 9.14.
so see the VVorth of the Lord Jesus. Is not his Blood an All-heal? Are not
through it Consciences purged and pacified?

The last Inference is. The Spirit of God should be waited on, and breathed
after; that the Conscience may be his Temple, that through his Influence this
Bird in the Breast may declare truly, and withal sing sweetly.

The 6th. Position. The Commerce and Communion between God and Man (in Man's
first Estate) was much furthered through the Liberty (Purity) of his own Will.

So noble a Faculty is that of the Will, (the choosing and refusing Power) that
it is usually said, Voluntas hominis est homo.
the Will of Man is the Man. Is not Religion rightly said to be the right
Poyse or Bias of the Will? Are not God's People willing (or as a Free Will
Offering? Psalm. 110.3.
Many Disputes are concerning Free Will; and it is out of Dispute, A coactione,
that there is a Freedom that is essential to the Will. That celebrated Saying
of an Ancient is approved by modern Divines; If there was nothing of Free Will,
there would be nothing to be saved; and if it were not for much of Free Grace,
there would be no Salvation.

It is not easy to satisfy some wherein the Freedom of Man's Will does most
properly consist; but I can easily satisfy my self, (...).
it is not in that Indifferency, which implies equal Inclination to Good, or
Evil.

Are not the Wills of Angels (yea and the Will of the God of Angels) free, Vide
Le Blank 's Theses.
tho wholly fixed on Good? Certainly in Man's first Estate his Will was purely
free: The Event proves there was a Possibility of its being drawn to Evil; but
God made it with a Bent and Inclination to Good; It was not only free from
Compulsion, so that it admitted of no Force, for so it is now; but it was free
from Corruption, there was no wrong tendency in it.

Had not Adam's Will been purely free, he had not been holy; and so not happy:
Was not such Freedom of his Will necessary to his being a Covenanter with God?
Had he not consented to the Duties, he had not been entitled to the Blessings
of the first Covenant.

May not the following Particulars be asserted of Adam's Will? Tact. Sac. p.
138,


1. His Will was under the Empire and Rule of Right Reason, Did not his Reason
vail to God, and his Will to Reason? Did it stir without Reason's Orders? or
stay when it had 'em to go? Did it not follow the best Light?

2. His Will did close with, See the incomparable Baxter on self-denial.
and was carried to God as its Felicity, and his chief End. Was not his Respect
to Creatures, yea to his own Pleasure, Profit and Honor subservient thereunto?
Romans 14.9,
Did he look at what he had (or was) as his own? Did he not look at his Maker
as his Owner?

3. Psalm. 116.7.73.25.
He by his good Will did rest and delight in God as his Treasure, satisfying
Portion, and chief Good. Was not God his dwelling Place? Did he not take
pleasure in other things for God's appearance in 'em? and as Rays from him were
darted through 'em?

4. Eadem velle, nolle, est amicitia.
Man's Will did then very readily bow to God's Sovereignty, was it not resolved
into the divine Will? Were not God and Man such great and good Friends, that
they did will and nill the same things. Was not God's Law in Man's Heart? Did
not Adam (whilst in Integrity) obey the Lord? 1. Perfectly, without failing in
any kind or Degree? 2. Readily, without any thing like demur or delay. 3.
Cheerfully, without raising Cavils or Objections. 4. Humbly, without taking
Honor (due to God) to himself.

Again: Man's Will at first was altogether for living in a way of Dependence on
God, as the first Cause. Did he not rely on the Arm of Almightiness? Even when
he had a large Stock in his own hand; Was not his Eye still on the highest Hand?

And now can any well doubt, that when Man did so freely and fully come to God;
God would not (or did not) graciously and plenteously communicate himself to
him? Did not Man live at the Wellhead, where the Water of Life is as full, so
pure, and sweet.

And hence (I first infer,) That whatever Fault was or is found in Man's Will,
it cannot be laid at God's Door. Was it from Want of Power, was it not from the
abuse of the Freedom of his Will, that Man fell? Jor. 17.9.
Did not Man's Uprightness in part consist in that Freedom?

The 2d. Inference. Is not the low way a good way, and fit for fallen Man to
walk in? Do not they do well, that much mourn that Man's Will is now frail,
and (alas!) false? Does it not mislead the Understanding, whereby it should be
be led?

The 3d. Inference. Their Tenants are not to be touched with, in whose Books
the Will of fallen Man stands as an undeflowr'd, Virgo intacta.
untouched Virgin. Do not some, whom we will not brand, See Worthy Dr. Hill.
as through Arminians, glory overmuch in the Title of Free-VVillers? Vide
Peltii harmoniam.
Are they not afraid of allowing Free Grace leave to rule and undermine Man's
Will?

The 4th. Inference. They who never before did, should now ply the Throne of
Grace; and in Christ's name beg the special Influence of the Holy Spirit, Psalm.
119.80. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
for removing the Pravity, without infringing the Liberty of the Will.

Be it considered, 1. In many good Motions of (on) the Will are quenched. 2.
This cuts the damned, See Dr. Hammonds Pract. Car.
that they chose the way to Hell.

The last Inference is. They who (having known the day of God's Power) are a
willing People, and are caused as well as called to walk in God's Statutes,
Psalm. 149.6.
should highly (seeing they shall eternally) praise the Lord.

The 7th. Position. Through the Order and Regularity that was in Man's
Affections, he was meet for Converse and Communion with God.

That Man is an affectionate Creature, Quid sensibile.
is a kind of sensible Truth. He is not without Affections in his fallen State;
and surely he was well affected in his first state, when some are said to be
without natural Affections, Romans 1.29, 30, 31. (...). 2 Cor. 7.15. (...).
Coloss. 3.5.
its rightly construed without the due exercise hereof.

I am aware, that the Word Affections is not so often read in holy Writ as any
others are; but the things we call so are oftener found therein, than most
others; and when we read o^ inward Affection, we may run and read, that in Man
there are inward Bowels. His Soul has such, and there is a Figure in the
Phrase; Bowels being put for Affections seated there. Do not we call those
Motions Affections, which the Moralists call Passions? and to that Word in
some Scriptures, where we meet with the Word Aflections, there is Respect.

Passions are usually said to belong to the sensitive Appetite. But eminent
Divines speak of Affections, as moving in an higher Sphere, So Rev. Reyner.
as nearly allied to the Will; flowing from it, (says a Worthy) as Fingers
from the hand, and as Toes from the Foot; and withal so influenced by the
Understanding, that they obtain the name of Rational. One who was one of a
thousand for choice Affections, Mr. W. Fenner.
describes them as sensible Motions of the Will, to (from) things as
apprehended good (evil).

First, That in Adam (when in Integrity) there were Affections, and that they
were pure, admits of no doubt.

1. Did not his being a Man endued with Sense and Understanding, and the Power
of choosing and refusing, speak this?

2. Is not this proved from his being made to love and fear his Maker? and to
avoid what was contrary to him?

3. Did not God, Genesis 2.17.
in order to preserving a holy Fear in him, propound a Threatening to him in
case of Disobedience?

4. Was there not in that Threatening couched a Promise of Life unto his
Obedience, that his Hope might be quickened?

Secondly, That Man, if he had kept his Assertions pure, had traded much into
Heaven, appears from the consideration of some particulars wherein his
Integrity lay.

1. Was not the Image of God fair drawn on his Affections? Far be it from me or
my Readers to socinianize, in ascribing to God such Passions as are found in
fallen Man; Malachi 3.6.
and carry the Print of Imperfections on 'em: Dr. Owen 's Vindic. Evang.
When in Scripture he is said to be grieved, angry, etc. This is spoken of him
after the Manner of men, and must be understood agreeably to the nature of God.

But though we would be loath to be chargeable with taking from God his
Perfections; and ascribing to him our Imperfections: yet this we may say, Man
at first was in Loving and Hating, an Imitator and Follower of God.

For Secondly, Were not Man's Affections subordinate to right Reason and
Religion, as their Guides?

3. Were they not right set and acted as to their Objects? Were they not all at
God's Service?

4. Were they not all in their exercise referred to the last and best, and the
setting forth of God's Glory?

5. Were they not harmonious? Did not every one further the Exercise of other?

6. Had they not Publickness in 'em? had Man continued perfect, had not mutual
Love among Men reigned?

And can it be reasonably questioned, whether whilst Man's Affections were on
God's side, his Communications were choice? Had not Man at first the best
Gratifications, as for his Soul, so for his Senses?

And now, I First Infer. It is no Wonder, that Persons whose Hearts are so
wrought on, Gal. 5.24.
that they take Religion to heart, do take up bitter Lamentations for Man's
Fall. Ah! Ah! What sad Work has sin made in Man's Affections? Oh! the vain,
yea vile Affections, that are in the World, Rom: 1.26.
yea in the Church considered as visible! Oh the Disorder, Deadness, Earthiness
and Selfishness that is found it (not felt) in 'em! and how is the spiritual
and heavenly Trade thereby hindered and marred?

The 2d Inference is. Satan will not fail to show himself (according to the
Importance of his Name) an Adversary. By his ill Will he will prevent good, 2.
Cor. 2.11.
and promote ill Affections. May we not be ignorant of, but armed against his
Devices!

The 3d Inference is. There is all Reason sensible Persons should run, and have
much recourse to Christ.

1. Have they not need of being washed in his Blood, from the guilt contracted,
as to their Affections?

2. Should they not depend on his Spirit for the fanctifying and governing of
their Affections?

Are not the Affections styled the Materials of Grace? Is it not much seated
and seen in 'em? Is it not through 'em we give to, and receive from God, and so
trade with him?

The 8th Position. That Man, when innocent, might have more free (and full)
Communion with God, there was an exact Temper, and excellent Composition and
Constitution of his Body.

Might not the Saying of David, Psalm. 139.14, etc.
concerning his Body, with much advantage be said of the Body of Adam? Vide
Poli Synopsin.
Fearfully and wonderfully was he made: curiously wrought, even as your rare
Needle Work.

I no way doubt, Man's Soul, which was his excellent part, had the chiefest
share both in the Holiness which he exercised, and the Happiness which he
enjoyed: yet, when it is said, Eccles. 7. ult.
God made him upright, or every way right, this must necessarily take in his
Body, which is one of his constitutive parts.

I readily own, that in and through the Body the Glory of the Soul does shine,
and show itself; yet I believe, that on it (even on it) from its Maker was a
Glory shed.

1. Had not Man's Body been serviceable to God. Man had not been wholly so. Was
not God to be served with his own, with the whole of it?

2. So profound Dr. Bates.
Was there not in Man's first Estate Provision made, whereby God gratified all
his bodily Parts and Senses

3. Was not Man's Body, as to the Matter of it, of the purest part thereof, and
of all visible pieces of the Creation, the choicest?

Was there not in it (and that in the Eye of an Heathen) so much of Excellency
apparent, Os homini sublime.
that he was for composing an Hymn to its Maker. Have not its erect Posture and
elevated Looks been looked at as in the count of its Excellencies?

Was not the Body of Adam, as to the contrivance and proportion of every part,
admirable? Was there any joint wanting or any one superfluous? Did not every
joint supply something, and contribute to the good of the Body, being fully fit
to serve its Maker?

If Man had kept from Sin, Romans 6. ult. 5.12.
God had kept him from Death, and from all the Sicknesses and Deaths that are
ordinarily its Forerunners. Did he not dig his Grave with his own hands?

And now, I First Infer: That Socinianism is by no means to be taken up, or
touched with. O that some, Dr. J. T. etc.
whom we will not call Socinians did not speak their Language or pronounce
their Sibboleth; Consequens naturas.
in saving, that Death is the consequence of Nature, and not the Punishment of
Sin.

Be it considered, Romans 6. ult. (...).
1. If Scripture Phrase and Doctrine be consulted with, does it make the wages
of Sin due to it, as a Soldiers pay is due to him?

And 2. Genesis 2.17.
Does not Scripture-History acquaint us, that it was threatened, and executed
for Sin?

3. Could not he that made the Body, have made it (though an Earthen) an
abiding Vessel?

4. If there be now in it contrary Humors, contending against one another, and
it, was it so from the Beginning?

The 2d Inference is. Even as to the Body (and bodily Senses) Man's Damage is
great, and evident. Is it not now a body of Vileness? Philip. 3. the End.
Is not the Spirit by its Distempers hindered in God's Service?

The 3d Inference. Persons whilst in their Bodies should bear in mind, for what
end, 1 Cor. 6. ult.
and in what capacity Man's Body was created, should not their Bodies be
ordered to the Honor of God?

The last Inference. Dan. 12.2, 3.
It may well be wondered at, that God has provided a Glory for his Peoples
Bodies, as in Heaven he has done.

The 9th Position. Through the Fall and Fault of Man, the Trade, Intercourse,
and Communion between Heaven and Earth, God and Man was interrupted; yea
stopped, broke and spoiled.

1. Genesis 3.
Do we not find Adam when fallen, shy of, and shunning God's presence? Did he
not hide him self from him?

And 2. Genesis 3.
Do we not find God conventing and convicting him as a Criminal? Can we well
construe that Question of his? Have thou eaten of the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil? As if it was not to God unquestionable and certain, Vide Dolum and
Rev. White. Ad locum.
that he had eaten of it? Did not these Words tend to work in him Conviction of
that Sin?

3. Were not the Rubs and Impediments, which appear as lying in the way between
God and fallen Man, and so interrupting and hindering their Converse, very great
ones? Does not this appear,

1. If we look up to God: Was not Injury offered to him, See acute Here Is
Tripo^.
as considered in all his Perfections? Two of them are especially instanced in.

1. Exodus 34.6.
His Justice. Is not Justice essential to God? though in the Exercise thereof
his Wisdom is with his Will exercised. Is it not a righteous thing with God to
take vengeance on such a great and wilful Transgressour, Psalm. 11. ult See the
excellent Burgess on this.
as Man became? Was not Justice (if not receiving Satisfaction) to have had its
full course on him?

2 The Holiness of God was also highly affronted. So Dr. Arrowsmith.
Is it not from comparing Scripture with Scripture concluded, that God is
Holiness it self? Is he not in his Nature an Enemy to Sin? Shall Sin, or the
Persons that will live in it, Psalm. 5.
dwell with him?

2. If we look down to Man in his lapsed State, there was what obstructed his
Communion with God.

1. Was not Guilt on him? Was he not, by and for his Sin, bound over to suffer
the unsufferable Wrath of God? Heb. 12. ult.
And does not a Malefactor affect (can he well endure) the sight of the Judge?

2. Was not Filth in him, yea was it not in him as a Fountain? Could he then
delight in him who is most pure; yea Purity it self? Seeing to him he had the
greatest unsutableness. Psalm. 51.5.


And now, I First Infer. There Is all Reason the fallen Man should fall on his
knees, in a way of Humiliation, on account of Sin, especially of the first Sin.
Has not Sin done that to and against him which no Suffering, or other Enemy,
can do? even separate betwixt him and his God?

1. Deicidium.
Does not Sin in general strike at the Glory (yea at the being) of God? Have
not some called it God-Slaughter?

2. Was not the first Sin a compre hensive one? a very compound of Sins?
Disobedience with a Witness? Romans 5.19. Vide Baxteri Methodum.
Witness what England's great Divine wrote of, the many Evils bound up in that
Volume.

The 2d. Inference. Persons of ripe years are in an ill Case (and State) that
know not what it is to be weary of, and heavy laden for Sin. Should not this be
written for a Lamentation? Man has lost, as his Conformity, so his Communion
with God.

The last Inference. Heb. 10.19, 20.
It Is the Wonder of Wonders, that a new and living way is opened betwixt Heaven
and Earth, for the dispersing of Mercy, and acceptance of Duty, and that
through the Blood of Jesus.

The 10th Position. Through the damage which Man's Fall has done to his
Understanding, his Communion with God is no little hindered.

1. Ephesians. 4.18.
Is he not alienated and estranged from the Divine Life, through the Ignorance
that is in him?

2. Prove. 19.2.
Can the Mind that is without Knowledge, (and so not good) lead any in the
right way of honoring God?

3. Will God admit the wilfully (or willingly) ignorant to the peculiar
enjoyment of him?

I add, 1. Do not some, who are sufficiently Arminianized, grant that Man's
Mind is maimed through the Fall?

2. Tit. 1.15. See renowned Burgess on this. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Has not the Scripture written defilement on it? Does it not labor under
Frailty and Falsehood?

As to Frailty, 1. Can the mere natural Man discern spiritual things in a
spiritual manner?

I am aware, that some new Methodists, in the Text referred to, understand the
Sensualist alone; in whom the Beast rules the Man, Dr. Gl. etc.
his Mind being wholly inslaved to his Lusts.

But poor I am loath to leave the Road (especially where there is so little
Reason for it). They are Worthies that construe it of the soully Man, Vide
Leigh Crit. Sac.
the Man whose Soul is most refined, having natural and moral Accomplishments.

Though there be light enough in the Air of Scripture, to one that wants sight,
or an enlightened Eye, Spirituals appear not. As to revealed Truths, the
Naturalist discovers not.

1. The inside and Glory, nor 2. The Scope and Tendency of 'em, which is to
free Persons, 1. from the Reign of Sin, 2. for the inwards of Grace.

And as to Truth essential, without a Spirit of Revelation, the Knowledge which
Persons have of Christ is not, 1. Clear, 2. Fixed, 3. Satisfying, or 4.
Transforming.

Again, Is not the Falsehood of fallen Man's Understanding proved, 1. From its
pretending to gnide Persons; when really it self is misguided by its Lusts and
Passion? 2. From its spending so many Thoughts on Vanities and Curiosities? 3.
From its representing things wrongfully, variously, and partially? 4. From the
Faultiness that is in its Assent to Divine Truths? which (alas!) is rather, 1.
Slightly, then Serious; 2. Traditional, then Spiritual.

Hence I First Infer. We have all Reason to reason against those Remonstrants
that said, Men may understand Divine Mysteries without Divine Illumination; and
against that Pluralist that wrote, Ephesians. 5.8. Vide Examen Arminiapismi.
that he who exercises his Reason, may as easily understand the Laws of God,
as those of his Prince.

The 2d Inference. Their Hearts are not what we would have them, whose Hearts
do not wish, that their heads were as Waters, and their Eyes as Fountains of
Tears; that Trading with and into Heaven is so hindered through want and
weakness of Knowledge. Does not this hinder Men's laying out their Love on God,
and his communicating the Tokens and Testifications of his Love to them? Are
any Hypocrites duly humbled on this score?

The 3d. Inference. They are most likely and fit to drive the Heavenly Trade to
the best Advantage, who most wait for the Spirit's Enlightnings.

Being. 1. Humble; Genesis 32.10.
making account they are less than the least of God's Mercies; how much then
below so high a Mercy as this?

2. True to the Light they have, Ephesians. 5.8.
making it a Light to their Feet, joining the Tree of Life to that of Knowledge.

The 11th Position. Through Man's Fall his Memory is so broken, that he is
rendered unmeet for Trading into Heaven, and with the God of Heaven.

1. Surely all thinking Men have this Thought, that if a Person has received
many clear Notions of God, upon the total Failure of his Memory, he cannot
serve him?

2. Without doubt the Solace of a Soul from God depends no little upon
remembering him, as to what he has said, done, and received (in a way of
Satisfaction) at his Son's Hands. I will not affirm, that Knowledge is nothing
but Remembrance; Eccles. 12.1.
but does not the Scripture call for the whole Religion under the notion of
remembering?

I ask, 1. Are not the Precepts for remembering Divine things many? 2. Are not
the Scriptures delivered in a Method tending to help Memory? Psalm. 9.17.
3. Do we not find the irreligious described as Forgetters of God? 4. Is it not
from not remembering God, that Iniquity abounds?

1. Totus Oculus. Job. 24.15.
Does the Adulterer (that waits for the twilight) bear in Memory, that God is
all Eye, and that Darkness hides not from him?

2. Psalm. 139.
Does he that sinfully puts the Bottle to his Neighbor's (or to his own)
Mouth, remember that God enjoins Sobriety under the Penalty of a Woe?

3. Malachi 1. ult.
Does he that does God's Work negligently remember unto and under what a Curse
he lays himself?

I add. Are not God's Words let slip? Are his Works of Judgment remembered, so
as to work due Fear of Sin? Are not his Mercies, which should move and lead to
Repentance, too much buried in the Grave of Oblivion?

The first Inference is. Questionless Man's Fall was a fearful one. Were not
all the Vessels or Powers of Man's Soul, particularly that of the Memory,
broken in pieces? O that this had the Consideration due to it! Can many say
with Truth, that they have set the Lord always before 'em? Yea, Psalm. 16.8.
that they have done it any one day? Have their Memories been affectionate and
practical, as to Good? Have they not been too too receptive and retentive of
Evil?

The 2d Inference is. It is the concern of Christians, in order to their
managing and driving the Heavenly Trade, to wait on God for a special and
differencing Work of Grace on their Memories?

Is not that Promise full of Grace wherein the Lord Jesus engages to send his
Holy Spirit to perform the Office of a Remembrancer to (and for) 'em? Jo. 14.26.


The 3d. Inference. That the Memories of Christians may be more refreshed, and
rendered more serviceable to God, and so their Communion with him may be
furthered; they should look and long for a fuller Work of God and Grace on
their Affections. Ephesians. 4.15.
Do we not hold fastest the things that take hold of our Hearts, or that our
Hearts take hold of? Where Truth is received, in the Love of it it is best
retained. Is it not true, that Coldness is (in more Senses than one) the Mother
of Forgetfulness?

The 4th Inference. God is highly to be praised, that for the penitent, on the
score of his Sons Merit and Mediation, he has provided a State wherein the
Memories of his People are perfectly healed; and so they are Vessels of Mercy
and Honor, I oppose not those who say; there will even in Heaven be a
Remembrance of Sin: Nor will they gainsay my Saying, that it will be no
disturbance of the Saints Rest and Joy. I doubt not, pardoning and purifying
Mercy, and the State of Holiness and Happiness endeared to 'em.

The 12th Position. The Converse and Communion, which (at first) God had with
Man, is broken through the Pollution that is in Man's Conscience.

Concerning the Name, Nature, and Offices of Conscience there passed some Lines
under the 5th Position, which must not be repeated.

That the Conscience of Man, Tit. 1.15.
whilst in his mere Naturals, is defiled, is a plain and positive Assertion of
the holy Spirit speaking in Holy Scripture; and have we not all Reason to count
it a note worthy of our best notice, Mr. Burgess. And Dickson. Ad Locum.
which we have under the hand of a late Worthy? Those Popish Interpreters go
too narrow a way in the Interpretation of that Text, who restrain it to the
Jews and their Mistakes about Ceremonies. For, tho some occasion seem
administered for such Words; yet he that runs may read, that the Proposition is
general, and refers to all that are in a state of Unbelief. Tho natural
Conscience is counted one of the best things that is in the unregenerate; are
there not diverse Evidences, that it is from being perfect, yea or pure.

At present I Will only consider Conscience as a Preacher.

1. Where lives that mere Naturalist whose Conscience is not chargable with
sinful Silence? Ah! Ah! how foul, and yet how common a Fault is this in
Preachers? An acute Divine well worded this; Mr. Porter.
It Is one thing for Conscience to hold its Peace, and another thing for it
aright to speak Peace.

1. Is it its manner to chide Persons for secret and inward Sins?

2. Does it call on them to improve, as well as to esteem Gospel Grace?

Alas! Eo minus tuti, quo magis securi. Prove. 23.24. Deuteronomy. 28.19.
Not a few sleep as on the top of a Mast, in the Mouth and midst of many
Dangers.

Are not some secure, who add Drunkenness to Thirst, and wallow in the mire of
Uncleanness, and overreach those they deal with? And as to sinful Omissions
(especially as to the exercise of Spiritual Duties and Graces) how few receive
a Check?

Again, 1 These. 5.2, 3.
if the Consciences of Unbelievers speak, they speak not home.

1. Is not their Cry often, Peace, Peace; when it is a base false Cry?

2. Do they not speak of great Truths and Duties in a formal way?

3. Is it not truly said, they are not diligent constant Preachers?

That a corrupt Conscience is a Bar to Communion with God, is apparent.

1. Job 27.9.
Will such a Conscience put and press on to a due dependence on and delight in
God?

2. Romans 14.17.
Will God to (and in) such a Conscience make a continual or refreshing Feast?

And so, I First Infer. They are under ill Characters, and Marks (even those of
unregeneracy) who are not inwardly concerned about the purging of their
Consciences from Guilt and Filth. O how greatly is this Purge needed? Mark
9.46.43. See Mr. Strong on this, who is Vir sui nominis.
Does not this lay a great load on their Consciences in Hell, who have
disregarded the purifying of 'em whilst they were on Earth? Will not the
undying Worm be a gnawing one?

The 2d Inference. It Is a great Matter (of as great Importance, as the Welfare
of Persons immortal Souls) to make Enquiry into the state of their Consciences.
2 Cor. 13.5.


1. 1 Timothy 4.2.
Are not the Consciences of many cautorized.
seared? Does not that appear? 1. Are they not past (or not common to) Feeling,
as some seared Parts have been? Have they any quick Sense of the Want of Love
to the Fear of God?

2. Do not many Consciences resemble dumb Dogs, that give no notice of Thievish
Lusts?

Again, Are not the Consciences of very many drouzy? Romans 8.11.
Has not a deep Sleep seized on 'em? Tho wise Virgins may slumber, yet
Sleepiness is not their ordinary Frame; Cant. 5.2.
and on second Thoughts they are thankful to such as are for awakening them. O
that Thousands could truly say, they do herein exercise themselves to have
Consciences void of Offense? Acts 24.16.
then might they Trade with Heaven.

The last Inference. The wonderful Provision which the Lord has made for the
making and keeping Conscience clear and tender, is well worth wondering at. O
the Virtues and Efficacies that are in the Blood and Spirit of Christ! How
precious is the one? Heb. 9.14.
How powerful is the other?

The 13th Position. Through the Corruption that is in the Will of Man, he is
rendered unmeet for Communion with God.

That there is some Corruption in the Will of fallen Man, See the Period of
Man's Life.
is not quite denied by some that are sufficiently Arminian, and do more than
enough mince the matter; and when, as such Men grant, the Understanding which
is as the eye of the Soul, is benighted, and no little darkened; Is it easily
conceivable, that the Will, which is its Foot, should stand (or be of it self)
upright?

We who believe, Jer. 17.9.
that by the Heart is (much) meant the Will, in that Phrase where he says,
that it is desperately wicked, do well approve of the Gloss of that excellent
Preacher who said, It is not only under a dangerous Malady, Mr. Porter.
but is opposite to the Sovereign Remedy.

And when it is affirmed, that the Corruption of Nature, which is Hereditary, is
withal voluntary, is not this confirmed from its being from Adam's Will;
Voluntas naturae.
which was the Will of our Nature, and not of his Person only, and from its
being feated in our Wills?

Within this Age, was a Writer of the first Rank, Rutherf. Exam. Mr. A. Burgess.
whose Enlargements on this Subject are worthy of viewing and weighing. I will
only hint, that its Corruption, is proved from its Act of Molition (Fruition.)

As to the former. Is it not evident, that the Will of Man is far out as to its
Wishings, which may be styled incomplete Willings? And as to those that are
more full, are they regular or near it?

1. Whence is it that Persons desire not the affectionate practical Knowledge
of God and his Ways?

2. How comes it to pass, Job. 21 14. See rewzing Fenner on this.
that Men, as if they were afraid of Life, will not come unto Christ that they
may have it?

3. Are not the unregenerate under this Character, Jo. 5.40.
their Hearts are set in 'em to do evil?

4. Whereas some are not so impetuously carried to gross Evils, are they not
inordinately bent toward that good, Psalm. 17.11.
that is not satisfying? And so I am led to touch on the latter Head or Point.

Are not the most refined among the unrenewed, wrong in their Fruition?

1. Does any one of their number choose God as his Treasure and Rest?

2. Psalm. 73.25.116.7.
Is not every one of them as Noah's Dove, finding no Rest for the Soal of his
Foot, (or Foot of his Soul) whilst out of the Ark, and without the true resting
Place?

3. When they are engaged in God's special Worship, does not some Lust divert
'em?

4. Judges 17.6.18.24.
When they meet with great Losses and Crosses, are they not apt to cry, our
Gods (or what we made as such) are taken away, and what have we?

And I need nor insist long on proving, that whilst Men's Wills are nor on
God's side, they cannot traffic or hold Communion with him.

Seeing 1. Such Communion is by virtue of God's gracious Covenant, to which
they consent not?

2. Psalm. 5.5.
Their Communion with Sin is that to which he is in his Nature an Enemy.

Hence, I First Infer. That the great Patrons of Free Will, that is, of Man's
being naturally free to (and for) Spiritual Good, are not patronized from the
Position I am on. Can we well say, (or think) that Original Sin is but like a
little Spot or slight Wound, and no more prejudicial to Man's Will, See Gaul's
Sapientia Justis.
than Garlic to a Loadstone, which is easily wiped off.

A 2d. Inference. One Reason lies ready, why diverse good Persons cry.

1. Have we such ardent Breathings after the Discovery of God's Will, and love
as he requires?

2. Do we keep a constant Guard against what tends to hinder or weaken the
Motions of our Wills upwards?

Alas! Alas! Our Communion with the Lord is much interrupted, and if it be thus
with the green Tree, how is it with the dry?

The 3d Inference. It is not a good hearing to hear diverse Persons tell and
boast of the goodness of their Wills, and Hearts, whilst their Lives are far
from Goodness. Psalm. 119.80.
Is it not the manner of the best Christians to maintain an holy Jealousy of
(and over) their Hearts; See Rev. Green-hill on this Place.
and to pray earnestly, O that our Hearts may be sound in thy Statutes.

The last Inference. All who will vouchsafe this poor piece a reading, may run
and read how much it behooves 'em to pray in the Words and with the Spirit of
the sweet Psalmist, Psalm. 51.10.
Lord create in us new Hearts! Cause us to feel the day of thy Power, 110.3.
that we may be a willing People, and so a People sit to hold Converse and
Communion with thee.

The 14th Position. The Intercourse and Traffic that was at first between
Heaven and Earth, was stopped through the defilement of Man's Affections.

Concerning the Nature of the Affections, there have been touches under the 7th
Position.

That Disorder and Defilement in the Affections of Man prejudices his Communion
with God; the two following Touches serve as Proofs.

1. Are not Persons, See Rev. Reyner on the Affections. Phil. 3.20.
whose Souls are on the Ascendant, moving Godwards, therein made sensible of
this, that their Affections are by Grace rendered serviceable, and in the nature
of VVing to 'em? Is it not in a due exercise of 'em, that their Conversation is
in Heaven?

2. Is it not the way of God to let out and communicate himself and his
peculiar Favors into the Affections of Persons? Matthew. 25.41. Psalm. 16. the
last.
Are not those of his, that are admitted into his immediate Presence entered
into joy, yea possessed of the fullness of it? Are not their Desires to all
purposes answered and satisfied?

That in (and with) Man's Fall, Corruption seized his Affections, and that
whilst Persons are in their mere Naturals, it does sway 'em, is sadly
experienced; and is it not argued?

1. A contrary.
From the want of the blessed Order and Regularity which was proved to be at
first in Adam's Affections.

2. From the Supposition of the Holy Ghost, Col. 3.5.
speaking in and by the holy Apostle, that even in the believing Colossians,
(...)
there was remaining inordinate affection, which was to be an object of
progressive Mortification.

3. From the rendering of that Word inordinate Affection, which at first
signifies Passions, Does not the Translation imply, that Passions or Affections
are too ordinarily disordered?

4. From our reading of Affections as joined to the Flesh, Gal. 5.24.
and its Lusts.

5. From the Earthliness, Deceitfulness, Violence and Vilness, that are in
Man's Affections.

Do not many so mind, (...). Philipp. 3.19.
that they mainly relish, favor and affect the things of the Earth? Have they
not set their Eyes and Hearts bowing downwards.

2. Is there not much of Falsehood in those Affections, Psalm. 17.11.
that make a fair show? Are they as much on God's side, as they make sure of?

3. Jer. 3.10. Numb. 23.10.
Do not their Desires pretend to Goodness, when they are mere Flashes, and
however are lazy and not lively, conditional and not absolute?

4. Acts 26.11.23.15.
How violently (yea brutishly) against all Rules of Reason and Religion, are
the Affections of sundry carried? Was not Paul verily mad in and for
Persecution? Were not the Jews for killing him when a Preacher?

5. Nitimur in veritum.
Is there not that Vileness in fallen Man's Affections, that Sodomy and
Bestiality etc. pleases many? The more God forbids, the less they forbear.

I now infer. Gal. 1.4.
One Reason lies ready, why the World carries after and with it the Epithet of
Evil. Are not Affections the Spring of Actions that are suitable to 'em?

The 2d Inference is. There is all Reason, that one Affection should be much in
exercise. Should not godly Sorrow be set to mourn over and for what is so wrong
in other Affections? 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11.
Has not Corruption infected the Vitals and chief Powers of Man? And is there
any hope of healing where there is no humbling?

The 3d Inference. Even good Persons should not let their Affections go (or be)
without a Watch, or guard on 'em: nor are they to lay too much stress on some
stirrings of 'em, So Renowned Baxter. Hos. 6.4.
seeing such goodness may pass away as the morning Clouds and Early Dew. May
they see, and wait that their Love may be sincere, their Fear filial, their
Hope purifying, and their hatred of sin vehement, universal and constant.

The 4th Inference. Surely, there is a Power, Energy and Efficacy in real
godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Does not Grace work a very great change in, and much elevate and raise the
Affections? Does it not fix 'em for God, and against sin? Does it not cleanse
that Fountain that cannot cleanse it self? O that for, and after sanctifying
Grace there were more and greater breathings?

The 5th Inference. They who have holy Affections, should (as with so) for 'em
highly praise God? Psa. 149.6.
Should not their Mouths speak out their Praises? That it is so well with them,
is it not for the Merit, and by the Spirit of Christ?

The Last Inference. No doubt, Satan's Design is no little on men's Affections.
Will he not attempt to disturb, and disorder them? 2 Cor. 2.11.
Does he not by ill Influences on their Affections, blind their Judgments? And
is not their trading with, and into Heaven thereby greatly hindered?

The 15th Position. Except persons (who live to ripe years) so trade into
Heaven, that they hold Communion with God whilst they live, there is no hope
they should be received into Heaven, or live in the blessed making Enjoyment of
God when they die.

Might it not have been said to that Noted Doctor, Dr. S.
who in Print scoffed at Right Worthy Persons, under the Notion of God's
Acquaintance, Sir, See Rolls on this.
they who are not of God's Acquaintance on Earth, shall not be of his
Acquaintance in Heaven? The short and long is,

1. Rev. Newcom on Job 22.2. Romans 2.8, 9, 10.
They who are willingly strangers to God in this state, cannot produce, or
prove (what they have not) a Right or Title to the glory that shall be revealed
in the future state.

2. They who are not for driving an Heavenly Trade here, are no way meet to be
partakers of the Heavenly Inheritance hereafter. See the excellent How of
Blessedness.


May such as are Masters of Right Reason use it!

1. Shall they have possession of happiness that are not Friends to it?

2. Col. 1.12, 13.
Shall they be possessed of it, that are not prepared for it?

With reference to the former question, be it considered,

1. Till persons be born again, (or from above) having a New Nature or
Principle, (...)
carrying 'em so that they may converse with the Lord, See Dr. Wallis on this.
Jo. 3.3, 5.
they can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Can they either obtain
or enjoy it?

2. Have not they their Conversation in Heaven (trafflcking as Citizens
thereof) who do thence look for a Savior. (...). Phil. 3.20.


For 3. Though Heaven be (even in the acknowledgment of Lutheran's, local, Vide
Binchium.
yet is it not very much a state begun below, and completed above.

Do not they who well view this Doctrine, see in it a display?

1. Of God's glorious Wisdom; who, tho most liberal of his great Gift bestows
with (or before) it Hearts set on setting forth his eminent Excellencies? Has
he not bound his Honor and our Happiness together?

2. Of his glorious Goodness; Psalm. 84.11, 12.
who doubleth his Gifts, giving both Grace and Glory, Grace to fit for Glory.

I add. Though there be not (nor can be) betwixt God and fallen Man what we
call commutative Justice, Romans 11.35 Vide Le Blank 's Theses.
who has first (or last) given to God any thing like hire or merit? yet, in
rewarding, out of his Grace, their Works that hold Communion with him, 2 These.
1.6, 7, 8. 1 Jo. 1.9.
he manifests what has the appearance of distributive Justice.

And now, I First Infer. They who slight (or neglect) the heavenly Trade, not
using holy Duties or Ordinances, or not breathing and panting after the Lord in
'em, Jonah 2.8.
are chargeable with forsaking their own Mercy. The good Lord work Convictions,
in order to the conversion in them!

1. Will any (I fear many will) say? Though we draw not near to God, he is near
to us. We have as good a claim to Heaven as the greatest Puritan among 'em.
Ephesians. 5.6.
Is not this rightly called Presumption, though we call it Faith?

Is this Claim derivably 1. From God the Father's Purpose? Has not he chosen
Persons to Holiness as the Path af Life.

Or 2. Ephesians. 1.4. Tit. 2.14.
From God the Son's Purchase. Is he the Author of Salvation to any save the
obedient?

Or, 3. From any Promise under the hand of God, the holy Spirit. 1 Timothy 4.7.8.
Are not the Promises of the Life to come entailed on those, who are exercised
and do trade in Godliness?

Again, Will any of 'em think the miss and Loss of Heaven's Glory a thing
tolerable? Do not Divines who say, that as to the Punishment of Sense Man can
only bear finite (tho great Wrath) in an infinite duration, New Eng. Div.
say, that the Punishment of Loss is infinite, being of him that is so. Did not
one, called a Father, say; that in the Words, Depart from me, Chrysostom.
mill Gehennae.
are contained a thousand Hells? Is it not terrible to hear of that Sentence? O
what will it be to hear it?

The 2d Inference is. The Patience and Goodness of God to Slighters of the
Spiritual Trade is admirable; yet it is said to 'em, Acquaint your selves with
the Lord, Job. 22.21.
yet through a Mediator this may be.

The 3d Inf. is. They who have not entered into (and engaged in) Converse with
God, should be for doing now without delay. Can Persons be willing to be
banished from the gracious presence of the sight of God, and that for ever? Is
not the Fountain of Being the Fountain of Life? Will not this cut deep, if
Heaven be lost for Lusts or Trifles? Will not this cause as wailing, so
gnashing of Teeth, Quantum pro quantillo. Luke 13.28.
when they see others that sat under the same means, in the Kingdom of God,
and themselves shut out?

The 16th Position. To those who live (and die) in the wilful neglect of the
heavenly Trade on Earth, there remains fiery Indignation, which shall for
ever abide and torment them in Hell.

1. (...). 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. Gal. 3.10.
Does not the Law breath out the Wrath to come (or which will still be coming)
against all those who have not obeyed its Orders? Has it not a Curse for every
one that violates any one of its Commands?

Does not the Gospel leave all, Jo. 3: ult.
who having come to ripe years do not come over to the Son of God, that through
him they may transact with the Father, for Mercy, and in Duty, under the
Penalties by the Law threatened?

3. In the Representation which we have of the general Judgment, Matthew 25.41.
etc.
and the Proceedings of that day, under the hand, and from the Mouth, of
Christ, is it not declared, that they who have not (by Grace derived from
Christ) discharged (in sincerity) their duties to him, shall go into
everlasting fire?

The 1st Inference is. There is great danger in (and so had need to be great
watching against) sins of Omission. Tho persons escape the grosser pollutions
of the world, See Baxters Apology. p. 238, 240.
if they do not in the ways of Gods appointment, tender their Homage to him,
and wait for grace from him, is not the mouth of the Pit open to devour 'em? O
that many took a truer measure of the guilt that attends their willful sinful
Omissions.

1. Deo servire est regnare.
Is not Gods Law (in its primary design) positive, and its Precepts
affirmative? and does not Religion much lie in respect to such Precepts?

2. Do not sins of Omission strike high, even, 1. At Gods Sovereignty, who
gives out Orders? 2. At his Goodness, as if all his Laws were not written in
love? I add, have not all sins of Commission sins of Omission leading to them?

To descend a little to particulars, both as to Duties and Graces.

1. As to Duties. Jer. 10.25.
Do not showers of Wrath hang over prayerless houses?

2. Was it not well said (or written) to King Charles the second, By Dr. Gauden.
that whatever hindered his regard to the word of God, would prove ruining and
damning?

3. Is not he accursed that respects not the right manner of doing duties?
Mal. 1. ult.
should any one that has a male in the flock, offer a corrupt thing?

1. Is not he in whom Unbelief reigns, under the Sentence of Condemnation? As
to Graces. Jo. 3. ult.
Does not the Wrath that comes on others, abide on him?

2. Does not an Anathema Maranatha (a Curse till the Lord come) belong to such
as are destitute of love to Christ? 1 Cor. 16.22. See Pink on this.


The 2d Inference. They are in an evil case (and state) who so commit, as to
drive a Trade of Sin, serving diverse lusts, 1 John 3.8, 9.
plying the work of the Devil.

1. If persons live and lie in those sins which Satan both tempts to and
acts in, So acute Herle distinguishes.
of which sort are Pride, Malice, Lying, Persecuting.

2. If persons follow those Vices which Satan tempts to, but does not (that I
know) act in, into which Count fall Drunkenness and Uncleanness.

Do not their paths visibly take hold of Hell? Prove. 9. ult.
If the tree that is barren be cut down, what will be the end of that that
bears ill fruit?

The 3d Inference is. It is the great and important concern of persons (a
concern as great as that of their immortal souls) to look and long after this,
Ezekiel. 18.31. John 14.6.
that there be in 'em a divine Nature, a pure and powerful principle, from
which the heavenly Trade may be set and kept up, that through Christ they may
come to God the Father, and find him coming to them.

May they cry for the Residence (in order to their having the Influence) of the
holy Spirit! And that,

1. As an enlightened Spirit. A Mystery is mentioned as to lower Trades. Without
Controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16
great is the Mystery of godliness, of the practice, and not only of the
principles of it. Can lower teachers teach it?

2. Romans 8.14. Ephesians. 4.18.
As an enlivening Spirit. Is not life the principle of Movers and Traders? Can
any that are alienated from the life of God hold spiritual converse with him?

1. That persons heard the Lord say to 'em, What mean you, O ye sleepers? Romans
13.11. (...)
will you sleep the sleep of eternal death? It Is high time for you to awake
(and arise;) can you dwell with a consuming fire, (...)
a fire that will burn and not wast, torment, and yet not destroy (as to
being?) Rather than you should not be awakened, Evaccat, haud perimit. Isa.
33.14.
I am willing that the flames of hell should flash in your faces, and
consciences; I had rather allure than affright, yet rather affright, than lose
you.

If this work go on, the Sovereign Remedy provided for lost man will next be
touched on.

FINIS.
Trading Spiritualized.

The Second Part.

Or, some more POSITIONS, On which Tradesmen (And Others) may (O that they
would!) meditate.

By W. BAGSHAW, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON; Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1695.

To the truly Worthy, and deservedly Honored, Mr. William Nicholas.
HOW many praying Persons in the High-Peak do (and will) rise up and call you
Blessed? and with you many noble Citizens, who promote the Work of the Lord
therein. We cannot think of the Fall of your late dear Son-in-Law Good Mr.
Coupe.
, without Grief: He (together with Reverend Mr. How) set on foot that
charitable Work, which that Worshipful Knight Alderman Abney, has continued,
and is now committed to your Hand. Blessed be God for you! and you of him, that
so favor the Place of my Birth and Labors. May you and all that derive from
you, and all the bountiful Persons that join with you, be blessed indeed here
and hereafter! So prays, Noble Sir,

Greatly obliged, W. Bagshaw.

To the Reverend Mr. Samuel Angier, Mr. Robert Mosely, Mr. Gamaliel Jones, and
other endeared Fellow Laborers, at our beloved Chalsworth.
THO I rejoice in your Love to the Truth in Christ, I wonder at God's rich
Mercy, that inclines you to encourage my preaching it, which (alas!) savoureth
so much of the poor Earthen Vessel. O that I gave you more cause to own me! as
I do own your over-honouring me. May the Lord be in all our Meetings of a
Truth! May you long continue great Blessings to me, and to the Church of
Christ! May I in some measure serve the Lord, and (under him) you, and others:
who am, dear Sirs,

Unworthy to be called your Brother, W. Bagshaw.

Trading Spiritualized.
The Second Part.
The 17th Position.
THO Man be fallen through Sin, into Misery, and under the Displeasure of God,
God is free and willing to transact, deal, and hold Communion with him.

Had the Door of Hope been shut upon fallen Man, as it is on fallen Angels,
with what Sorrow might I write and others read? Psalm. 30.5. and 63.3.
Does not that Life of Man that is most worthy of the Name, consist in the
Favor of, and Fellowship with God?

Does not the Truth of this Position shine into right (and open) Eyes?

1. Romans 6.14. 2 Cor. 6. latter end.
What is the Language of the Dispensation of the Grace of God, styled the New
Covenant, and Grace it self, Grace in the Abstract? Is it not that God will
give himself to his People, and they give themselves to him? O blessed
Transaction!

2. Was not this Position exemplified, and the Truth of it evidenced, very soon
after Man's Apostasy? Genesis 3.15. Vid. Tact. Sac. p. 5, 6.
Even within the Doom denounced against the Seducer, was not Intimation given
of the promised Seed, the true Messiah? And did not the Light that then dawned,
V. Owenum de Theolog.
by degrees break forth toward a Noonday? Might not Man in that Catechism,
truly called Christian, (the first Edition of the Gospel) run and read, that
God was reconcilable to, and free to hold Converse with him.

3. Whence also is it that the Lord stands (and has so long stood) at the
Doors of Sinners Hearts, (...). Rev. 3.20.
and that knocking, earnestly entreating them to hear his Voice, See Rev,
Sedgwick on this.
and open (in a way of consent) to him, that he may by his Spirit and Grace
come into them, and they may have sweet and solacing Communion with him, set
forth under the Notion of their supping with him, and his supping with them?

4. Does not the Experience of thousands, and ten thousands, put a Seal to this
Point and Position? 1 John 1.3. (...).
Do they not feel the Lord communicating Grace to them, whilst they are
exercising Grace on him? Have they not Meat that the World knows not of, as
well as Work that it touches not with?

5. Can any thing more fully prove the Position in hand than this, that when
Man had rendered himself incapable of transacting with God in an immediate way;
Joh. 14.6. 1 John 2.2. and 4.8, 9.10.
God the Father provided a Mediator, sending (and setting forth) his Son as a
Propitiation, or Propitiatory Sacrifice, in Man's Nature which he assumed, that
so mutual Transactings might be?

And now I infer, 1st. That there lies before Man Matter (as of Thankfulness,
so) of Wonder. Does not Jehovah, who stooped low in convenanting and conversing
with Adam, whilst a Subject, condescend so far as to invite, Joh. 3.18. Romans
5.7, 8. 1 John 3.1.
as well as admit him and his Posterity to draw near to him, since he and they
were Rebels? Did not Man at once lose God and himself? and does not God seek,
that he may save him? having sent his own Son made of a Woman, made under the
Law, on that Account and Errand? O admirable!

The second Inference is, It is the Concern and Duty of all who hear the joyful
Sound of the Gospel, Ephesians. 2.4. Isa. 53.10.
to study the exceeding rich Grace which in and by the New Covenant is
displayed; on which this weak Hand has in Print touched? Is there not in that
Covenant and Grace a Foundation laid for Man's Intercourse with God?

1. See on this the Ark opened.
Has not this Covenant for the Spring of it his Grace, as well as free Love?
Does it not therein appear that he is Love?

2. Did not the Covenant of Redemption, or Suretiship (as choice Divines speak
and write) which was from Eternity, make way for that which is styled the
Covenant of Grace, in time?

3. Does not the New Covenant run much in a promising Vein and Strain? Is it
not styled in the most holy Writings the Promise, Acts 2.39.
and by good Writers a Bundle and Collection of Promises referring to the Life
that now is, and to that which is to come?

4. Does not God in (and by) this Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
bequeath and make over to Persons an Interest in himself, in every Person in
the Godhead, Quantus est quantus.
and in all the Attributes or Perfections attributed to God?

5. Does not that which is (and in a sound sense may be) called the special
receiving Condition of the Covenant, See Rev. Lorimer, Williams.
to wit, The Faith of God's Elect, both by Divine Institution, and in the
Nature of the Means, necessary to apply Christ, and interest in the Benefits
purchased by him, flow from free differencing Grace? Dare any of us gainsay
him, who says, Ephesians. 2.8.
It is not of our selves, Is it not the pure Gift of God?

The third Inference. They who are Recusants (though bearing the Protestant
Name, and appear Excusants) undervaluing God's Overtures and Offers to transact
with them, are in a most sinful and miserable Estate. Heb. 2.3. and 10.29.
How can they escape? what way in the World can they think of wherein they
should escape the Damnation of Hell? Who had rather trade in Trifles,
Temporals, (yea base Lusts) than drive a Trade with (and into) Heaven?

1. Does not God clearly see all the Pretensions to, and the Vanity of them, on
(and for) which they continue Slighters and Neglecters of his Grace?

2. Is he not concerned (in point of Honor) to bear witness against such
Slighters? Woe, woe, woe will be to them that live by and die in this Guilt?

The fourth Inference. They who have not entered into the way of transacting
with God, should bethink themselves, turning in to their own Hearts, and not
think of delaying any longer? Should they not forthwith (and upon the instant)
give their Hands, 2 Cor. 6.1.
and so themselves to the Lord? O that they waited and cried for Grace enabling
thereunto! Yet the Day of Grace lasts, yet the God of Grace wooeth: Modo and
Modo non habent Modum.
If it stir them so, that they are up and doing, will not the Lord be gracious
with them? But O how dangerous are Deferrings!

The last Inference is, Convinced, humbled, dejected ones may take much
Encouragement, and should in the face of many Discouragements, come to and lay
hold on God's Strength and Son, that they may be at Peace with him. Isa. 27.5.
Have they not his Word, (and can they desire a better Warrant?) that on their
so doing they shall be at Peace with him? Should they not in holy Duties go
for, and fetch Grace from him? Is it any Presumption in them to come to him,
seeing they have a particular Call, and a particular Promise, that they shall
be welcome? Tho they have much dishonored God by Sin, will not God count
himself much honored by their believing on him whom he has sent? Joh. 6.29,
30.


The 18th Position. That there might be Commerce and Communion between God and
fallen Man, he who was (and is) God, became Man.

Was not the Word (essential) the Word which is God, Joh. 1.14.
manifest in and made Flesh? Did he not partake of the Human Nature? Tho he
ceased not to be what he was, Non transmutando quod erat, etc. Boxhorn, p. 1, 2.
did he not begin to be what he was not? Blessed be God, great Men do now
undertake those who call (and count) themselves Wits, that disbelieve the
Mysteries which the Scripture mentions, among which is that great Mystery of
Godliness, or Religion. Dr. Tillotson. Dr. Stillingfleet.
Tho the Godhead was not altered, was not the Manhood assumed into Personal
Union with the second Person (or subsistent) in it? 1 Timothy 3.16.


Long have poor I been affected with the sententious Saying of a late Worthy,
Mr. Norton Orth. Evang.
whose Name is precious in both Englands. God and Man met in one Person, that
God and Man might meet in one (New) Covenant: I add, and so in one Communion.

That he who was the Son of God from Eternity, became the Son of Man in the
fullness of Time, is a Fundamental in Christianity, is argued at length
elsewhere. Here I hint;

1. Our choice Divines own, that being Anointed respects Christ's Human Nature,
tho it is said, Idem, and Bucanus.
the Name (or Word) Christ, points at the Person, consisting of both Natures.

2. Is it not intimated in the very first Edition of the Covenant of Grace,
that the Serpent's Head, or Power, Genesis 3.15.
was to be bruised by the Seed of the Woman? Tho the secondary Seed (or
Generation of the Faithful) are included as sharing in the Conquest, as to the
Benefit of it. No doubt, the primary Seed (to wit, Semen primarium.
Christ) is primarily intended as the Conqueror. And does not he who delivers
out of Satan's Hands by way of Power, Heb. 10.20, 21.
deliver out of the Hands of his Father's Justice by way of Price? and so make
way that God who is offended, and Man who has offended, may converse together?

That the Incarnation of the Son of God conduced to restore lapsed ruined Man,
as to Reconciliation, so to Communion with God, is evident.

Is there not such a vast (even infinite) distance between the All-glorious
Creator, and the Apostatized Creature, that Man could not think of such a thing
as an immediate Access and Address to God? Had not God made a low stoop to Man,
1 Timothy 2.5.
and so drawn nigh to him, how can we think that he should have adventured to
draw nigh to God?

I ask, 1. Is it not upon God's matching into (and with) our Nature, that he
deals in a familiar, friendly way with our Persons? See Mr. Jeanes his Mixture.
Do not deep Divines say, that the substantial Mediation must be presupposed,
as the Ground of the actual Mediation?

2. Quod non assumsit, non redemit.
If the Human Nature had not been assumed, had we who partake of it been
redeemed?

3. Is not the Human Nature in Christ the great Channel through which, as the
Divine Nature is the first Fountain from which, Grace flows, and is
communicated to Christians?

And so I infer, 1. That those Tenants are erroneous, Gal. 4.4.
and carry much of danger in them, which cast any Reflection on the Truth and
Worth of Christ's Human Nature. See Dr. Usher's Immanuel.
Was not the Son of God made of, and conceived in a Woman? Was not part of her
Substance sanctified, that it might be the holy Thing united to the second
Person in the Trinity?

The second Inference is, The Wonders showed in God's Word do far and far
transcend those called the Wonders of the World. Isa. 9.6.
Is not Wonderful one of Christ's Royal Titles, and that as he is a Son given
and a Child born to and for us? Was it not admirable, that his Father should
prepare for him a Body? That he who is Infinite should take on him the Human
Nature that is Finite; Romans 8.3. See the Engl. Annotat.
and that after Man was fallen, and so appear, tho not in sinful Flesh, yet in
true Flesh, and in the likeness of sinful Flesh? Yea, that he should take on
him as the Nature of Man, so the State of Infancy, and the natural Infirmities
thereof? Did not the holy Spirit wonderfully tie the Knot between the Divine
Person and Human Nature, See excellent Usher.
in the Bride-chamber of the Virgin's Womb?

The third Inference. Every Man and Woman to whom the Gospel comes will be
found inexcusable, who slighteth the Lord Jesus Christ, and lives without him,
and that Communion with his Father, Acts 4.12.
that is to be had in and through him.

Alas! 1. Some are Neglecters of, or negligent in the management of holy Duties
and Ordinances. Are they not as Atheists, or Formalists?

2. Not a few by living in Worldly, Fleshly, or Devilish Lusts, dishonor the
Human Nature, which God has highly honored.

Will not Christ in his Human Nature sit as Judge, Act. 17.31.
and condemn those that die in this Guilt? Will they not be thought worthy of
the sorest Punishment?

The fourth Inference. It Is the great Duty of Christians in the management of
all Duties (that they may maintain Communion with God in them) to eye and
employ the Lord Jesus Christ. Is he not a Non-such? Is any other Person
God-man, Immanuel? Is it not through him, Joh. 14.6.
and him alone, that God comes to Man, and Man goes to God?

The fifth Inference. Drooping Christians should lift up their Heads and
Hearts. Heb. 2.15. and 4.15. Manet Compassio, etc.
Is not God become Man, and will he not be tender of Man? From him that is Man
is received Satisfaction, that Man may receive Salvation.

The last Inference is. They who are in Heaven, do and well may admire the Lord
Christ. Is not he in their Nature gone to Heaven, Heb. 10.20 Joh. 14.2.
and that in the Nature of a Forerunner, to make a way for them thither; and
of an Harbinger, to take up Rooms for them there?

The 19th Position. That there might be Communion between God and fallen Man,
the Son of God, who became Man, became the Mediator between God and Man.

Tho I cannot swear to all that a learned Writer has said, Dr. Scot, vol. 2.
I heartily approve of his stiling the Doctrine of our Savior's Mediation, a
Fundamental Principle of Christian Duty; this Mediation being also the great
Channel for Conveyance of saving Mercy.

1. Heb. 12. ult.
Had Man been to have looked immediately on a provoked God, would he not have
appeared as a consuming Fire?

2. Had the Lord looked on and dealt with Man as in Filth, and under Guilt, had
not his fierce Wrath fallen on him?

3. Is not Christ, as Mediator, Joh. 14.6.
the way from and to his Father?

If Enquiry be, What Is implied in Christ's being a Mediator?

I answer; 1. If respect be had to the Greek Word so rendered, (...). 1 Timothy 2.5.
it is (as some think) a word peculiar to the Scriptures, and is said to
signify a Middler, or middle Person, a Person that steps into and stands in the
middle betwixt two or more that are at Variance, See Dr. Collings and Leigh
Crit. Sac.
in order to agreeing them.

2. We are hereby led to consider the Person under Consideration, Jesus Christ,
who partaking of the Nature of both, is equally distant from and drawing near
to God and Man, deals with God for Man, and with Man from God, having as
motion'd, so made Peace between them. And accordingly, great Men speak of him
as a Daysman, Ephesians. 2.13, 14.
that lays his Hand both on God and Man, that he may procure the Reconciliation
of God to Man by his Merit, and of Man to God by his Spirit.

Is not Christ rightly counted the true and full Mediator for Men of all
Nations, as Moses is styled typical (and in part) Mediator for one Nation?

Of his three Offices (or the three Branches of his Mediatorial Office) e're
long I may touch. Here I hint,

More learned Men than one have compared the Mediation of Christ to the Ladder,
Dr. Horton, etc.
whereof Jacob had the Vision. And are not five middle (or intermediate) Steps
or Rounds written on it?

1. See Rev. Brynsley on this.
Is not Christ as an Arbitrator or Umpire, that undertakes to take up the
Difference?

2. Is he not an Intercessor, or Solicitor, that deals with both sides in
order to that end?

3. Is he not a Surety that answers for the Wrongs done to his Father by his
Children? Heb. 7.22.


4. Is he not an Advocate, 1 John 2.2.
that pleads his Satisfaction for them?

5. Is he not a Ruler, Idem.
that gives as Laws, so Hearts to obey them?

The two first point at his Prophetic, the two following at his Priestly, and
the last at his Kingly Office.

And now I infer, 1. That Sin made a wide Breach between God and Man. Isa. 59.2.
Can any lower or other Mediator, save he that is God-Man, make it up?

Inf. 2. One Difference between the Covenant with Man when fallen, and Man in
his first Estate, is evident; the former being a Covenant of Amicitiae.
Friendship was made with Man immediately, See acute Blake.
the latter being a Covenant of Reconciliation, is made through a Mediator.

Inf. 3. No Man or Woman should think of transacting with God in an immediate
way, nor dare to go to the Father not having the Son in his Arms. Luther.
Was not the great Reformer afraid to think of an absolute God, or of God out
of Christ?

Inf. 4. It is the Concern of all who are for trading in Spirituals, to study
the Mediator. When they look upon him as God, he appears,

1. Able to bear the Wrath of his Father off from them.

2. To satisfy the Justice of his Father in behalf of them.

3. To appear and plead in his Presence for them.

4. To obtain Grace for: And,

5. To apply Grace to them. And when they look on him as Man, may they not see,
(1.) His Fitness to suffer for Man: And, (2.) His Readiness to pity Man: (3.)
His entering and taking possession of Glory in Man's Nature? And when they see
him as Immanuel, as having his Human Nature united to his Divine Person, they
may see flowing from this Union that which is called the Communion, (...).
or Communication of Properties: 1 Jo. 3.16.
so that his Godhead gave Virtue or Value to the Sufferings of his Manhood. Is
it not said, that God (he that is God) laid down his Life?

Inf. 5. Persons should try whether they be interested in this Mediator.

1. Do they feel, as their pressing Burden, the Breach Sin has made?

2. Do they despair of having it made up save by him?

3. Do they comply with his Proposals?

4. Do they employ him to the Father? Be it known, this Mediator is precious,
for there is but one!

Last Inference. Drooping Souls when they find themselves willing to receive
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.7.
should take the Comfort that belongs to them. Heb. 7.27.
Is not this Mediator able and willing to save 'em to the uttermost?

The 20th Position. That there might be Commerce and Communion between God and
fallen Man, he who is God-Man, as Mediator did and does exercise the three
Offices (or threefold Office) of Priest, Prophet, and King.

In that famous Psalm which carries the Title of David's Creed, Psalm. 110.
Symbolum Davidicum. See the excellent Dr. Reynolds on it.
as the Lord Christ in (and by) that choice Servant of his, exerted his
Prophetical Office, his Kingdom and Priesthood are expressly prophesied of.

Who that owneth true Christianity, questioneth the Truth of the Position now
before us? May its Usefulness be touched on in some Inferences.

Applicat. 1. I infer, That it is the near Concern of all who are for managing
the spiritual Trade, to meditate on the several Offices of Christ, See Gillespy
's Ark, the second Part.
viewing (and weighing) their exact Sutableness to the best Good of Man, and
their sweet Concurrence with one another, with respect to that, and the Glory
of God.

Was he not a Priest to God, Heb. 5.1.
that he might be a more meet Prophet to, and Prince over Men?

1. Is he not as a Prophet made unto his People Wisdom? 1 Cor. 1.30.
Is he not as a Priest made unto them Righteousness? Is he not as a King made
unto them Sanctification and Redemption?

2. Vid. Amesii Medullam. And Norton Orthod. Evang.
Does not his Prophetic Office tend to heal their Ignorance of God? Does not
his Priestly Office conduce to heal their Estrangment from him? Does not his
Kingly Office further the taking away of their Enmity against him?

3. Does not he as a Prophet make known the best things? Does not he as a
Priest make Purchase thereof? Does not he as a King make over those things?

4. Are there not in his Priesthood Evidences of his Love? Are there not in his
Prophecy Evidences of his Skill? Are there not in his Government Evidences of
his Power?

5. Does he not as a Prophet enlighten his Peoples Minds? Does he not as a
Priest engage their Affections? Does he not as a King incline, bow, and rule
their Wills?

Again; As to the second Particular pointed at, to wit, The Harmony of Christ's
Offices, and their concurring with one another in this grand Case and Cause, I
ask the following Questions.

1st. Does not the Priesthood of Christ render him more meet to discharge his
Prophetic and Kingly Offices? See Gillespy further.


1. Will not he, who as a Priest has dearly bought his People, plainly and
familiarly, as well as fully, teach them?

2. Will not he, that as a Priest has paid so great a Price for them, mildly,
and with a Golden (or rather gracious) Scepter sway them?

2dly. Are not the Priestly and Kingly Offices of Christ promoted by his being
a Prophet?

1. Does not this Prophet acquaint Persons with the Compleatness of his
Satisfaction and Intercession?

2. Does not this Prophet lead them into the Knowledge of him as a King, and of
his Laws and Ways?

3dly. Does not Christ's Kingly Office carry him through the Exercise of his
Prophecy and Priesthood?

1. Does not Christ his being a King, a Royal Martyr and Purchaser, render his
Sufferings more valuable?

2. Does not Christ's being a King put Virtue into his preaching? so that he
who gives out Laws, gives in Strength to obey them.

Inf. 2. Their Case is sinful, and so sad, who are willingly ignorant of
Christ, Christum si nescis, etc. Joh. 17.3. Phil. 3.8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.
or rest without a distinct, affectionate Knowledge of his Person and Offices:
What will other Knowledge avail if Christ be not known? Is not this the
Excellency of Knowledge? Does not Ignorance herein expose to Vengeance?

Last Inference is, They who would give (and have) an Evidence, that their
Trading is into (and in) Heaven, should make much use of Jesus Christ, Heb.
4.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 18.15. 2 Cor. 8.5.
and of every one of his Offices. Should they not daily employ this Priest,
learn of this Prophet, and submit to this King?

A touch on every one of these is to follow.

The 21st Position. That there might be Communion between God and fallen Man,
the Lord Jesus Christ who became a Mediator in the case, engaged in the Office
of a Priest.

1. Psalm. 110.4, 5. Heb. 7.1, 5. and 4.12, 14. and 3.1.
Was he not in Scripture-Prophecies spoke of as such?

2. Is he not in Scripture-History written of as such? Yea,

3. Has he not the Title of an Apostle, the highest Church Officer under the
New Testament; and of the High Priest, to whom some Employs were peculiar under
the Law?

That this Priest procures (yea promoteth) Communion between God and Man,
cannot well be questioned.

1. Is it not rightly said, That the Heart of Christ's Mediation lies in his
Priestly Office and the Exercise thereof? So solid Strong.


For, 2. Does he not as a Priest deal with God for Man, Heb. 5.1.
that he may as a Prophet and King deal with Man from God?

That this may be more evidenced, we will look at the Resemblance that lies
between Christ and the High Priest, Heb. 5.6.5.1.
that was Aaronical, and glance at the higher Priesthood of Melchizedec, 7.26.
of whose Order he was, by whom he was much typified.

As to the former: Was he not, (1.) Taken from among Men? (2.) 1.9.9.12.
Unblemished? (3.) Called to his Office? (4.) Anointed? (5.) Richly arrayed?
(6.) Bearing the Names of the People on his Breast? (7.) Entering into the Holy
of Holies? Surely he who has all these Qualifications, is qualified to deal
betwixt his Father and his Children?

As to the latter; The Comparison is carried further than I design. Who hint,
Vid. Outramum de Sacrificiis.
(1.) That Melchizedec's Priesthood did not pass from one to another: And is
not that of Christ unchangeable? (2.) Melchizedec gave Abraham his Blessing;
and does not Christ bless Abraham's Children so as none else can do?

And now I infer, 1. That they are forsakers of their own Mercy, in being
Slighters of the Heavenly Trade, who make not good use of Christ's Priestly
Office; into which Count (alas!) great numbers fall. Is not this their case?

1. Who are for continuing in a course of Sin. Psalm. 66.18
If Persons regard Iniquity in their Hearts, will God the Son present, or his
Father accept their Prayers?

2. Who live in the wilful and ordinary neglect of known Duties. Were not they
to bring their Sacrifices to the Priests, Mat. 8.4.
that would have them presented to God?

3. Who rely on any other Mediation; as if any one, 1 Timothy 2.5.
save this High Priest, could avail, as to satisfying Divine Justice, and
meriting Divine Favor.

4. Who refuse Christ's other Offices. Will he save those who will not be
taught and ruled by him?

O that Persons considered, that if they slight Christ's Love, they shall (to
their Sorrow) fall under his Power! and what will be the end of those that
abuse the Priesthood of Christ, to the encouraging of their Sin?

Infer. See Rev. Flavel 's Vind. vind. p. 183.
2. It is our great Concern to meditate on the Greatness of our great High
Priest. What were the highest Priests under the Law to him?

1. Is not he God-Man? 2. Had he any Moral Blemish at all? 3. Was not his Call
to Office extraordinary? 4. Was not his Anointing by the Holy Ghost? 5. Is he
not clothed with Glory? 6. Are not his People in his Heart? 7. Is he not
entered the Heaven of Heavens?

I add, 1. He is but one, Heb. 7.9. Chapters.
and he is for ever.

2. He made his own Blood and Soul an Offering.

Inf. 3. They may hear the most High, saying to them, Comfort ye, comfort ye,
Isa. 40.1.
who have received (and do give) themselves to this great High Priest.

1. Tho they meet with many, and those sore Sufferings.

2. Tho they complain of the Remains (and Rebellings) of Sin. Upon their
employing this High Priest, they shall by sweet Experience find;

(1.) That as he has not See Mr. Durant. 1 John 2.1.
put off his Priestly Garments, he is pleading on their behalf.

(2.) That his pleading being grounded on his dying, it is (and will be)
prevalent: Him the Father hears, Joh. 11.42
and accepts always.

The 22d Position. That there might be Commerce and Communion between God and
fallen Man, he who assumed Man's Nature, was in that Nature sacrificed on Man's
behalf.

1. That Christ, our Passover, being to us in truth what the Passover was in
Type, was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.8.
is written as with a Sunbeam.

2. That the new and living way to the Holy of Holies (or Heaven) whereof the
holiest place in the Temple was a Figure, Heb. 10.19, 20.
was opened and consecrated by the Blood of Jesus, who was made a Sacrifice; he
that runs may read.

I am aware, that a late learned Writer made account that Christ, Dr. Nicholson
on the Catech. p. 42.
as exercising his Priestly Office, put forth four Acts, to wit, Offering,
Praying, Atoning, and Blessing. Poor I, who am much in the Road, reduce his
Acts, as a Priest, to two Heads: See the excellent Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p.
424, etc.
Intercession, whereof (if God will) e're long: And Oblation, concerning which
I shall offer some Hints here.

In the Creed, called the Apostles, we all profess that Christ died; and it is
a great Point and part of our Belief, that he died as a Sacrifice. Was there
not in Christ's Death all that was essential to a Sacrifice? Ephesians. 5.2.


1. Was he not (as were the Sacrifices) set forth by Divine Order?

2. Vid. Owenum and Outramum de Sacrificiis.

And Rev. Hurst.


Was he not (as they were) offered to his Father?

3. Was not his Soul, together with his Body, made an Offering?

4. Was not he (as they were) slain, and (so far) destroyed?

5. As in the offering of Sacrifices, there was something peculiar to a Priest:
Romans 3.25. Heb. 10.14
Was there not this Specialty in this great Sacrifice? Isa. 53.10. See the
Funeral of the Mass.
This great High Priest did offer himself as Man, and through his being God,
the Sacrifice of his Manhood was rendered of infinite Value.

In infer, 1. That all that are for trading into Heaven, and with the God of
Heaven, should muse on, that they may make use of Christ as a Sacrifice.
Sacrifices, as mentioned in the Old Testament, are distinguished as follows.

1. There were those styled Patriarchal; So worthy Mr. Waterhouse.
such as were used from the time of Adam to that of Moses.

2. Judaical ones; such as God, Genesis 4.4. Levit. 1.
by Moses, did appoint, and the People of Israel observed.

3. Evangelical ones; 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.16
into which Count fall Exercises of Piety and Charity.

The Sacrifices of the two former sorts were Types of Christ, and those of the
third sort are tendered through Christ the great Expiatory, Propitiatory and
Atoning Sacrifice. That Christ's Sacrifice was such, is argued;

1. Romans 3.25 See acute Trueman on this.
Does not his being called a Propitiation, which implies Satisfaction, and
includes Atonement, denote this?

2. Is it not expressly said, that he puts and purges away Sins by the
Sacrifice of himself? Heb. 1.3.


3. Was he not made Sin (that is, 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.
a Sin-Offering) for the removal of the Guilt of Sin from those that are his?

4. See the eminent Dr. Stillingfl. against Crellius.
Did not the great Sacrifices that were Types of him, particularly the slain
Goat, signify this?

(1.) Were they not used with respect to Sin?

(2.) Levit. 1.4.
Were they not substituted on behalf of Sinners?

When they who brought them laid their Hands on their Heads, So Rev. Maynard.
did they not thereby confess their Desert of Death, and declare the
Translation of the Punishment?

Inf. 2. It is our great Concern (as great as that of our precious Souls) to
make good use of his Sacrifice.

And so, 1. To grieve for and under the Burden and Body of Sin, Heb. 10.4, 5,
6, 7, 8.
which cannot be taken away save by it.

2. To own that they might most justly have been made Sacrifices to Divine
Wrath and Justice. Psalm. 130.3


3. To apply this great Sacrifice, to and for the great Ends for which it was
offered.

4. Gal. 2.20.
To give up their Lusts to be sacrificed through Virtue thence derived.

God forbid that any should use (and so abuse) this Sacrifice as a Shelter for
their other Sins, or for their Slothfulness in the Business of Religion: Exodus
21.14.
Would any Sacrifice of old exempt some Offenders from Death? Were the Cities
of Refuge provided for wilful Murderers?

Last Inference. They who are hearty and diligent in driving the spiritual
Trade (notwithstanding their short Fallings) should be of good cheer. When the
Formality and Self-Righteousness of others will not, Romans 8.33, 34.
this great Sacrifice will set them to rights in the Eye of God's Law and
Justice.

The 23d Position. The Commerce and Communion between God and Man, is no little
furthered by the Intercession of Christ, who is God-man.

One of our late great Men has well said, Renowned Baxter.
That the Intercession of Christ is a great Article of the Christian Faith;
whose Words do also imply, that Christian Practice (or the spiritual Trade) is
thereby promoted.

1. Do we not owe thereunto the Application that is made of Pardon, Joh. 14.16.
Power and Peace to us; yea and the Effusion of the Spirit on us?

2. Rev. 8.3, 4.
Would any of our Prayers (or other Services) ascend before the Throne of God,
were not Incense, or Intercession joined to them?

Concerning the Intercession of Christ, be it remarked:

1. 1 John 2.1. Joh. 14.16.
The Act of Intercession (and accordingly the Greek word translated Advocate,
or Paraclete) is applied both to the second and third Person in the Godhead,
whereon the Glosses of the Godlylearned deserve weighing.

(1.) Intercession is ascribed to the Spirit, Dr. Arrowsmith in a Sermon.
as an Adviser; to Christ, as Mediator.

(2.) The Spirit makes Intercession in us, Christ intercedeth for us.

(3.) Romans 8.26.
The holy Spirit helps our Infirmities, Heb. 7.24.
and directs us in drawing up our Requests on Earth; See acute Hollingworth.
the Lord Jesus prefers them, and pleads our Cause in Heaven.

So that, as a learned Man notes, being an Advocate is attributed to the holy
Spirit in a figurative Sense; but to be our proper Advocate interceding with
the Father on our behalf, Dr. Outramus.
is peculiar to Christ.

Again; The Advocateship and Intercession of Christ is founded on his having
been a Propitiation, 1 John 2.1, 2.
or Satisfactory Sufferer.

One to whom I even now referred, writes of and for Christ's offering himself
as a Sacrifice for our Sins in the Celestial Sanctuary, into which he is
entered; but, he withal owneth, that what he calls an Oblation, does not
really differ from what we (with Scripture) call Intercession, or his
presenting himself as one that was slain, and his Blood and Offering as
meritorious before his Father.

I rejoice, that the worthy Person expresses his dislike of the Followers of
Socinus, who yet express their Minds in some of his words: He holds (what
they deny) that the Lord Jesus suffered in our stead, Nostro loco.
and does commend and render acceptable, as our Persons, so our Performances.

There is a Scripture which the Socinians pervert, to wit that that says, Heb.
8.4.
If Christ was on Earth, he should not be a Priest; arguing from hence against
the Current of other Scriptures, that in his Death he offered not a
Satisfactory Sacrifice.

1. May not the words on the Earth, Vid. Arnoldum and Vindic. Evang.
be construed thus, of an Earthly Quality and Condition?

2. Did being on Earth incapacitate for the Legal Priesthood?

3. Is not this the Intendment of the Holy Ghost, that if Christ had been only
such a Temporal Priest as the Jewish ones were, and had not shed such precious
Blood, as that he could (and did) take the Virtue and Merit of it into Heaven,
and there present it, he had not been so complete a Priest as he is?

I infer, 1. That their Case is deplorable who set light by Christ's
Intercession, and consequently neglect spiritual Traffic. And,

(1.) Can they plead, Not guilty, Rev. 8.3, 4.
who either do not use solemn Prayer in their Houses and Closets, or do not use
it in a spiritual way? Is it not with (and not without) the Prayers of Saints
that Incense ascends?

(2.) Is it not Guilt on them who are the Men and Women of the World, of a
Worldly Complexion and Disposition? Does Christ pray for such as for those that
are given him? Joh. 17.9.
Can they with Comfort look to Heaven, or for special Communications of Grace
from Heaven, by whom Christ's Intercession is so undervalued?

Inf. 2. They who groaning under the Burden and Body of Sin, and breathing
after sanctifying Grace, trade into Heaven, are furnished with Matter and
Ground of Encouragement.

1. Does not their Advocate thoroughly understand their Case, Joh. 2. ult.
Condition and Concerns?

2. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.
Is he not most compassionate and tender of them?

3. Is he not with the Father? always ready to present and plead their Cause in
Heaven? 1 John 2.2.


4. Has he not that Interest in his Father which will render his pleading as
effectual as continual?

5. Joh. 11.42. Luke 22.32
Is he not an Advocate for every one that is penitent, as if he had but one to
plead for?

O that they who are thus privileged did better understand and improve this
Privilege!

The 24th Position. Through the Exercise of Christ's Prophetic Office,
Commerce and Communion between God and Man is much furthered.

1. Does not Christ as a Prophet show, that as such Communion may be held, so
the true and ready way of holding it?

2. Ephesians. 2.8. Illuminati Beneficio and Doctrina Christi.
Does not Christ as a Prophet teach People, and lead them into, and in that
way? Are we not in and by the holy Scriptures, and choice Catechisms grounded
thereon, acquainted with his Teaching?

That it is, 1. Outward, Joh. 5.39.
to the Ear and Eye, revealed to Persons.

2. Ephesians. 1.17.
Inward, to the Heart, by the holy Spirit, who reveals Christ in Persons,
Joh. 16.13.
leading them into Truth, showing its Glory and Tendency. On these Particulars,
particular Hints may follow.

Here I infer, 1. That all those who are for trading with (and into) Heaven,
are nearly concerned well to study (and much to improve) the Prophetic Office
of Jesus Christ.

That they who need Help in this noble Study may not want it, See Wilson 's
Dictionary.
be it considered, the word Prophet is not always taken in one sense.

1. Tit. 1.12.
Are not Heathen Poets spoken of as Prophets?

2. 1 Samuel 10.5. compared with 19.20. Hoornbeck de Indep. p. 285.
Is not Prophesying by Christians construed concerning Singing?

3. Has not a Dr. Stillingfleet 's Orig. Sac.
learned Writer written, that the proper Notion of a Prophet is not a
Fore-seeer, or Fore-teller of such future things as we call Contingencies; but
having in an immediate way Divine Revelation?

4. Are there not directing as well as predicting Prophets?

5. Mat. 10.41
Do not some hold, that the Prophets set before Evangelists, and next after
Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11.
had a peculiar Gift for interpreting Scripture-Prophecies?

Clear it is, that both as to foretelling, and as to instructing, Christ is a
Nonesuch.

1. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Isa. 7.14.
If we regard his Person, Was any other Prophet the begotten Son of God?

2. As to Revelations made and given by him, See Roobotham. Heb. 1.1, 2. Joh.
1.8.

See Dr. Arrowsmith on it.

Dr. Owen on Heb. p. 17, 18.


did he not excel?

(1.) Did not he being in his Father 's Bosom, know his Secrets?

(2.) Had not he a full Comprehension of all the Revelations that he had?

(3.) Did not the Spirit of Prophecy so rest on him, that he was always ready
to receive Revelations?

Again; As to his teaching others, what Prophet came near him?

1. Are they able to teach further than he enableth them?

2. When they are teaching, Isa. 48.17.
is it not he that teaches to profit?

3. Whereas they own their Weakness, he teaches with all Power. Rev. 3.7.


4. Are the best Teachers any more than his Ushers?

5. When they teach a little in much time, he teaches much in a moment.

For, 6. Their Teachings take place according to the Hearers Light; Joh. 1.9.
he gives (and is) Light.

And now I hint, 1st. That this Office and Employ of Christ should be improved.
Acts 3.22.
Him should all that call themselves his, hear in the best manner.

(1.) Humbly, Heb. 5.11, 12. and 4.2.
bewailing their being hard Learners, and having learned so little.

(2.) Hungringly, that they may hear his Voice, and not only that of his
Ministers.

(3.) Believingly, acting Faith on his Merit, that his Spirit may teach them.

(4.) Honestly, resolving (through Grace) to be as Hearers, so withal Lovers,
Learners, and Livers in and after hearing.

(5.) Reverentially, bearing in Mind, that he who is their Prophet, Psalm. 45.11
is the Prince of Princes.

Infer. 2. We are to keep a due (and so great) distance from the Tents of
Socinus and his Followers.

1. See Polhill 's Answ. p. 573.
Do not they deny that inward Illumination or Teaching of Christ, which has
the Pre-eminence?

2. Vid. Arnoldum, p. 344.
Do not they affirm, that he was taken up from Earth to Heaven, that he might
there learn the Mind of God?

3. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Do they not confine his Teaching to New-Testament-Times? Whereas we with (and
from) holy Writ, are taught, See Dr. Owen 's Vindic. p. 376, etc. 1 Pet. 1.11
that tho his Human Nature received Light, he who Assumed it, is (as is his
Father) Light it self; and the Prophets as well as the Apostles had their Light
from him.

Inf. 3. They are to be pitied (O that they did pity themselves!) who have it
not in design to honor and learn of Christ as the Prophet. Does he not stand
at their Doors, Acts 3.21. Rev. 3.20.
and that knocking, whilst some shut the outward Door of the Ear on him, not
affording him an hearing, and others will afford him no more? Does not their
wilful Impenitency in inward (if not open) Sins, keep the inner Door of the
Heart shut on him? How will they answer this at the great Day?

The last Inference. Humble Christians who complain of their less Skill in the
Heavenly Trade, should take Comfort. Has not the best of Teachers undertaken
to be their Teacher? Isa. 48.17.
Should they not wait that he would be so?

The 25th Position. The holy Scriptures given out by the Church's great
Prophet, do much promote the Converse and Communion between God and Man.

1. (...) Romans 3.1. 1 Kings 6.5-31.
Are not the Scriptures the written Oracles of God, as distinguished from the
Oracle which is styled vocal? Were the Heathen Oracles fit to be named the same
day with these Divine Ones?

(1.) Are not these Oracles declarative as of Man's Duty, so of God's Love? May
not they who consult with them (and with God in them) clearly find the former
set before them in the Law, Vid. Armillam Catech. Et Wilkinsonii Concionem ad
Clerum.
and the latter displayed in and by the Gospel?

(2.) Are not these Oracles predictive of Man's Destiny, as well as directive
as to his Duty? May not Persons who lay the Scriptures and their Hearts (or
State) together, Joh. 5.39.
have a Prospect how it shall be and go with them for ever?

Again; Are not the Scriptures the choice Privilege of Persons? Among the
Advantages of the Jews of old, Romans 3.1.
is not this counted the chief?

1. Psalm. 119.105. Joh. 6.63, 65.
Are not the Scriptures a Light both to their Eyes and Feet?

2. Are they not of an enlivening (as Well as enlightening) Nature?

3. Romans 15.4. Scripturae tuae deliciae meae, said an Ancient.
Are they not as Cordials for chearing, as well as Food for nourishing?

I infer, 1. That it is incumbent on all Christians, to be well settled and
satisfied, that the Scriptures are from the Inspiration of God, and so of the
highest Authority. Can they who call this in question (tho they call themselves
Deists) through them converse with God?

Many have excellently, See ingenious Mr. Lee.
and one lately enlarged on this Subject.

Poor I hint: The Scriptures carry Divine Characters and Impressions savouring
sweetly and strongly of the holy Spirit. Is not his Testimony to the Gospel,
which (as to us) is the Marrow of the Scripture? See Renowned Baxter passim.
(1.) Antecedent, by Prophecy. (2.) Concomitant, by Miracles. (3.) Subsequent,
by Success. May I not add, There is a Witness styled Constitutive? Se and alia
manifestat.
Does not this Light show and discover it self,

1. In its sublime Doctrines, only revealed in (and by) them?

2. Vid. Tact. Sac.
In its Majestic Style? Does no^ Power accompany Plainness?

3. 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 4.12.
In its pure Scope and Drift, which is to abase Man, and to exalt God i^ Christ?

4. In its exact Harmony, there being a real Agreement where there is a seeming
Difference?

Would bad Men or Angels have discovered things so holy? Could good Men or
Angels have discovered things so high as abound therein?

Inf. 2. It is greatly to be wished that they who by the Testimony of the
Church were induced to think well of the Scriptures, and by Arguments fetched
out of it are convinced, that it is from Heaven, did wait for that Witness of
the Spirit which is styled effective. Effectivum, Dr. Arrowsmith.
O that the Eyes of our Understandings were cleared to see together with the
Truth the Glory of Scriptures! O that our Wills were persuaded to be ruled and
governed by them! What is a mere notional or traditional to a pure spiritual
and effectual Knowledge of them?

Inf. 3. They who cry so loud, To Rome, To Rome, give us cause to cry against
their Way and Tenets. Do they not reflect foully on Christ's Prophetic Office,
and that as exercised in giving out the holy Scriptures?

Do they not charge them, 1. See even the Representer himself.
With Obscurity and Darkness? as if God had wrote and sent a Letter from Heaven
to Earth, which the Saints on Earth cannot read and understand without the
Pope's Spectacles.

2. With Imperfection and Defectiveness? as if they were not a Rule, but needed
the Eek of their Traditions in order to acquainting Persons with Necessaries to
Salvation.

Inf. 4. They are in a very ill case who cannot trade into Heaven, through the
small Esteem they have, and the little or no use they make of the holy
Scriptures. Some do scarce read, others do not search them. How few
(comparatively) are conducted by them to leave every Sin, to follow the Lord in
all Services, and in close of all to exalt Christ?

Will they not be judged at the last day by the Words which they slight in
this? Joh. 12.48


Last Inference. Comfort falls to their share, who in order to the driving of
the Heavenly Trade, Psalm. 119.24.
make the Scriptures (or Counsels of God) their Counselors Dr. Hammond. 1 John
2.20, 27.
, or the Men of their Counsels.

1. Have they not an Unction from the Holy One which shall abide?

2. Shall they not have Comfort when it will be most comfortable? Romans 15.4.


The 26th Position. The Commerce and Communion between God and Man, is much
furthered through the inward Teachings of God's Spirit, whom Christ as a
Prophet employeth.

1. Does not God evidence his Kindness to Men, in that through Christ he
communicates to them the Spirit of Revelation? Does not the Apostle beg this
as a choice Boon for the Ephesians? Ephesians. 1.17.


2. Are not Men by the Spirit, as a Revealer and Teacher, and 5.8, 9.
fitted to exercise Graces on the Lord, and to derive Grace from him?

That Christ teaches Christians by his Spirit is evident. 1 John 2.20, 27.
Vid. Polum ad locum.
Is not this the Interpretation of that Phrase, their having an Unction (or
Anointing) from the holy One? Is not the holy Spirit compared to Oil? Does not
the word Christians point at Anointed Ones?

I grant, the Oil of Christ's Grace and Spirit has a softning and cheering
Virtue: Exodus 25.6.
But as Oil was used for Light in the Sanctuary of old, the Unction which the
Apostle treats of is by him expounded concerning teaching.

1. When Ministers are endeavoring to open the Scriptures, is it not the
Spirit that opens their Understandings, Isa. 61.1, 2.
to conceive aright the Mind and Meaning of God in them? Psalm. 45.7. comp. with
Joh. 3.33. and 1.41.


2. When Ministers have studied to preach profitably, is it not the Spirit that
teaches Persons to profit?

The first Use is for Caution. Act. 11.26.
Take we heed, lest we take in (or touch with) those who under pretense of
crying up the teaching of the Spirit, cry down learning by the Word, or through
the qualified and called Ministers thereof.

1. Joh. 16.13. Dan. 10.21
Is not the Spirit of Christ the Spirit of Truth? and does he not lead into,
and according to the Scripture of Truth?

2. Are not those two Orders issued out together, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20.
Quench not the Spirit, Despise not Prophesyings? Does being taught of God
exclude his teaching by Men? And if the Sanctified have learned that first
Principle about knowing the Lord, does it follow that they need not that any
Man should (under him) further teach them?

The second Use is for Information.

The first Branch is, There is a great Difference between spiritual Persons and
others. Are not the former the excellent of the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. and 105.15.
and among his anointed ones, and so prepared for driving a spiritual Trade
with him? Are others so?

The second Branch is; It is the Duty of us all to enquire, whether Drops of
the holy Oil, or Measures of the teaching Spirit are fallen on us.

Surely, Prove. 20.13.
1. The holy Spirit renders his Hearers and Scholars attentive: Have not they
hearing Ears?

2. Mat. 13.13 Job 42.5, 6.
He makes such as learn of him, meek and humble. Are they puffed up as others?

The third Use is for Reproof. 1. This falls fully on those who make the
Teachings of the Spirit matter of Scorn and Drollery, 2 Pet. 3.3.
and brand those as Fanatics and Franticks that wait for them.

2. They also fall under the Lash, Jam. 1.21. Rev. 2.7.
who being Hearers are only so. They hear the Voice of the Servants of God; but
to hear what the Spirit says by them, they are not sollicitous.

May it be well weighed, 1. The holy Spirit is the Comforter, Joh. 16.7.
and can they who slight him expect Comfort from him, or receive it from a
lower Hand?

2. The Spirit is the Spirit of Glory. 1 Pet. 4.14. Isa. 63.8, 9.
Shall they have Glory from him hereafter, who do willingly want him here? Will
he not be to Despisers and Vexers a sore Enemy?

The fourth Use is of Exhortation.

The first Branch bends toward those that are willingly Strangers to the
holy Spirit, and his Teachings. Go they directly (and in a Scripture-Path) to
Christ for Supply?

1. Feeling, that naturally they want spiritual Sight.

2. Grieving, Ephesians. 5.8. Job 36.12.
that they have so long rested in this State.

3. Fearing, Mat. 8.12.
lest they should be taken out of the World with their Eyes shut, and so pass
from inner into outer and utter Darkness.

4. Waiting, that in the Use of Means on Christ's Account the Spirit may be
conferred on them.

The second Branch bears what is cordial, 1 Jo. 2.27.
and calls on God's Anointed Ones to take it.

1. Shall not they be taught the most needful and useful Points?

2. Will they not find the Spirit's Teachings attended with Clearness, Isa.
32.3.
and that they are of a growing nature?

The 27th Position. The Kingly Office of Jesus Christ does much contribute to
the Converse and Communion that is between God and Man.

1. Cant. 1.4.
Do not Christians in (and by) their Services own this King?

2. Psalm. 45.11, 14.
Does not this King on his Servants confer choice Favors?

3. See spiritual Troughton thereon. Psalm. 110.3, 4, 5.
Are not they maintained and defended in the Enjoyment of Privileges, and
Exercise of Services, by his Royal Power? Are not their Enemies (especially
spiritual) by that Power subdued?

I infer, 1. That the Opposition that is made to Christ's Kingly Office, is to
be made matter of mourning. Are not the Opposers thereof opposite to
themselves, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3.
and to the spiritual Trade which they should with others drive? O that some
Words of truly worthy Persons had the Weight due to them!

One said, Dr. Holmes.
Very few (if any) Ministers dare preach up the Extent of this Office, so
little can many brook this Doctrine.

Another in a small Piece of no small Worth, Mr. Beadle.
having made Enquiry (in Times better than in some late Reigns) what was the
great and crying Sin of England, Nolumus hunc regnare.
did at last pitch on the great Enmity to Christ's Kingdom, and Government of
his Church; and the prevailing Cry, We will not have this Man to reign over us,
Luke 19.27.
as that Crime.

Be it (as it is) known, 1. That they who refuse Christ's inward Government in
and over their own Souls, are not likely to be rightly zealous for that
Church Government that can lay Claim to Divine Institution.

2. They who will not submit to Christ's Golden Scepter, must expect to feel
the Weight of his Iron Rod. Will he not break those that will not bend?

Inf. 2. The Children of Zion, Psalm. 149.2.
who are for spiritual traffiquing, should much rejoice in Christ as their
King. Is there not a Cause, the greatest Cause? Is any other King comparable to
him?

1. Does he not choose his Subjects, Joh. 15.19 1 Jo. 4.19.
and cause them to choose him?

2. Does he not give them as Laws, Psalm. 110.3
so Hearts to obey them? Can any other King write Laws in the inner Parts?

3. Does he not as forbid the Acts, See Roobotham on 1 Pet. 2.7.
so by degrees take away the Jews Pretenses?

4. Psalm. 89.29, 30, 31.
Does he not as correct their Disloyalties, so bless that Correction?

5. Does he not as call them to, so qualify them for the holy War?

6. Romans 14.17.
Will he not as preserve spiritual Power, so create spiritual Peace in them?

7. Will he not so reward as (at last) to crown them, and that with Glory?

I will ask some farther Questions about Christ's Kingdom.

1. Luke 17.21.
Is not his Kingdom spiritual, and within Men, in their Consciences?

2. Psalm. 2.8.
Is it not extensive and universal? and his Dominion over all. Rev. 19.16.
(1.) All Persons, (even Kings.) (2.) All Nations. (3.) All Ages. (4.) All
Creatures? Is not he who is Head of the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Isa. 9.7.
Head over all things for the Church's good?

3. Is not his Kingdom everlasting? can there be any end of it?

I add, What can be eminent in a King, that is not eminently in Christ? (1.)
What Extraction or Pedigree? (2.) What Anointing? (3.) What Qualities in the
best of Earthly Kings are to be compared to those of his?

For Wisdom, for Courage, for Righteousness, for Mercy, for Conduct and
Management, who comes near him?

Inf. 3. All that do rejoice in Christ as their King, should have their Joy
duly qualified.

May it be, 1. Reverential, and mixed with holy Fear. Psalm. 2.11.
Are not the highest Subjects infinitely below this Sovereign?

2. Spiritual; reaching, Gal. 5.22.
yea rising in (and from) their Spirits, and savouring sweetly of God's Spirit.

3. Strengthening, Neh. 8.10.
and enabling their Souls to run after him.

4. Raising, Mat. 25.4.
so that their Souls mount up toward that State that is styled Joy.

The last Inference. Mat. 6.9, 10.
Christ's Subjects that are spiritual Traders, should pray (as they are taught)
that his Kingdom may come.

1. That the Word or Scepter thereof may be lifted up.

2. That the Body of Israel, Psalm. 110.2. and 14. ult.
with the Fullness of the Gentiles, may bow to him.

3. That his Spirit in (and with) his Word may ride on conquering and to
conquer. Revel. 6.2.


4. That Magistrates who rule by, may rule for Christ.

5. That in order to the flourishing of Churches; (1.) Col. 2.5.
Officers may be established. (2.) Order maintained. And, (3.) Censures
exercised.

The 28th Position. Through the Humiliation of Christ, spiritual Trading, or
Communion between God and Man, is no little furthered.

Did not the Humiliation of Christ show most evidently, That notwithstanding
Man's Fall, 1 John 4.9, 10.
both he the Son, and his Father, were willing to transact with him? Quo vilior
pro nobis, eo charior nobis.
In this among (in this above) other things, was the Love of the Father
manifested, That he gave his only begotten Son, that we might live through his
Death, and be exalted through his being humbled: Velatio Deitatis Revelatio
Charitatis.
And when he stooped lowest, did not his Love (to our sight) rise highest?

2. Does not the Humiliation of the Son of God greatly encourage the Sons and
Daughters of Men to draw nigh to God? Dr. Manton.
Do we not read under one of the best of Hands, that as by the Incarnation of
Christ may be seen a way for removing Discouragements that arise from Man's
distance from God, so from his satisfactory Passion, is a way made for taking
away Man's Difference and Disagreement with God. Hebr. 10.19, 20, 21.
Seeing Heaven has come down to Earth, Men and Women on Earth may more boldly
go up to Heaven.

I infer, 1. That Christ's State of Humiliation is a Subject well worthy of the
spiritual Traders Study. May the Touches given thereon have becoming
Consideration!

1. Tho in the strictest sense, he that is God, and so most High, cannot
intrinsically be humbled; Vid. Amesii Med. p. 81. and Baxteri Methodum, Part 3.
p. 11.
and Christ's humbling himself is brought in as following his being found in
fashion as a Man; yet, as to us (and as to appearance) God is said to humble
himself: and when the Son of God took on him the form of a Servant, he made
himself of no Reputation, he verily nothing'd himself, Phil. 2.7, 8. (...).
Psalm. 113.6
and so was extrinsecally and reputatively low.

2. The stooping of Christ after his Incarnation is worth wondering at.

(1.) 2 Cor. 8.9.
Had not he humbling Circumstances attending his Birth? Did not he who was and
is rich, become exceeding poor?

As a Creature is a poor thing to the Creator, See profound Dr. Bates his
Harmony. Luke 2.24. compared with Levit. 12. (...). Mat. 2.13, 22. Mark 6.
and Man a Creature lower than the Angels, and Man fallen lower than in his
first Estate.

1st. Was not the blessed Virgin Mother (tho well descended) so poor, that her
Offering was two young Pigeons?

2dly. Did not the most holy Babe first breath in an out-House, belonging to an
Inn, and fall from the Womb into the Manger?

3dly. See Dr. Lightfoot.
Was not the Raiment he was wrapped in so coarse, that by some the Greek Word
is rendered Rags.

Again, (2.) Was it not wonderful that our dear Lord, who was early made a
Fugitive when and where he settled, should go in the count of a Carpenter's
Son? and (as some think) work in that Trade?

(3.) Can we stay on this side admiring, Gal. 4.4.
when we look on the Lord Jesus as made under the Law, his own Law, yea, the
Ceremonial Law, that typified him, having Blood drawn in his Circumcision?

(4.) Was it not part of his Humiliation to be assaulted by the Tempter, Mat.
4. the beginning.
and that with such horrid Temptations?

(5.) Was it not so also that he endured the Ignominy that attended the verbal
and real Contradiction of Sinners against himself? See on this Dr.
Stillingfleet on Heb. 12.3, 4.


(6.) Was not his entering the Gates of Death (who gave his Enemies Life)
wonderful Humiliation?

1st. Was not his dying a prime completing Act of Obedience?

2dly. Phil. 2.7, 8.
Was not his being made an Offering in his Soul a great Abasement?

3dly. Were not his penal Sufferings, as in all Parts, so from all Hands?

I add, Isa. 53. ult.
1. Was not his Burial (or being brought to the Grave) an Ingredient to his
Humiliation?

2. Was not so also that he descended into Hell, Vid. Vcetium de descensu.
in the mildest sense that most Divines take the words in?

Inf. 2. In vain do they pretend to be spiritual Traders, who do not look for
and long after Communion with Christ in his Humiliation, particularly in his
Death.

Is not this their case, 1. Zech. 12.10.
Who are not for steeping their Souls in Humiliation for Sin, and that as
against Christ? And theirs,

2. Who are not for dying to Sin daily, Gal. 2.20.
thoroughly and voluntarily? And are they so who live and lie in open Sins, or
do not keep up a Watch against inward ones?

May such Persons consider, that if they thus live and die, Christ's
Humiliation will aggravate their Condemnation.

The last Inference. All truly good Persons should learn the proper Lessons
that Christ's Humiliation teaches.

The first is; Romans 8.32.
God the Father stood much on the Honor of his Government, and so of his
Justice: To what Pains was Christ put?

2. A fair open way was made for Christ's Exaltation. Psalm. 110. ult.
Did not his drinking of the Brook in the way lead to the lifting up of his
Head?

3. The Doctrine of the Cross, of Christ's enduring the Cross, Gal. 5.14.
and calling others to carry it after him, is not to be stumbled at.

4. 2 Cor. 8.9.
A wide Door of Hope is set and stands open to and for humble Penitents. Did
not his drinking of the bitter Cup tend to sweeten it to them, 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult.
and to prevent their drinking the Dregs of it?

The 29th Position. Christ's State of Exaltation makes much for furthering
Communion between God and fallen Man.

1. Does not God the Father, who has received the Son, as in our Nature, into
Heaven, look on that Nature, and on our Persons through it, Ephesians. 1.6.
if we stand in a State of Union to him that took it on him, In Capite.
as pleasing to him? yea, does he not consider us as in a sort exalted in (and
with) him our Head? Ephesians. 2.6.
And are not his Employs and Actings on our behalf peculiarly regarded by him?

2. When we are making Addresses to the most High, Heb. 12.2.
is it not our Duty, Interest and Way much to look unto Jesus, and that as
exalted, and appearing in our Nature for us? Does not this much encourage us,
Joh. 20.17.
that he is gone to his Father and our Father, to his God and our God?

The Use follows, which is, 1. By way of Caution. Tho in managing the spiritual
Trade, we are with (and by) our Faith to follow Christ into Heaven; yet are we
much to lie at his Cross, and consider him as enduring it, and satisfying the
Demands of his injured Father. Heb. 12.2, 3. Romans 4. ult.
Tho he as exalted, applies the Benefit of Redemption, he as abased, obtained
and purchased it. He is now eminently lovely, but did then eminently show his
Love.

And so I next infer, That all those who are for trading into Heaven, should
get and keep distinct and clear Apprehensions of Christ as received into
Heaven. Vid. Amesium and Alstedium.


Are not the Degrees of his Exaltation well worthy of our best Thoughts? Do
they not exactly answer the Degrees that were in his Humiliation?

1. Did not he who died, 2 Cor. 5.15.
after Death rise again?

2. Ephesians. 4.9, 10.
Did not he who descended into the Earth, ascend into Heaven?

3. Does not he who continued for some time in Hades, or the separate State,
Heb. 1.2, 3.
now sit and abide, where he ever will be, at the Father's Right Hand?

Again; Is not Mystery written on, and to be read in the Ends of Christ's
Exaltation?

And that first, 1. In reference to himself: Phil. 2.9, 10. Psalm. 110. ult.
Is not he rewarded after all his fore Services and Sufferings? Is not his Head
lifted up that drunk of the Brook in the way? Has not his Cross proved the way
to his Crown? And tho he was only capable of being exalted in his Manhood by
way of Addition, yet may he that is God be said to be exalted by way of
Manifestation.

2. With reference to us; Is he not full of Compassion when freed from Passion?
Does he not sympathize, tho he cannot suffer? Heb. 4.15, 16.
Is he not entered Heaven with an Heart full of Love to Sinners on Earth? Does
not his transacting there make much for our Advantage that are here?

The next Inference is, They do not drive the spiritual Trade, who neither have
nor desire to have Communion with Christ as exalted. Joh. 14.6. See the solid
Scotch Brown.
Is not he as the Truth, and the Life, so the Way? the way to the Father in
Duty, and the way from the Father in the Expression of Mercy? And here let me
propound some Questions of Concernment.

1. Have they Communion with Christ as in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.
who have not in Desire and Design their Conversation in Heaven?

(1.) As to their Minds, musing on him, and the things above.

(2.) Intellectualiter, etc. So profound Whichcoat.
In their Affections, loving, hoping for, and longing after him and them.

(3.) In their whole Couse studying the exactest Imitation of, and Conformity
to him attainable.

2. Have they Communion with an exalted Savior, who too frequently, and too
too wilfully abase and debase themselves in the way of sinful Sins?

Whether they be such as are (for distinction sake) styled fleshly, 1 Pet. 2.12.
and sensual, tending to gratify the sensitive Appetite, such as Drunkenness,
Uncleanness and Idleness.

Or they be such as carry the Title of Worldly, such as Covetousness,
Oppression, and the like.

Or such as are said to carry the Face and Figure of the Devil, Dr. Arrowsmith,
styled Suavissimus.
such as Pride, Wrath and Malice.

May such Persons consider!

1. This exalted Savior keeps his Heart open to the Penitent.

2. His Hand will fall and lie heavy on all that are found in wilful
Impenitency.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
THE Church's Triumph over Death. A Funeral Sermon upon the Decease of blessed
Mr. Rob. Fleming, late Pastor of a Church in Rotterdam. By Daniel Burgess. Mr.
Baxter's Grand Question resolved. His Call to Seriousness in Religion. His good
Counsel to the converted and unconverted Sick, bound together. Free
Justification by Christ: Written first in Latin, by John Fox, Author of the
Book of Martyrs, and now translated into English, for the Benefit of those that
love their own Souls, and would not be mistaken in so great a Point. The poor
Man's Help, or young Man's Guide. By Mr. Burkitt, Minister of Dedham in Essex.
An earnest Call to Family Religion; being the Substance of eighteen Sermons: By
Sam. Slater. The Confirming Work of Religion: By Robert Fleming of Rotterdam.
Advice to an only Child; or excellent Counsel for all young Persons.
Trading Spiritualized.

The Third Part.

Or, some more POSITIONS, On which Tradesmen (And Others) may (O that they
would!) meditate.

By W. BAGSHAW, Minister of the Gospel.

LONON; Printed for Nevill Symonds, Bookseller in Sheffield, in Yorkshire; and
Sold by George Conyers, at the Ring in Little Britain, in London. 1696.

To my much Honored Friend, Mr. Henry Gill.
Worthy Sir,
THough my Memory labors under much Weakness, Can I ever forget the
Encouragement which my Ministry met with (in Times sufficiently discouraging)
at the Beloved Oaks? where some of the Truths presented in the Printed Sheets,
came to the Ears, yea, and (as I believe) to the Hearts of you, and your then
precious Bosome-relation, who has for some Years layen in the Bosom of
Abraham. I am assured, you will not despise the Day of Small Things; you will
look with favor on his hand, whose age and infirmities have (of late) hindered
your seeing his face. May you whose self-denial is exemplary (as is also your
bounty) be blessed, and a great blessing! May your dear Children (Children of
the Covenant) and all your Relations prosper! May the Church that is (and that
meets) in your house have in it a special presence of God! So prays, Endeared
Sir, much obliged

W. Bagshaw.

To the Reverend, Mr. Edward Prime, Mr. Robert Fern, and the other Worthy
Ministers near Chesterfield, and Sheffield, that join Hearts and Hands for
furthering the Lords Work.
Very Dear Brethren!
MINE Hand was at the Proposal for your Associating, and mine Heart is with you
in all your Meetings for your strengthening of one another Hands in God. With
what delight I have comen amongst you when younger, and fitter for Travel, he
knows, who is All-knowing. I have no such vanity, as to expect (or desire) to
be counted an Author, yet am not unwilling that when dead I may yet speak in
such Papers as this is prefixed to. Pardon (I pray you) my mentioning you in
this Address. If to your solid Judgment, my proceeding further appear
unnecessary, and unprofitable, I beseech you, hint so much. The Good Lord who
has taken down many Lights that were in his Golden Candlesticks, continue you
long as Burning and Shining Ones! and bless all Related to you. This is the
Heart's desire, and Prayer, of

Choice Sirs! One unworthy to call you Brethren, W. Bagshaw.

Trading Spiritualized.
The Third Part.
The 30th Position.
THE Holy Spirit of God has a special Hand in (and does promote) the spiritual
Trade, Commerce, and Communion, that is betwixt God and Man.

1. May not this well be (as it is) written on, See Dr. Clifford his Methodus.
that to the carrying on of Man's Salvation (and so of his Communion with God,
as it is here begun) the Ministration of the Spirit, as well as the Mediation
of the Son of God is requisite? Are not Christians washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
justified, and sanctified, as in the Name of Jesus Christ, so by the Spirit of
our God?

2. 2 Cor. 13. ult.
When the Apostle prays that Persons may have the Communion of the Holy
Ghost, does not that hint, that as they have Communion with him, so also that
by his Influence (and Efficacy) they are prepared for Heaven, and for having
their Conversation in Heaven, whilst they are on Earth.

For the further proving of the Position,

I offer. If we look upwards, and unto God.

1. Is it not the Work of the Holy Spirit to reveal, as his Nature and
Excellencies, so withal, the great Mystery of Godliness, and the way of
exercising the Trade and Transaction that is held with him, Ephesians. 1.17.
as also the Laws, Privileges and Advantages that any way concern it? Is he
not styled the Spirit of Revelation?

2. Is it not the Work of the Holy Spirit (as proceeding from God the Father
and the Son) to instruct and elevate the Hearts of Persons, that they may not
be entangled in such Employes, and Affections, as would hinder their
Trafficking with Heaven? 1 Cor. 7.
And also, that they may attend on the Lord, and the main Business, without
(allowed) distraction?

And now, we will a little cast our Eyes down on Man, with regard to the Point
in hand, and under consideration propounding the following Quaere's.

1. As to that part of Trade, that goes under the Name of Exporting, or
carrying and sending to Heaven: Can any Person do any Duty aright, so as to
exert Graces therein, without the special Aids and Operations of the Holy
Spirit? Jude 20. Gal. 5.22.
Are we not to pray in the Holy Ghost? And are not the Fruits of Faith from him?

2. As to what is Imported, and fetched from Heaven, (into which count falls
increase of Grace, and Communication of Comfort:) Is not his working necessary?
Ephesians. 3.16.
Are any strenghened with might in the Inner Man, save by the Spirit? And does
not a late great Divine hold forth that Communion with him is much in
Consolation? Dr. Owen of Communion.


From what has been said, and proved, I will first lay down some Inferences of
Truth.

The 1st. is, All the Persons in the Allblessed and undivided Trinity are
engaged, having an Hand (and Heart) in Man's best Good, even his spiritual and
eternal Welfare. Joh. 14.
Does not the Holy Spirit proceed from the Father, and the Son, (as to his
Personality, so) as to the great Office I am pointing at? Idem.
Who that reads this, should do it without Admiration?

The second Inference. All that call and would prove themselves Men, (and
Women) of God should be exceeding loath to do what is called grieving (and
demean themselves with all tenderness Ephesians. 4.30.
and due respect to) the Holy Spirit of God. Should they be chargeable with
what would grieve him, So Dr. Spurstow and Mr. Hickman.
if he was (as we are) capable of grief? Or causing him to carry strangely as
we do toward those that grieve us? Can we have Fellowship (or as England's
later great Divine would have it read, Mr. Baxter.
Communion) with the Father, 1 John 3.3.
and with his Son Jesus Christ, except we be inspired (and acted) by the Holy
Spirit?

The third Inference. They show, that they are not for driving a Trade into
(and with) Heaven, whose course carries in it a wilful quenching of the
Motions and resisting of the Ministry of God's Spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5. See on this
Reverend Polwheel. Boyse.
Alas! is not the World (I add, Is not the Church considered at large, and as
to those that cry aloud, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord,) full
of such Persons? Whilst some vainly pretend to the Spirit, and others vilely
scoff at him, How many are there that sit at his Summons, strive against his
Strivings, and will by no means be wrought (or brought) over to a Closure with
the Person, Acts 7.51.
relying on the Mediation and Submission to the Government of Christ?

The fourth Inference. The spiritual Trade shall not quite fall, or fail. How
great soever their Numbers are who do neglect or decline it, Will the Eternal
Spirit (whilst Time lasts) leave off to spiritualize Thousands, yea
Millions, and so hold this Trade up? Shall not the Pleasure of God the Father
prosper in this Hand?

The fifth Inference. According to the drawing near or withdrawing off the Holy
Spirit, the Trade into Heaven, (and the Management thereof) does fude and
flourish. Does not the more full and plenteous pouring out of the Holy Spirit,
since the Ascension of Christ as to his Humane Nature, Vicariam navare operam.
vid. Buxhorn. Hist. p. Cant 4. ult.
supply the want of his Bodily Presence? Is he not said to be in his stead? As
this Wind wakeneth, the Spices of Grace flow forth.

Rules of Duty are to come next.

The first is general. All that will vouchsase this poor Paper a reading should
take themselves to task, and enjoin their Consciences to give right Answers.

Have they ever yet experienced, what it is to have Communion with the Holy
Spirit, and with the other Persons in the Godhead by and through him? Has he
in a convincing, humbling, quickening and mortifying Presence and Influence
come in to them? Are not sundry rigid Separatists said not to have the Spirit?
Jude 19.


The second Rule is. They who have not found should humbly (and earnestly) seek
the Effusion of the Holy Spirit, should they not cry to the Holy Spirit, and to
the Father, through the Son, for the Spirit? Zech. 12.10.
Should they not wait at the foot of the Promise made of him? If once God gives
them hearts to ask, will he not answer them? Should not Spiritual Traffic be
esteemed? Luke 11.13.


The third Rule is. They who have the Holy Spirit should evidence it, by their
being spiritual and heavenly Traders, and by their studying to excel therein:
Should they not be always abounding in the Work of the Lord? 1 Cor. 15. ult.
Adding unto Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge, etc.? For being filled with
the Fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11.
and fitted for the Crown of Righteousness, should their souls cry?

The fourth Rule. They whose hearts are by the holy Spirit set on driving the
spiritual Trade, should take the Cordials which God offers them. Was it not
the sweet Psalmist's Infirmity (Did he not see, Psalm. 77.2.
that it was so?) to refuse to be comforted? Alas! many of the Excellent of the
Earth labor under that weakness; they put the Word of Consolation away from
them.

Shall not all that hold converse with God by his Spirit, find their Trading in
Grace issuing in the gain of Glory? 1 Pet. 4.
Is he not the Spirit of Glory?

The 31st. Position. Spiritual Commerce and Communion between Heaven and Earth
(God and fallen Man) is much furthered by the Holy Spirit as a revealing
Spirit.

A Touch has been on this; a little I will enlarge on it.

1. Is it not by the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1.17. Vide Bodium. ad lo um.
that the All-blessed Three in one with whom Communion is held is manifested,
and made known so as he is not to the world, or to any save those that are
called out of it? Does he not reveal outwardly, 2 Cor. 3. ult.
and inwardly, unto (and in) them, especially in the Gospel Grace, the Divine
Glory?

2. Is it not by the holy Spirit that the Lord Jesus in his Person, Offices,
and Estates, through whose Mediation God comes to Man, and Man goes to God, is
declared? Joh. 16.13, 14. See Dr. Owen on this.
Does not the Spirit glorify Christ, in taking what is his, and showing it
unto those that are his? Is not the Gospel hid (as is He that is held forth in
it) to those lost ones into whose Hearts the Spirit shines not? 2 Cor. 4 3, 4.


Is it not the holy Spirit that so makes known the Duties in which, and Graces
by which spiritual Communion is maintained, that Persons are duly exercised in
the one, 1 Cor. 12.2, 3. Gal. 5.16, 25.
and do truly exercise the other? Can spiritual Duties be done, or spiritual
Dispositions be showed, by any save those whose Eyes the Holy Spirit has
anointed?

The first Use of this Position is for Conviction of sin.

1. Does it not fall on those, who though they give the Word of God an hearing
(which (alas!) some will not do,) Isa. 59. ult.
are slighters of and not waiters for the holy Spirit, which is put into the
same Promise with it, whose Office it is to lead Persons into the knowledge of
it, and of managing the spiritual Trade by it: Do they duly value the Spirit of
Revelation?

1. Who are not for being clothed with Humility? Psalm. 25.9. Job 42.5, 6.
Do not such as lie low lie fair for enlightings? And does not the Light of
Life show Persons matter for Humiliation?

2. Do they value the revealing Spirit, whose Carriage toward him is very
untoward, and cross, doing what in them lies to quench the Sparks that are of
his kindling.

1. See Mr. Polwheel on 1 These. 5.
By pouring on the foul Water of sensuality, and Flesh pleasing.

Or, 2. By heaping up the dust of Worldliness, and Earthliness.

Or however, 3. By withholding Fuel, and slighting Ordinances. O that these
persons were in Mourning for their sin! and did set themselves under a clear
and searching Ministry, and cried, that the Spirit would open their
Understandings? Can any expect he should be a glorifying who have not found him
an enlightening Spirit? 2 These. 1.8, 9.
Shall not they who willingly want inner light be cast into (and kept for ever
in) outer darkness?

The second Use serves to quicken all enlightened persons to duty, yea, to
diverse duties, proper for and incumbent on them.

Particularly, 1. To Thankfulness, that when the things that concern the
spiritual and eternal Peace are hid from the eyes of many, Mat. 11.25.
they are revealed to (and in) them? 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who made them to differ? Or, what save Grace moved him to it?

1. Has not their Knowledge clearness in it? Are not they of those who seeing
so see, as to perceive, John 16.13.
and discover the inside beauty and glory of Truths? See Arrowsmith 's Armilla.


And so, 2. Has not their sight sureness and satisfy ingness in it? Do they
not in some measure arrive at assurance of Understanding having settlement in
the Truth? Col. 2.3.


3. Scientia gustus. 1 Pet. 2.3.
Is not their Knowledge that of Taste and Experience? Have they not Palats that
are spiritualized? Do they not know the sweetness of Grace?

A 2d. Duty to which they are quickened is waiting for further and fuller
Revelations.

1. Have they any more than dawnings, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10.
if their light be compared with the day of Glory?

2. Will not the beauty of their spiritual Trading increase together with their
brightness?

A 3d. Duty to which they are excited, is walking as they should do, who would
show they have the Spirit of Revelation, being acquainted with those secrets
that are peculiar to such.

1. See Dr. Cheynell on Genesis 18.19.
Humbling secrets. May they know (to the best purpose) what it is to put their
Mouths in the dust, to cherish sorrow, Lam. 3.29.
that is after (or according to) God! May this stream rise so high, (...). 2
Cor. 7.10. Phil. 3.8, 9.
as to carry them out of an unwarrantable confidence in self-righteousness! in
order thereunto, may they know.

2. Convincing Secrets. May they see sin as by sun-light, which shows how
moates abound in the air! Joh. 16.9, etc. Neh. 3.12.
May they see that it is an evil thing! May they see (what too few see) the
evil that is in an heart of unbelief.

3. Isa. 40. ult.
May strengthening secrets be revealed to (and in) them! May they know (from
experience) what it is to be strengthened with strength in their souls, or
inner man! Ephesians. 3.16.
May they run the way of God's Commandments, and not be weary! May they walk,
and not faint!

And so, 4. May also comforting secrets be communicated to them! May the holy
Spirit take them down into Christ's banqueting house! Cant. 2.4.
May his banner over them be love! May they have (so as to feel) those strong
Consolations that are able to hold up their heads, and hearts. in a dying hour!
Heb. 6.18.


May they (in seeing) see the great Things of the Gospel!

To wit, 1. That the Lord Jesus is Immanuel. God with us, Isa. 7.14. Joh. 1.14.
God manifested in the flesh, or humane Nature. Do not heaven and earth
Infinite and Finite meet in him.

2. That sincere Christians, 1 Cor. 6.17.
though distinct persons from Christ, are in near union and relation to him:
Are they not ingrafted into this Vine? and espoused to this Husband?

3. That in the Justification of a believing sinner, there is a royal exchange:
Are not his sins inputed to Christ? 2 Cor. 5.21.
Is not Christ's Righteousness (in order to their acquittance and acceptance)
imputed to him?

May they withal (as to great Gospel-Duties) well know!

1. (...) Luke 9.24.
What it is utterly to deny themselves, as self stands opposed to the Honor of
God, the first Cause, the chief Good, the Highest Sovereign, and the last End:
And as it lies cross to the advantage of men, should any Christian say after
Cain, Am I my brothers keeper?

2. Gal. 2.20.
What it is to be crucified with Christ, and to have Communion with him in his
death, deriving from him as slain, sin-slaying Virtue; so that the death of
sins that were as Dalilah's may be real, and gradual, through the actings of
Faith.

3. Job 23.4. See Reverend Harrison on this.
What it is to pray, and use Pleas in prayer, to beg in Christ's name, leaning
on his Merit, to fill the mouth with Arguments drawn from Power, Goodness,
Promise, and Providence of God.

4. Heb. 11.1. See renowned Baxter on this.
What it is by Faith to render as present, things that are future; and evident,
things that are not seen: So that Eternals are most looked at, and looked at,
as great reality.

5. Phil. 4.11, 12 See blessed Burroughes.
What it is to know, both how to suffer want, and how to abound, how to be
abased, and how to be exalted, how to bear an heavy load quietly, and how to
carry a full Cup even.

O that more Persons had knowledge of this Stamp!

The last Use shall be for their cheering under Trouble, who are Spiritual
Traders. Shall not their Gains and Incomings answer (yea exceed) all their
pains and out-layings?

1. Did not the sweet Psalmist experience what he expressed? That in the
performance of Gods Commands, there is great reward? Did not a late great
Divine well say, Dr. Tillotson
That God's Work carried Meat in its Mouth.

2. Has eye seen, or ear heard, or can it enter into Man's heart to conceive, 1
Cor. 2.9.
what vast sums of glory they shall have given into their hands hereafter? O
the blessedness of the Saints in Heaven!

The 32d. Position. Spiritual Trading, or Communion between God and Man,
depends no little on the Spirit as Regenerating, or the Spirit of
Regeneration.

I am willing to premise the following Particulars.

1. Dr. Wallis.
Though one that is among the first Three, conceives, that the Word signifying
Regeneration does as well denote a Christians relation and state in
Justification, as his principle in initial Sanctification; I shall (as usually
I do) keep the Road, and have an eye and respect to the latter.

And so, 2. It is not doubted, but is by the best I am acquainted with
concluded, Vid. Voetium Disp. p. 2:
that the Phrase of Regeneration is figurative, and has an allusion to Man's
natural Birth, and generation. As in this, there is natural Life given, so in
it there is an infusion of Spiritual Life. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Cor. 5.17.
With this new Nativity there is a new Nature, styled Divine, conferred; the
regenerate are new Creatures.

3. (...).
Being born again (or from above) is rightly fathered on the Holy Spirit, as
proceeding from the Father and the Son, to produce it. The subject of it is an
elect sinner; a sinner, else he needed it not; an elect one, else he obtains it
not. Idem. ^om. 8.33.
They who are brought forth by the hand of God, were first conceived in his
Heart: Is not Vocation called Election?

4. Far be it from me to limit Divine Prerogative! God can (and does)
communicate the first grace to unregenerate ones; Jam. 4.8. See Divine Vines on
this
otherwise none would be regenerated. But, as the regenerate are in a capacity
to hold converse with God, God who is most free, has by promise bound himself
to converse with them.

And now I fall on proving the present Position.

1. Does not the change made by Regeneration fit for Spiritual Trading?

(1.) Is there not a renewing in (and of) the Spirit of the Mind? Does not the
Understanding behold the glory of God? Romans 12.2.
and see the way to (and from) Heaven? particularly, that they who come to God
do it by and through Him that is God. Ad Deum. Per Deum.


(2.) Does not the renewing Work reach the memory? Does not that retain the
truth delivered by the Lord, the Star that guides to him, Joh. 14.26. Cant. 1.4.
and withal the sweetness, that in duty has been received from the Lord, a
proof, that the soul has been with him.

(3.) Has not the Conscience the influence of this Work of the Holy Spirit?
See acute Sheffield on this.
Does it not thereby act as a Minister, preaching up Christ, and duties to be
done to (and through) him; and preaching down sin, yea, running upon the
occasions and appearances of it. Does it not as a Witness (yea as many
witnesses) testify against whatever would hinder Spiritual Converse, Mill
testes. Acts 24.16.
and as a Judge give its Verdict, for, and withal quicken to those services
wherein it is held.

(4.) Has not the Will of regenerate persons a new bias put on, and a new
bent put into it? Is it not (as a Worthy's phrase was) rightly poysed? Mr.
Strong Libera liberata.
Does it when set free, freely choose God in Christ, for its Treasure? counting
it good to be and draw near to him? And does it not refuse what might breed
estrangement from him?

(5) Are not all the Affections (both closing or liking and guarding and
disliking) renewed by the Spirit's hand? Are they not in truth, (and in some
degree) as wings, Col. 3.3. See ro^zing Fenner on this.
whereby the regenerate fly away from the tents of wickedness, and above the
allurements of the world, soaring and mounting up toward Heaven, and heavenly
Enjoyments.

Again. Will not the Lord readily manifest and communicate himself, and his
choice favors, to those that are born of the Spirit, and so brought into the
state and relation of his dear children? Shall not his upright servants find
him the best of Masters? Joh. 14.21.
Shall not his sons and daughters be admitted into his special Presence? Shall
not his Spouse be taken into his arm, yea heart, and bosom?

From this Position, I shall draw Two Inferences of Truth.

The former is. Persons in their mere impure Naturals (or state of
unregeneracy) are objects of compassion: Phil. 3.15.
O that the bowels of the regenerate did more yearn over them! Is there not a
cause, yea very great cause? Are they not in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. (...).
without God in the world? without communion with him, in communion with whom
happiness does lie? Does not the Scripture (which miscals no one) call 'em
Athiests? Are they not in a present incapacity to enter the Kingdom of Heaven?
Joh. 3.2, 5.
If we take the word in the highest sense, could they desire to stay in it? Can
the unholy be happy?

And so the latter Inference is. There are not a few that bear themselves high
on their birth (I mean their natural birth) that have very small reason for it.
Are they that are merely born of blood, or as it is read of bloods, Joh 1.12,
13 (...).
of the best blood, fit in their present state to hold converse with God? Is it
not the new second (or supernatural) birth that prepares for such a practice
and privilege? How many in vain wish, they had never been born, who dye, and
have not been born again? Have they any right to eat of the Tree of Life? Psalm.
9.17.
Have not they their portion in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone?

And now, I proceed, to Rules of duty.

One is. They who want the Regenerating work of the holy Spirit should by no
means (or with no willingness) want breathings after it: O that many did pray
and cry, Psalm. 51.10.
Create in us (O Lord) new hearts! O that so many were not insensible of their
sad case! O that they posed themselves after this manner! Have we the
characters and signs of Regeneration by and from the Spirit? Who,

1. Never yet bitterly bewailed our first being in the flesh, which has some
being in the spiritual. Romans 7.24.


Nor, 2. do yet go much with praises to the Author of Regeneration; nor study
to give the praises of the life together with those of the lip to him, or to
answer an High Birth in an holy Walk. 1 Pet. 2.9.


Can they walk with God, that walk not in the Spirit? or they walk in him, that
do not live in him? Gal. 5.16, 25


May they who cannot regenerate themselves, and are not worthy that God should
regenerate them, wait on and love the Ministry of the Word, 1 Pet. 1.23.
where it is plainly and practically preached, that being the blessed seed,
which the regenerating Spirit does usually use.

Employ they the Son of God, to pray down the Spirit on them.

Plead they, 1. That they are true and great needers of him. Luke 11.13.


2. That the glory of supplying them will redound to him.

Another Rule respects those whose hearts the Spirit as a Regenerator has
wrought on. Psalm. 149.6.
The high praises of God should flow from their hearts, and be in their mouths?
Have persons these evidences of life?

1. Romans 7.14.
Sensibleness of sin (though counted small) as contrary to it.

2. Acts 9.11.
Breathing in prayers and desires that are spiritual.

3. 1 Pet. 2.2. (...)
Catching at the breasts and desiring food and strength spiritual.

Are not they the blessed of the Lord? Is not their dwelling on high? Is not
God in Christ their dewlling place? Psalm. 90.1.
Is not that communion with him begun which shall by graces hand be perfected?

The 33d. Position. Through the Holy Spirit as uniting Persons to Christ, the
Spiritual Trade (or Communion between God and Man) is promoted.

That it is one of the Offices of the holy Spirit to cause an union betwixt
Christ and those who are made sincere Christians, is a great Truth, on which
many years ago I more than touched.

1. 1 Cor. 6.1^. (...).
Is not he that is joined (truly and closely glued) to the Lord in this sense
One Spirit, Davenantius and Polus ad locum.
or one spiritually one with him, through and by the Operation of the holy
Spirit?

2. Do not Divines who write of the union of persons to Christ, Col. 2.19.
and of the two bands thereof, write of the Spirit as being the principal band,
2 Cor. 4.13. See Nortons Orthod. Evang. Heb. 12.2.
the band on his part?

And, 3. Is not the holy Spirit the Spirit of Faith, the Author as well as the
Finisher of that Faith, that is the other band?

That the Spirit considered under this notion surthereth Trading with and into
Heaven, is evidently evident.

1. Is not Union to Christ the foundation of Communion with Christ? 1 John 5.12.
Have any Life spiritual that have not the Son? Have not all that have the Son
such Life? Does not receiving further grace from Christ flow from receiving
Christ?

And, ^ John 1.3.
2. Is it not through Christ the Son, that persons have communion with the
Father? Is it not on their being and abiding on him, that the way between
Heaven and Earth is kept open?

1. Have any save those that are in Christ (by way of union) the dews of Heaven
lying on their fleece? When the Lord blesses persons with spiritual blessings
in heavenly places (or things, Ephesians 1.3. (...).
) Is it not in Christ?

2. (...).
Can any save those that have union to Christ perform duties in a due (that is
spiritual and so acceptable) manner? Does not Christ say to his peculiar
disciples, Without or separate from me ye can do nothing? (that is, nothing
aright. Augustine.
) Does not one called a Father thus gloss thereon, He says not no great thing,
but nothing?

The 1st Inference is. They are surely less worthy of the Christian Name (how
elegant soever their Tongues or Pens were) who have spoken (or written) in a
drolling way, Dr. Parker. Dr. Sh.
as of persons having the Spirit, so of their being any way (save politically)
united to Christ? Are they not well sent to School to an eminent Doctor? Dr.
Patrick.
Can they be counted Friends of (or well-wishers to) Spiritual Trading? May he
that survives well weigh, as well as view, what England's late great Divine
wrote to him! Mr. R. B.


The 2d. Inf. That persons may hold Communion with the Lord, and Trade with
(and into) Heaven, they should long to know (if they have not known) and that,
experimentally, what it is for the Holy Spirit to perform this Office for and
in them. Should they not be loath not to be as Members united to the All-blessed
Head?

1. Be they willing he should take his own way and method to work and cause
this Union? Joh. 16.8, 9. Will he not prepare the House he possesses and
furnishes. Jude ult.
Is not he (as are the Father and the Son one in Essence with him) All-wise,
yea, the only wise God? If he make use of his Word that is a sharp sword, yea,
of that part of it the Law, in order to the convincing persons of sin, and
self-emptiness, and so of cutting them off from the old ill Stock, Adam, as
corrupted, should not they be complyant?

2. Be they afraid, lest they should mistake in taking up with a show and
pretense (how specious soever) of this Union without the reality of it? Gal.
6.6.
God will not be mocked: Should not Men be unwilling to be deceived in a matter
of so great moment? What are notions of Christ? What are common (though to
others useful) gifts from Christ, if compared with union to him? I add, What is
that union that is by way of adhaerence or appendance to him (such as is that
of a branch tied to a Vine) unto that of inhaerence and implantation, Joh.
15.2, 5.
as is that of a branch this is and abides in the Vine.

3. May they pray to the Spirit, and to the Father for the Spirit, and in their
praying employ the Son as Mediator, Joh. 14.16.
that this Work may be wrought in and for them! joining unto Prayer, Pleas of
this sort:

1. Blessed Lord! Those have been joined unto Christ by grace, that were by
nature as distant and disunited from him as we can possibly be. Isa. 59.1.


2. Is not thy power for uniting us to him as great as ever? Is not thy
willingness in the case sufficiently declared? Art thou not in and by the
Ministry of the Word, moving on and striving with us? Art thou not in some
measure inclining us to beg this great boon, and to be earnest that thou
would grant it?

3. Blessed Lord! If thou will vouchsafe in this particular to hear and answer
us, will not much glory redound to thee as well as much benefit accrue to us?
For thy Names sake, By thy Spirit cause this Union. Sinful (and therefore sad)
is their state, who willingly resting on this side Union to Christ cannot Trade
into Heaven, nor lay a rightful claim to the Joys thereof, but lie in the mouth
of eternal Condemnation. Mark 16.15, 16.


The last Inference. They who have real special spiritual Union to Christ as
they are to ascribe it to all the Persons in the Godhead, and particularly (and
more immediately) to the Holy Spirit, the third in order of the Persons, they
are to be much in the high and noble Work of Praise. Ephesians. 1.3.


1. Do not their hearts lie open to Heaven? and does not Heaven stand open to
them? O the sweetness and preciousness of this Intercourse (...) which (alas!)
Millions are utter strangers!

2. Ps. 138. ult.
Will not the Lord perfect that which concerns them? Does not hi^ mercy
endure for ever? Did not purely free mercy move him to lay the first stone? and
shall not the last be brough^ forth with shouting, crying, Mercy! Mercy!

3. Are not they by being in (and united to) Christ, out of the reach and
gunshot of divine wrath? How many corrections soever they may meet with, Is
there any so much as one Condemnation upon or before them? (...). Romans 8.1.


4. Col. 1.27.
Is not Christ in them the hope of glory? Is he not the ground o^ which they
may groundedly expect the possession of it? Shall not that Communion that is
spiritual, issue (and end) end in that which is (and will be) eternal?

The 34th. Position. Trading with (or into) Heaven, or Communion between God
and fallen Man, is much furthered by the Indwelling Spirit, or the Spirit, as
dwelling in persons.

The Doctrine of the Inhabitation of the Holy Spirit being high, and being
misunderstood, some hints shall here be given concerning it.

And 1st. See worthy Mr. Barret on the Covenants.
They (as I and my betters judge) fall too low, whose opinion is, that the
Spirit's indwelling in the faithful implies no more than his being essentially
with them. Who is there with whom he is not? In this sense, Psalm. 139.7, etc.
Whither can men go (or flee) from this presence?

2. Undoubtedly, they rise too high, who assert such an indwelling of the Holy
Spirit in persons, that they become one person, or one personally with him.

1. One that excelled has observed, See the excellent Tuckney on 2 Pet. 1.4.
that this Tenent draws after it, the affirming, that there is an Incarnation
of the Third Person in the Trinity, as well as of the Second; and a dwelling of
the Fullness of the Godhead in the Members of Christ, as well as in him, their
Head.

2. Acute Hollinworth.
Another Worthy expressed his dissatisfaction with that assertion, in this
manner; Whereas, the Holy Spirit is both indivisible and omnipresent, this
represents him as divided, and limited; as if he was personally here and
there in Peter and Paul, and other Saints, and not in intermediate places.

3. Poor I am well satisfied, and judg^ it safe to keep the Excellent of the
Earth company, who hold, and hol^ forth, that the Communion of the Holy Ghost
as well as the Grace (...) Christ, 2 Cor. 13. ult.
and Love of God the Father is with gracious persons; and that in sound sense,
the Spirit is together wit^ his gifts given to them. See Dr. Jacomb on Romans 8.
And Baxteri Methodum. And Pool against Biddle Romans 8.9, 10 and 5.5, 6. and
8.16, 26.
Do not d^vers Texts attest, that he is peculiar^ related to and does
peculiarly opera^^ in them? Is it not he himself that wor^ eth and preserves
grace in them? tha^ witnesses to and with their Spirits (...) that helps
their infirmities? tha^ strengthens, quickens, and seals them?

And now (at length) I offer at proving the Position.

1. Does not the Holy Spirit as dwelling with (and in) the sanctified, excit^^
to, direct in, and enable for the duties in which the Spiritual Trade is driven^

2. Does not the holy Spirit furnish and supply the sanctified with those
soul-solacing (or at least soul-supporting) comforts wherewith the performance
of those duties is rewarded, and so encouraged? Gal. 5.22.
Is not Joy reckoned among the Fruits of the Spirit? and i^ not this Joy of the
Lord the souls strength? Neh. 8.10.
Is it not as oil on the wheel that furthereth its motion?

And now, I 1st. infer. That the condescension of the holy Spirit (and
consequently of the Father and Son from whom he proceeds) is well worth
wondering at. Will God indeed dwell on Earth, 2 Chronicles. 6.
will he that thinks it no robbery to be equal with the other Persons in the
Godhead dwell in the hearts of those who dwell on earth? Can we refrain crying?
O admirable? Does not this his dwelling imply?

1. A Presence that has much of inwardness. May not that Phrase of one be here
applied? Intimior intimo nostro. 1 Cor. 6.17.
He is nearer to the faithful than they are to themselves? Is he not more to
their souls, than their souls are to their bodies?

2. A Presence, in which there is permanence and continuance. Pulsat aliorum
corda. Dr. Sibbs. John 14.16, 21.
Does not this blessed Lord who knocks at the doors of others hearts, come into
and inhabit theirs? Are they not as his Temples? Does not he who only moves
others (as he did Sampson) at times, abide with them for ever?

3. A Presence, that has much of familiarity: Are not persons familiar and
open-hearted in their dwellings? Do they not count their houses their castles,
where they may safely communicate their secrets? Does not the holy Spirit open
much of his mind and love to those that are an habitation to God John 14 21.
through him? Does he not manifest himself to them as he does not manifest
himself to the World?

2. A 2d. Inference is. They who believe the Position I am on, and Head, the
hints given concerning it, cannot call in question this great fundamental
Truth, 1 Cor. 3.16.
that the Spirit of God is very God. Does not his being (as essentially so)
graciously present with all the sanctified, yea, as to peculiar operations in
them all, in all parts, and places, of the world, sufficiently prove, that he
is immense, infinite, and unbounded? Is any Being so, save he that is the Being?

A 3d. Inference. They cannot in their present state hold Communion with God or
have their converse and conversation in Heaven, who willingly want the
Indwelling Spirit or the Spirit as standing in a peculiar relation to them,
Jude 19.
and having a special interest and propriety in them; as persons have in their
dwellings and possessions: Are not these persons, Multitudes, Multitudes?

1. Does the Pure Spirit dwell in those impure ones who walk after the flesh?
Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.16, 17
not abstaining from (but delighting in) those fleshly lusts of drunkenness,
filthiness, and idleness; will he endure to be so opposed and affronted, where
his abode is?

2. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Does the Spirit of God dwell where the Spirit of the World does animate, act,
and rule? Are they his habitations, that are its drudges and slaves? rooting in
the earth, Ezekiel. 33.31.
even on the day, and in the duties and ordinances that are sacred?

3. Does the Spirit of God dwell where Satan the worst of Spirits keeps the
house? And does he not so, Joh. 8.44. Arrowsmith Tact. Sac. p.
in those who look as like him as men and women can do? being

1. Filled with wrath, envy, and malice.

2. Addicted to lying, and false accusing.

3. Employed (or at least rejoicing) in persecuting.

O that persons saw, and felt, that whilst they are in their natural state,
they are void of the Spirit, Romans 8.9.
and so without Christ! O that they sorrowed for their own danger, and God's
dishonor! and were afraid of dying, yea, of living in this condition! and
cried, and got others to cry, that the holy Spirit may be given to and dwell in
them!

The last Inference. God's peculiar ones are privileged ones. O happy happy
they if they know their Privilege! They are Heavenly Traders; and shall not
let the Trade fall.

1. Gal. 5.22.
Will not the Indwelling be an In-working Spirit?

2. Shall they not by him be brought from Trading into to live in Heaven?

May not they say, aa the sweet Dropper wrote, Dr. Sibbs. Motum sentimus; medum
nesci mus. Ephesians. 4.30.
We feel his Motion, though we know not the manner of his Presence.

May they daily demean themselves tenderly toward him! and highly bless God
the Father. and the Son, for him!

The 35th. Position. The Holy Spirit as a guiding (and leading) Spirit does
much promote the Heavenly Trade, or Communion between God and Man.

2. Does he not guide unto Truth; the Truth he has given out? Does he not also
lead into Truth, and show persons the inside and excellency of Truth? John
16.13. See Reverend Case on this.
even as persons that are within a room that is adorned, see the Ornaments of
it? Does not the Lord herein at once communicate his will and love to persons?
And are they not hereby brought to exert and exercise Grace on and toward God.

2. Does not the holy Spirit lead unto duty, and to God in it? And is it not in
the due exercise of duty that persons draw near to God, Jun. 4.8.
and have God drawing near to them? Can either be expected, where duties are
wilfully omitted and neglected?

From this Position, I shall first lay down Inferences of Truth.

The former of them is. Persons naturally (or in their mere naturals) are
benighted, or in the dark, as to holding converse and communion with God. Are
they not said to be darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
darkness it self, or in the abstract, A Domino. Vide Poium ad lo^^m.
till they become light in the Lord? or by (and from) the Spirit of the Lord?
Are they not alienated from and strangers to the Life of God, that Life, which
the upright have from and lead with God, Ephesians. 4.18.
through the ignorance that is in them? O that they saw their want of sight,
and their loss thereby!

The latter is. The sons and daughters of God are primely privileged. Romans
8.14. See Dr. Jacomb on this.
Are not they led and conducted by the Spirit of God? As he is the Spirit of
Glory, filling those with glory that have full Communion with him in Heaven, so
he is the Spirit of Grace, fitting those that are hi^ ^or such Communion with
him on Ea^^^, as they are capable of. How happy O fortunati, etc.
are they if they understand their state, and know the things given them of God.

And now, I am to present Rules of Duty: The 1st. whereof is,

It is the near concern of all who will give this poor Paper a reading, to put
it on a fair issue (or trial) whether they have known (by experience) what the
guidance and conduct of the holy Spirit is. O that many did not vainly trust,
without serious trying! I take the boldness to ask them (at least to put them
on posing themselves with) these Questions:

1. Ephesians. 4.18. Joh. 3.19.
Have they seen (to their sorrow) that once they were not in this good
Circumstance? Are not Adam's Children born blind, as to Spirituals? And are
they not averse to divine guidance?

2. Do they highly value the Mercy of God the Father, and the Merit of the Son,
Ephesians. 5.8.
to both which they are indebted, that are led by the Spirit?

3. Are they under a daily fear, lest they should provoke, Ephesians. 4.30.
vex, displease, and distaste this blessed Guide, and cause him to be strange to
them?

4. 1 John 5.1. See Dr. Roberts Believ. Evid.
Do they truly love those who evidence that they are under the Spirits
guidance, though as to some opinions they are dissenters from them?

5. Joh. 16.13.
Are they for keeping close to the Scripture of Truth, in and according to
which the Spirit of Truth does lead and guide persons?

6. Is it their resolution (through Heavens help) that they will be much on
their knees, and when on them, Luke 11.13.
beg the Spirits guidance.

O that I was assured that all that read this would lay these Marks and their
Hearts together! 2 Cor. 13.5.


The 2d. Rule is. None should bless themselves in their Hearts and state, till
they can witness and prove that the holy Spirit is their guide and leader.

Motives are, 1. Is not the path of Life, and way of Trading spiritually,
hidden from all save such as he is the Guide of? Isa. 35.8.


For, 2. Is it not a low, and yet high way? lying as in humility, so in
heavenly-mindedness?

2. Is it not the way of such as are wise for themselves, and yet are much for
self-denial?

Is it not by a late worthy well said, Dr. Collings in his Lessons
That it lies cross the Fields of Nature, down the Narrow Lane of
Mortification, and up the Mount of Holiness?

The 2d. Motive is. Shall any be received into Heaven who slight the Spirits
Conduct? Psalm. 73.24.
Shall they be happy above, who Trade not thither whilst they are here below?

3dly. Romans 8.1. 1 Cor. 2.13. Ephesians. 2.2.
If persons be not guided by this good Spirit, will they not be led by at ill
one? if not many ill ones, or by the Flesh, or the World?

The last Rule is. They who drive the Heavenly Trade, and have the Spirits
guidance, should humbly glory in this high Favor showed them.

1. Is not this guide the most able, and knowing? yea, All-knowing?

2. Nec fallcre nec falli potest.
Is he not of all Guides the most true and faithful? Will he either mislead or
mistake?

3. Is he not the most tender and compassionate Guide? Does he not pity such as
are apt to go astray?

4. Heb. 5.2. Psalm. 48. ult.
Will he not be a Guide unto death? Will he desert his?

5. Will not his Guidings be attended with Efficacy?

1. Hos. 11.3, 4.
Will he not so guide as a Mother does a Child who hlods it by the hand, and
streng thens it?

2. Romans 6.14.
Will he not preserve from a course of sin; so that no sin shall have full
dominion?

3. 1 Cor. 10.13
Will he not support under sore sufferings; so that they are kept from sinking,
that are sighing?

4. Will he not (at last) Land people in the Place and State, where Bliss and
Blessedness shall have no

END.

