Die Mercurii, 22. Feb. 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that Mr. Glyn shall
return thanks to Mr. Bridges, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he
Preached at the entreaty of this House at St. Margarets, in the City of
Westminster, (being the day of Public humiliation) and is likewise to desire
him to Print and publish his Sermon; And it is further ordered that no man
shall presume to Print his Sermon, but whom he shall Authorize under his
handwriting.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do appoint Andrew Crook Stationer, to Print my Sermon. W. BRIDGES.

IOABS COUNCIL AND KING DAVID'S SEASONABLE HEARING IT. Delivered in a SERMON
Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their late solemn Fast, Feb. 22.

By W. BRIDGES, Preacher of the Gospel at Dunstans in the East, London.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Green Dragon, in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE the House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN a willing obedience to your Commands, I here present to your Eyes, what You
were lately pleased to attend unto with great patience and Christian
chearefullnesse with your ears. Christ Jesus please to speak that to the
hearts of the Auditory, which I did to their ears, that in this time of great
sorrow, there may that evidence be to our Ministry (which would be to every
conscionable man, a matter of great joy) that some may be undeceived and
brought to see the things that concern their peace: A wonderful security and
insensiblenesse lies upon our people every where, beside a spirit of
contradiction or malignity, deserving a censure like that Act. 7.51. My humble
request to you is, that you will please to accept this as an earnest of my
affectionate service to you and the Public. My humble request to God for you
is, that he will please to carry on the weighty Services you have in hand for
his glory, and the good of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the bringing to
pass the work of Reformation, through so maine, so great oppositions.

So prays your most humble Servant, W. BRIDGES.
From my Study in Minchin Lane, Feb. 27. 1642,
THE PREFACE.
THE business of Christ Jesus Kingdom, in these sad times, (ye Servants of
the living God) is looked upon with the squint eyed multitude, under an Hexapla
of considerations.

The first is a Theological, they would make us believe they desire Divinely,
or at least Divinelike to behold it. To say nothing of Books, Dr. Fern.
for they have had their Answers, and some of them newly furbushed over, speak
such language now, as the Author knew not in the time of his delivery, of
himself, upon that subject, Grand Rebellion by Gr. Williams.
or else the Title page says that which the Book proves not at all. I shall
deliver the sense of the whole in that of Romans 13. He that resists, etc. and
of the Evangelist, Resist not evil, etc. To let go Fathers, Pr^^^er out of
them, Epist. Syned.

Cui nomen libellus supplex Tom. 1 fol. 80 3. Conc. ^ph^s. Da^enet. pa. 77.


something out of the Councels, the Doctrine of our own Bishops, and other
things that might be said, J shall desire the Reader to observe from me,

1. That the King must command not only according to Gods, but Man's Law also.

2. That if he do not so command, the resistance is not a resistance of power,
but will.

3. That to say such a resistance must be but only defensive, is nonsense, for
so a man may be resisting ever, and never, resist like the filly women of whom
the Apostle says, they are ever learning and never attain to the Truth.

The Second is an Historical; they conceive and say, Never such times, such
Taxations, such Precedents, such a war, etc. Never? Sure you err much in
point of History, the twentyeth part, fifteenth part, See Chron. K. John. Ed.
2. etc.
seventh part, as in the Reign of King John and others, etc. But here the
willing to learn, must know,

1. That if some be taken away, it is to preserve them, and the rest.

And 2. Whether they had rather part with it to the Parliament, or that and
their lives too, to the Cavaliers?

The third is a Legal consideration: Some propositions J would make to our
Malignants skilled in the Law, which shall be these: 1. whether I had better
trust to another man's favor, or to mine own strength for my defense? My
strength is the Law, against which, if the government command it does me wrong,
if J obey, I do my self wrong. 2. The great offense of authority is
whatsoever is committed against the security of the State. 3. Arist.
Heathens tell us that the wise must give as much to the Law as may be, but to
the Lawgiver as little; for (says he) he is a man subject to passions, may be
miscarryed, etc. 4. The Law is the common surety between the King and the
Subject, that is to say, it binds me to pay the King Tribute, etc. and binds
the King that J shall enjoy my protection. 5. In a word, he is a good Subject
that looks up ward to see what, in God, Gods Vicegerent commands; and
secondly, that looks downward to see whom the obedience thereunto does either
hurt or hinder. Papists grant us this, Bellarm.
that in the Superior three things are concurrent, 1. The place, which is from
Christ alone. 2 The person, which is from the choosers. 3. The union of these
two, which is from Christ, but by the mediation of a humane act: Let
Protestants then have their ei^s in their foreheads.

The fourth consideration is critical. My money shall never help to kill men:
I answer, your money is not yours, if the Lord, the Law, the Liberty, the cause
or the defenders thereof stand in need thereof, no more then the ass in the
Gospel or the bread and beese of Naball, Matthew 21.3. ^ Sam. 25.1^
theirs, in the like case. 2. I answer, your money shall not help to kill well
if you hinder the killing, quelling of those who would both kill and quell us,
ours, our Religion, Kingdom, you become friends of Gods enemies and ours, and
resolve to make peace with them, with whom God has resolved to have war,
Exodus 17. ult.

The fifth consideration is a sullen Melancholy one, trading's dead, our Money
goes, never so many payments, etc. This man is not worth the answering, J shall
only desire him to learn, if he be learneable, what Job says, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not evil also? The Gospel has
been a peaceable plentiful Gospel, and then you loved it, ran after it, but
now it is otherwise, you are otherwise affected. To you J shall commend that
John 6.26. You follow me for the loaves, etc.

The sixth is a mere foolish consideration (if it may so be termed) or rather
(for fools also will be talking) a mere prating, a mere nothing, and non
sensical thought about the present things in the Kingdom. Within the verge of
this J shall include the indiscreete running before Authority, in things where
the command and countermand are not alike. This J shall desire to be proposed
within these two Propositions.

First, Manners to stay the States leisure: but,

Secondly, Is it any offense to do their work for them?

Good meaning may be grounded on errors, but the bad must be shadowed with
colors; J shall cornmend to my Countrymen, whose salvation (if J know mine
own heart) I earnestly desire, these following Notes, with some other; these
by command, the other by permission, set forth to light. I have spoken herein
to Christians, like such a one (...)

and context following, viz.

1. A sad and civil War in the bowels of a Kingdom.

2. Between the King and his, and his Son and his party.

3. A battle given, not without bloodshed on both sides.

4. A victory ordered by the Lord of Hoasts on the Kings side.

5. The sad entertainment this news of victory had at Court, and even amongst
the Conquerors themselves.

6th. A peremptory and positive inference of Joab concerning the same, viZ.
Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, verse. 5.

Which inference contains,

1. An objurgation or reproof in those words, Thou have shamed, etc.

2. A demonstration of the truth thereof, Thou love thine enemies, etc.

3. A reason given of this demonstration, Thou regardest neither, etc.

4. A request urged to his Majesty, Now therefore up, come out, etc.

5. A danger discovered, if not granted, For I swear, etc.

7th. The event and issue of this sad business, which is,

1. On the Kings part, he is persuaded, and comes out, and sits in the gate, so
verse. 8. Then the King arose, etc.

2. On the peoples part, they are contented, and with this glad tidings of the
Kings approach, come before him, strive to serve him, etc. So verse. 8, 9, 10,
11. etc.

In the handling of this long Text and History to you Honorable and
well-beloved, for brevities sake, this shall be mine order.

The two first parts, viz. 1. a sad war, 2. and betwixt such parties, shall
yield us this point of Doctrine.

That to see a sad and civil war, Jer. 25.29. See the Lords description of a
war, sad words, more sad works, if God be provoked to do them.

Joab's sin is thus set down, 1 King. 2.5. Omega nostrorum mors est, Mars
alpha malorum. Epigr.
he shed the blood of war in peace: the blood of battle to be shed at any
time is a sad and sorrowful thing; but in the time in the land of peace is a
double grief. Every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and with
garments rolled in blood, Esa. 9.5. sad spectacles, sorrowful cries; see the
Prophet. The shield of the mighty is made red, the valiant men are in Scarlet,
etc. A multitude is slain, and the dead bodies are many, there is no end of
the corpse, they stumble upon the dead carcasses, Nahum 2.3. and cap. 3.3. the
sighing prisoners, Psalm. 79.11. mourning captives, Psalm. 137. are all within
this doleful spectacle of war, what war soever it be; but such a war as
is in our Text, 3. Properties of a civil war. -- omnibus hosts Redditens
populis, ^^vils avertite bellum.
yea in our times, it has these considerations in it. 1. It is a civil war.
2. A destructive. 3. An unnatural war, and these evil properties belong to
none but such a war.

But why so sad a spectacle?

Such a war is a fearful cause.

Do you make it a case of conscience you that fight? then hear a The
soldiers rule, an ill trade to kill men for money
a rule: The engagement in a war (especially on the offensive part) where the
quarrel is either unjust or unknown, makes both the actor and helper guilty
of bloodshed.

Do you make it no case of conscience, but for pay, hatred of goodness,
emulation, particular revenge, etc. hand over head and blindfold undertake it?
Paterculus de Roman. diseerdia.
Then hear one that spoke by experience. War amongst us (says he) is
begun, not so much upon any cause, as for the wages the undertakers should
receive. 2. When once begun, no man knew when it would end. 3. Covetousness
yielded a cause of cruelty; rather then not rob, they will kill, etc. 4. The
manner of offense was judged by the measure of coin. 5. For if any one were
rich, that was enough to render him guilty. 6. And no thing or action accounted
bad if gainefull. So then in this looking-glass of ours we see a bad cause
working two bad effects.

1. Are we scient, knowing? read 2 Samuel 2.14. or Genesis 27.40.

2. Sam. 15.11.

Such a war has fearful effects. God and man will tell you this truth both
of them. 1. God; see the Scriptures before, and add to them one more, Ier.
6.22. they come from the North, that is their place, verse. 23. tells you their
preparation and qualities, their mercy as little as their power great, verse.
24. shows us the peoples caution; how are they prepared? very poorly, verse.
25, 26. sets down the Prophets counsel, a sad business.

(...), the Greek word for war, signifies much blood. Bellum a belluis.
Tamberlaine's Coachhorses were conquered Kings, Adonibezek's Dogs, 70. Kings
gathering crumbs, etc. Jud. 1.7.
When the Switzers Anno 1443. Lanquer. Chron. p. 261.
vanquished the Thuricenses in battle, they banquetted in the place where they
won the victory, using the dead bodies of their adversaries in stead of
stools and tables.

The Numantines Guevara Epist.
assaulted by the Romans made solemn vows amongst themselves, no day to
break their fast but with the flesh of a Roman, nor to drink before they had
tasted the blood of an enemy. Scipio See Plutar. killed all the old women and
children, and set fire of all their riches in the marketplace.

Brutum fulm. p. 144.


took their Town at last, and the story tells the sad issue. Or if these will
not serve, you may remember the cruelties between the Spaniard and the
Hollander in our own eyes.

If of civil wars you would see the effects either in the Chronicles of
others, or our own, you may receive satisfaction; the Brutum fulmen, page 144.
tells us that in the late civil wars of France there were slain 120000.
natives, besides other of their allies. See our own, William the Conquerotr,
and successively York and Lancaster, says my Author, (...) H^st. lib. 1. c. 7.
in that unhappy quarrel devoured no less then eighty Princes of the blood
Royal besides an infinite number of the commonalty: these are sad effects, and
yet it might be drawn lower yet, but I forbear.

Such a war has doleful bystanders.

Such are either friends or enemies, good or bad. 1. The Churches friends, as
Jeremy in his Alphabeticall Lamentations, send forth sad expressions of sorrow,
for it grieves them to see her in the dust; these yield bindings (...), Nazi.
up to the sores; they take words Hosea 14.2. (...). Basil.
and go to God, pleading with him as if they meant to silence him, yea make
him blush and shame him; these like the Jews in their Feasts, break their
Glasses as Jerusalem was broken, and sow (...). Nazian.
seed in the long furrows which the ploughers made upon our back.

2. But are they bad and our enemies? now they rejoice and cry down with her,
even unto the ground, Psalm. 137.7. Now they consult, Exodus 1.10. Come let us
walk and work wisely; Now they conspire, Geball, and Ammon, and Amalek, the
Philistines, and them of Tire, how they may take the house, and the cause, yea
and Kingdom of God too into their possession.

Well then,

Resp. 1. You must look upwards, and God says he is the cause: So Ezekiel.
14.17. If I bring a sword, etc. it is Malum poenae, therefore not brought
amongst us, unless he do it, Amos 3.6. and Esaias 45.7. War is amongst the
treasury of Gods Judgments, in the Magazine of his instruments of vengeance.
The Church feels, Lam. 1.12, 13, 14. etc. And where it is not so perceived,
they may feel the smarting of the wound, but (believe it) hardly run right
to the cure. The people sin and God makes the sin of the King, the sin of
the peoples punishment.
See an instance for this Hosea 5.13, 14. Oh that England might never forget
that, 2 Samuel 24.1. The wrath of the Lord kindled against Israel, and he moved
David, etc.

How shall we be persuaded? Oh I think it is impossible, impossible I say,
though not in it self, yet at least by accident, for we knock at deaf men's
doors, our people are deceived, and God has said, Let them alone. Hearing
they shall hear, and not understand, etc. Esa. 6.9, 10.

First, Hypocrisy has overcome us. We are like those Micah 6.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
like them in the question we would seem to ask, not like them in the Answer,
for we cannot hear the rod, nor who has appointed it, and indeed it is
because the treasures of wickedness are in the house of the wicked, no power,
no will to be reformed. Alas the sin and punishment are National, so must
the amendment be. It was the old rule, Si veniam reus speret, petat cum
lachrymis, petat fletibus totius Ecclesiae, Amb. de poeniten l. 1. c. 16.
If the private man (in case of public sin) desire pardon, let him ask it
with his own, yea, and the tears of the whole Church also.

Secondly, Deceit has overcome us; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. God has given them up to
believe a lie; the Note upon that Text is, Infatuati seducemur, seducti judical
untur, Aug.
that being infatuate they shall be seduced, and being seduced they shall be
punished: There is the fearful malignant, the wilful malignant, the ignorant
malignant; and every one of these covers himself under falsehood, making a lie
his refuge, Esaias 28.15. The Sanctuary these men have in these sad times, is
like the covering under Jonahs Gourd, or Adams Figgeleaves; Oh that they could
know that, first, under God there is no hiding place, for in the time of
trouble he, etc. Psalm. 27.5. secondly, that upon God who casts himself, Nulla
vis, nulla fraus, nullae jam illecebrae poterunt vel stantem dejicere vel
subjicere dominantem Bern.
no force, no fraud can reach him.

Thirdly, Schism and division has overcome us, Manasses against Ephraim, and
Ephraim against Manasses; but what shall I say? so it has been, will be, must
be, Christ foretold it, and we have found it true which is said Matthew. 10.34,
35.

But what is this Schism? I Will give three rules in answer:

First, Quando doct^inae seu praecepta in consetentias hominum obtendentur,
quae non dubitative, sed direct contra verbum Dei, aut legem humanam, etc.
When things are thrust upon the conscience, which are not doubtfully, but
directly against the Word of God, schism in this case is not active but
passive, a due separation from the error, not the body, for to that we are
united by the Spirit and love, so far forth as it is united to the truth of
Jesus Christ the head thereof.

Apply this rule to the present state of our times, Schisina, 1 activum. 2
passivum
and then tell me what is Schism, or what Rebellion?

Secondly, Schism or Division likewise is cadent,

First, Upon bad men, in whom it is either, 1. Through too much faith: or 2.
Through too little Charity.


Secondly, Upon good men, in whom it is either, 1. Through error of Judgment.
2. Or scruple of conscience.


Apply this also, and you shall find the rash and heady malignant, so to be
divided: First, he believes all, every promise, every protestation. And
secondly, (which is worse) he would cut the throat of him that will not so do
too.

The ignorant and better malignant he is divided otherwise, he has a little
Non est conscientia quae obligat sed lex illa quam intellectui conscientia
praesentat: and revera conscientia semper praesumer^^ scientiam.
conscience and that scruples almost the very word King or Parliament; he has
less judgment, and that is the reason his conscience is no better informed.

3 Rule is for the Judges of what is Trouble, Schism, Division, Rebellion,
etc. where you have,

1. The greater part: these say, Judicium 1. Majoris, 2. Melioris partis.
Elias troubles Israel, 1 King. 18.18. and the Apostles, the world.

2. The better part, and they can tell you that this must be retorted out of
the same Text.

We have all this while looked upwards to find out a cause of war amongst
us. Now downwards, and there we shall find our sin the cause of this so sad
an effect; Nihil in poenaquod non prius erat in pecate.
and there we will put a parallel between David's time and ours in point of
sorrow-bringing sins, thus.

1. David's indulgence: Is Absalom such a man? a proper man, a goodly head of
hair, but not a dram of grace, no Psalm. 45.13, 14.
inward beauty at all, and yet the King cannot pull his heart from him although
in the danger of the loss of a Kingdom.

2. This Absalom has a party, and that in Israel too, that will venture their
lives in such a desperate ungodly quarrel: Oh the wickedness of this world!
No cause so ill, or person so untoward, that is or shall be without adherents
as wickedly desperate as the undertaker can be in a case of mischief.

3. And these Ahitophel, Sh^mei, Z^ba. A Counselor, a curser, a cousener: a
party good enough for so bad an undertaking.
counselors, cursers, colloguers, what not? We may see the old complaint too
truly verified, My Kingdom is not of this world, etc. John 18.36 All them that
do the Devils business show their faithfulness, (if it may so be called) the
Lord Jesus hardly finds one to trust; Concilium deforme voca^, glomerantur in
^nu^ Innumerae pestes Erebi. Quest.
this I am sure is a very sad spectacle, to see a good cause have so few, a bad
so many friends.

But let us ask one question.

What marks or signs may be given for the discovery of and discerning between
the good and bad cause, side, or party, in such a sad spectacle of confusion?

1. Solution. Marks to know the best side in a time of war. 1. The M^rcy.
The best side is ever the merciful side, more sparing, less cruel, ready to
say with him, 2 Samuel 2.26. Shall the sword devour for ever? ready to do like
him, 2 King. 6.22. Thou have taken them, but smite them not, set meat and
drink before them, that they may refresh themselves and go to their Master;
Mark this, and where you find it, honor that side, in times of sadness and
combustion, the worst Religion is ever most cruel; Bastardly professions are
ever full of blood.

2. The best quarrel is mixed, not personal; 2. Quarrel.
so God be not dishonored, sin maintained, they are ever as conscientious in
laying down, as courageous in taking up Arms; with such men sin is a greater
evil then war, and no shame like that, not to defend Gods cause. See Joshua
22.12, 13. etc.

3. Does God give them victory? 3. Clemency.
other men shall feel their clemency, they will cause their enemies praise God
they have, and pray him they may fall into such hands. 2 Samuel 19.23. David's
Cavalliers are under command.

If God will please to continue us yet under this sad condition, as I am afraid
he will, these few rules I desire to present the people in a desolation
public. 1. The Law Jus legionis facile est. 1. Non sequi; 2. Non fugere
bel^^m. Veget. lib. 2. cap. 17.
of warfare is, (especially in a good cause) Do not follow, do not fly an
onset. 2. Every spiritual war consists in a conflict between the reason and
the will: Does ours so? surely it does.

1. It is reason the Militia be in safe hands. 2. Reason the Parliament punish
gross offenders. 3. Reason men should part with some to defend all. 4. Matthew.
13.41.
Religion, things be taken out of the Church that do offend.
3. God is a Warrier, Allegory.
and continually fights against the sinner, his enemy; How does he defend? Oh
he is got into a walled Town called Obstinacy, the ditch about it is a great
depth of sin, the Turrets of those walls are pride, and height of spirit; but
what are his weapons? resistance of the holy Ghost, and a wilful extinguishing
the light of his own conscience; his Captain, blindness, and his soldiers
in this war, inordinate affections; his Counselor is folly, and his
conquest hardness of heart, with the forsaking of God and security. Apply this
to our present condition, and you shall find it to be Englands Looking-glass.

The two next points, viz. the battle and the victory, yield us this:

That Christians ought in times of sadness to contemplate the actions of war
which are severally performed, 2. Things in war to be seen.
viz. on man's part the former, for they can fight; but on the part of God the
latter, he orders the victory,

God orders hereby our sight of things, King. 6.16, 17. we see but half, if we
see man only: We see him taunting, vaunting, boasting, threatening, he will do
this, and bring to pass that, but we see God determining, Esa. 37.33. He shall
not enter into this City, nor, etc.

God would hereby guide our affections, grief, fear, Flanders, they ask at
Sea, Are not all the Roundheads killed yet? Cloisters, and the whole rabble of
the Romanists, all contribute heads, hearts, hands, purses, and all to this
war: yea Antichrist, Tua res agitur? is thy work a doing? But turn me out
one of thy companions that can give the victory; no, that is out of all your
reaches, see 1 Samuel 14.20. It is God that gives victory unto Kings, Psalm.
144.10.

God hereby orders his own acknowledgements. No sacrificing to our nets, Exodus
15. and Jud. 5. are monumentall chapters for such a purpose.

The Christians contemplation: Paul said to Timothy, Ep. 2. c. 2. v. 8.
Remember that Jesus Christ, etc. so say I, let all be remembered, but especially
fundamental truths: There is a counsel well given, Act. 5.39. yea and well
taken too, for verse. 40. to him they all consented; in what? in this maine
thing, that if it be of God there is no resistance, lest happily we be found
fighters against God.

If I had such a proffer from the King as sometimes Solomon had from a greater
then he, To his Majesty.
1 King. 3.5. Ask what I shall give thee, I would first defire the
contemplation of my dear Sovereign fixed on this point; We will not remember
misled Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. for fear the parallel should not be good enough: But
we will think of good Iosia one of the best of Kings, 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22.
Leave off to come against God which is with me, lest he destroy thee: but Iosia
hearkened not to the words of Neche, which were of the mouth of God. Next ye
Patriots of our Country, 2. The Parliament.
I shall desire your remembrance of this point that you may be called, (as
heretofore, in such times, and upon such occasions as now) be called I say the
Parliament working wonders. 3. The Kingdom.
Of you ye Citizens and Contrymen, I desire the reading of Iad. 5.6. the
high ways were (I say will be) unoccupied, but observe verse. 8. they chose new
Gods, new Devils rather, and then was war in the gates.

The Christians consolation, Nec temere, nec timide, men and Christians too,
both or neither. Hezekiah's method (me thinks) is excellent, When the
Blasphemer brags, tell God of him.
Esa. 36.21. with 37.1. Say nothing to that blasphemer, but (as if they should
say) Sir, we will complain of you to one that shall take you to task; an
excellent course, be you careful in nothing, (that is, unbeleevingly,
distrustfully so) but make your requests to him who gives the victory, guides
the bullets, Threefold comfort.
orders the battle, appoints the success, Psalm. 115.3. is in heaven, i. e. on
high, and therefore 1. sees, 2. and does whatsoever he will, 3. and he is our
God: Of our persons? yes: if not so, of our cause he is the God sure.

Directions.
1. The old Plutarch in vita Thrafibuli.
rule: the divident of victory was between the Commander, the Soldier, and
Fortune: the last should be first; I am afraid the last has too little for his
part.

2. Quid est victoria? It is said of old, It is Non osse turpe ab co vinci,
quem vincere (...) nefas; neque ei inhoneste aliquem submitti, quem fortuna
super omnes ex^u^isse^. Dictum Armenii Pompeio.
no shame to be overcome of him, whom to overcome were a shame; nor is it
uncomely to be under him, whom God has set over all. This is for the King
indeed, indeed I intend it so; and it is for the Parliament too, all good Kings
and Christians should intend it so. The Chronicle says of King Edw. 2. Tunc
vere victus quando tot vicit prudentes milites. Walsingham. Ed. page 95. Ut
superater victor prius 5000. hostiu^ istius Reip. aut 5. victorias obtineter;
vide Isid. Tranquil.
that he was never so overthrown, as when he had overthrown so many brave and
wise Soldiers; no such victory against the King, as for him to have victory
against the Parliament.

3. There were in Rome certain Laws for their triumphs, that first the
Conqueror should have got five victories: Allegorically, to have overcome his
five senses, that is, himself. Oh such a victory on any side were worth a
triumph! and surely that side is nearest the deserving of it that seek not
their own ends or glory, but his that sent them.

The fifth part, that is, the entertainment and sad welcome of the news of a
victory, gives us this doctrine.

That a victory even to them that most desire it may peradventure turn to be a
thing sorrowful enough, verse. 2.

Is drawn from the things which must or may be before a victory; I shall only
quote the instance, Iud. 20.21, 25, 35. with 21.3, 6. see here a victory full
of blood before, and wates, that is, tears afterward: Oh these wonderful
punishments, just, Paenae mirabiles, Cajetan.
yet secret, secret yet just, so his Judgments, as that they are also our
sins, God deliver us from them.

From the things which are after the victory. Secundae c^gitationes.
First, the number of Christians: Secondly, the manner of their death: Thirdly,
the fear of damnation: Fourthly, the illness of the Quarrel: Fifthly, my
engagement to defend it: Sixthly, Oblationes pacis, prayers for peace:
Seventhly, cause of refusal thereof, as dissimulation, etc.

Information of the danger: Hoc dulce inexpertis est: We must be knowing men in
our dangers. May I have leave to distribute them?

1. Danger of not parting with money, so in the wars at Constantinople. Dangers
in war


2. Danger of sedition, so in Jerusalem, in London.

3. Danger of emulation, so in our Gentry and Army.

4. Danger of mercenaries, so at Brainford, and every where.

5. Danger of sin, the danger of all dangers.

Object. Best to leave all?

Sol. Nunc periculum par animo Alexandri.
That were the basest of basenesses: Now there is a danger fitting the mind of
Alexander. There is necessity (says he Pompeius, See Plutar in vita ejus.
) of Sailing, no necessity of living. So say I, a necessity to fight, none to
live, in servitude especially, Ephesians. 6.10. It is Gods method to teach so, his
peoples, to learn so.

Prepare therefore, shall we? Oh by all means possible, spiritually
especially, a Moses, with an Aaron, and Hur to your Joshua, Mountain men, and
valley men, Exodus 17.

Your doubt is the next use, and that thus, Absalom be killed, what then? how
then will you be affected in such a case? will you not love Religion the worse
all your life time? Numaes Temple of old had this Inscription, (...).
The Temple of Faith and Peace. Faith first, and secondly Peace: Christian
keep those two in that order in thy Soul, and take with thee these three
guidances.

First, See the worlds order, Numb. 16.41. Understanding
they will have liberty to say, ye have killed, but we must not say, ye have
set your selves against God, and therefore we are against you, and yet this is
very true; if the effect be ours, the cause is yours, that is certain.

Secondly, Prayer.
Pray that that piece of the Psalm may be fulfilled, Be wise now therefore O
ye Kings. Much, much must be in Kings, Solomon the Son showed such a
Masterpiece, 1 Reg. 3.28. All Israel admired it, and feared him; So David the
Father here, the danger of losing his people, is turned into the delight in
gaining them; So King James the Father, showed a Masterpiece of skill in that
great danger Gunpowder treason.
; And pray we that God will guide our Royal Sovereign his Son, that he will
kiss the Son of God, lest he be angry, and so he and we too, perish from
the right way.

Thirdly, Boldness.
Pray we that boldness may be given to Joab, Micaiah, Jeremy, etc. they may
suffer much ill, but nothing to the good they shall do: I shall present them
with the Apostles reckoning, Romans 8.18. And if we reckon otherwise we reckon
wrong.

The sixth part, viz. Joabs inference follows, and presents us with this;

That in sad times,

Kings have at such times given leave, and Priests and Prophets taken leave, so
to deal with the greatest of men; Jerem. 38.20. But Jeremy said, they shall
not deliver thee, hearken unto the Word of the Lord, etc. So 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
Eliah with Ahab, 1 King. 18.18. Nathan with David, 2 Samuel 12. Flattery is
odious at all times, but at such times, Jerem. 7.16.

So then, we should take and have given us in times of danger, how it is
raised: We cannot but speak, Act. 4.20 And Act. 20.24. My life is not dear,
so I may carry on the service a little: What need men venture their necks,
their lives, to defend the cause? Oh their conscience and the Commandment of
God, Gods Spirit, the Churches ruin, all concur and become mightily, yea
irresistibly operative for the public.

God gives another Spirit, as to Caleb, Numb. 14.24. The River of Jordan turned
our of its course to Pella, a year together a Comer like a flaming Sword over
Jerusalem. Ar Sacrifice a Calfe brought forth a Lamb. See Eusebius and others.


Gives warnings, as to Jerusalem, fills the Air with sights and Comets. As the
Cocks crow loud and thick before a storm, so these before a Judgment.

This begges excuse for us, others, all well-affected sympathizing ones in
times of sadness.

Not so much manners, discretion.

For believe it, Honorable and well-beloved in Jesus Christ, they cannot help
it sometimes.

And mark the instance Amos 7.13. ver. 16, 17. He that says so, and dares to
silence the Lord of Hoasts, his Wife shall be a Whore in the City, and his
children shall fall by the sword, etc. v. 17.

But let us see the parts of the Kings chiding:

First, His blame is plainly laid down: David was a very happy King here, in
the plain dealing of Joab, elsewhere in Nathan.

Kings are not more unhappy in any thing, then this, their flatterers and
falsifyers with their entertainment, reward hearing.

But is it true that Joab charges the King withal?

The Lord forbid that anything but truth should be charged upon the Lords
Anointed. Then for Answer,

1. Simply and by it self, David really hated to shame them that preserve him
and his.

2. But it is by accident thus: as if Joab had said, Sir, I perceive there are
in your heart two things, in great competition, striving for pre-eminence, your
Absalom first, and then your People. Now because he has gotten so much of your
heart, therefore we get so little. And thus Joabs charge is true laid to the
King; and thus may the Subjects charge against the King be true, if lying under
the like cause of complaint.

But the second part is Joabs Demonstration, In that thou love thine enemies,
and hate thy Friends: Is this tiue? Yes, with this qualification;

1. Negatively, I do not say always you do so, but in this particular.

2. Not in all particulars neither, but in particulars of No miserv greater to
us in this sad time then this, Religion is in competition with Barbarism,
purity with popery, he latter has store of carnal men for it, for they love
it, the former seen and loved of few, and therefore of few embraced
competition, q.d. Joab; Sir your Absalom and your Adonijah, you may love them
well, but not better then your own peace, your own people. If the Queen of
your bosom stand in competition with your Kingdom, your people, you must not
love her better then us, then it: Sapientia optime cernitur in comparatis. I
conclude this with a History I have read: the Emperor Turk. history.
was charged with defect and want of care in government, by his Nobles and
Princes moved thereto (as they alleged) by the too much love of a Lady his
Concubine: Whom in a great assembly the Emperor showed to all his people on a
time, and they concluded that in regard of her excellent beauty, they could not
blame him for being misled by her, and so were contented. But (says he) that
you may know how little I regard her in comparison of you, he drew his cemyter
and killed her before them all. If our Religion had stood in competition with any
thing but Popery, our Parliament with any thing but the Gentry and Delinquents,
they had never been so near a miscarriage.

But the third part is Joabs humble request: Now therefore, etc. It is in a
triplicity:

First, Surge, you are fallen Sir very low, a King of others and not of your
self, how shall you rule their passions that cannot guide your own?

Secondly, Egredere, you are in prison, the worst of prisons, Men's captiva
manet, a bird may be kept so long in the cage, that at length she will not out
though the door be open.

Thirdly, Loquere super cor, speak comfort, we have heard sorrow enough, we
desire now comfort, and it is only to be had in you, and with a word, a
comfortable aspect upon your people, you may give it them.

And the fourth part is David's great danger, if this be not done, viz. the
Peoples desertion.

But who shall apply this? Who may? Who dare?

First, Let it be applied to our David, and tell him ye pillars of the People
first: Then bring it swiftly to him some of you also, ye Charets and Horsemen
of Israel, that there are but two governments. Two kinds of government.
First, as the Soul governes the body. Secondly, as the reason, the appetite.
Our Kings government is not like the first, he cannot enliven us as the Soul
does the body: Then let it be like the second, as the reason does the appetite;
how is that? by commanding reasonable things.

Secondly, And take heed you speak our sense. We do not The Mother of
Artaxerxes had wont to say, that they that would address themselves to
Princes, must use (...), Silken words. Plut. Apophtheg.
, we dare not think his Sacred Majesty, does intentionally hate his friends
and love his foes, but that something is unhappily got in competition with us,
which yet God has not discovered to him.

Thirdly, And let this be done dutifully, humbly, in a Subjects posture, and as
to a David indeed.

Fourthly, And yet so boldly that you propound the danger, with this direction
also, which is none of mine, Scopus nostrae professionis est ut, etc. the scope
of our Profession is, that we be obedient to all Superiors, so long as this
obedience brings no detriment to the Soul: but if it come to this, we must
dare to use our own Liberty. Epist. Synod. cuinomen Libellus supplex, and vide
Tom. 1. Fol. 803. Conc. Ephesians.

The seventh part, the event on the Kings part, he comes to the place of
Judicatory, on the Peoples part, they come to the place of auditory.

The retractations of public persons, etc. are exceeding attractive, like the
great wheel in the watch: Instan. 2 King. 22.12.

There is a concurrence, and commoving in, David's action, after comes the
peoples affection, a heavenly order; so deals God with his People, as you may
see, Psalm. 116.1.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 19. and 2 Chronicles. 15.8.12.16. The King shows
himself zealous of their good, the people show themselves as zealous of his
glory, he Crowns their desires, they his Temples.

There is a seasonablenesse, David, which is observable, before the mischief
grow too big, before the Devil tempt, before the heart be hardened, before
the approach of flattery, or evil counsel, the good God suggesteth, and the
good David obeys, to return to his People that they may return to him, etc.

Pray for audience in this particular,

In relation to us they are Gods (our Governors I mean) but in relation to
God, they are but men.

First, Present good, viz. that of retractation in things amiss, that they owe
to us.

Secondly, The future good, that of submission and obedience, that we owe to
them. With them both, and with all those things which make to the best and
blessed establishment of Peace and Truth amongst us, the Lord of Heaven be
entreated to bless both the King and People in this much distracted Kingdom,
for his dear Sons sake, Amen.

FINIS.

