THE WORKS OF WILLIAM BRIDGE, Sometime Fellow of Emmanuel College in
CAMBRIDGE: NOW Preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth.

The second Volumn.

VIZ. I. Grace for Grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's fullness received by
all Saints. II. The Spiritual actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.
III. Evangelical Repentance.


London, Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

To the Reader.
THat we may at least stay the longings of many thirsty Souls with a sweet
Relish of a promising Vintage of new Wine this year, we have slipped off this
Second ripe Cluster of Grapes from its fellows, which if it be squeezed in the
hand of Faith, will prove it self to be so rich, fragrant and sparkling with
the the Blood, Juice and Spirit of the Gospel, that it needs not the Purple of
our Epistle Recommendatory to welcome it to any, that are in truth the living
Branches of the true Vine; Yet to the end we may happily invite some that are
without to come in, that they also may both see and taste how good the Lord is
to the Children of the Bride chamber.

READER, Stand a while at the Well head, with the poor woman of Samaria,
admiring the infinite dimensions of those waters of Life that are fountain'd up
in Jesus Christ, of whose fullness we All receive even gracef or grace.

The Saints may be brim full of the holy Spirit, as Stephen was, but its
according to measure, a Vessel-fulness; but Christ above or without measure, a
Spring-fulness, which is not only repletive, but diffusive, unsearchable,
unmeasurable.

The great Ocean is too little to shadow out the over flowings of this fullness;
for take away a drop or two from thence, it presently suffers a diminution: But
though this Fountain of Salvation should shed abroad his love upon all the
world of the Elect (as the waters cover the Sea) yet it is ever full running
over: There is not the less light or heat in this Sun of Righteousness, though
he daily arises with healing in his wings unto them that fear his Name from
East to West; He is resterday, to day, and for ever the same. This is no
Hyperbolie, Nec Christus nec Coelum patitur Hyperbolum. Sic Lutheras.
but the language of Canaan.

Oh that this unspeakable Fullness of Heaven and Earth, or Saints and Angels,
that fills All in All, did now constrain thee to cast thy empty Pitcher into
these Depths of his Grace, so should thou with this beloved Evangelist, and
the rest that are included in this, WE ALL receive even grace for grace. To act
Faith is the principal use which directly flows out from every Doctrine about
Jesus Christ.

We shall Appeal unto thee (whose eye is fixed on this full Book of Grace) Is
not fullness in other things a Conquering golden Argument? Did not Joseph's
treasure of Corn prevail with good old Jacob and his Sons to go down into
Egypt? And shall not this one Gospel Joseph (who alone is the Bread of Life
that once came down from Heaven to feed hungry souls) engage thee (almost
famished) to come unto him for this Staff of Life, that thou may live? Were
they not the Floods of milk and honey that did run down the Promised Land, that
did set the Israelites teeth on edge to be there? And shall not the
overflowings of Christ's heart in heaven toward sinners on earth, make thee to
hunger and thirst after his Righteousness, who is the Lord our Righteousness?
Was it not the Abundance of Solomon's natural wisdom (which was as a
constellation of Stars in his Crown) that invited the Queen of Sheba to travel
from the utmost parts of Arabia to kneel before his Throne? And is there not a
greater then Solomon here? who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the
express Image of his person, full of grace and truth? Oh where, where then are
the Spiritual actings of thy Soul upon him! Abraham's Faith was a very lively,
vigorous, and a more then conquering Faith; when the Sentence of Death was
apparent on the head of the Mercy, and the womb leading to it, and is thy faith
like a tree twice dead, plucked up by the roots? God forbid. Oh remember the
fullness of the Infiniteness of all Perfections that are originally in the Lord!
being able to fill up all the empty chinks, void places, the unsatisfied
gaspings and yawnings of the vast Spirit of-man. We shall seal up all with the
Evangelical words of that voice of Christ echoed in a wilderness, as the great
Motive of all Motives, The Kingdom of Heaven, of Grace, of Christ, and all his
Benefits, is at hand, has approached. Therefore Believe, Repent: Blessed is
that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

Thine, in and for Jesus Christ, and his fullness, that thou may receive even
grace for grace, William Greenhil, William Adderley, John Yates.


The Titles of the first Volumn.
I. The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. II. Satan's power to Tempt; and Christ's
love to, and care of his people under Temptation. III. Thankfulness required in
every condition.
THE CONTENTS Of the Second VOLVMNE
JOHN, 1.16. SERMON I
Doctrine 1. THERE is a Fullness of Grace in Jesus Christ Page 3 Opened Ibid
Grace taken 3. ways 1 For the love and favor of God ibid 2 For holiness Page
6 Proved by Demonstrations Page 7 Objections answered Page 9 3 For gifts and
abilities ibid Proved Application Duty 1 Let all men come to Christ Page 12
Objections answered Duty 2 Let all trust unto him, and build upon him Page 14
Duty 3 It is our duty to draw forth this fullness 1 By a frequent eying of it.
Page 15 2 By resting up on it in the time of tempt at on Page 16 3 By giving it
foirth to others ibid Duty 4 Let us labor to be like to him. ibid Duty 5 Take
heed how we do any thing that may rob Christ of glory of his fullness
SERMON II John 1.16.
Proposition cleared Page 20 Doct. 2 All the Saints and people of God do
partake of the fullness of Christ in a way of receiving Page 20 Divided into two
parts Page 21 1 There is a communication of the fullness of Jesus Christ unto
all believers ibid 2 Whatsoever Grace or holiness the Saints have from Christ,
they have it in a way of receiving ibid The former proved Reason 1. Because
there is a union between Christ and a believer ibid 2 By 4. propositions 1
There is an infinite treasury of grace in Jesus Christ Page 22 2 What grace
soever and holiness he received as mediator he received not for himself but
for others ibid 3 There is an infinite willingness in Jesus Christ to
communicate his grace to the sons of men Page 25 4 There is nothing in heaven
or earth can hinder him from doing all Page 28 Objection Why are believers so
empty of grace Answered 1 The fullness of grace which is in a believer is many
times hid from the world Page 31 2 He communicates grace to them as an
universal cause and an universal cause seldom or never produces particular
effects without the concurrence of a particular cause ibid 3 He does it in
proportion Page 32 4 He does it according to their necessities and wants ibid
Application 1 Difference between the fullness of the world and the fullness of
Christ Page 33 1 The fullness of the world is made up of many things, The
fullness of Christ of but one thing, viz, the Deity ibid 2 The fullness of the
world is made up of worser things, But the fullness of Christ of the best of
bests Page 34 3 The fullness of the world runs into emptiness, but the
fullness of Christ is a dwelling fullness ibid 4 The fullness of the world can
never satisfy the better part of man. The fullness of Christ ever does Page 35
5 The fullness of the earth cannot commend a man to God, the fullness of Christ
makes a man lovely in the eyes of God Page 36 6 The fullness of the earth is
mixed with poison, sin, and the curse of God, The fullness of Christ with
contentment ibid 7 The fullness of the earth is a defiling fullness, The
fullness of Christ, a pure fullness Page 37 8 The fullness of the world is
less than is expected, the fullness of Christ is more than can be expected
ibid 9 The fullness of the world is sometimes better wanted than enjoyed, The
fullness of Christ always makes men happy ibid 10 The fullness of the earth
costs many times more than it is worth, but Christ gives much, and takes
nothing Page 38 11 All the fullness of the earth is not able to return you love
for love, The fullness of Christ returns you more love than you brought ibid
Application 2 An encouragement to all men to come in to Jesus Christ Page 39 To
Believers It will make them firm against al Temptations Page 40 Discouragments
Page 40 Afflictions Page 40 To Unbeleevers Page 41 Application 3 To believers
to labor to own their own, and strengthen their assurance of their union with
Jesus Christ Page 42
SERMON III John 1.16.
Doct. What grace or holiness the Saints have from Christ, They have it all in
a way of receiving Page 46 Proved by instances In Justification ibid In
Adoption ibid In Sanctification ibid In The gifts of the ibid In holy Ghost
ibid Prayer Page 47 All in general ibid The rain that falls Page 48 As also 1 By
the insufficiency of Nature 1 To overcome sin though never so small Page 49 2
To rise again if he be fallen Page 50 3 To continue if he should rise again
Page 51 4 To do any one good work Page 52 5 To prepare himself unto what is
good ibid 2 By the supernaturallity of grace Page 54 3 By the shortness of the
means of grace Page 55 4 By the work and nature of faith Page 56 5 By the
posture and true behavior of prayer Page 57 Object. This cuts off all
endeavors Answered Page 58 1 It moves to endeavors because it causes love
and fear Page 59 2 Whatsoever service we tender to God on this side heaven, is
all a waiting upon him Page 60 Reasons of the point 1 That all boasting,
rejoicing and confidence in ones self may be taken away Page 61 2 That Jesus
Christ may be fully honored and exalted ibid 3 That the Saints may live by
faith Page 62 Application 1 Behold what infinite care God has of believers
Page 62 Application 2 Behold what pleasant lives the Saints live Page 65
Application 3 What abundance live under the Gospel that have no saving interest
in Jesus Christ ibid Application 4 All is from grace from first to last Page 66
SERMON IIII John 1.16.
Doct Abundance of grace the Saints in the new Testament have from Jesus Christ
Page 69 Cleared 1 If we consider the several advances grace has made from the
beginning of the world to this day Page 71 1 We have it not by the candle but
by the Sun Page 76 2 The vail is now rent, we have it not in shadow but in
substance Page 79 3 It is not tempered with the Law but with the Gospel Page 77
4 We have it not in bondage but with the spirit of adoption ibid 5 We have it
from the Son of God Page 78 2 As there is abundance of grace discovered so
there is abundance exhibited and communicated to the Saints Page 78 1 It is a
great matter for an ungodly man to be justified Page 79 2 It Is a great matter
for a man to be the Son of God ibid 3 It is a great matter to have the Image of
Jesus Christ drawn upon a filthy soul ibid 4 It is a great matter for a man to
be in heaven before he comes there Page 80 Object. We do not see such abundance
of Grace in the lives of those that are accounted godly Answered 1. Do you
consider the opposition of Grace? when grace is much opposed, though it be
little in bulk it will be great in operation Page 80 2 Consider the Retinue of
it, though grace be mean it has a rich retinue Page 81 3 Consider the mystery
of grace 1 It is a great matter to tremble at the word and yet to love it and
prize it Page 82 2 To love the Ordinances and yet at the same time to think he
does not profit thereby Page 83 3 To comfort himself in that the Lord knows his
heart, and yet to see there is much hypocrisy there ibid 4 To be sensible of
his sin and yet not willing to chang his condition with another for all the
world ibid 5 To work out his salvation with fear and trembling, and yet to rely
upon Jesus Christ alone for it Page 84 6 For a man to walk closely with God and
yet be in the dark ibid 7 To be diligent in his particular calling, and yet
take no thought what he shall eat, drink, or put on ibid 8 To know that God
will work good and gain to him out of his sin, and yet to strive against it as
against the greatest evil of the world ibid 9 To be the more afflicted because
his affliction comes from God Page 85 10 To pray earnestly for a better
condition, and yet be contented with his present though never so mean ibid
Application 1 Do not vilify the gift of God wherewith thou art enriched
through Jesus Christ Page 86 Application 2 Behold what great sinners professors
are Page 86 Application 3 What a mighty encouragement here is, both to good and
bad To bad, to come in to Christ Page 88 To good, to abound in grace Page 88
SERMON V John 1.16.
Doct. Whatsoever grace the Saints have they have it from Jesus Christ Page 91
Proved By the insufficiency of nature Page 92 By the alsufficiency of Christ
Page 93 Objections answered Page 99. 101 What good a Christian receives hence 1
Jesus Christ is made our strength Page 104 2 We are moved to love him ibid 3 To
live in dependence upon him ibid 4 To walk humbly before him ibid 5 To be
fruitful Page 105 Application What infinite cause have we to advance the Name
of Jesus Christ Page 106 How may this be done 1 By offering up our own christ
to him Page 107 2 Account it a great honor to belong unto him ibid 3 Give not
the worst, but always the best to him Page 108 4 Despise not the choice work
of Christ ibid 5 Trust always in him ibid 6 So to walk that the men of the
world may speak well of the ways of God Page 109 7 Own Christ Page 110 8 Be
willing to stoop to any work, for Jesus Christ, though it lie below your
condition
SERMON VI John 1.16.
Doct. Whatsoever grace or holiness there is in Jesus Christ, there is somewhat
in the Saints that is answerable thereunto Page 113 Proved Reason 1 Because
there is a blessed union between Christ and every Christian Page 115 Reason 2
Jesus Christ is our second Adam a common person between God and us Page 117
Reason 3 There is an incomparable love between Christ and a Christian ibid
Reason 4 There is the same spirit in a Christian that is in Christ Page 119
Object. How can this be? Answered Page 120 Application 1 How many persons there
are that live under the Gospel and have no interest in Jesus Christ Page 122
Instanced 1 In profane people ibid 2 In merely Civil and morral people ibid 3
In Hypocrites Page 123 Application 2 What a blessed thing it is for people to
be in Christ Page 123 Quest. What is our duty that flows from hence? Answ. 1.
Be not proud of it Page 124 2. Improve it Page 125 1 By beholding it ibid 2 By
imitating it ibid 1 By bearing witness to the truth ibid 2 By stooping to any
work though below us ibid 3 By being much in prayer ibid 4 By not knowing our
natural relations ibid 5 Having an high esteem of the Saints though never so
low Page 126 6 So exercising one grace as that we may exercise another ibid 7
Being a lamb in our cause, a lion in Gods ibid 8 In sufferings 1 Not till we
are called ibid 2 When we are called not to be put out of the way ibid 3 To
have regard to other men's goods ibid 4 To be more sensible of Gods withdrawings
than of al other pains ibid Application 3 How infinitely we are bound to God
the Father for our Lord Jesus Christ Page 128 Gods two great gifts were 1 He
gave the world to man 2 He gave Jesus Christ to the world ibid Application 4 Be
contented to have fellowship with Jesus Christ in all his sufferings
SERMON I Romans, 4.19.
Text opened Page 152 Doct. 1. When God intends to fulfill his promise by
giving any special blessing to believers, he does first put the sentence of
death upon it, and upon all the means that lead unto it. Page 154 Proved
Reason. 1 That he may be most seen therein Page 156 Reason 2 That the Saints
may learn to trust to God alone Page 157 Reason 3 That they may be conformable
to Jesus Christ Page 158 Reason 4 That their comforts may be the more sure and
steadfast ibid Objections answered Page 159 Cautions, 1 Understand this,
concerning great and spiritual blessings Page 160 2 The sentence of death may
be put upon the blessing in another man's hand Page 161 3 It is much according
to the life of the mercy that come afterward Page 162 Quest. Why does God first
give the promise? Answ. 1 To show us where the mercy lies Page 163 2 Because he
does not intend we shall have it presently ibid 3 That our hearts may be born
up against all discouragements Page 164 Application Rest upon God in the
darkest times Page 164 Quest. How shall I know the mercy will revive again
Answ. There are two acts of faith 1 Reliance 2 Assurance Accordingly there are
two objects of faith 1 A may be of mercy 2 A shall be of mercy A may be, of
mercy causes Reliance A shall be, of mercy causes Assurance Reliance causes
quietness Assurance causes joy ibid Ways to know whether mercies shall rise
again or not 1 By the frequent visitings of the promise Page 167 2 By the first
fruits of the promise Page 168 Encouragements to wait 1 If ever it rise it will
be the choicest mercy we had in all our lives Page 170 2 It will be the surest
mercy ibid 3 It will be the sweetest mercy Page 171
SERMON II Romans 4.19.
Doct. When God is pleased thus to put the sentence of death upon a blessing or
the means that leads to it, it is the duty of the sons of Abraham to trust in
God and not stand poring upon the means and deadness thereof Page 174 Divided
into three propofitions, and cleared 1 A mere rational considering of the means
and the deadness thereof is a great enemy to believing cleared Page 174 2 When
all means fail and seem to lie dead, then it is the duty of all the sons of
Abraham, to believe cleared Page 177 3 Thus to believe when all means fail, is
exceeding well pleasing and acceptable to God, cleared Page 180 Application
What an encouragement is here to to live above hope and under hope Page 183
Object. We are afraid to believe when means fail, because God has commanded us
to use the means Answered Page 184 1 It may be God takes away the means to try
thy faith Page 185 2 God does never give to supply our lusts, but to supply our
wants ibid 3 If all the means fail, faith is a means to a means Page 186 4 Look
what way God is used to walk in toward you, in that way you may boldly expect
him ibid Object. I should prosume if I should trust in God when means fail
Answered Page 188
SERMON III Romans 4.19
Doct. True saving faith carries the soul through all difficulties Page 192
Cleared 1 In that the wy to Jesus Christ is clogged with many difficulties Page
193 2 True saving faith will carry a man through them all Page 195 3 Nothing
but faith can do it, For, 1. Conviction of the good ways of God cannot Page
200 2 Resolution will not ibid 3 Morral virtues will not Page 201 4 Gifts and
parts, Gospel enlargments cannot ibid 4 What it is in faith that does it 1
Faith shows the soul the invisible things of God Page 202 2 It tells the soul
all things are it is own Page 203 3 It shows a man greater excellencies in
Christ than all difficulties Page 204 4 It enables the soul to leave the
success and event of all to God ibid 5 It is that grace whereby a soul takes up
the yoke of Christ Page 205 6 It teaches man to pick out the love of God from
under the anger of God Page 206 7 It fills the soul with Gods infinitness Page
207 Application If Difficulties arise, here is the way to grapple with them
Page 207 Object. How shall a man use his faith that be may break through all
difficulties? Answered 1 Exercise your faith in the promise, before you speak
with the difficulties Page 208 2 When you do look upon them, look upon them as
your trials and many times as the Devils Engines to work your hearts off again
Page 208 3 Set your selves (now especially) with all your might to venture upon
Jesus Christ Page 209 4 The greater difficulties your graces are recovered out
of the hands of, the more sweet will they be unto you Page 210 5 Study Jesus
Christ more ibid Object. Suppose a man has bin in Jesus Christ a great while,
and then discouragements arise to beat him out of the ways of Christ how shall
he raise his faith to work through these? Answered 1 Consider your call, often
Page 211 2 The more you believe in the full of difficulty, the more you please
God ibid 3 Talk often one to another what great things God has done, that he
has promised Page 212 4 Consider what great difficulties Jesus Christ has
broke through to come to you ibid 5 Never speak with your difficulties apart
from a promise. ibid
Matthew, 3.2. SERMON I
The text opened and explained Page 216 Doct. The kingdom of Grace, mercy and
forgiveness, comes to us before we com to that Page 211 Proved Page 218
Evidenced 1 From our own condition. Lost sheep Page 228 2 From Christ's
willingness to save sinners Page 224 Objections answered Page 225 Reas. 1 That
God may be known to be God Page 229 Reas. 2 That men may be made the more
gracious ibid Reas. 3 That no flesh may glory in it self nor any thing it does
Page 231 Application 1 Consider whether God have dealt thus by our souls or no
Page 232 If so, learn these duties 1 Be sooner at heaven gate with your duties
hereafter than you were before Page 234 2 Labor to be like God in this
particular ibid 3 Wait with long suffering for the conversion of others Page
235 4 Trust in God for ever Page 236 Application 2 You that have not received
the Kingdom of Grace, Take heed how ye neglect so great salvation Page 237
SERMON II Matthew. 3.2.
Doct. 2 The drawing nigh of the kingdom of grace, is the greatest motive to
true Repentance Page 240 Opened by considering the particulars of Repentance,
and you shall find the grace and love of God has influence upon them all Viz.
1 Sight and knowledge of sin Page 242 2 Be humbled for it Page 243 3 Loath
himself ibid 4 Be ashamed of it ibid 5 Acknowledge it Page 244 6 Labor to unsin
it it ib. Reason 1 Because Repentance is a fruit of faith Page 245 Reas. 2
Because it flows from love Page 246 Object. Arguments drawn from Hell, and the
wrath of God, seem to work Repentance more than the love of God Page 247
Answered, by distinctions 1 It is one thing to be troubled in conscience, and
another thing to be humbled for sin Page 248 2 It Is one thing to be pricked at
heart, and another thing to repent ibid 3 It Is one thing to repent of sin in
regard of the inconvenience of it, and another thing to repent in regard of the
morral evil of it ibid 4 Its one thing to be broken with the weight of sin, and
another to have the soul melted for it Page 249 5 Its one thing to have sorrow
and repentance in the Ore, and another thing to have it refined. ibid 5 It is
one thing for repentance to be more in view, another to be mort in spirit Page
250 7 It is one thing for our Repentance to affect our own heart much, another
thing for to affect the heart of God much. Use 1 What a sad condition are those
in, to whom the kingdom of God has come, and yet they are not moved to
repentance Page 251 Use 2 The reason why our hearts are no more humbled is,
because we do not labor to bring the kingdom of God near to our souls Page
252 Use 3 What infinite cause we have to repent Page 254 1. The more evangelical
our repentance is, the more it will cure our souls, and not hurt our bodies
Page 255 2 The more you will be grieved for sins against the Gossel Page 256 3
It is a friend to spiritual joy ibid 4 The more you hope your sin is pardoned,
the more you will grieve for it Page 257 5 The more your heart will be enlarged
to and for Christ ibid 6 The more of the Gospel is in your repentance, the more
of the Gospel will be in your obedience Page 257 7 The more your hearts will be
sweetened toward the Saints Page 258
FINIS
Grace FOR Grace OR THE OVER-FLOVVINGS OF CHRISTS-FULNES Received by all SAINTS.
JOHN 1.16. And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.
Preached at Dunstans in the East, March 16. 1644



HERE in this Chapter are Two choice Spirits, John the Baptist, and John the
Evangelist: both agreeing in this, To advance the Honor of Jesus Christ. John
the Baptist is brought in by John the Evangelist, giving (as you read in this
first Chapter) Four great Testimonies of Jesus Christ.

The first begins at the 15. verse, John bare Witness of Him and cried, saying,
This was He of whom I spoke. Wherein John the Baptist does prefer Jesus Christ
above himself; both in regard of His Person, and in regard of His Office; In
regard of His Person, as you read in the latter end of the 15th, This was He
of whom I spoke, He that comes after me, is preferred before me, for He was
before me.

In regard of His Office, at the 16, the 17, and 18. verses: And of His Fullness
have al we received, even Grace for Grace. For the Law was given by Moses, but
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, etc.

I confess there are Learned Interpreters, as Cyril, and Chrysostom, that do
conceive the words of my Text, to be the words of John the Evangelist: the 15.
verse, having (as they say) relation unto John's speech in the latter end of the
14. verse, Full of Grace and Truth.

But Origin and others (unto whom I rather incline) think that they are the
words of John the Baptist; because they are knit unto the former by the
copulative And: And, of His fullness have all we received, Grace for Grace. He
therefore that spoke the words of the former verse, in all likelihood, spoke
these words: He that spoke the words of the former verse was John the Baptist,
and therefore these words being linked unto the former by the word, And, in all
likelihood are the words of John the Baptist.

The Words of themselves fall into these Three Propositions.

First, That there is a fullness of Grace in Jesus Christ. Secondly, That of
this fullness, we have all received. Thirdly, That we have all received, even
Grace for Grace.
There is a great Controversy upon the latter Clause, what should be meant by
those Words, Even grace for grace: But because the Determination thereof falls
properly within the compass of the Third Proposition, and will have little
influence upon the first, which I intend (God willing) to speak unto at this
time; therefore I pass by that Controversy, and come presently unto the First
Proposition, which is this:

Doct. That there is a fullness of Grace in Jesus Christ.

Fullness is here attributed (you see) unto Jesus Christ.

The word in the Original sometimes is taken for Abundance, (...). Psa. 24.1
The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: So here it is not taken; here
it is too narrow: for there is not only Plenitudo abundantiae, but, Plenitudo
redundantiae; not only a fullness of Abundance, but a fullness of Redundancy; an
over flowing of fullness in Jesus Christ.

Sometimes the word is used for Fulfilling, and Perfecting of a thing: So Love
is said to be the Fulfilling of the Law. So it is not taken here, for though
Christ be the end of the Law, yet notwithstanding, the Fullness spoken here, is
that which we do receive, and that is the Fullness of grace.

The word Firstly, and Properly is given unto Vessels, that are brim-ful of
liquor; and so Metaphorically applied here unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
brim-ful of grace; in whom there is no emptyness, there is no evacuity. While I
speak of Jesus Christ, I mean Christ as Mediator, as Godman. There is a Fullness
in Christ as God: That is not the fullness, so Christ is not taken here, by what
is said in the verse before the Text, the 14 verse. And the Word was made
flesh; And of His Fullness we have all received: So that it is the Fullness of
Christ as Mediator, there is a Fullness of grace in Christ as Mediator. I shall
keep me close unto the words. The Fullness is here spoken of which we are said
to receive, of which we receive; we receive grace for grace; it is the Fullness
therefore of grace that is in Christ, that I am now speaking of.

Now the word Grace, sometimes it is taken for the Love and Favor of God: We
are saved by Grace: That is, Ephesians. 2.5.
we are saved through the Love and Mercy of God.

Sometimes this word in the Original is used, (...). Coll. 3.16
or put for Holiness: Singing with grace in your hearts; that is, with Holiness
in your hearts.

And sometimes it is used for Excellency, (...) Donum, quodquis gratificatur.
for Gifts, or Ability, as in Ephesians. 4.7. and in all these respects there is a
fullness of grace in Christ.

First of all, Take grace for Love, and Bounty and Mercy: and so there is,
Plenitudo bonitatis, there is a Fullness of Love in Christ: The heart, and love
of Christ now in Heaven, is the same toward poor sinners, toward His Children,
toward Believers, toward Men; as it was when He was upon the earth, when Christ
was upon the earth.

First, There was a fullness of Pardoning Love in Him: Then He would pardon men,
before they did come for pardon. Father, Luke 23.24.
(says Christ) Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Ye count it a
great act of love, where the fault is great; to forgive a man upon his
acknowledgment of the fault: Our Lord Christ did not stay for their
acknowledgment, but whilst they were reeking in their sins He forgives: Father
forgive them, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Yea, if you look into the Gospel ye shall find, that when men were putting
forth the highest acts of fin, He was putting forth the highest acts of His
love. When Christ was suffering for Peter, Peter was denying Christ: Peter
denying Christ, and Christ suffering for Peter. When He was upon the earth, He
did not only pardon once, but He would pardon again and again: if men sinned
again, He would pardon again. The Disciples slept, and Christ Pardoned: They
slept again, and Christ pardoned again: they slept again, and Christ pardoned
again. Yea, and when He had pardoned, He would not upbraid them with their
former sins, or with His own mercy: After His Resurrection not a word to Peter,
of all his denial, or of Christ mercy. Beloved! Christ is the same in Heaven,
He is the same in Heaven now.

Again, when Christ was upon the Earth, His first, and His great care was,
Matt. 5.3, 4.
for those that were weak in grace. The first Sermon that He Preached, Blessed
are the poor in spirit: and blessed are those that mourn: He does not say,
blessed are those that have assurance of the love of God: and blessed are those
that have the sense of His Love in their hearts; but blessed are the Poor; and
blessed are they that mourn: And when any poor doubting, trembling soul came
unto Him, He would not cast away their service because it was accompanied with
infirmity: but He would rather pass by their infirmity, because it was
accompanied with some sincerity: So the Woman that came behind Him: So
Nicodemus. And when any poor soul could not come to Christ, could not come to
Christ in Christ's way; Christ would come down to him in his way: Thomas (says
He) Thou say thou will not believe, unless thou thrust thy hands into My
side: Thomas, Thou will not honor Me by believing unless thou see; Thomas,
Thou will not come up to Me in My way: Well, I will come down to thee in thy
way: Come, reach hither thy fingers, and thrust thy hands into My side, and be
not faithless, but believing. Oh! the admirable condescension of the love of
Jesus Christ! Beloved! He is the same now in Heaven.

Again, When He was upon the Earth, He professed that His heart, and His love,
and affections was as much (if I say not more) unto one Saint, Rev. 22.14.
Matt. 12 47.50.
as unto all His kindred that are such. Blessed are those that keep Thy
Commandments: Bebold, (say they) Thy Mother, and Thy Brother, and Sister are
without to speak with Thee: Says He, Whosoever shall do the Will of My Father
which is in Heaven, the same is My Brother, Sister, and Mother. As if He should
say, You count My kindred happy, because they are near unto Me; but do you see
one poor believing, trembling gracious soul? I tell you, the soul that keeps My
Commandments, is as much unto Me as all My kindred that are such, Here is
love! And I say, the Lord Jesus, His heart is the same still in Heaven. And
therefore you shall observe, that when He was risen and came amongst His
Disciples, the door being shut; He comes into the room and He says unto them,
Luke, 24.36.
Peace be unto you: Why Peace be unto you? (the ordinary way and manner of
Salutation:) As if He would say thus much unto them, That they should find Him
every way as courtious, and as loving toward them now being risen, as He was
before He died.

And, my beloved, if Jesus Christ should not be as gracious, and as kind after
death, as before; then His Disciples should be losers by His death: But He
professed to them before He died, that they should not be losers, but gainers
rather. When our Lord Christ was upon the earth, out of His love He died for
us; He loved us, and died for us: His love then cost Him much: Now that He is
in Heaven He dies no more, He can love us at a cheaper rate. And shall we
think, that when He was upon the earth, He would lay down His life for us; and
now He is in Heaven He will not speak a good word for us? Certainly, beloved, the
Lord Jesus is as full of love, and tender affection toward His now He is in
Heaven, as He was upon the earth. Take grace for Love, and so there is a
fullness of grace in Jesus Christ. That is the first.

Secondly, Take grace for Holiness, and so there is, Plenitudo sanctitatis, a
fullness of Holiness in Jesus Christ. There are Three things in the old
Testament that were very Holy, The Law: The high Priest: And the Temple.

As for the Ceremonial Law, though it was very holy; yet in regard of the
Spiritual command of the Gospel, and Christ; the Ceremonials of the Law, in the
book of the Hebrews, Heb. 7.16
is called the Carnal Command.

And as for the high Priest, though he had holiness written upon his forehead;
yet therein he was but a type of Christ. And says the Apostle in the book of
the Hebrews: The high Priest then when he offered for others sins, Heb. 7.27.
he offered first for his own sins: But our high Priest not so.

And as for the Temple, it was indeed very holy, the Jews rested much
thereupon: And therefore they cried thrice, Jer. 7.4
The Temple, the Temple, the Temple of the Lord: But now if you look into the
6. Chap. of Esaias, you shall find that our Lord Christ is there upon the Temple;
and whereas they cried Three times for the Temple, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: Three times this is ecchoed
concerning Christ, Holy, holy, holy. (At the first verse) I saw the Lord
sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and His Train filled the Temple; His
Train filled the Temple. Above it stood the Seraphims: each had six wings, with
twain he covered his face, with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he
did fly, and one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy. As if he
should say: you that are the Jews, you cry out of the Temple; The Temple, the
Temple, the Temple: But here is holiness, here is one that is holy, Holy, holy,
holy. That this is to be understood of Christ, you may see plainly, by
comparing it with the 4. Chapter of the Revelations, at the 2. verse:
Immediately I was in the Spirit: and behold, a Throne was set in Heaven, and
one sat on the Throne. (as it is said in Esaias) one sat on the Throne. And he
that sat was to look upon as a Jasper, and a Sardine stone: And there was a
rainbow round about the Throne: And round about the Throne were four and
twenty Seats, and there were four and twenty Elders, and four living creatures:
(The description of the Gospel Church) And (says he at the 8. verse:) The four
beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were full of eyes within,
and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy. (Mark) the very same
expression that you have there in Esaias: he does not say thus, Righteous,
righteous, righteous; Just, just, just: But Holy, holy, holy. Is there not then
a fullness of Holiness in Jesus Christ?

I Will give you but Two Demonstrations of it.

If there were not a fullness of Holiness in Jesus Christ, how is it possible
that God and man could be brought so near together, that were so far asunder?
Every man naturally is full of sin: You say of the Beggar, He is full of
vermin, why? because he goes to this door, to that door, and to another door,
and he scatters his vermin where ever he comes, and the man knows it not:
Surely therefore, the man is full of vermin.

And so a man naturally, dropping, and scattering his sins and not knowing of
it, it argues he is full of sin. God, he is full of Holiness: whose eyes cannot
endure to behold iniquity: yet when men are converted and drawn to God, they
are brought near unto him: they are the apple of His eye: their names are
written in the palm of his hand. That is, (says Luther) the hand is an
instrument of work; and when the names of the Saints are said to be written in
the palm of Gods hand, it notes thus much (says he) That God in all his works
has an eye to his Children; God in all the works of his hands has an eye to
his Children. They are the friends of God, and God is their friend: When a man
is my friend, not only his Purse is my friend, or his Estate is my friend, or
his Tongue is my friend, or his Hand is my friend; but his Sword is my friend:
So when God is a friend to any, not only his Mercy is his friend, but the Sword
of God is his friend, the very Wrath of God is a friend to his Children: Such a
great friendship there is between God and his people, so near they are brought
to one another. Well, but how are they brought thus near? They are brought near
by Jesus Christ: in whom we have a Manuduction, a leading by the hand (says
the Apostle) as the word carries it) unto God the Father. But now, could men so
full of sin, and God so full of Grace, and Holiness be brought so near together
by Jesus Christ, if there were not an infinite fullness of Holiness in Jesus
Christ?

Again, If there were not this fullness of Holiness in Christ, how should he
be anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows? The Saints themselves
are said to be full of grace. Ephesians. 1.23.
The Church called, The fullness of Christ that fills all in all: Stephen,
Mary, others: full of the holy Ghost: Surely therefore, if so much of the
ointment run down upon Christ's Members, there must be a great anointing upon
Christ himself: Surely, there must be an infinite holiness in Christ, that must
serve us all: And of his fullness we have All received, we have All received.

You will say,

Yes, For though the Saints be full of grace, Sufficiency, (Mark) whereby they
are made able to this, or that work whereunto they are appointed: But the
fullness of Christ, is a fullness of Efficiency, that fills all in all. And
therefore it is said in this Chapter, The Law was given by Moses, Joh 1.17
but Grace, (Grace and Truth you read it) Grace and Truth came by Christ: the
word will bear it, But Grace and Truth were made by Christ: Christ is our
Grace-maker.

The fullness that is in the Saints, is but a Particular fullness.

The fullness that is in CHRIST, is an Universal fullness. Therefore says the
Apostle, It pleased the Father, Col. 1.19
that in him should all fullness dwell. All fullness.

The fullness that is in the Saints, is such a fullness as does ebb and flow;
as the Haven is said to be full of water, yet sometimes it is empty: but there
is a dwelling fullness in the Sea: So there is a dwelling fullness in Jesus
Christ: and therefore says the Apostle, It pleased the Father, that in Him
should all fullness dwell: Oh! it is a dwelling fullness that is in Jesus Christ.

Our Righteousness as we are distinct, or abstracted from Christ, it is but a
fading Righteousness: as the morning dew. Our righteousness (says Hosea) is
as the morning dew, Hos. 6.4.
in regard of it is fading: But the holiness, and righteousness of Christ, in
the 110. Psalm, is called, The dew of the morning: not in regard of it is
fading nature, but in regard of it is much-ness. in regard of it is multitude,
because it makes al dewy. So then it is a Filled Fullness: It is a dwelling
Fullness: It is a Glorious fullness, a fullness beyond all expressions. Thus, take
grace for Holiness, and so also, there is Plenitudo Sanctitatis in Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Take grace for Gifts, or for Ability, and Excellency: And so there
is, Plenitudo Excellentiae, a fullness of, excellency in Jesus Christ. Therefore
says the Apostle, Hebr. 7.25.
He is able to save to the uttermost; He is able to save to all perfection,
those that do come unto Him: He is able to save to the utmost; (...)
though thou have finned to the utmost, He is able to save thee to the utmost.

Would you have a proof of His Kingly fullness? (for He is both King, Priest,
and Prophet,) Look then I pray into the 1. Hebrews, at the 3 verse. He is
called the brightness of His Fathers glory: Who being the brightness of His
glory, and the express Image of His Person, and upholding all things by the
word of His Power, when He had by Himself purged our sins, sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on High: He is made so much better then the Angels,
as He has by inheritance obtained a more excellent Name then they: For unto
which of the Angels said He at any time etc. But (at the 8. verse) unto the Son
He says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousness
is the Scepter of Thy Kingdom. Here Is the fullness of His Kingly Office.

Would you have a proof of His Prophetical fullness? look into this Chapter
where the Text lies, and it is said, at the next verse, the 17. verse; The Law
was given by Moses but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: No man has seen
God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father,
He has declared Him. Ye all count Moses a great Prophet; so he was: But Jesus
Christ was above him, in two, or three things here.

Moses gave the Law: But grace came by Jesus Christ grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ.

Moses never saw God, he saw His back side: Christ has seen Him: John, 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, ( Moses was but a
servant) the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He has
declared Him. None so fit to declare the mind of God (which is the work of a
Prophet) as He which has lien in the bosom of God the Father.

Would you have a proof of His Priestly fullness? Pray look into the, 16. of
John: (consider it duly) says he, I will send the Comforter (at the 7. verse)
and He shall convince the would of sin; and of righteousness (at the 10. verse)
because I go to My Father and ye see Me no more: Mark those words: I go to My
Father and ye see Me no more. As if He should say thus: You are indebted to God
the Father through your transgressions: I am become your surety; and now I am
ready to be cast into prison for your debt: the grave is to take hold upon me,
I am to lie by it for your fin, for your debt: But (says He now) I Will rise out
of the grave, I Will come forth of prison, I Will go to God the Father, and you shall
see Me no more: Whereas now, if I did not pay the whole debt when I came in
Heaven, God the Father would say to Me: You are in prison for man's debt, What
do you here? You have not paid the debt yet; go to prison again, go down to
prison again. No (says He) but I go to My Father and ye shall see Me no more:
and therefore conclude I have paid the full debt, I go to My Father and ye see
Me no more.

Would you have a proof of Christ's fullness of Excellency in general? Look then
I pray upon the 2. of Hag. 7. there you have this expression of Him: He is
called the desire of all Nations: I will shake all Nations, and the desire of
all Nations shall come: (mark) the desire of all nations shall come. Christ,
our Lord Jesus, is the desire of all nations. What is there in all the world
that is the desire of all nations but Jesus Christ? Some Nations, some
Kingdoms, (as the West Indies) they are full of Gold and Silver, but they want
Clothing; and therefore they desire Cloth. Other Kingdoms now, (as these of
England, and the like) they have much Clothing, and Cloth; but they want Gold
and Silver and they desire that: Some Nations they abound with Spices, and with
Wines; but they want Corn: and they desire that. Some Nations again, they have
much Corn, I but they have no Wine, no Spices; and they desire that. Oh! but
our Lord Jesus Christ, He is the desire of All Nations, the desire of All
Nations. What woman, never so beautiful that the whole world was in love with?
Jesus Christ the desire of All Nations. And, Col. 1.18.
(says the Apostle) He has in all things the pre-eminence. If you will, I
will gather it up into a Syllogism, thus: If Jesus Christ be the desire of all
Nations, and has the preheminency of all the world; then there is a fullness of
excellency in Jesus Christ: But our Lord Jesus is the desire of all Nations,
having the preheminency in all the world; surely therefore, there is a fullness
of excellency in Jesus Christ, a fullness of excellency, a fullness of Holiness,
1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3.8.
a fullness of Love: No wonder then that Paul says, I desire to know nothing,
but Jesus Christ, and Him Crucified: No wonder that He said, I count all things
but dung, and dross, in comparison of the knowledge of Jesus Christ Certainly,
surely, there is a fullness of grace in Jesus Christ.

You will say unto me, Applic.
We see, we know there is a Fullness in Jesus Christ, a Fullness of Grace: But
now (by way of Application,) What is our Duty that does flow from hence?

Much every way: I will instance in 4. or 5. particulars so many Duties that do
flow from hence.

First, 1 Duty.
If there be such a Fullness in Jesus Christ, a Fullness of Grace in Jesus
Christ; Then let all men come unto Him. There Is none of us all here present,
but labor under some wants or other: Oh! says one; I have a great Charge;
family, Parish, or other ways; and I want grace to manage it. Oh! says
another: I have great and strong Temptations; and I want strength to resist
them. Oh! says another: There are many Errors abroad; I want knowledge to
discern them, and avoid them; I want wisdom to know the Truth, and join with
the Truth, and own the Truth, and manifest the Truth. Well, what ever your
wants be, there is enough in Jesus Christ to supply it, there is a fullness in
Him; why should we not come unto Him? Oh! you that never tasted of Christ's
sweetness, that never yet partaked of His fullness; Come unto the Lord Jesus
that you may be filled for ever.

You will say,

But if Christ's Invitation be made to you; the 9. Chap. of the Proverbes of
Solomon; See what an invitation is made upon this ground of Christ's fullness:
Wisdom has built her house. (by Wisdom, you must understand Christ, as will
easily appear by reading over the former Chapter) Wisdom has built her an
house. (that is the Church) She has hewn out her seven Pillars, (the
firmness and beauty of the Church: Seven is a note of perfection) She has
killed her beasts, She has mingled her wine, She has also furnished her
table. Here is the Fullness of Christ in His Church. What then? She has sent
forth her Maidens, (that is, the Ministers of the Gospel, who, as Virgins
should be untouched, and undefiled by the world) She cries in the high places
of the City: Who so is simple, let him turn in hither; as for him that wants
understanding, she says to him, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine
which I have mingled. Pray observe it, who are invited to partake of this
fullness; simple ones: Who so is simple, let him turn in hither.

Oh! but I am not only simple, and ignorant;

See what follows, Who so is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him
that wants heart, (so it is in the Hebrew) she suith to him, to him that
wants heart, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of my wine which I have
mingled. Oh! is there ever a poor, simple man or woman here? one that
complains, The Lord knows, I want a heart to what is good? The Invitation of
the Lord Jesus, it is made to you, it is made to you; think not to say within
your selves, I am afraid to come to Christ.

I have read of the Senate of Athens, that once upon occasion, they were
constrained to sit in the open fields: and being there set in the open fields;
a poor chased bird, a sparrow, or the like; chased by the birds of prey; came
flying to the bosom of one of the Senators, for rescue from the birds of prey:
The Senator being of a churlish disposition, he takes the poor, little, chased
bird, and throws it from him, upon the ground, and so killed the bird: whereupon
the Senate made an Order, that he should die himself: they would not have a man
so churlish to be one of the Senators. And do you think, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, when you come as a poor, chased bird for shelter into His bosom: Do you
think that the Lord Christ will throw you away? No, no. as He is full of glory,
and excellency; so He is full of love, and bounty: Whatever therefore thou have
bin (man or woman) whatever you have been: though you have been never so vile,
Come unto Jesus Christ, come unto Jesus Christ. Oh! me thinks this Doctrine
that I have now preached unto you, is a solemn, and a great invitation to every
soul for to come unto Jesus Christ: and therefore come now unto Him, Come unto
Christ, Come unto Christ: Come Drunkard, Come Swearer, Come Liar, Come Unclean
person; Oh! Come, come: You that never tasted of Christ's sweetness, you that
never yet pertak't of Christ's fullness; Come now; Come for there is a fullness
in Jesus Christ. That Is the first thing.

Secondly, 2 Duty.
If there be such a fullness in Christ; Then let us all trust unto Him, build
upon him: And you that are the Servants, and People of God, trust, and trust
perfectly: There is no grace would stand us in more stead in these evil times.
Beloved! ye al see into what sad times we are now fallen: There is no grace (I
say) will stand us in more stead, or more able to turn away the evil that is now
upon us, then faith is. Luther has a notable story to this purpose: There was
(says he) a deadly contest, between a great Bishop, and a Duke of Saxony: The
Duke of Saxony prepares for War against him: but before he would come upon
him, he sends a Spy to observe what the Bishop was a doing: The Spy went: and
being returned again; Come (says the Duke) what is the Bishop a doing? Sir
(says he) he is idle, and secure, you may fall upon him, and destroy him when
you will: I (says he) but what says the Bishop? Sir, he says thus: I will
feed my flock, I will visit the sick, I will preach the Gospel; and as for the
War, I will Totius belli molem Deo committere, I will commit the whole weight and
bulk of this War to God Himself who fights for me. I (says the Duke) did the
Bishop say so? Bellum ei inferat Diabolus, non ego, then (says he) Let the
Devil take up Arms against him if he will, for I will not. Thus, thus faith,
faith turns away the Sword, faith turns away War. And my beloved, there is no
such way, either to beget, or increase faith, as the sight, and consideration
of the fullness of Jesus Christ: Those that know Thy Name, Psalm. 9.10. Psalm.
36.7.
(says the Psalmist) they will trust unto Thee: How excellent is Thy Name, O
Lord; therefore do the children of men put their trust in Thee. Beloved! ye
have heard of Christ's Name, His Name is full of sweetness: Oh! therefore, you
servants, and People of God, that have gone fearing, and trembling up and down,
drooping under many fears, without assurance of Gods love in Christ; if there
be such a fullness in Christ, then trust unto Him: yea, trust, and trust
perfectly to Him. If Satan come and tempt you, and says thus unto you; Thou
art a poor unworthy creatrue; and do thou think to have mercy? Answer, True
Satan, I am so indeed, most unworthy. but there is a fullness in Jesus Christ,
and I will trust in Him. Does Satan tempt thee, and say unto thee; Thou art a
poor guilty creature, and do thou think to find mercy? Answer, True Satan, I
confess I am, I have committed such and such sins; but there is a fullness in
Jesus Christ, and I will trust in him: Say, say Satan what thou will against
me, I subscribe unto it: I am poor, I am empty, I am unworthy, I am guilty: but
Christ is Full, Christ is Full; there is Fullness in Jesus Christ, I will trust
unto Him. Oh! you Servants of the Lord, Live much by Faith: there is a Fullness
in Christ, trust unto it. And that is the second.

Thirdly, If there be such a fullness in Christ: 3. Duty.
Then it is our duty to draw forth this fullness: Let all men draw forth this
fullness. That is done these Three ways:

First by a serious, frequent, solemn consideration, 2 Cor. 3.18.
For beholding as in a glass (says the Apostle) we are changed from glory to
glory: The beholding of Christ's glory, changes us into glory.

It Is drawn forth also,

It Is drawn forth also, giving forth: As now, the Conduit, or Cistern receives
more water into it, by letting out the water which it has. Possibly, there may
be much water in the Conduit, or much water in the Cistern; and the fountain
may be willing to furnish it with more, but it is full already; therefore now,
turn the cock, and let that run out which it has received already, and it
draws more into the Cistern: So here, beloved, our very spending for Christ
receives from Christ: the way to draw out His fullness, is to lay out His
fullness; as you do receive from Him, so to comunicate to other folk: this draws
it out. Well then, A fullness ye have heard there is in Christ. This fullness is
to be drawn out; ye hear also, how it is, or may be drawn out. Enter therefore
into your Chamber, and when you are all alone; seriously, frequently, think
much of this Fullness of Jesus Christ: and in the time of your Temptation, then
rest upon it. And as it pleases Jesus Christ to give out any of His Fullness
unto you, so let it run out again upon other folk. And this is the third thing.

Fourthly, 4 Duty.
If there be such a fullness of grace in Christ: Then let us all labor to be
like unto Him; full of grace as Christ, full of meekness, full of humility,
full of Love especially; for there is a fullness of love in Christ. And yet,
alas! when ever was there less love, and more strife then now? when ever less
love among Professors? when ever more strife then now? Give me leave a little:
Beloved in the Lord! you see, and know what great divisions there are among us,
great strifes. All strife and envy arises from an apprehension of scantiness,
and narrowness in the thing desired. Now then, that which we do strive for;
either it is more of the World: Or more of Christ. If it be more of the World
that we sirive for; who shall be most Rich, who shall have most Honor: if it be
more of the world that we strive for: Why? Oh! why should we strive for that
which may make us worser, but cannot make us better? why should we strive for
that, when as the very striving for it, will deprive us of it? If it be more of
Christ that we strive for: (mark) if it be more of Jesus Christ, and more of
Him that we strive for; There is enough in Him, there is enough in Jesus Christ
for to serve us al. If two, or three, or six, or twenty men be a thirst; and
they go to drink out of a Bottle: while one is drinking the other envies,
because he thinks there will not be enough for him too: But if now, five, six,
twenty, a hundred be a thirst; and go to the River: while one is drinking the
other envies not: Why? because there is enough to serve them all. Beloved! if
it be more of Christ that we strive for, if it be more of Jesus Christ that we
strive for; there is a fullness in Him, there is enough in Christ; there is
enough in Jesus Christ (ye have heard) to serve all our turns. Oh! therefore,
that there may be no more striving, no more envy, no more contention, no more
division, labor, let us all labor to be more and more like unto Jesus Christ:
He was full of grace, especially He was full of love, let us labor to to be
like unto Him.

In the fifth, and last place: The fifth Duty. 5 Duty
If there be such a fullness in Jesus Christ: Then take heed how we do any thing
that may rob Christ of the glory of His fullness: Let all men take heed how they
do any thing that may rob Jesus Christ of the glory of His fullness. As now,
Suppose that I think, and am persuaded, that Jesus Christ has not given a
sufficient rule, has not laid down a perfect a sufficient rule in the Word,
for the Ordering, and for the Governing of the Churches: and therefore I will
eek out what He has done with my own prudence: This robs Him of the glory of
His Prophetical fullness. Or, suppose I think my sins are so great, they can
never be pardoned, so great, there is no hope for mercy: This robs Him of the
glory of His Priestly fullness. Or, suppose that I stint, and limit Christ unto
this, or that particular means of delivering of the Church; I know that God is
able to deliver England, and to deliver the Church; but if He do not take this
way, if He do not take this course, if this means fail, then we are all undone,
then all, all is lost if this means take not: This is to rob Christ of the
glory of His Kingly fullness; to stint Him to one means; to tie Him, and limit
Him to one means. Or, suppose that I set my heart upon any Creature fullness;
and say as the whore said in the 7 of the Proverbs, Come, and let us take our
fill of love: Come friends, come company, let us go unto such a Tavern, or such
a place, where we may be fully merry: Come, O my soul, take thy contentment in
creature fullness, there is enough there: This robs Christ of the glory of all
His fullness. To carry away the custom of my thoughts unto another Shop from
Christ, argues that there is not enough in Christ alone. Then, beloved! to
conclude all. Are there any here; (as I fear there may be too many) that have
thus robbed Jesus Christ of the glory of His fullness? I beseech you, in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose fullness I have bin now preaching to you; I
beseech you, in the fear of God, go into your Chamber, and be alone awhile, and
fall down before the Lord, and say thus unto Him, or to this purpose:

Oh! Lord, I confess it has bin so with me: I have thought that there has not
bin a sufficient rule for the Government of the Churches; and herein I have
wronged Christ in His Prophetical fullness, and the Lord pardon this unto me.

Lord! I confess also, I have said, many times, that my fins are so great, that
there is no hope for mercy, that there is no hope for pardon; herein I have
wronged the Priestly fullness of Jesus Christ: now the Lord pardon this unto me,

I confess, Lord, I have stinted thee, and I have limited thee, and I have
said, many times, in my have; if this means fail, then England is undone, the
Church undone; thus I have limited thee, Lord: Oh! herein I have wronged thee,
and robbed Christ in His Kingly fullness.

Yea, Lord, I do acknowledge, and I do confess, I have gone to
creature comforts, and my heart has taken a content and complacency, as if
there were enough there; but now I see there is a fullness in Jesus Christ: the
Lord pardon me, that ever I let out my heart upon any creature-comfort, upon
any thing but Jesus Christ. You that have bin guilty; fall down, and humble
your selves before the Lord and consider that there is a fullness in Jesus
Christ, and labor to draw out this fullness from Him. Which that you may so do,
think on all these things, and the Lord bless them to you.

SERMON II.
JOHN 1.16. Preached at Wapping. Aug. 17. 1646.
And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.


I Have made entrance into these Words in a neighboring Congregation: and shall
now desire to go on where I left there.

The Words hold forth, Three, Great, Grand Propositions.

First, That there is a Fullness of Grace in Jesus Christ. Secondly, That of His
Fullness all we do receive. Thirdly, That we do receive of His Fullness: even
Grace for Grace.
The former Proposition I have dispatched: and desire at this time to speak
unto the second.

All we do receive of His Fullness. Of His Fullness have all we received.

The difficulty that lies upon the Proposition is this: Who are meant here by
this All We. Some there are that conceive, that by those words we are to
understand all the Creatures in Heaven, and Earth; because it is said before, in
the beginning of the Chapter; That He is the light, that lights every one
that comes into the world. But though the thing be true, that there is no
Creature, either in Heaven, or Earth, but more or less is beholding to Jesus
Christ: for if Christ had not stepped in upon the fall, Gods displeasure was so
great against man, that he would presently have broke up house: and the sin of
the fall was so heavy, that it would have broken the very Axel-tree of the
World, if Jesus Christ had not put to His shoulder; according to that of the
Apostle: Heb. 1.3.
He bears up all with the Word of His Power: yet notwithstanding, all the
Creatures in Heaven or Earth, cannot be meant here, by this, All We: for all
the creatures in Heaven and Earth, do not receive Grace: they may be said to
receive of the Fullness of Christ; but not Grace for Grace. But (at the 12.
verse, it is said) as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the
Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name. Now in Scripture phrase,
those are said to receive Christ Himself, that do receive His Grace: and those
that receive His Grace, receive Christ Himself. Understand therefore, by this,
All We, those that receive Him; as ye have it in the 12. verse, which is
explained to be, Them that believe in His Name.

And then the Observation, or Doctrine lies plain before us, which is this:

That all the Saints and People of God, do partake of the Fullness of Christ in
a way of receiving.

It falls a sunder into Two parts, Thus:

First, That there is a communication of the Fullness of Jesus Christ unto all
Believers.

Secondly, That whatsoever Grace or Holiness the Saints have from Christ, they
have it in a way of receiving.

I shall only speak unto the former at this time:

There is a communication of the Fullness of Jesus Christ unto all Believers. Of
His Fullness all we receive. (mark) There is a communication of the Fullness of
Jesus Christ, unto all Believers.

He is the second Adam which the Apostle Paul speaks of, in the 1 Cor. 15.
Chapter, and the 45. verse, The first man Adam was made a living soul, and the
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. The whole world is divided into Two
great Houses: As once in this Kingdom, There was the House of York: And the
House of Lancaster. So now, the whole world is divided into Two great Houses:
The House of the First Adam: And the House of the Second Adam. The first man
Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit:
that is, look as the first Adam did communicate life unto all his seed: So the
second Adam does communicate Spiritual life, and grace unto all his people. As
by the first Adam, sin, and sorrow, and death came into the world; and so upon
all mankind: So by the second Adam, grace, and life, and eternal life unto all
Believers. There is a dealing out, a giving out of the fullness of Jesus Christ
unto all Believers. This will appear.

First of all, by the Union that there is between Christ, 1 Reason
and a Believer: there is a glorious, a blessed, an incomparable union between
Christ, and every Believer, though he be never so weak, though he be never so
poor. There is a union between the Root, and the Branches; and by virtue of
that union, the Root sends forth life, and strength into all the Branches: but
yet notwithstanding, the Root is not in the Branches; nor the Branches in the
Root, mutually. There is a union between the Head, and the Members; and by
virtue of that union, the Head has an influence upon all the Members: but yet
the Head is not in the Members; nor the Members in the Head. But now, there is
a union between Christ, and Believers: and Christ is in them; and they are in
Christ: We in Christ, and Christ in us. There is a glorious, and blessed union
between them. Now union is the cause of communion, or communication: bread is
united unto a man's body by eating of it; and so by virtue of the union,
strength is derived into all the parts, into all the members; and the nearer,
and closer unto, this union is, the more full is the communication. Now though
the union between Christ, and a Believer, be set out in Scripture phrase, under
such Metaphors as these: The Root, and the Branches: The Husband, and the Wife:
And the Head, and Members; yet none of all these are able to reach it, not in
all respects: it is a glorious, and it is a blessed, and incomparable union. And
therefore, there must needs be a comunication of the fullness of Christ to every
Believer.

Secondly:

First, He was in all things tempted like unto us, Heb. 2.18.
that He might be able to succor those that are tempted. Jesus Christ is not
only, the Lord-Treasurer of all our comforts; but the Lord Keeper of al our
graces. The nearer any thing comes unto the Fountain of excellency, the more
excellent it is: The Sun is the fountain of light: and the nearer any thing
comes to the Sun, the more light it has. Fire is the fountain of warmth, and
heat; and the nearer any thing comes unto the fire, the more warm it is. Why,
The Deity is the Fountain of all Holiness; and Jesus Christ is so near unto
it, as Mediator; that the Apostle says, In Him the fullness of the God Head
dwells. Col. 2.9.
And surely therefore, there must needs be an infinite treasury of Grace, and
Holiness in Him.

The Saints (you know) of the Old Testament, they were very Holy; Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Moses, and Samuel, and David, and Solomon;
they were full of Grace, and Holiness: and yet these were but types of Christ,
they were but shadows of Christ. Now the type and the shadow does fall
infinitely short of the thing typified, and of the substance: And therefore, if
there were so much Grace, and Holiness in things that were but a shadow of
Christ; if there was so much Wisdom, and Holiness in others of them that were
but the type: Oh! what an infinite treasury of Grace, and Holiness must there
be in Christ Himself. This is the first Proposition.

Secondly, As there is an infinite treasury of Grace, I go to prepare a place
for you. Jo. 14.2. Ephesians. 4.8
And so when Christ received gifts; (says the Apostle) He received gifts for
men; not for Himself, but for others: He received gifts for men. The woman
has milk in her breasts, but not for her self but for her child. The Sun has
abundance of light in his body, it is not for himself, but for the world. And so
Jesus Christ, He has received abundance of grace, and holiness; but it is not
for Himself but for others. And therefore pray mark what He says, in John,
17.19. And for their sakes I sanctify My self, that they also might be
sanctified through the Truth. He does not say, for My own sake do I sanctify
My self, but for their sakes: For their sakes I sanctify my self, that they
also might be sanctified through the Truth. There are certain Official parts in
the body (you know) that stand as Officers unto all the rest. The stomach has
a great deal of meat in it, but it has not that meat for it self but that it
may communicate to all the members. The liver has a great deal of blood in it
but the liver has not the blood in it for it self, but that it may communicate
it unto all the parts. And the head, it has all the fences seated in it, it
has many spirits: but not for it self, but for the members. So Jesus Christ,
who is the Head of the Church: whatsoever Grace, and Holiness, as Mediator, He
has received; He has not received for Himself, but for others.

This may make the Saints, and People of God to come with boldness to the
Throne of Grace: Has Christ received for others, and not for Himself; Then why
not for me? Lord, why not for me? Now you shall see that further proved in the
61. Chap. of Esaias. the 1. and 2. verses. The Spirit of the Lord God is on me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; He has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound. To proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that
mourn: They are the words of Christ, spoken in the Person of Christ: as if he
had said thus: There are a generation of men in the world, that are taken
captive by their sins; and lie bound in chains, and irons by Satan: and they
are broken, and bowed down greatly under the burden of them: Now God the
Father, He has designed me, to go open the prison doors to these poor
captives: and because God the Father has designed me to it; therefore the
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, (not in me) therefore the Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek. So that you see now, that anointing that falls upon the head of Christ,
it falls not upon Him for Himself, barely, but that it may run down upon all
His members. That is a second Proposition.

Thirdly, As there is an infinite treasury of grace, Heb. 3.2.
He is faithful (says the Apostle) in all His house as Moses was. Now if Jesus
Christ should receive gifts for men, for others; and then run away with all,
and not be willing to give them out; He could not be faithful: but faithful He
is. Look I pray for this in the 16. Psalm. 2 v. Thou have said unto the Lord,
Thou art my Lord, my goodness not for thee: but for the Saints that are in the
earth, and for the excellent in whom are all my delight. You read the words
thus: Thou have said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord; my goodness extends
not to thee. But in the Hebrew, the word extends is not. Thou art my Lord: my
goodness not for thee: but for the Saints that are in the earth. That these
words are spoken of Christ. Pray read the Four last verses; I have set the
Lord always before me: (at the 8. ver.) because He is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices: my
flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou will not leave my soul in Hell; neither
will thou suffer thy holy One to see corruption. Now compare these words with
what the Apostle says in Acts, 2.25. David speaks concerning him, (mark) For
I foresaw the Lord always before my face, he is on my right hand, I shall not
be moved: Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad: Moreover
also, my flesh shall rest in hope: Because thou will not leave my soul in hell,
(the same viorde) neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see corruption.
Mark what is said then, at the 29. ver. the Apostle proves, That these words of
the Psalm, must needs be understood of Christ, and not of David. Men and
brethren, (says he) let me freily speak unto you of the Patriarch David, that
he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day.
Therefore (says he) these words cannot be understood of David, but must be
understood of Christ. Now then, this Psalm being thus to be understood of
Christ, says Christ, Lord, Thomi^t my Lord: my goodness is not for thee: but
for the Saints that are in the earth, and for the excellent in whom is all my
delight. They are my delight, and therefore what goodness I have from thee, I
am willing to give it out again unto them, because al my delight is in them. Do
you not think, that a man is willing to eat his meat when he is a hungry I ray
look into the 4. chaptes of John, and you shall see what was Christ's meat
(verse the 34.) Jesus faith unto them, My meat is to do the will of Him that
sent Me, and to finish His Work. My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me:
What is that? Finish His Work: What is that? You read before in the, 61 Esaias,
That the Spirit of the Lord was upon Him: and God the Father had anointed Him
to open the prison door. Now therefore (says He) look how willing a man is to
eat his meat when he is a hungry: So willing am I to releeve poor sinners, to
open the prison door to poor captive souls. Tender hearted Mothers, are you
willing to give your Children suck? to have your breasts drawn? Yes: Why so?
Truly, not only because of my child, but the truth is, unless my breasts be
drawn it is a pain to me: not only for my child therefore, but for my own ease
also, you will say. Why, brethren, the Humanity of Jesus Christ, is (as I may
so speak) the breasts of the Deity; by which we suck out all the holiness, and
grace which we have: and if Jesus Christ's breasts be not drawn, He counts it a
pain to Him. And therefore He complains so in the Gospel: Joh. 1.11.
I came unto mine own, and mine own received me not; They will not draw My
breasts; He counts it a pain to Him. Tell me, are you willing to receive grace?
Yes: If you be willing to receive grace, Jesus Christ is willing to give it:
for you cannot be willing, if He were not willing first, your willingness does
come from His. But I pray, what grace are you willing to have Oh! says one, I
am a poor ignorant creature: I would fain, I would fain have more knowledge.
Oh! says one, I am one of great Passions, and of a disordered life; and, Oh!
that I had my life better ordered. Oh! says another, I am a poor guilty soul;
and I would have pardon, I would have pardoning grace. Now I Will appeal to you:
Whether do you not think, that an honest man is willing to do the work of his
office? Can a man be an honest man, and not be willing to do the work of his
office? This is the Office of Jesus Christ. He is a Prophet, and therefore He
must be willing to teach you you that complain that you are ignorant. This is
the Office of Jesus Christ to be a King; and therefore He is willing to direct
you; and to order you: You that complain of distemper, and disorder.

This is the Office of Christ to be a Priest, and therefore He is willing to
satisfy for you: and indeed, if Jesus Christ were not willing to give out His
grace unto the children of men, He would never lay it upon such conditions as
He does. When a man is unwilling to do a thing for another, He will put it upon
hard conditions: As Saul, being unwilling to give his Daughter to David, He put
it upon hard conditions. But now, what does Jesus Christ require? What does the
Lord Jesus Christ require, for the Communication of His grace? But only this,
that you do receive it: Mark, only this, that we do receive it; a condition
indeed, that is no condition: I say, a condition that is no condition, because
he promises strength to receive also. Oh! my beloved: Why should we cumber the
way to Heaven with Preparations, and Qualifications, and Precedaneous
conditions? There are no In-coms, no In-coms to be paid at our coming in to
Jesus Christ; there are no Precedaneous conditions: Grace is free, and Mercy is
free, and Christ is free, and His Love is free: there is an infinite Propension
in Jesus Christ, to communicate this His Grace to the children of men. This is
the third Proposition.

Fourthly,

I work, Esaias, 43.13.
(says God) and who shall let? And I communicate My grace (says Christ) and
who shall hinder? If any thing can hinder it must be either Satan without us,
or our sins within us: Satan without cannot hinder, he could not go into the
herd of swine, he could not destroy a hog, a sow, a pig till he had leave from
Christ: and can Satan hinder then, when Christ intends to communicate His
grace? He is called the strong man, but Christ is called the stronger than he.
Luke 22.31, 32.
Peter, Peter (says our Savior) Satan has desired to winnow thee; but I have
prayed that thy faith fail not. I, one prayer, one prayer by Jesus Christ is
stronger than all the temptations of Satan. Satan cannot hinder. Nor can our
sins within hinder. For if you look into the 2. Chapter of Titus: it is said
there, at the 14. verse, He gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from
al iniquity. If from All iniquity, then from unbeleef. Then unbeleef cannot
hinder. If a King come on purpose to pardon All Rebellion; if he be able, and
willing, and come on purpose to pardon All Rebellion: then no one Rebellion can
hinder, can be a reason why he should not pardon. The Covenant that God makes
with His; is like the Covenant that He made with Noah; as you read in the 54.
Chapter of Esaias, the 8. and 9. verses: In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee:
says the Lord thy redeemer: for this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as
I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have
I sworn that I would not be wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee. Mark, The
Covenant God would make with His people, is like the Covenant that He made with
Noah: The Covenant that He made with Noah, what is that? Pray now look into
the, 8. Chapter of Genesis, and the 21. verse. Noah being come out of the Ark,
and offering unto the Lord; The Lord smel'd a sweet savor: and the Lord said
in His heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. I think it should rather be
read thus, according to the Hebrew: I will not again curse the ground any more
for man's sake; although the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth:
although: ye read it, for: I will not again curse the ground any more for man's
sake; for, the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth: One would
think He should rather say thus: I will curse the ground again, and I will bring
a new flood, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. No, but
the Covenant that God made with Noah, was thus: I do now make a Covenant with
mankind, that the world shall never be drowned again: yea, Though man do sin,
yet the world shall not be drowned again. This is the Covenant that the Lord
made with Noah: The Lord did not make such a Covenant as this: I do promise,
that the world shall not be drowned again, if man do not fin. No, but the
Covenant that the Lord made with Noah was thus: But I promise the world shall
not be drowned again, Though men do sin again: this is the Covenant the Lord
made with Noah: it was so far from running upon a condition, that it runs
cross to all conditions. So now the Lord says concerning a poor Believer: I
do take this soul into Covenant with Me: Yea, and Though he do sin, yet
notwithstanding I will pardon him, and this soul shall never lie under water
again, shall never lie under water again: his sin shall not hinder My grace; he
shall never lie under water again: for as the Covenant I made with Noah, such
is the Covenant I make with every believer. And beloved, if indeed that we
could hinder Christ, when He comes to communicate His grace; if our sins could
hinder: then we might resist grace, with an Overcoming resistance. It Is true, a
man may resist the grace of God, with A gainsaying resistance; but he cannot
resist the grace of God, with an overcoming resistance. Whatsoever is overcome,
is overcome by a stronger: Man, (I say) cannot resist with an overcoming
resistance. Pray do but consider well the Covenant of Grace: Ezekiel. 36 26, 27.
says the Lord in that: I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give
an heart of flesh: and I will cause ye to walk in my ways; and I will put My
Spirit into you. I will take away the heart of stone: What is that? a stone is
hard, a hard thing does not yield to the touch, a soft thing yields. Pharaoh
had a hard heart, and therefore he yielded not. When therefore, the Lord makes
such a promise as this; I will take away the heart of stone: What is His
meaning? His meaning is plainly, I will take away the un-yeelding, the
resisting disposition that is in man. Now therefore, when the Lord makes such a
promise as this: That He will put His Spirit into them, and cause them to walk
in His ways: Our resisting can be no hindrance: Why? because the Lord has
made a promise to take away our resisting. If the Covenant had run thus: I will
put My Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in My ways; upon this condition,
that you do not resist, then we could hinder: but the Lord in the same promise
that He does say, I will put My Spirit into them, and cause them to walk in My
ways: He does also promise to take away the resisting heart, to take away the
spirit of resisting. I will take away the heart of stone: there is the
resisting: And I will cause them to walk in My ways. So that our sins cannot
hinder.

Now then, put al these together: There Is an infinite treasury of grace, and
holiness in Jesus Christ. This He has not received for Himself, but for
others. There is an infinite propension, and willingness in Him, to give out
this grace unto the children of men. And nothing either in Heaven or earth can
hinder Him: Surely therefore, there is the Communication of the Fullness of Jesus
Christ, unto all Believers

You will say unto me then:

I answer: First, Our life is hid with God in Christ: Coll. 3.3, 4.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with Him
in glory.

Secondly, ground is plowen, and sown. The River, or the Fountain is the
universal Cause of the Water that ye have in your houses: but yet
notwithstanding, you have not this Water, but by pipes, and conveyance; and
when ye want water in your house, you do not say; There is no water in the
Thames, there is no water in the Fountain: No, but surely the pipe is broken,
the pipe is stopped; or we want some pipe or other. So now, when you want Grace,
and when you are empty of Grace; you are not to say; Oh! it is because there is
not enough in Christ, or Christ is not willing; but rather, surely the pipe is
broken, or we want this, or that Ordinance: the pipe is not clean, the pipe is
stopped, and therefore we are so empty of Grace as we are.

Thirdly,

Fourthly, indeed, may be laid upon the whole cloth; but ordinarily, your
silken-lace, your silver-lace, your golden-lace; it is laid upon the seam. Now
the Lord Jesus Christ, He knows all the seams of your life, all the seams of
your life: there He lays His Golden-Lace on. Mark therefore, what are the
seams of thy life, and see if Christ has not laid on something there. pa Take
but these Four Considerations together, and there is a sufficient Answer to
that Objection.

I come to the Application. Applic.


And whilst I stand upon this point: Me thinks here I see, betterness of their
condition, above the men of the world, though they be never so Rich, or Great,
Beloved! Every man is according to the fullness that he does live upon: There
is the Fullness of the Earth; 1 Cor. 10 26.
The Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof. And wicked men, they are said
to be filled with this: Whose bellies Thou fillest with hid Treasures. Psalm
the 17. And there is the Fullness of Jesus Christ: And of this Fullness the
Saints, and Believers do all receive, and partake. Look therefore, what a
difference there is between these fulnesse's The fulnesie of the Earth; And the
Fullness of Jesus Christ: such a mighty difference, in point of excellency,
there is between a Believer, though he be never so poor: and a wicked
man-though he be never so rich. Give me leave a little, to open the difference
of these Fulnesses to you; that so you may see the difference betwwen men, and
men, and be encouraged unto a godly course.

First, The fullness of the world, Martha, Martha, Luke 10.41.
(says Christ) thou art busied about many thing. It Is a fullness made up of
many things; and therefore not a Homogenial fullness: The fulness of Christ is a
fulness made up of one thing, the Deity, in whom the Godhead dwells; and
therefore it is a Homogenial fullness; every part of it is fullness: every part of
a Homogenial body, has the name of the whole: Wvery part of water, is called
water, though it be but a drop: Every part of fire, is fire, though it be but a
spark: And Every part of Heaven, it is called Heaven, though it be but a corner
of Heaven. And so, every part of the Fullness of Jesus Christ, is fullness. As
the Philosophers say of the soul, Animatota in toto, that the soul is, wholly
in the whole, and wholly in every part: So the Fullness of Christ, it is wholly in
the Church, and it is wholly in every Believer. Every Believer may come and say,
I have all Christ. But as for the fullness of the world, every one that has the
worlds fullness cannot say so; I have all the worlds fullness.

Secondly,

Thirdly, has emptied out his fullness into his children; the childrens glass
is turned up: but they having children under them, and house under them; their
sand also, is soon run out, it runs out into emptiness. Thus, all the fullness
of the world, it is but a fullness that has a hole at the bottom, that runs into
emptiness. Oh! but the fullness of Jesus Christ, the fullness of Jesus Christ it
is a dwelling fullness; His sulness runs out into Leleevers, and yet He is full
Himself: In Him the fulness of the God head dwells, it dwelleththere.

Fourthly, The fullness of the Earth, but the fullness Jesus Christ, is a
soul-satisfying fullness: He that drinks of the water that I shall give him
(says He) shall never thiest again. Joh. 4.4. Psalm. 17.15.
When I awake (says the Psalmist) I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. And
that is a Fourth.

Fifthly, Pet. 3.4. The Apostle speaking of the adorning of women: says he (at
the 3 verse) Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of playting
the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel: but let it be
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is incorruptible; even the Ornament
of a meek, and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. As if
he should say: All other Ornaments, plaiting of hair, and gold, and the like;
is of no price in the eyes of God: Oh! but a quiet spirit, and a meek spirit;
one drop of the Fullness of Christ falling upon the soul, makes the soul lovely
in the fight of God; is of great price.

Sixthly, the Fullness of Jesus Christ, there is poison in it, the Curse of God
in it, the wrath of God there: and therefore, what pleasure, what contentment
can a man take therein, without the Fullness of Fullness of Jesus Christ?

Seventhly,

Eighthly, Take all the Fullness of the world,

Ninthly, As for the fullness of the earth, Christ, it can never make you
miserable, it will certainly make you happy, there is no such time, wherein
it is better wanted, than enjoyed.

Tenthly. Esaias, 56.1.
Come, buy Wine, and Milk without money, or moneys-worth. Christ gives much,
and takes little, takes nothing, it costs you nothing, and having it you have
all.

And again.

You that are Believers, you do envy at the men of the world, because of their
fullness? I Pray tell me, would you change your Fullness for theirs? Would you
change your Condition for theirs?

And you that are of the world, wicked ungodly men; that have but the Earths
fullness: Why do you lay out your thoughts and your time upon such a fullness?
a dropsical fullness; a fading fullness; a dying fullness; a fullness that is
mixed with a Curse; a fullness thsat does al bemire you, and dirty you: pray
tell me, Are you able with the Dasies, and Tulips of the world, to satisfy
your better part? Oh! know you not, that notwithstanding all the Earths
fullness, that a wicked man's fortune, (I say) that a wicked man's fortune it
lies in a lake that burns with fire and brimstone? And when you have done all
you can, and gathered all that ever you can together; you may go unto your full
purses; or unto your full bags; or unto your full houses; or unto your full
barnes; and you may say of this fullness I have received. Oh! but you cannot go
unto the Fullness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and say; And of this Fullness my
soul has received. Oh! fool (says our Savior, Luke 12.20.
when His barnes are full) this night shall thy soul be taken away from thee.
And when you come below, in the pit, where no water is; then you will complain,
and say: Oh! wretch that I was; I might have had of the Fullness of Jesus
Christ, but I chose rather the fullness of the earth: and if I had had the
Fullness of Christm, I had bin made for ever; but I chose rather the fulnesss of
the world, then the Fullness of Jesus Christ, and now I am lost for ever; Oh! I
am lost for ever, I have none of the Fullness of Jesus Christ.

What an encouragement here is then (And so I come unto the Second Use: Appli.
2.
and I will not hold you long in it) What an incouragment is here unto al men,
good and bad, to come in unto Jesus Christ, and partake of His Fullness! (I
say) in the Second place; here is encouragement unto all you that hear the Word
of the Lord this day, good or bad: an encouragement unto all souls, good, and
bad to come in unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and partake of His fullness! Says
our Lord and Savior, When I am lift up, Joh. 12.32.
I will draw all men after Me: I, Love is a drawing thing: Love is a drawing
thing: it draws men and women together into one youke, that lived far asunder;
And what greater love than this, that Jesus Christ should lay down His Life for
poor sinners? Wisdom, wisdom is a drawing thing, it drew the Queen of Sheba
from far, to come unto Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon is here!
Riches, riches; Wealth, wealth is a drawing thing. Bounty, and Liberality a
drawing thing; it draws the poor beggar to the rich man's door: And behold!
here is Riches! Oh! there is an infinite treasury of Grace, and Holiness in
Jesus Christ. And here is Liberality! For there is an infinite propension, and
willingness in the Lord Jesus Christ, to give out of this Fullness unto poor
finners. Oh! has God the Father exalted Jesus Christ, and shall not our hearts
exalt Him? Beloved! let but Jesus Christ be exalted in your thoughts, and in
your hearts; and you will stand: Firm against all Temptations: Firm against and
Discouragements: Firm against all Afflictions.

Firm against all Temptations: If Temptations come to offer you profit, and
pleasure; then will you make this answer: No, you bid me loss; for there is a
fullness in Jesus Christ; and of His Fullness, through the Lords mercy, I have
received,

Firm against all Discour agements: If the Devil come, and tell you; Thou art
now a Professor, but ere long you will fall away, and prove as great a scandal
to Religion, as ever you honored it before: You will make this answer, True
(indeed) Satan, I have a backsliding soul, I have a backsliding heart; but
there is a Fulness in Jesus Christ, and through the Lords mercy, I have received
of this Fullness; an d therefore I shall persevere in the way that I am in,
notwithstanding sall thy discouragements.

Firm against all Afflictions: if you want this creaturecomfort, or the other
creature-comfort; you will answer: I, true, I want Friends, I want Money, I
want Credit; Oh! but yet, there is a Fullness in Jesus Christ, and there is enough
in Him; and of this Fullness, through the Lords mercy, I have received. Oh! what
a drawing, what a drawing argument is here! me thinks the stoutest sinner in
all the Congregation should now come in, and close with the Lord Jesus Christ.

You will say unto me: Here are encouragements indeed,

I pray look into the, 68. Psalm; Thou have ascended on high, Thou have led
captivity captive: Thou have received gifts for men; ('it is spoken of Christ)
yea, for the Rebellious Also; Mark that word: Thou have received gifts for men;
yea, For the Rebellious Also. Well then, is there ever a Rebellious Child in
this Congregation? Is there ever a Rebellious Drunkard, that has taken up arms
against the Lord Jesus Christ? Is there ever a rebellious Swearer, or an
unclean heart here, that has taken up arms against the Lord Jesus Christ?
(Says the Text) He has received gifts for men; yea, for the Rebellious Also;
The Reason why you have not these gifts, is, because you do not come to Christ.
Oh! But if you would come to Christ, (Mark) If you would come to Christ, you
that are Rebellious, if you would come to Jesus Christ, He has these gifts, or
Grace by Him; if you would come to Him, you should have these gifts from Him.
Who would not throw down his weapons now? Is there ever a Rebel in all this
Congregation, that has taken up arms against the Lord Jesus Christ heretofore?
Me thinks he should be encouraged hence to come unto Jesus Christ. Bodin has a
story concerning a great Rebel, that had made a great, and strong party against
a Roman Emperor: and the Emperor makes Proclamation; that who ever could
bring in the Rebel, either alive, or dead, should have such a great sum of
money. The Rebel hearing of this, he comes in himself, presents himself unto
the Emperor, and demands the sum of money. Says the Emperor; if now, I
should put him to death, the world would think, that I did it to save my money:
notwithstanding all his former rebellion, the Emperor pardons him, and gave
him the sum of money. Oh! would a Heathen Emperor do thus by a poor Rebel? And
if thou, (man or woman) wilt throw down thy weapons, and come in unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, do you think that the Lord Jesus Christ, will not give to you
those gifts that He has received for you? Certainly He will. Oh! me thinks
therefore, every poor sinner should now hang upon this last word; yea, For the
rebellious Also. Has the Lord Jesus Christ received gifts for men, and for the
rebellious Also? I will for ever hang upon that word, Also. Oh! I have bin a
Rebel: I have bin an unclean Rebel; I have bin a swearing Rebel; I have bin a
drunken Rebel: Oh! Lord, I will throw down my weapon, and hang upon this word,
Also: Has He received gifts for men; and for the rebellious Also? Oh! I will
come in unto Him. Oh! what a mighty encouragement is here for all, good and
bad, to come in unto Jesus Christ? Come Drunkard; Come Swearer; Come Unclean
heart; Come Sabbath-breaker; Come lying-Children; Come stealing-Servants: Oh!
Come unto the Lord Jesus Christ that you may be filled for ever. Oh! Come unto
Christ, that you may leave your sins. Here is encouragement to all, good and
bad, to come unto Jesus Christ.

One word more of Use unto Believers; Appli. 3.
and so I have done. Is there a communication of the Fullness of Jesus Christ
unto all Believers: Then Believers Own your own, own your own: labor to
strengthen your Assurance of your Union with Jesus Christ: and maintain your
confidence in Him. If you have Assurance of Union with Jesus Christ, you may
have the comfort of all this truth: you may, and you will say thus, or to the
like purpose: Has the Lord given me Christ, and will He not with Him give me
all things else? True indeed, I want Grace to do such a work with; to pray
with, to hear with, to examine my own heart, withal: I want Grace to do such a
work for God: Oh! but, there is a communication of the Fullness of Jesus Christ
unto all Believers; and through the Lords Grace I am one: There is a
communication of the Fullness of the Lord Jesus Christ unto all the Saints; and
through the Lords Grace I am one: and therefore in due time, I know I shall
have this Grace communicated to me.

But if you want the Assurance of your Union with Jesus Christ: Oh! then, you
will want the comfort of this Truth: then you will break out and say: True
indeed, there is the communication of the Fullness of Christ unto Believers; but
the Lord knows I am none; It Is true indeed, there is a communication of the
Fullness of Christ unto all the Saints; but the Lord knows I am none; I have an
unclean heart of mine own: the Lord knows I am none. Oh! therefore, you that
have gone doubting up and down, and had no assurance of your condition all this
while; assurance of your Union with Jesus Christ: for the love of God, get it
now: as you desire to have the comfort of this truth that now I have bin upon,
get it now.

You see Beloved, these times we are fallen upon, are dying times: and truly, I
may say; Dying times, and Doubting hearts cannot stand together: Oh! Cock up,
cock up? you that have had your evidence for Heaven lying abroad all this
while, get it in. Labor to get assurance of your Union with Jesus Christ: and
maintain your confidence, and assurance? and so shall you have the comfort of
all this Truth made good unto you: And the Lord give it in unto you.

SERMON III.
JOHN 1.16. And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.
Preached at Magnus. Aug. 24. 1645.



I Have made entrance into these Words in other Congregations: And desire to
proceed here, where I left there.

The Words are spoken of our Lord and Savior Christ: They hold forth Three
great, grand Propositions.

First. That there is a Fullness of Grace in Jesus Christ. Secondly, That of His
Fullness, all we have received. Thirdly. That of His Fullness all we have
received, Even Grace for Grace.
I have done with the First Proposition.

The Second afforded this Observation.

That all the Saints, and People of God do partake of the Fullness of Jesus
Christ in a way of receiving.

This false asunder into Two Parts, or Two Branches.

First, That there is a Communication of the Fullness of Jesus Christ unto all
Believers. Secondly, That what ever Grace, or Holiness the Saints have from
Christ, they have it in a way of receiving.
I have done also, with the First of these: And am now (God willing) to speak
to the Second.

Whatsoever Grace, or Holiness the Saints, and People of God have from Christ;
they have it all in a way of receiving. Of His Fullness all we have received.

The former Branch told us, That Christ Communicates: This tells us, That we
Receive. There the Emphasis lay upon Christ's Communicating: And here the Accent
is set upon our Receiving. The Grace of Jesus Christ is not borne with us: We
do not go to Jesus Christ in the strength of our Nature, to take of His
Fullness to our selves: But Jesus Christ gives out, and we receive: All in a
way of Receiving.

The Grace, and Mercy of our Justification, and remission of Sins; is by way of
Receiving. Romans 5.11. Not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. Atonement is to be
had, it is to be had by Christ; and this in a way of Receiving.

Again. The Grace and Mercy of our Adoption, is to be had in a way of
Receiving. Gal. 4.5. He came to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons. Adoption is a Blessing that is most
desirable: This Christ gives; and this we receive.

Again. The Grace of our Sanctification, is to be had in a way of Receiving.
What is the Cause, and Original of all our Grace, or Holiness but the Spirit
of God? And that is received. Gal. 3.2. This only would I learn of you,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? The
Schools say, that the word Grace, is either taken for The Gifts of the
Holy Ghost: or for Saving, and Sanctifying Grace.

Take Grace for, The gifts of the Holy Ghost, (as sometimes the Word is used in
Scripture) and that is in a way of Receiving. Acts, 10.47. They heard them
speak with Tongues (at the 46. ver.) Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost;
That is The Gift of the holy Ghost.

Take Grace for Holiness, and Sanctification; and that is also, in a way of
Receiving; to be had in a way of Receiving. Romans 8.15. For ye have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear: But ye have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. There are Gifts of Prayer: And there is
the Spirit of Prayer, of Adoption crying, Abba, Father. The First may be
without Grace; but the Second not: where ever the Second is, there is Grace:
And this is Received says the Apostle here:

In general, all is by way of Receiving. Col. 2.6.
As ye have Received the Lord Christ (says the Apostle) see that ye walk in
Him. And in another place: 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou, that thou have not Received? What have thou, that thou have
not Received; All in a way of Receiving. He shall come down (says the Psalmist
in the 72. Psalm speaking concerning our Lord and Savior Christ, and His Grace
at the 6. verse) He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass. Or as some
write it (for so the Original will bear it) He shall come down like rain upon
the Fleece: having relation to Gideons Fleece. He shall come down like rain
upon the mowen grass: as showers that water the earth. A Psalm for Solomon:
(says the Title.) But there are many things in this Psalm, that cannot
properly, be understood of Solomon; but in a type, properly belonging to Jesus
Christ. For as Strigelius does well observe: (at the 7. verse, the verse next
following this text) it is said: In his days shall the righteous flourish: and
abundance of peace so long as the moon endures. Solomon did not live so long
as the moon endures. This therefore, is to be understood of Christ. And at the
5. verse, it is said: They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations. They did not fear Solomon; men did not fear Solomon
as long as the Sun and moon endures, through all generations. This therefore,
must be understood of Christ. Now, see therefore, what is said of Christ, and
concerning His Grace: (says the Text, in the 6. verse:) He shall come down
like rain upon the mowen grass. Like rain: rain (you know) is that that does
make the earth fruitful. Non ager sed annus facit fructum: It Is not the sowing,
but it is the Year that causes fruit: it is the rain that causes fruit: And so,
it is the Grace of Jesus Christ that does make us fruitful; His Grace the cause
of our Grace. I will be as a dew (says the Lord, in the 14. of Hosea) unto
Israel: and then follows fruitfulness.

Again, The rain comes by special appointment from God; Amos. 4.7. Judge. 6.38,
39, 40.
with a kind of dis-crimination. He makes the rain to fall upon one City
(says the Prophet) and not upon another. As we read concerning Gideons
Fleece; the dew fell upon the Fleece, when all the earth was dry round about
it: And then the dew fell upon the ground, when the Fleece was dry. And this
was a Type of the Grace of Christ: when the Jews were bedewed with the Grace
of Christ, then all the Nations round about, they were dry: And then, when God
bedewed the Gentiles, the Nations round about with His Grace; then the Jews
were dry, and they are dry to this day.

Again, The rain, falls ('it is the Scripture phrase) the rain falls; and
falls upon the earth: and the earth is a recipient to receive it: it is mere
recipient at the first, and then brings forth it is fruit: the Rain falls. And
so does the Grace of Christ: the Grace of Christ falls upon the souls of men
and women (says the Text here) He shall come down like the rain upon the mowne
grass. So does the Grace of Jesus Christ, it comes down upon a poor soul: All
in a way of receiving, al in a way of receiving; whatever grace, or holiness a
man has on this side Heaven, it is all in a way of Receiving.

And this will appear further to you, if you consider: The insufficiency of
Nature. The Supernaturallity of Grace. The Shortness of all means that are
appointed thereunto. The work and nature of Faith. And the posture, and true
behavior of Prayer.

First of all. There is a Natural inability in a man unto what is good, truly,
Spiritually good.

First. A man is unable by Nature, to overcome any sin, though it be never so
small. A man by Nature, he may abstain from vices, from a sin; but overcome it
he cannot. Sin may be Satisfied, and not Mortified. (Mark) ^n may be Satisfied,
and not Mortified. As in the dropsy: There is a great deal of difference
between the satisfying of a man's thirst, and the healing of the Disease. Many
men think that their fin is certainly Healed, when it is only Satisfied. Whereas
a beggar, when he is competently served, he will beg no more: And sin,
beggar-like, when it is well served it will not beg again presently, not in the
same temptation. Sin it self, will cease to sin, that it may gather strength to
sin. But now; a man by nature he cannot overcome it. And therefore, in the 1 Cor
15.57. the Apostle says thus: But thanks be to God, which gives us the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Victories, and all Victories is through
our Lord Jesus Christ. And if in the Old Testament, all Victories were given
from God, all outward Victories were given from Him: Then much more in the New
Testament, are all our Spiritual Victories, (the former being but Types of
these) much more are all our Spiritual Victories, then to be given to God. Now
you see how it was with David, in the 18. Psalm, concerning outward Victories
he gives all to God. Says he there (at the 32 verse,) It is God that girdeth
me with strength: He makes my feet, like hindes feet: He teaches my hands to
war, so that a Bow of steel is broken by mine Arms. And at the 2. verse (says
he) The Lord is my Rock, my For tress, my Deliverer: my God, my strength in
whom I will trust; my Buckler, and the horn of my Salvation, and mine high
Tower. As if all his Warlike strength and skill were from God. And is not much
more our Spiritual strength, which we have in our Christian warfare from Jesus
Christ? Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord always at my right hand, therefore I shall not fall:
(says the Psalmist.) Naturally then, a man is utterly unable to overcome any
sin, or temptation, though it be never so small.

Secondly. As a man is unable to overcome any sin: So also, if he be fallen, he
is unable to rise again. Peter himself must have a look from Christ, before he
could repent. As if Jesus Christ had said to him; Peter, thou art now down in
the dirt, and I know thou can not rise, unless I give forth My hand unto
thee: then here is My hand; and so He did heave him up. Every sin that a man
does commit, he is taken captive by it, more or less: sin is a captivity. Now,
Voluntas non est libera, nisi liberata: A man is not free, unless freed. If
the Son make you free, you are free indeed; but else not at all. Every sin that
a man does commit, it is a mortal wound, a death of the soul, sin is. A man may
be able to kill himself, but being killed, he cannot raise himself. The Ship
having his rudder broken, cannot go where it will but must go where the Tempest
pleases. And Beloved, there is never a fin that a man commits, but he does
strike upon his rudder, he does strike upon the earth withal; and he does lose
his rudder. A poor sheep is able for to lose it self, and to wander: but being
lost, is not able to come home agaim. Yea, our Savior says, in the Parable of
the lost-sheep, (meaning lost-man) The lost-sheep is taken by the shepherd, or
the good man that finds it, and is laid upon his shoulder, and so brought back
again. What is this shoulder, but the strength of Christ? And indeed, if a poor
soul, if a wandting, poor, lost soul be not laid on the shoulder of Jesus
Christ: he will lose, and wander unto all Eternity, will lose himself, and
wander for ever. This is well expressed (as an Ancient does observe) in the
example of Adam: when Adam had sinned, and fallen; Adam was not able to return
again (Let us mark it the rather, because Adam, he was our Great Common-father;
and in his example we may all see our own faces,) Says he, Adam being fallen,
he could not rise again: but when Adam was fallen, What does he? Then he sets
himself, for to make himself clothes of siggleaves, that so he might be freed
from the injury of the weather: he could mind his clothes, and do something to
take away his shame; but not one thought of God, not one word of God whom he
had lost. And so now man, man having finned; What does he do? He can mind his
clothes, he can mind the affairs of the world; those things that concern this
life, and his body: Oh! but not one word, not one thought of God, until the
Voice of the Lord be heard: And what then? Then Adam-like he may be ashamed,
and may be afraid,; but yet no repentance till Christ comes. Naturally a man
being fallen, he is unable to rise again.

Thirdly. As he is unable to rise again: So he is unable to stand, to hold, to
continue: though he should rise up again, he is unable to stand, he is unable
to hold, to continue. And therefore David seeing his people in a good frame, he
prays, That the Lord would continue that good in the thoughts of their heart,
and that for ever. And so the Apostle in the 1 Peter, 5.10. 1 Chronicles. 26.18.
But the God of all Grace, who has called us unto His eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, after ye have suffered a while, make ye perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. (Pray mark the words) The God of all Grace, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. He does not say; The God of Nature settle you: Oh! it is an act of
Grace, of great Grace, of rich Grace to be settled, it is an act of great Grace
to be truly settled, As Hierome excellently notes; God is always a giver; God
is always a bestower: It shall not suffice me that God has once given, unless
He would always give. You know the parable concerning the strong man, that ye
read of, in Mat. 12. being cast out by a stronger then he, and yet returns
again. The Devil is this strong man in some great, and gross sin: now, though
he be cast out; yet notwithstanding the room being emptied, though it be
garnisht with moral virtues, and Evangelical gifts yet the room being left
empty of Jesus Christ, the Lord Jesus Christ not keeping the house: says the
Devil, the house is mine still: and therefore (says he) I will return to mine
house, he calls it his house all this while; Though the strong man were cast
out, and though the room were swept, and garnisht, yet he calls it his house
still, because Jesus Christ did not keep there, and continue there. So that,
the Lord Jesus Christ must have the Keeping of the house, as well as the
Sweeping of the house. Naturally, a man is unable to hold, to stand, and
continue, though he do rise.

Fourthly. As a man is unable to stand, and persevere: So also, he is unable to
any one good work; Spiritually, Evangelically good. We are not able (says the
Apostle) as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.
to think a good thought, to speak a good word; but all our sufficiency is of
God. And Bradwardin, he reasons the case very well: (Says he thus ^) If that a
man bestow good breeding upon his child: the father gives the natural being to
the child, he brings him up in Military affairs, and the child grows very
skilful, and the father furnishes him with all kind of Armor: yet
notwithstanding, if the child has the prowess, and the valor of the action
from himself, he may boast in himself, and he may say, True indeed, I had my
being from my father, I had (indeed) my skill from my father, I had my Arms
from my father: But the Action is my own, the valor my own, the strength of
the action is my own. So (says he) if God should give habitual grace to a man,
if the strength for the action should not be from God, he might boast; True
indeed, I had the habit from God, the habitual grace from God, but the action
is my own, the spirit of the action is my own: he had now wherein to boast. But
all boasting is cut off, as you shall hear by and by. And therefore Naturally a
man is unable to every work: Not only the habit is received; but strength for
the action also, it is all received.

Fifthly. As a man is unable to every action: So also, he is Naturally unable to
prepare himself unto what is good, spiritually good. (Good people mark it) I
say, a man is also unable to Prepare himself unto what is good. Not only unable
to do good; but unable to Prepare himself unto what is good, Spiritually good:
not only unable to Overcome the enemy, but unable to draw out his forces: not
only unable to Receive the enemies charge; but he is unable to draw out his
forces. Ho, ho, every one that thirsts, Isa. 55.1
come and buy wine and milk without money, or moneys worth. If a man could
prepare, here is money, here is moneys worth: As one observes well, Then a man
might say, The first beginning of my salvation was of my self: Yea, in truth a
man may say, The greatest part is from my self: for it is more to begin, and
more to prepare; so the the greatest part of our salvation should be from our
selves. Ye know what the Apostle says, (and I pray consider it) in Ephe. 2.1.
And you has He quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Even you (at
the 5. v.) even when we were dead in sins has quickened us together with
Christ; by Grace ye are saved. (Mark) Twice the Apostle brings in that
sentence: be brings it in again at the 8. verse: For by Grace ye are saved: why
twice? Not only to show that the progress of a Christian is by Grace, but the
very first beginning, and setting out, it is al of grace: By Grace ye are saved.
It Is a good speech of Austin, Grace is no way Grace, unless it be every way
free. Now can a poor dead man prepare himself unto life? Did Lazarus prepare
himself to life? Could he do it? Could Lazarus do it? There is (says the
Philosopher) a proportion always between the Action, and the term of the
Action. Now what proportion is there between Nature and Grace? No man (says
our Savior) comes unto the Son, Joh. 6.44
but whom the Father draws, thus says our Savior. Oh! but (says Pelagius) I
can go unto Jesus Christ by my own preparation, I can prepare, I can draw my
self unto Jesus Christ, or I can draw Christ to me. Beloved! In natural
Actions, there needs always preparations to the introducing of forms: because
in the way of Generation of Nature, things are wrought by degrees. As for
example now: If a great log lie in the mud; before you can carry it away, you
must loosen it from the mud: but the logg does not loosen it self: And so, if
wood be to be burnt; first it must be dried, there is preparing the wood to be
burnt, because the thing is to be done by degrees. But in the conversion of a
poor sinner, the work is done in a moment, it is no natural work, God infuses
Grace there; and therefore there needs no prepararation there. And therefore
Bradwardine, he reasons the case very well thus, If (says he) a man can
prepare himself, then the preparation either helps forward, or causes the
following grace; if it does not help forward, nor cause the following grace,
then it does not prepare, that which does not help, does not prepare: and if it
does help forward the following grace, or cause it, that God must give a
following grace as a reward of this preparation; then surely, this preparation
makes a man pleasing in the eyes of God: for, will God reward a man for a work
that does not make him pleasing in the eyes of God? But how can a man be
pleasing in the eyes of God, Heb. 11.6.
without Faith? Without Faith it is impossible to please God. So that a man
cannot prepare himself to what is good. Put all these together: A man cannot
naturally overcome a sin, a temptation, though never so small: He cannot rise
when he is fallen: he cannot stand though he should rise: yea, he is unable to
any good work, simply in it self: and he is not able to prepare himself unto
what is good. Surely therefore, all is in a way of Receiving: what ever grace
one has, he has it in a way of Receiving. This is the first Argument.

Secondly. Supernaturallity of Grace: Grace is a Supernatural thing, and is
called in Scripture phrase, The Seed of God: The Image of Christ: The Divine
Nature: The good and perfect Gift that comes from above from the Father of
Lights: It is wrought in the soul by the infinite, and Almighty Power of God;
the same power wherewith God Created Heaven and Earth at the first. And
therefore it is called a Creation, in Ephe. 2.10. We are His Workmanship,
created unto good Works. The same power that the Lord used in raising up Christ
from the dead, is also put forth in the conversion of every sinner.

And besides, When the Lord is pleased to convert, and draw a poor sinner unto
Himself, He does not always take those that are the best, those that are the
wisest, those that are the most moral, Civil men; He does not always take the
most Prudent: but many times the Lord takes the worst; Paul, Zacheus, Matthew,
the Jailour, diverse others. And if you look into the 33. Chapter of Job, where
you have the platform (indeed) of man's conversion: you shall find there, in
what a time God takes a man to Convert him: (at the 14. verse) God speaks
once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not: In a dream, in a vision of the
night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the bed: Then He
opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, That He may withdraw
man from his purpose, and hide pride from man. When man least thinks of it,
then God comes, in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls
upon a man, and in slumbrings upon the bed: Then he opens the ears of men,
and seals their instruction. What does all this argue then? But that grace,
grace is infused, grace is supernatural; Oh! there is a supernaturallity in
saving grace: Surely therefore, all is in a way of Receiving, all is Received.
That is a Second Argument.

Thirdly. This truth is also argued, Shortness of the means of grace. Much
means of grace appointed; but take the means as it is in it self without Gods
appointment, or institution upon it, and you will find that all means are too
short to reach the end. For example: In the old Testament, when the Lord would
take in Jericho, and break down the walls of Jericho; He Commands, Josh. 6.4
The Rams horns should be blown. Take the blowing of the Rams-horns as lying
under Gods appointment, and so this action was sufficient for to break down the
walls: but take the action of blowing the Rams-horns by it self, and so it was
too short. So the Lord commands Naaman, 2 Kings 5.10.
To go and wash himself in the water of Jordan: take this action of Naaman
washing himself in the water; take it (I say) without Gods Commandment: take
it with Gods Commandment, Gods Appointment, so it was sufficient to reach his
Cure, and heal him of his Leprosy: but now, take the action as it was in it
self, without the Appointment, and institution of God, and so it was too short
to reach his Cure. So in the new Testament: Joh. 9.6.
our Savior Christ, He takes spittle and clay for to cure a man's eyes: Take
this under Christ's appointment, and so it is sufficient to reach the cure; but
take it without, and so short. So God did appoint in Baptism a man should be
washed in water; and in the Sacrament we should eat bread, and drink wine, for
the begetting, and increasing of Faith. Take these actions as they lie under
Gods Appointment, and Institution, they are able to reach this end: but take
these actions as they are in themselves, washing in water; and eating bread,
and drinking wine; they are all too short; all too short, either to beget, or
increase Grace. Well now, why does the Lord still appoint such means, as in
themselves are too short for the end whereto appointed? Surely, not only for
this reason, that he might teach us, that the thing done is rather by the
appointment, then by the use of means: but also to show thus much, That though
we do use the means, yet notwithstanding in the use of the means, we do not
attain the thing by the use thereof; but that in the using of means, and
waiting there, we shall receive strength from God to do it, to attain the end.
Whenever therefore, you consider the shortness of the means appointed,
conclude thus, That all is in a way of Receiving: therefore God has appointed
the means that are in themselves short.

Fourthly. From the work, and nature of Faith. There is no Grace that the
Scripture puts more upon, than Faith. (Mark I pray) In the old Testament, all
the Victories are put on Faith: In the new Testament, all the Cures: if thou
can but Believe (says Christ) According to thy Faith be it unto thee. Yea,
Beloved, if you look into the new Testament, you shall find, that the same works
that are given to Christ, are given to Faith, Jesus Christ, He is said for to
Sanctify the soul: So does Faith, Faith purifies the heart (says the
Apostle.) Jesus Christ, He is said for to justify a sinner: So does Faith too:
Being justified by Faith: Romans, the 5th. Jesus Christ, He is said for to save
the soul, He is called our Savior: So does Faith too: By Faith ye are saved.
What Is the Reason now, that the Lord does especially set the Crown upon the
head of Faith? Some think it is for this Reason; Because that Faith does unite
the soul unto Jesus Christ: But so does Love, Love is an affection of Union;
and all Grace unites to Christ; as every sin seperates, so every Grace unites.
Others think it is for this Reason: Because that as Faith sets the Crown upon
the head of Christ: So God sets the Crown upon the head of Faith: and this is
true. For as the Lord does honor those persons most, that honor Him most: So He
will honor those Graces most, that honor Him most. But besides this, I conceive,
the great Reason is this; why the Lord does thus set all over upon Faith: (I
say) because that Faith, in the nature of it, is a Receiving Grace. And
therefore John having said in this 1. Chap. of Joh. and the 12. verse. To as
many as received Him, He gave power to be called the Sons of God. Explains
himself by this afterward in the same verse; Even to them that Believe on His
Name. So that Believing is nothing else but Receiving the Grace of God: the
nature of Faith, being to Receive the Truth, or the Receiving of Jesus Christ:
the proper work, and nature of Faith being to Receive. Now therefore when the
Lord does put al upon Faith, and Faith in it is nature is a Receiving; plainly
it holds forth this Truth unto us, That all is in a way a Receiving: all Grace
in a way of Receiving.

Fifthly and lastly. This Truth is argued also, From the posture, and true
behavior of Prayer (Mark) Prayer, is nothing else, but the souls begging, or
petitioning for something from Heaven. A beggar you know, when he begs, he
holds forth, or he stretches forth his hand: noting a willingness to receive.
So you read in Scripture, that when the soul is put into a posture of Prayer,
it is put into this posture. Read therefore what is said, in Job, 11.13. If
thou prepare thine heart, ( or est ablish thine heart, for so the word
signifies) if thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
Him. That is, if thou do Pray unto Him, thou stretchest out thine hands unto
Him. Now as one observes well: As it were a derision, or a mocking of God, to
praise God, or to give God thanks for that which He does not give, but I have
in my own power: So it were also a mocking of God, to pray to God for that
which is not in His hands to give, but in mine to do. Now my Beloved, What ever
Grace, or Holiness a man has, he is to pray for: pray for healing strength;
pray for quickening strength; pray for confirming strength; pray for strength to
pray: and seeing the posture of prayer is this, to stretch forth the hands,
(which notes receiving) in that we are for to beg all Grace from God; it
argues, all is in a way of Receiving, all, all good is in a way of Receiving:
what ever Grace, or Holiness a man has on this side Heaven, it is all in a way
of Receiving.

But you will say, Cuts off all endeavor; if all be in a way of Receiving,
then nothing to be done? This Doctrine is an Enemy to all Obedience, to all
laboring, to al good Works, and to all performance, to al Endeavor.

Not so: Philippians: Wherefore (at the 12 verse) says he) my beloved, as ye
have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence: work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. Why? (at the 13
verse) For it is God which works in you both to will, and to do, of His good
pleasure. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling: why? for all is
in a way of Receiving; it is God, it is God that works all in all; it is God,
it is God that does it, therefore work. Mark, how the Apostle argues: He does
not argue, as many do: And I pray tell me if there be any here that think this
Doctrine is against Endeavor; pray tell me, What Work or Endeavor? Either you
would endeavor for to leave your fins; or you would endeavor to do what is
good, to perform some good. If you would endeavor for to leave your sins:
there is no such way, as to be truly, fully persuaded in your heart of this
truth, That all is in a way of Receiving. Mark therefore I pray, how the
Apostle argues for that purpose, in the 1 Cor. Chap. 3. at the 3d verse: For
(says He) Ye are carnal; ye are carnal; for whereas there is among you
envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk as men? For
while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal?
Well, but what course does the Apostle take to cure this carnallity? See what
he says, at the 6th verse: at the 5th Who then is Paul? who is Paul? and who
is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord Gave to every
man: I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase: So then,
neither is he that planteth any thing, neither is he that waters: but God
that gives the Increase. As if he should say thus: Here Is divisions among you;
and one says, I am for Paul; and I am for Apollo: Oh! but get your heart
settled in this Truth, That all is of God, and all is of Christ, and all is in
a way of Receiving; and then divisions will be no more; there will be no more
such sayings as these, I am for Paul, and I am for Apollo.

And again, Would your endeavors be for the performance of what is good? The
consideration of this Truth that is now before you, is of great avail this way
too. Says Paul, I have labored more abundantly than they al, yet not I, 1 Cor.
15.10.
but the Grace of Christ in me. Mark, yet not I, but the Grace of Christ in me.
Labored more than they al, more abundantly than all, yet al from Christ, and
yet all from Grace, and yet all in a way of Receiving. Surely, there is no such
way to gracious, and blessed endeavors, as the serious consideration of this
Truth that is now before you.

I Will give you Two Reasons for it:

All Actions are carried upon two wheels, Fear, and Love. As a Cart moves upon
two wheels; so every Action is carried upon these two, Fear, and Love. The more
ye love, the more ye move toward a thing: The more ye fear, the more ye move
to avoid it: Fear, and Love the two great wheels of every motion. Now as for
Love; what greater Love than this; That Jesus Christ has died for us, and
works all our works for us, and in us? and Love causes Love. As for Fear, Ye
know there are some children, so long as they are kept in dependence upon the
father, the father having not given them portions they are obedient to him: but
if once the children have gotten their portions, and are come to live by
themselves, then no more obedience. If you have a man by the wrist, and he
knows that if you let him go, he falls down into some great river, and there he
is lost for ever: will not this man that you have by the wrist, will not he be
afraid now to offend you, knowing you have him thus by the wrist? Beloved! this
Doctrine tells us, that the Lord has us all by the wrist; we live in a continual
dependence upon Him: and all is in a way of Receiving: will not this make us to
fear the Lord then? The Prophet Jeremiah, in the 5th of Jer. 24. He wonders
that the people should not fear the Lord upon this ground: That the Lord gave
them the former and the latter rain. And (says he) they have not feared the
Lord, that has given them rain; the former and the latter rain. As if he
should say thus: These poor people they depend upon God for rain; and is it not
a strange thing that they should not fear Him? Why, beloved, There is not one
drop of Spiritual rain, or dew of Grace that falls upon the heart, but we live
in dependence upon God for it; shall not this make us fear?

Again, besides, Whatsoever service you tender unto God on this side Heaven, it
is all a waiting upon God. And therefore, the Saints that serve God, in
Scripture they are said to wait on God. (Mark I pray you) Our service is a
waiting upon God: Isa. 40.31.
But those that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength (says Isaiah.) Now
if a man hear, that if he have no oil in in his I amp, he is lost for ever; and
there is no way to get oil, but by setting his vessel under Gods Spout, and
Gods Ordinance; will not this make a man to wait upon Him? Some there are that
defer their Repentance, and they think to repent afterward, they think they
shall be able to repent afterward: But now, when a soul shall hear, that all is
in a way of Receiving; he must take it (therefore) when God does offer it; then
he concludes thus: Is it so indeed, That al is in a way of Receiving? strength
to repent, it is by receiving? then will I take while the Lord offers me
strength: Oh! I will never defer my Repentance again, I will now wait upon God,
and now while the Lord offers, now I will take it. Thus you see this Doctrine is
afriend unto all endeavor: All is in a way of Receiving: no such friend unto
good endeavor as this Doctrine.

But you will say unto me.

Besides the Reason,

And the First is: That all Boasting, rejoicing, 1. Rea.
confidence in ones self may be taken away. If Abraham (says Paul in the 4. of
the Romans) were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, though not
before God: He has whereof to glory. But now, when all is in a way of
Receiving, there is no room for Boasting. Mark therefore what is said, in the 1
Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou
did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if
thou had not received it. God cannot endure Boasting, cannot endure
Self-confidence, God cannot endure that a man should glory in any thing in
himself: therefore all, all is in a way of Receiving. This is Gods Reasoning.

Again. 2. Rea.
God has so ordered things in the dispensations of His Grace under the Gospel,
That Jesus Christ may be fully Honored, Exalted. No such way to Honor Christ as
this, that all should come out of His hands, to be received from Him. Pray? Was
it not a great Honor to Joseph in the time of the famine in Egypt, that no
bread, but should come through his hands? not a corn of grain but should come
through his hands? So here: when no grace, no strength, no aid, no assistance,
no supplies; but all through the hand of Christ, all in a way of Receiving:
does not this glorify Christ much? What is it, (I pray) that makes the Sun so
glorious a creature, above all the creatures in the world; but this, That all
the creatures depend upon him for light, and for warmth? This is that that
makes the Lord Jesus Christ glorious, That all must be in a way of Receiving
from Jesus Christ.

Thirdly. 3. Rea.
God has so ordered things in the dispensations of His Grace under the Gospel,
That the Saints, and Children of God may live by faith. (Good people mark it.)
Some there are, some creatures in the world, that do live by Sense: as the
beasts, and beastly men. Some creatures there are that do live by Reason, moral
men: But the Lord would have His Children to live by Faith: That as the men of
the world do live by Sense and Reason; So the Lord would have all His Children
to live by Faith. What way, or means to bring a soul off for to live by Faith?
Establish this Doctrine, let this be a Statute made in the Churches, All in a
way of Receiving: I, (says a poor soul) is it so indeed? What? all in a way of
Receiving? Then I fee a necessity of living by Faith: Oh! Lord, teach me now
for to live by Faith.

Thus you see the Doctrine clearly proved by Reason to you. I shall not be able
to reach the Use of the point, so as I intended.

The Doctrine is exceeding Useful, full of Spiritual Use: yet though I shall not
be able to do what I would, give me leave for to make some Application of the
point; and so I will wind up all.

Is this Doctrine true, 1 Applic.
That all, all is in a way of Receiving? Then behold what infinite care the
great God of Heaven and Earth, has of Believers, of every believing soul
though he be never so mean! would you not think, that if a mother were so
tender of her child, that she would not let her child eat a bit of bread, but
it should be of her own cutting: that she would not let it drink a drop of
drink, but it should be of her own drawing: would you not think this mother,
this woman were very careful of her child? Beloved! thus the case stands: No
Grace, no Assistance, no Help for duty, no Help against sin; but the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself will have the cutting of it, the Lord Jesus Christ will have the
giving of it out; He will have the drawing of it all; all in a way of
Receiving. Oh! what care! Oh! what infinite care has God of poor Believers!
When the Lord would commend His care of the Children of Israel unto them; pray
mark what an argument he uses, in Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12. For the Land whether
thou go in to possess it, is not as the Land of Egypt from whence ye came
out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden
of herbs. They fetched water out of the River Nilus, and so they watered the
Land of Egypt with their feet. But (says he at the 11. verse) the Land whither
ye go to possess it, is a Land of hills and valleys, and drinks water of the
rain of Heaven: Not taken out of the River, and watered by men's feet, as Egypt
was. A Land (says the Lord) which the Lord thy God Cares for: A Land which
the Lord thy God Cares for: He Cared not for Egypt. How does he prove that the
Lord Cared for it? The eyes of the Lord thy God are always on it, from the
beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year. He gives rain from
Heaven, and when your Land wants water, it is given from Heaven, it is not
watered by men's feet, it is not watered as Egypt was watered, which Land God
Cared not for. So now, there are some people in the world, that water
themselves, that go forth in their own strength, that have moral virtues, and
they water their hearts with their own feet, (as I may say) the Lord Cares not
for those, the Lord Cares not for such. Oh! but give me a soul that has rain
from Heaven, that lives in continual dependence, that acknowledges that all is
Received, that lives upon Heaven; the Lord Cares for such a soul. Now this is
the condition of all the Saints, of every Believer, he has all in a way of
Receiving: Oh! the infinite care that the Lord has of every Believer though he
be never so mean.

Secondly. Appli. 2.
Is this Doctrine true, All in a way of Receiving? Then behold! what sweet, and
comfortable, and pleasant lives the Saints live, Believers have. When you look
upon a Godly man, and consider what great works he does, and what hard things
he bears, what great Afflictions he goes through: You say, Good Lord! how is a
man able to do, or bear all this? Paul and Silas ^^nging in the stocks, when
they were whipped and scourged, and the blood running down their shoulders; and
yet singing: How? how are they able to do all, to bear all? To here, here is
the reason: They have all in a way of Receiving. When you see the little Child
run by the father in his hand, in a green meadow, you say, the Child has a
^^ne, and a sweet time: but when you see the Child coming at a high gate, or
style to get over, or dirty lane to pass over, now ye say, how will the Child
do now? Why, surely the Child will do as well, and better now, if the father
takes the child up in his arms, the dirty lane will be the pleasantest place to
the child, when it is taken up into the fathers arms. Thus it is with the Saints
great works they do, and hard things they go through: Oh! but they are taken up
into Christ's Arms, and they have all in a way of Receiving. When you look upon
a man that does keep a great Table, has many servants attending on him; his
Purse always full of money; you will say, surely, this man leads a fine, and a
sweet life if it do not cost him much for to receive it, or get this money: but
if you hear that he has all his Estate, only for telling his money, his great
pains is all in receiving his money: Oh! here is a blessed man indeed, and
here is a happy man you think presently! Thus it is; the great pains of a
Christian is to Receive from Christ, and to spend for Christ. Oh! what a sweet
life does the Saints live, that live by Faith in Jesus Christ?

Thirdly. Appli. 3.
Is this Doctrine true? Then what abundance are there in the world, many that
live under the Gospel, that from hence are argued to have no saving interest in
Jesus Christ. (Good people mark it) that I say, are not savingly united to
Jesus Christ. There is a Twofold Union with Christ; as Christ is considered
Two ways: He is either considered with His Church, the Church and He making
one body; and so all together are called, Christ: In 1 Cor. 12. Or else He is
considered as the great Mediator, and Savior of Believers by Himself.
Accordingly men may be said to be United to Him, Either Outwardly in the
Church, tied and related to Him by outward Ordinances: Or else Inwardly united
to Him by saving faith. When a man is Inwardly united to Jesus Christ by saving
faith; he has all from Christ: Strength unto every duty from Jesus Christ:
Praying strength, and Hearing strength, and Repenting strength, and Confirming
strength, he has from Christ in a way of Receiving. But the other has little,
or nothing from Christ: (Pray mark it) I will express it thus: A man takes a
piece of bread, or a loaf of bread; he ties it to his arm; his arm has no
strength from that, it is but an outward tie to his arm, it has no strength
from that: and it argues that it is but an outward tie, it causes no strength by
it. But if a man take bread, and eat it, that there be an inward union, then
there is strength, there is bread goes to all the parts: you know my meaning.
Or thus; I will express it thus: Take a graft, and tie it unto a Tree, tie it
unto a stock, and it brings forth no fruit at all; why? Because it is but
outwardly tied unto the root, unto the stock of the Tree: But take the branch,
and graft it into the Tree, into the stock; then it brings forth all that it
brings forth by virtue of the stock that it is grafted into. So my beloved,
there are a company, there are a generation of people that live here under the
Gospel, that are Outwardly tied unto Christ: they are Baptized, they have the
Name of Christ by profession; and by the tie of the Ordinances, they are
outwardly tied unto Christ: but, Oh! they receive nothing from Him, nothing
from Him: pray, what do they receive? Suppose Christ had not come into the
world, suppose they had never heard Christ preached; they might have lived
Civilly; they might have lived Justly amongst their neighbors: they might have
abstained from Lying, and Drunkenness: why, they do not thus much: poor
creatures, nothing from Christ, they receive nothing from Christ: Oh! these are
but outwardly tied, as a loaf of bread is tied unto a man's arm; so is the Lord
Jesus in the Ordinances tied unto them. I, but then, There are another people,
that are Savingly united to Jesus Christ: and these, they have strength from
Him; they cannot Pray but as they have strength from Christ; they cannot Confer
and speak of good things, but as they have strength from Christ, they cannot go
and hear a Sermon with any affection, but as they have strength from Christ:
All, all in a way of Receiving: Oh! they stand in a way of dependence upon God,
in Him, and they have all from Christ, these are Savingly united to Christ. But
Oh! many that live among us that have not all from Christ: Certainly therefore,
there are many that are not savingly united to Jesus Christ. This is a Third.
I Will add but one more, and so I have done.

Is this Doctrine true, Appli. 4.
All in a way of Receiving? Then surely Beloved, All is from Grace, from first
to last. Heaven, Heaven is a Donative, Salvation is a Donative, every step in
the Iadder to Heaven is Grace, every link of the chain is Grace; Oh! every beam
of our day is Grace; every stone of our building Grace. Is all in a way of
Receiving? What? Praying strength? What? Hearing strength? What? Suffering
strength? What is all, al in a way of Receiving? Oh then! what glorious Grace
is here! Oh! rich Grace! Oh! free Grace! Oh! incomparable Riches of the
freeness of Gods Grace in Christ! Is the Lord Jesus the Alpha, and the Omega?
Is He the Beginning, the Middle, the End of all our actions? Oh! what Grace is
here! If there be ever a drooping soul, If there be ever a poor, hard heart, a
cold heart, a frozen heart in all this Congregation? Come, O poor soul come,
and warm thine heart at this fire of Love. Were our Heaven, and our Salvation
put to sale upon our Doing: (I say) were Mercy set to sale at our doing, then
we were in a sad condition, we were in a lamentable condition. Well now, Is al
in a way of Receiving? What then though I cannot Pray for the present? What
then though my heart be dead for the present? yet notwithstanding, I will wait
upon the Lord in the way of His Ordinances, it may be this day, and this time I
shall receive something that may put life into my poor, dead, soul. Oh! you
that never waited upon the Lord, and upon free Grace, wait now upon the Lord:
you that have waited, wait still; you that never waited, wait now. Beloved!
the more Dependant our condition is, the more Depending should our spirits be:
What more Dependant condition can you think of? All, all in way of Receiving:
Oh! therefore, now let us all labor to live by faith: Go away with this in your
bosoms; I see a necessity of living in a continual Dependence on God in
Christ. Which that you may do, think of all these things, and the Lord bless
them to you.

SERMON IV.
JOHN, 1.16. Preached at Margrets new fish-street. December. 8 1645.
And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.


I Have made entrance upon these Words in some Neighboring Congregations; in
the hearing of diverse of you: and my desire is to finish them here.

Having spoken of the former part of the verse: And of His Fullness have al we
received.

I come now unto the latter Clause; Even Grace for Grace.

The great Question is upon these words; What should be the meaning of them?

There are no less then Seven, or Eight Interpretations that are given by men.
I shall presently tell you what I apprehend to be the meaning of them:

Three things, I conceive, may be specially held forth in these words:

They may note, An Abundance of Grace,

The Universality of Grace.

And an Answerableness of Grace in every Christian,

I begin with the former at this time. They seem to note an Abundance of Grace:
Of His Fullness, all we have received, even Grace for Grace: that is, Abundance
of Grace.

This Interpretation, (that I might clear up the meaning before I come to that
which I intend to press) it suits with the like phrase of Scripture, Job, 2.4.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life: (you know
the place.) That is, a man will give all his Skins, all his Cattle and Skins:
(for their Estates in those times did lie in Cattle much) he will give al his
Skins though they be never so many; he will give them all for to save his life:
Skin for Skin; though he have never so many: Skin for Skin, Abundance of Skins:
Grace for Grace, and Abundance of Grace: Gratia gratiis accumelata.

This also suits with the word, And, or Even: it is not barely said thus: And of
His Fulness have al we received Grace for Grace: but, of His Fulness have al we
received, Even Grace for Grace. That is, in great Abundance; we have not only
received Grace, but we have received much Grace, Even Grace for Grace. This
also suits, with the Title, the Attribute that is here given to Christ; and
that is; Fullness: When God, or Christ is mentioned in Scripture they are
mentioned still under such a Title, as suits with the matter that is in hand:
and you may know what the matter in hand is, by the Title. Now the Title here
that is given to Christ, the Attribute that is given to Christ, is Fullness:
Answerable unto that is, Fullness of Grace in us, or Abundance of Grace from
Him. This also suits with the Scope of the place: for here the Evangelist sets
Christ above Moses; shows how Christ does go beyond Moses: the following verse
coming in as a reason of this: For the Law was given by Moses, John, 1.17, 18.
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. No man has seen God at any time;
the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared
Him. You have much by Moses, but you have more by Christ; you have Abundance of
Grace by Christ.

This also is agreeable to other Scriptures, where the same matter is spoken
of: If you look into the 5. of the Romans, you shall find, that the Apostle,
speaking of the free gift of Grace, (at the 15. verse) says, That it has
Abounded unto many: Much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which is
by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Would you have the word
Received, joined with Abundance? Look into the 17. verse, and there you read
For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one; much more they which Receive
Abundance of Grace, and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one
Jesus Christ. All these things being thus laid together, they argue unto me;
The main, and special thing that is here intended, is, an Abundance of Grace:
of whose Fullness we have all received, Even Grace for Grace: All the Saints and
People of God under the new Testament, do receive Abundance of Grace from Jesus
Christ.

Abundance of Grace Discovered.

Abundance of Grace Exhibited, and Communicated to all the Saints: he that has
the least measure of Gospel Grace, has Abundance of Grace from Jesus Christ.

Abundance of Grace is now Discovered. That I may make that appear: First.

It will appear, if you consider the several Advances, that Grace has made,
from the beginning of the world to this day, upon the children of men. In the
beginning God made man perfect, and righteous, after His own Image: Man falling
from that Estate, exposed himself, and all his posterity to the wrath of God
for ever: Then Grace steps in, and makes it is first Advance into the world;
Genesis 3.15.
The Seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. Here Christ is preached,
and preached to the greatest sinners; Adam and Eve, that had damned all the
world: And Jesus Christ is preached immediately by God Himself. One would think
now, that the Lord should rather have said to Adam: Adam, I made thee Perfect,
and Righteous; thou might have kept thee so: thou would not trust to Me,
Adam; thou would trust unto the Devil; Go now, now thou art fallen, go mend
thy self; if thou can find out a better Master, Adam. Or if the Lord would
have shown mercy to Adam; one would think, that He should have stayed for Adams
Repentance; that Adam should first a cried Him mercy: No, but before ever this
poor prodigal stirs one step unto his Father, his Father runs out to meet him,
to overtake him: The Lord Christ is preached, the Promise is propounded, the
free Grace of God is revealed: Here was the first Advance that ever Grace made
into the world.

But God who is rich in Grace, was not satisfied with this; but as in the
fourth day, He does gather up all the light that was scattered abroad in the
world before, into one body, The Sun: So now He does gather up all the beams of
His Grace into one body, The Covenant which He does make with Abraham: Genesis
12.3. Gal. 3.16. John, 56.
And unto Abraham He says, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the world be
blessed. In thy Seed (says the Apostle) He does not say Seeds; but Seed:
meaning Christ. Abraham saw so much of Christ, that our Lord says, He saw His
day, and rejoiced in it. Here the Sun was gotten higher: For now, though Christ
was preached to Adam; the Promise was propounded: yet notwithstanding, it was
but barely propounded to Adam, it was not applied; And propounded in obscure
terms to Adam too: and rather given Threatning-wise against Satan; then
Promise-wise concerning them. But now, the Lord does professedly come and apply
the Promise unto Abraham; And in thy Seed: which He does not give unto Abraham,
as Abraham, as that Person; but as a Common Person for all Believers. Here was
now a Second Advance that Grace made into the world.

But the Lord was not yet satisfied with this; but causes His Grace to Advance
higher, in Moses time: And unto Moses He speaks expressly; Deuteronomy. 18.15.
A Prophet will I raise up like unto thee; and I Will put My Name in him: He shall
be called, God, and Jehovah as I am. Then the Lord proclaimed before Moses,
himself to be, the Lord, gracious, merciful, forgiving iniquity, transgression,
and sin, reserving mercy for thousands. Then the Lord gave the Law: and least
they should think, that God intended it as a Covenant of works; He did at the
same time give the Ceremonial Law; that thereby they might read the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ for any sin they should commit against the Moral
Law. Here was a higher Advance.

But because this was still under-vail'd; And it is a pain to love to conceal
it self: the Lord does make a further revelation of His Grace, of Christ, by
His servant David: for after David, and Solomon's time, we read of the Eternal
generation of Christ; Proverbs the 8. Of the Incarnation of Christ: Lo, I
come, Psalm. 40.7.
in the volume of thy Book (says the Psalmist.) Of the Death, and Suffering of
Christ; Psalm the 22.1. (and diverse other Psalms) My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me. Of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: in the 118. Psalm; and the
16. Psalm. Thou will not suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Of all the
Three Offices of Jesus Christ: His Kingly Office, The second Psalm, Yet will I
set my King upon my holy Hill. His Prophetical Office, He shall declare the
Decree, Psalm. 2.7. And His Priestly Office; Thou art a Priest for ever after
the Order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. Of the Ascension of Jesus Christ; Psalm.
68. He has ascended on high, and received gifts for men. Of the Sitting at the
right hand of God the Father, the 110. Psalm. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit
thou on my right hand. Thus you see in David's time the Gospel had Advance
further, had gotten a great deal of ground.

But the Lord was not yet contented, but causes more of His Grace to break
forth in the times of the Prophets; more concerning Christ: He tells them of
the very Time Christ should be born, Daniel the 9. Of the Place where He should
be born, At Bethlehem. The Person that should bear Him: Mic. 5.2 Isa. 7.14 Mal.
3.1
A Virgin shall conceive. Gives them diverse Characters whereby they should know
Him when He came: And I will send my Messenger before Him, The voice of one
crying in the wilderness: He will ride upon an Asses colt; Behold thy King,
Isa. 40.3 Zac. 9.9. and 11.12 Isa. 53.5
comes riding upon an Asses colt: He shall be sold for Thirty pieces of silver
(says the Prophet Zachary) He shall die, not for His own sins but ours; The
chastisement of our peace shall be upon Him. And, as if all this were not
enough; The Lord speaks out the Covenant of Grace expressly in Jer. 31.31. The
days come, say the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah, verse the 33. This shall be the Covenant
that I will make with them, after those days says the Lord; I will put my Law
into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God,
and they shall be my people: And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother; saying, Know the Lord: They shall all know
me, from the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; for I
will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. What a
mighty Advance had Grace made now! Is there any more yet? Yes! our Savior
Himself comes, and then Grace Advances higher, by much higher; then Grace
enlarges her Quarters, extending it self unto all the world, go teach all
Nations: Go teach all Nations (says our Savior.) That house of Israel would
serve such a candle as Moses was: Mat. 28.19.
But when the Sun arises, no less then the whole world for him to display his
beams upon. He had set up a school of Grace in that corner of the world, in
Jenny: But when the Lord Jesus Himself comes, a Free School is set up, the
School of Free Grace for all the children of men to come unto: Go teach all
Nations.

Yea, Joseph to his brethren at the first, in a hidden way under a vail: But
now the vail of the Temple is rent asunder, and the most common people may see
into the Holy of Holiest; Now we all with open face, behold as in a glass the
Glory of the Lord. The Jews, 2 Cor. 3.18.
they had the Shadows: and we have, (as it were) the Picture: but the
Substance, the Thing; it is yet to come. These Three ye find in that first
verse of the 10. Chapter to the Hebrews. For the Law having a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of the thing. Here Is the Shadow; and
here is the Image; and here is the Thing it self: The Thing it self, it is yet to
come: They indeed had the Shadow, but we have the Image: and look how much an
Image, or the picture of a man goes beyond a shadow; So much does the discovery
of Christ now, go beyond the discoveries of Him then. Luther says, The whole
world is but one day, (as it were.) And as the evening, and the morning made
the day; so (says he) our fore fathers the Jews, they had the evening, but we
have the morning.

Again. Though there were many Doctrines of Grace, Moses, and we have Moses in
the hand of Christ. A mighty difference! As we have a Baptized, and a Christian
Moses; so they had a Circumcized, and a Mosaical Christ. They had Grace in the
hand of the Law. And therefore you shall observe, that when the Lord appeared
unto them in way of greatest mercy, He appeared still with tokens of Majesty,
and Greatness: But now we have Grace in the hand of Grace; we have Grace with
the tokens of Grace, and with the tokens of Love. And this difference the
Apostle makes out clearly, in the 12. of the Hebrews, from the 18. unto the 25.

Again, Though they had many Doctrins of Grace, Ceremonial Rites. They had the
free use of the creature: their hearts were not free, and enlarged toward God.
Indeed, those that were Godly among them, they were Children: Gal. 4.1, 4, 5, 6.
But (as the Apostle speaks) they being under age, they differed not from
servants ordinarily: But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
Son, that we might receive the adoption of Sons: And the Spirit of Adoption
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. They had the spirit of Bondage unto fear; and we
have the Spirit of Adoption unto Love, to cry, Abba, Father. They could not go
to God, but with many fears: but there is none of all the Saints now, but go
with a Spirit of Love, go to God as a Father: Every Saint now, may go to God
and say, Father, Father, I labor under such a temptation; Oh! Father, help me:
I want such a blessing, or mercy, Oh! Father give it me.

Again further, droppingly upon them; now a drop, and then a drop: As you have
it in the 1. Chap. of the Hebrews: 1. verse, God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the fathers by the Prophets; has in
these last days spoken unto us by His Son. God who by piece-meals, drop by
drop; now a drop and then a drop, spoke unto our forefathers by the Prophets;
has in these last times spoke unto us by His Son. This being the opposition,
shows, that God spoke perfectly, and spoke al by His Son. When this King came,
then all the Cocks run with wine. Some observe, that Jesus Christ preached the
Gospel more plainly unto one poor, ignorant, sinful, wicked woman, that ye
read of in the 4. of John; then He did unto al our forefathers under the Old
Testament: for unto which of all our forefathers did He say, I am the Messiah,
Ask of Me the water of life, and I will give it thee? You know the great
Doctrins of the Gospel, Justification by Grace: Free remission of sins; and the
like: Now though these Doctrins be in the Old Testament, yet take your Book,
and howmany leaves shall you read over, before you be able to read this
Doctrine clearly? But open your Book where you will, open in the New Testament,
and you shall meet with one every where; with this Doctrine, this great
Doctrine of Free Grace every where. Oh! much, much of Jesus Christ, and of His
Grace that is now Discovered; surely Abundance of Grace, Abundance of Grace
Discovered to the Saints now, and to all the Saints.

But in the Second place. Discovered: So there is Abundance of Grace Exhibited,
and Communicated to all the Saints. Those that have the least measure of Grace
now, have Abundance of Grace. That is the Thing that I would clear up to you.
That those that have the least measure of Gospel Grace, they receive Grace for
Grace, they have abundance of Grace.

Is it not a great matter for an ungodly man to be Justified?

Is it not a great matter for a man to be the Son of God? David counted it a
great matter to be son-in-law to a King, though but a wicked King, and the
Kingdom but small. What is it then to be Adopted to be the Son of God, the
Daughter of God? To as many as receive Him, Joh 1.12
He gives power to be called the Sons of God. And there is this difference
between Gods Adoption, and man's: When man does Adopt one to be his son, he may
put his Name upon him; he may give his Estate to him: but he cannot make the
person to be like himself; he cannot communicate his nature to him. But now,
when God does Adopt one to be His Child, He does not only put His Name upon the
Soul, and give him a great Estate; but He makes him to be like Himself, and
communicates His Nature to him. So says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.4
We are made partakers of the Divine Nature.

Is it not a great matter, I will write My Law in your heart, Jer. 31.33.
says God in the Covenant of Grace. That look as the Heathen, having the law
of nature written in their hearts, are naturally inclined unto the works of
Nature. So will I write my Law of Grace in your hearts, and you shall be
naturally inclined unto the works of Grace, and unto the works of the Gospel.
He that has least of Christ, he has all Christ; all Christ imputed unto all
the Saints. Beloved! we have not so much of Christ in our lives as Peter, and
Paul, and John had: but we have as much of Christ's Righteousness imputed to us
for our Justification as any of all the Apostles had: and if our Faith be
right, it is like precious with theirs.

Is it not a great matter, Joh 17.3
To have eternal life in this world? This is eternal life, to know thee, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And that day that any soul begins to know
Jesus Christ: that day is the daybreak of his eternity: the Saints that are in
Heaven, they count from that day; there began our eternity; This is eternal
life; here it begins. All the Saints and People of God, they do know God in
Jesus Christ. And therefore surely, There is an Abundance of Grace, Grace for
Grace, an Abundance of Grace Communicated, and given our unto all the Saints
under the new Testament.

But you will say unto me: Abundance of Grace in the lives of those ye count
godly; those that are in Christ indeed, we do not find that they have such an
Abundance of Grace?

I but, Opposition of Grace: The Retinue of Grace: And the Mysiery of Grace.

First, Opposition of Grace. A little Grace may be much opposed: and when the
Opposition is great, though Grace be small in the Bulk, it may be great in the
Work: though little in the Quantity, yet it may be much in Quality. There Is no
true Gospel Grace, but it is much opposed. When Jesus Christ came into the
world, you know Herod raised all the County upon him: And so when Christ comes
into the heart, the whole soul it is raised against Him, because He comes as an
enemy unto the soul. As when an enemy Lands, the Beacons are all fired, and the
Country all rises: what do you say? An enemy is landed, an enemy is landed, and
all the Country rises. So when Christ Lands upon a soul, at the first. He
Lands as an enemy unto the ^^n, and soul; and all the soul, the Region, the
Continent, it rises up against Him.

Then also, as the Dragon ^ood before the woman (which you read of in that of
the Revelations) to out off the child as soon as it was born: So the Devil
stands before the soul, to cut off the souls birth.

Then also comes in the power of all Relations; And the power of all
Engagements: And the power of all former Customs; And the power of an Evil
Nature: Nay, if you will go this way to work, then farewell all Friends; and
farewell all your former Pleasures, and farewell all Preferment. Was it not a
great matter for Job to be upright in the Land of Vz? why? Because there was
much opposition in it. Is it not a great matter, for a little poor Barque, or
Vessel to live at Sea in the time of a storm? for a little spark of fire to
live in much water? for a little light to live in a great wind? You look upon
such a poor gracious soul, and you do not consider the wind that blows upon it,
the storms that beat upon it; and you say, It Is not much Grace he has, or much
good he does: Oh! but consider, if you would consider the great Opposition that
the soul meets withal, then you will say, Oh! it is much indeed, there is
Abundance of Grace there.

Secondly. Consider the Retinue of Grace: Earnest of a great Inheritance, it is
much: Look upon the little Cottage in it self, or the Rood of Land in it self,
it is not much; but consider it as an Earnest of a great Inheritance; so it is
much. Beloved! whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it but as an
Earnest. Ye read of the Testimony of the Spirit, of the Earnest of the Spirit:
all the Grace that the Saints have on this side Heaven, it is all but the
Earnest of what they shall have. And the Apostle, he blesses God for this, as
ye read in the 1. of the Colossians 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which
bath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light:
(Mark,) Here are Three things especially considerable in these words: All the
Children of God have an Inheritance. You have but one Heir to your Estate, all
are not Heirs; but all Gods Children have an Inheritance. And the Inheritance
called, an Inheritance of Light: It does not lie in a dark, foggy, and fenny,
and moorish place; it is a comfortable Inheritance, it is an Inheritance of
light. And the Apostle, He does here give thanks unto God, that had made them
Meet to be the partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light. He does not
here give thanks unto God, for the Inheritance; but that they were meet, to be
partakers of the Inheritance; that they had an Earnest, till the Inheritance
came. (I say) all the Grace which a godly man has on this side Heaven, it is
but an Earnest: you look upon it as it is in it self, and you say; It Is not
much: I but, look upon it as an Earnest, but as an Earnest, and then you will
say, It Is much indeed, Oh! it is much indeed.

But then Thirdly, Mystery of Grace: Grace is a mystery. Ye read in Scripture
of the mystery of iniquity, and the mystery of godliness: godliness is not only
a mystery in the general, but all the parts of godliness are mysterious; there
is a mystery in every part: and if you would but a little consider the mystery
of Grace, I dare say, you would lift up your hands and say then, Oh! what
Abundance of grace is here, even in the weakest Saint!

For example, to tremble at the Word: It Is more then many a one does; many come
and fit out Sermons, and never tremble before the Word. Well, but you say, it is
no great matter to tremble before the Word, to tremble at the Word. I but, for
a man to tremble at the Word, and yet to count it as honey, and the honeycomb to
tremble at the Word, and yet to love it, and prize it then, and look upon it as
the honey and the honeycomb; this is much: Now ye shall have a poor soul, a poor
Christian, come and tremble before the Word, and yet look upon the Word as the
honey, even as honey, and the hony-combe, for sweetness; This is much.

Again. to love the Ordinances, so to love the Ordinances above all the world,
as to be willing to part with all the world, rather than to part with them:
This is a great matter. But may be, you will say, this is no great matter.
Well, but for a man or a woman to think so; so to love the Ordinances, and yet
notwithstanding, at the same time to think that he don't Profit, that he is
barren, and gets little or no good thereby; this is much. Now thus you shall
have it with a poor Christian; love, and prize the Ordinances, and would not
part with the Ordinances for all the world, and yet at the same time complain,
and say: Oh! I get little good thereby. Here Is a Mystery. Put all together; you
take things asunder, and therefore you think it is not much.

Again. You think it is no great matter for a man to comfort himself in this,
That the Lord knows his heart. There is much hypocrisy there; and the same day,
(it may be) say; Oh! I am an hypocrite. Thus you shall have it with many a
poor, poor gracious, drooping soul. All is naught; Oh! my heart, it is full of
hypocrisy; and I am but an hypocrite: and yet now, let him be charged or
accused by men of the world, for such and such designs; he comforts himself in
this: Oh! but, blessed be the Lord, the Lord knows my heart. Put these things
together.

Again, You will say it is no great matter, for a man, To look into his own
heart; so to look into his own heart, would not change his condition with
another for all the world; this is much. Take many a poor drooping soul, and
thus it is: I am afraid I shall go to Hell, and perish to all eternity: But
now, come and lay his condition to a Drunkard, to an Adulterer; says he, I
profess, I would not change my condition with that man for all the world, at
the same time. Here Is a mystery! it is strange; but there is a mystery in every
piece of godliness; and if you would but consider, it would appear that there
is much Grace in those that have the least.

Again. To work out his salvation with fear, and trembling. I but, for the same
person, To rely upon Jesus Christ, only, for salvation; This is much. Now thus
it is, you shall have a godly man work, work with fear, and trembling, as if he
would earn Heaven with his fingers-ends, and yet he relies upon Jesus Christ
only for his salvation.

Further. To walk closely with God: But it is a great matter. It may be you will
say it is not. I but, for a man to walk closely with God, and yet to be in the
dark: to walk exactly, and yet to be in a crowd, and throng of business; who
can walk exactly in the dark? and who can walk exactly in a crowd, when he is
carried to and fro in a crowd? Thus now, you shall have a godly, gracious man,
walk exactly with God, closely with God; and yet may be in the dark; a Child of
light, and yet in the dark; and in a crowd of occasions and business, and yet
walk exactly: this is much.

Again. for a man to be diligent in his particular Calling. I but, for the same
person, for to take no thought, no dividing thought, what be shall eat, or
drink, or put on; and yet be diligent in his particular Calling: this is much.
Now so it is, you shall have a godly, gracious soul, taking no care, no
dividing care, what he shall eat, or drink, or what he shall put on; and yet
diligent in his particular Calling.

Again. To grieve for sin past, and to strive against sin for the time to come.
I but, for the same person to know, that his sin past is pardoned, and to know,
that if he fall into a sin for the time to come, God will work good out of it,
it shall be for his gain, God will overruled it so; and yet strive against it as
the greatest evil in the world: this is much. Now thus it is, A gracious soul
knows his sin is pardoned, yet he grieves for it: and he knows that if he shall
fall into a sin, the Lord will overruled things so, as he shall be the better
for it; and yet he strives against his sin, as the greatest evil in the world.
Here is a Mastery! this is much.

Again. You will say it is no great matter, for a man to be quiet under his
Affliction, because it does come from God; for that reason: I but for the same
person, To be the more sencible, and to be the more afflicted, because it does
come from God; this is much. Beloved! you shall have these Two meet together: A
godly, gracious soul, he is therefore quiet under Affliction, because it does
come from God; and he is therefore the more sencible of his affliction, because
it does come from God. Here Is a mystery! put these together, and you will say,
things rese high.

I Will Instance but in one more, and that is a Tenth. For a man to be contented
with his condition: to be contented with his condition when it is mean, and when
it is poor. I but, for the same person, To desire a better, and pray for a
better, and to pray earnestly for a better; and yet be contented with his
condition though it be never so mean; this is much. Thus it is with the Saints,
a Child of God, being in a mean condition, he desires a better; he prays to
God for a better, and he prays earnestly to God for a better; and yet he is
contented with his condition though it be never so mean: pray, and pray
earnestly, and yet contented with his condition, though it be never so mean,
Thus, my Beloved; Oh! there is a Mystery, there is a mystery in every piece of
godliness: and you look not upon things under the mysterious Notion, and you
say; It Is no great matter, that is in the life of such a one: Oh! but, if you
would look upon things under this Notion, and consider the mystery of
godliness, and every piece thereof you would lift up your hands, and say; Oh!
surely, he that has but the least measure of Gospel Grace, has Abundance of
Grace: he that has but the least degree of Grace, has Abundance of Grace; of
Christ's Fullness. Now under the new Testament we have received not Sparingly,
not Scantly: but Grace for Grace, and Abundance of Grace: he that has but the
least measure, has received much, has received Abundance,

Some few things by way of Application, and so I have done.

If it be so; Applic. 1
Then why should any of Gods People vilify, and degrade, and lowen the gift of
God wherewithal they are enriched through Jesus Christ? Would you take it as
fair dealing from a child that is estated in great lands by his father; if he
should say, my father indeed was pleased to bestow a great Estate upon my
Brother; but he has given little, or nothing to me? He has bestowed great
means upon such a Sister, but he has given little or nothing to me? This were
not fair dealing. And is this fair dealing with your God, and with your father?
When you shall say, I, there is such a godly man, the Lord has given him a
great Estate of the Gospel, but little or nothing to me: And there is such a
woman, such a Sister; the Lord has done much for her soul; but Oh! little or
nothing for me. Beloved! There is no sin small, because committed against the
great God; There Is no blessing small, because received from the great God: but
of all blessings, Gospel-blessing is the greatest blessing. Has the Lord
therefore, (man or woman) given thee any Gospel Grace, the Grace of Jesus
Christ? He has given thee much: that which thou look upon as little, it is
much in the eye of Heaven. Wherefore now, let not the Eunuch say; Oh! let not
the Eunuch say; I am a dry tree any longer. Take heed how you degrade, and
vilify, and lowen the Grace of God wherewithal you are inrich't through Jesus
Christ.

Secondly. Appli. 2.
If there be such Abundance of Grace, even Grace for Grace; Abundance of Grace
given unto the Saints, and People of God under the new Testament: Behold then,
what great finners Professors are! yea, the fins of Gods own people. The more
light, and knowledge a man has; if he sin, the greater is his sin: The more
beams of Grace fall upon a man's heart, the more he is able to discern the motes
that are there, and so may avoid them: and sinning, he sins the more. The more
grace, and the more mercy a man sins against, the greater is his sin; because
free Grace, and mercy is the remedy. The more strength a man has to stand, the
greater is his sin if he fall: As it was with Adam, He had strength to stand,
and yet he fell. (I say) the more strength a man has to stand, the greater is
his sin if he fall. Now Beloved! ye have heard what Abundance of Grace is
Discovered, Exhibited, Communicated unto all the Saints under the new
Testament; unto all the People of God: Oh! how great are their sins when they
fall! The Lord was quick with many that sinned in the old Testament: and will
He not be quick with Professors now? that know more, that have more Grace, more
Grace Discovered now? Many, when they sin, they excuse themselves and they say,
True indeed, I have thus and thus sinned; but David did so: I have sinned, I
have done thus and thus; but Sampson did so: I have committed this, or that
sin; but Noah did so. I but, we have more light, we have more Grace discovered
ordinarily among us now, than ordinarily among them in the Old Testament: We
have more Grace Discovered; more Abundance of Grace Communicated now. And
therefore as the Apostle concludes from it; we ought the more Abundantly to
take heed: For if they escaped not without a recompense of reward that sinned
against the Law of Moses; What shall become of those that sin against the Word
of Christ, the Son of God? Professors! all you that are the People of God, take
heed how you sin! take heed how you tamper with your sins: Grace has Abounded!
you have received much: and therefore if you sin, this is that that will make
your sins out of measure sinful: Take heed what you do.

But in the Third place. Appli. 3.
If there be such an Abundance of Grace Communicated now, unto all the People
of God under the new Testament: What a mighty Encouragement is here to all,
good and bad; (I say) a mighty Encouragement to all, to all those that hear me
this day, good and bad.

Bad, An encouragement unto those that are Bad, to those that are wicked:
Therefore they should come in unto Jesus Christ; He will not send your souls
away empty; there is a Fullness in Jesus Christ, and those that come unto Him
shall be filled by Him. He does not only give Grace, but He gives Abundance of
Grace: Who would not come unto Jesus Christ, that he may be filled by Christ?
(Mark) Is there an Abundance of Grace to be had from Christ? and will thou have
none, Drunkard? Is there such Abundance of Grace to be had in Christ? and will thou have none, wanton? Unclean heart, will thou have none? Swearer,
Sab-bath-breaker, will thou have none? The Lord persuade your hearts to come in
unto Jesus Christ. I tell you, you will have more from Him, then you expect:
The Prodigal looked but for bread at his fathers house; and he met with a
fatted Calfe, and with a Ring, and with the best Garment; you shall have more
than you looked for: It Is a mighty Encouragement. Oh! you that never thought of
returning unto Jesus Christ, Come in now unto Jesus Christ, that you may have
Abundance of Grace from Him. I have done, only this, Here is also encouragement
unto all that are godly, and therefore they should labor to be rich in Grace.
shall Jesus Christ do much for you? and will you do little for Him? shall you
receive Abundance from Him? and will you not do Abundance for Him? Labor, Oh!
labor all you Servants of God to Abound in the Work of the Lord; That you may
be filled with all the Fullness of God in Christ; That you may be filled with all
the fruits of righteousness; That you may be strengthened with all might in the
inner-man: you have received much, you have had Abundance; he that has the
least Grace, has Abundance: if thou have but the least Gospel Grace, thou have
Abundance. Brethren! Grace has Abounded! Oh! let us Aboundin Grace, Aboundin
Faith, and Abound in Patience, and Abound in Meekness, Sweetness, and Love
toward one another, and toward all the Saints. You have received much; can
you go to Heaven with doing little? God expects much from you. I conclude
therefore, with the exhortation of the Apostle: Col. 2.6.
As you have received the Lord Jesus Christ: walk in Him; Always Abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord.

And thus much for the First thing that is here intended.

SERMON V.
JOHN, 1.16. And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.
Preached at Margrets new fishstreet. Dec. 15.1645.



YE heard the last day, that three things were contained in this last Clause,
Even Grace for Grace; as it stands in relation to the former part of the verse.

First of all, It notes an Abundance of Grace: Even Grace for Grace; that is,
Abundance of Grace. The Saints and People of God under the new Testament, do
receive Abundance of Grace from Jesus Christ.

Secondly, It notes also thus much: That all Grace is from Jesus Christ. That
whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ. Grace for
Grace (says Austin) that is, Grace in order to Grace: God gives the former
Grace (says he) to prepare for the after Grace. Whether the former, or the
latter rain; whether the former or the latter Grace, it is all from Christ.
whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it from Christ.

This suits with the phrase of Job still: Skin for skin, that is, all a man's
skins. So it is explained by the following words: Skin for skin, Job, 2.4.
even all that a man has will he give for his life. So here, Of His Fullness
have all we received, Even Grace for Grace: that is all Grace: Whatsoever Grace
we have, we have it from Jesus Christ.

And this also suits with the Scope of the place: the scope of the place is, to
exalt Jesus Christ above them that came before Him, above Moses Therefore says
he at the next verse, Joh 1.17
For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.
Though the Law were given by Moses yet notwithstanding, Grace, (the chief) that
is from Christ.

Now Grace, The word Grace here in the 17. verse, must be understood of All
Crace. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth: that is, All Grace: And
this verse being brought in as a reason of the former; surely therefore, this
must needs be the meaning also of the former, That all grace is from Jesus
Christ; whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ. This
is the Argument that I intend (God willing) to speak unto at this time.

Grace, Sometimes is taken for the Favor of God. Sometimes it is taken for Gods
Assistance. Sometimes it is taken for Holiness, either in the habit, or in the
act. Sometimes it is taken for gifts.

Sometimes the word Grace, is used for an Office in the Church. Whatsoever it
be, which way soever you take it; All Grace is from Christ: whatsoever grace
the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ.

This now will appear, if you consider, The Insufficiency of Nature: And the
All Sufficiency of Christ.

As for the Insufficiency of Nature; You know what the Apostle says: 1 Cor.
3.5.
We are not able as of our selves, to think a good thought, but all our
sufficiency is of God. And if you look into this first Chapter of John, you
find, That those that are regenerate, and borne again; it is said concerning
them (at the 13. verse) that they are not borne of Bloods (in the plural
number) your English has it, Blood, (in the singular) You are not born of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Some
there are, and were, that thought themselves to be the children of God, because
they came of godly parents, because of their bloods, because of their
education: Ioh. 8.33
So the Jews, We are the Children of Abraham. Some there are, and were, that
think themselves the Children of God, because of some Legal workings, and
monkish devotion: all those legalities under the Gospel, are called, flesh.
Some there are that think themselves the children of God, because of some more
refined, and raised, and heroical actions. That he might obviate all these;
says he, We are not born of bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God. You are for Free Will, and you think Free Will has a
great stroke in man's Conversion: but how can ye look this Scripture in the
face? No way of will, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man. If
it be any will, it must be either the will of the flesh, or the will of man: but
I tell you (says he) We are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, (no way of will) but of God.

To the like purpose you have in James, 1.17. Every good giving, and every
perfect gift is from above. In some of your books you read thus: Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above: But it is rather to be read, Every
good giving. Every good gift, and every good giving is from above. Not only the
Thing given, is from above, but the very Donation, the very Exhibition, the
very Giving out of the thing that is good, it is from above. Every good giving,
and every perfect gift is from above. So that plainly then, there is an utter
Insufficiency in Nature unto what is good.

As for the Al-sufficiency of Jesu Christ: Romans 8.29. Rev. 1.17.
He is the first born among many Brethren. He is the first fruit that
sanctifies all the rest. I am the first, and the last, says he. The first is
the cause of the rest. The Sun is the first, and the great light, so the cause
of all other light. Jesus Christ, He is called the first, in this same Chapter,
15. verse This was He (says John) of whom I spoke, He that comes after me, is
preferred before me, for He was before me. So ye read it, but it is He was my
first, preferred before me, (...).
for He was my first; and therefore the first, giving a Being unto all that
follows. Jesus Christ, He does give a Being unto all our graces. I am the way,
the truth, and the life, says He. Joh. 14.6


I am the Way. Would you go to Heaven? You cannot go thither, but you must go
in some Way: A man cannot go unto a City, but he must go some way or other; if
he go by water, go by land, this way, or that way; still he goes some Way or
other. Says Christ if you would go to Heaven, I am the Way. This same word,
Way, it notes the means unto a thing: and when He says, I am the way, it is as
if He should say, That look what ever means you do use in order to Heaven, all
those means they have their virtue, and their power, and their efficacy from me.

I but, a man may be in a way, and in a right way; and yet notwithstanding, if
he have not some guide, he may lose his way.

True (says He) therefore I am the Truth: and it is observable, how Truth, lies
between Way, and Life: as if the way to Life were thorough Truth, as if Truth
were the great road, or the thorough-fare to life: says Jesus Christ, I am
that too; I am the Way, and the Truth too.

I but, though a man be in the right Way, and have a guide; he may fall sick,
and die, and never come to his journeyes end.

Therefore says Christ, I am the way, and the Truth, and the Life too. I, even
I am He, that gives life unto all your motions, and actions for Heaven; all
Grace from Christ. He it is, even He alone, that has every man's heart, and
soul under lock and key.

There are Three great doors, that must ordinarily be opened, before
converting-Grace can get into the soul of man: 1 Cor. 16.9. Job, 33.16. Acts.
16.14 Rev. 3.7
The door of a Powerful Ministry: A large, and an effectual door is opened. The
door of the Ear: He opens the ear, and seals instruction. The door of the
Understanding, and of the heart: Lydias heart was opened. Now if you look into
the Scripture you will find, that Jesus Christ has the opening of all these
doors. He has the key of David, He opens and no man shuts, and shuts and
no man opens. in the 1. of the Revelation, and the 18. He says, That He has
the keys of Hell, and of death. No man goes into the grave, but He opens a
door to let him in: and no man goes to Hell, but Jesus Christ He locks him up
there, He locks him up there unto all eternity; if He did not lock him in, he
would not be there unto all eternity. So that whatsoever Grace, or holiness
there is in any man's heart, He opens the door, He lets it in, it is by His
ordering and His sending thither.

And Beloved, if Jesus Christ were not the great Lord Keeper of His Fathers
wardrobe; why should those Names, and Titles be given to Him, which you find so
frequently in Scripture? Cast your eyes where you will, you shall hardly look
upon any thing, but Jesus Christ has taken the Name of that upon Himself. If
you cast your eyes up to Heaven in the day, and behold the Sun: He is called,
Mal. 4.2 Rev. 22.16. Col. 1.18 Romans 13.14. Ioh. 6.35 Ioh. 10.9 Ioh. 10.11 Ioh.
1.29 Luke 15.23. Zac. 13.1 Isa. 28.16. Pro. 3.18.
The Sun of righteousness. If you cast your eyes in the night upon the Stars,
or in the morning upon the morning star: He is called, The bright morning star.
If you behold your own Body: He is called the Head, and the Church the Body. If
you look upon your own Clothes: He is called your Raiment; Put ye on the Lord
Jesus. If you behold your Meat: He is called Bread, The Bread of life. If you
look upon your Houses; He is called a Door. If you look abroad into the fields,
and behold the Cattle of the fields: He is called, The good Shepherd; He is
called, The Lamb; He is called, The fatted Calf. If you look upon the Waters:
He is called, A Fountain, The Blood of Christ a Fountain. If you look upon the
Stones: He is called, A corner Stone. If you look upon the Trees: He is called,
A Tree of life. What is the reason of this? Surely, not only to way-lay your
thoughts, that wheresoever you look, still you should think of Christ: But to
show, that in a Spiritual way, and sense, He is all this unto the soul. And you
may observe, that these Titles, and Names, they are not barely, and nakedly
given to Him; but still with some speciality, some mark or other. He is not
barely called the Shepherd; but the good Shepherd. He is not only called a
Lamb; but the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. He is not barely
called the Light; but, The true Light, the Light of the world. He is not barely
called Bread; but, The Bread of life. Now you know why Adam at the first gave
Names unto the Creatures: according to their names was their Natures, was their
conditions, and Adam, our first father Adam, was not mistaken when he gave the
names. And do you think, Christ the Second Adam, when he gives these names unto
himself, that he is mistaken? Certainly, he is not mistaken, he is all this.
And therefore as the Apostle speaks in the 3. Col. 11. you read it, Christ is
all in all: but better, He is all things, in all persons: or all things, (...)
in all things: He is all things. Whatsoever good there is found in any man,
it is from Jesus Christ. Surely may one say, The Lord is our strength, Surely
may we all say, the Lord is our strength, the Lord Jesus is our righteousness:
Whatsoever Grace, or holiness the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ.

You will say,

No, Paul was much in this Doctrine that now I am upon, Romans 1.7.
and yet he honored the Father too. Grace and Peace (says he) from God our
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Though al Grace be from Christ, yet
Grace and peace from the Father too, (says he) from God our Father. And having
shown in the 7. of the Romans, That being married unto Christ, and dead unto
the Law, that therefore we should bring forth fruit. (as in the 4. verse,)
Wherefore my Brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law, by the Body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to Him who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. He does not say, That we
should bring forth fruit unto Christ; but that we should bring forth fruit unto
God. The Father and Christ are one: Joh. 10.30
I and my Father are one (says Christ.) In honoring Jesus Christ, you honor
the Father; as in honoring of the Father you honor Christ.

You will say, Wherein is the honor to the Father,

Yes! for, First, Ioh. 6.38
I came not to do my own will, but the will of Him that sent me. Was it any
dishonor to Pharaoh, that Joseph gave out the bread in the time of famine? No,
because he was Commissioned by Pharaoh to do it. And so now, If Jesus Christ
have a Commission from the Father to do this, it is no dishonor to the Father:
and a Commission He has, He will show you it under hand, and seal; Him has
God the Father sealed. Ioh. 6.27
so says Christ.

Again, Though all Grace come immediately out of the hand of Christ, all Grace
from Him, and He gives it out: Yet He is furnished, and accomplished with
ability unto this great Office by God the Father. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, (says he) and He has anointed me to open the prison doors to
Captives etc. Now, is it any dishonor to God, that the Sun does distribute, and
give out light, and heat unto all the Creatures? No, but rather an honor to
Him: for when a man sees so glorious a creature as the Sun, that gives out
light, and heat unto all the creatures here below; he lifts up his hands, and
says; Oh! what a glorious God have we, that has furnished this creature with
these abilities? So now, when a man considers Christ, as this great Sun of
righteousness, distributing His Graces to all the Saints; will it be any
dishonor to God the Father that He is in this Office, seeing He has furnished
Him hereunto? Surely no, they will-rather lift up their hands and say, Oh! what
a good God have we, that has furnished Christ with all these abilities for our
poor souls?

Again, Though the administration of things be in the hand of Christ, the right
is in the Father: and when Jesus Christ has done His work, He will give up the
Kingdom to the Father: Ioh. 6.44 Mat. 11.27
in the mean while, None comes unto the Son but whom the Father draws And None
comes unto the Father, but he unto whom the Son reveals him. Is it any
disparagment unto a man, to have a wise, a potent, a great man to his child?
Pro. 10.1
A wise son, makes a glad father (says Solomon.) Indeed, if the Father, and
the Son were two, they might be enemies: but Christ and the Father are one:
Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are one: and therefore, in honoring of Jesus Christ, you honor
the Father also.

But you will say,

No, Phil. 2.7.9.
He emptied Himself, and became of no reputation; wherefore God has given Him
a Name above every name, that in the Name and strength of Jesus Christ we
should be more than Conquerers. He had a great Estate by Him, He was the Second
Person: Yet notwithstanding, this purchase was so great, that (says Paul) He
emptied Himself. Surely no Creature in Heaven and Earth was able to come to
this purchase: He that must be the worlds Joseph, to give out bread of Grace to
all the world, the Saints in the world; He must have infinite Knowledge; to
know the wants of Gods Peopel: and He must have infinite Mercy, and Patience,
and Goodness to pity them: and He must have infinite Power, to reach it forth
unto them, which no creature has, and therefore no creature at all fit for
this work.

Besides, God the Father has so ordered things in the dispensations of His
Grace, that he might take the most comentment, and complacency, and delight in
the duties, and services of his People: this is the only way to it. This is my
beloved Son (says he) in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3.17.
If there be a garment that is laid with gold-lace, hung or stuck full of
Pearls; though the Cloth of the garment be not much worth; yet because of the
gold-lace, and the Pearls that are upon it, you count it very precious. Such
are our duties; the Cloth of our duty is not much worth, but because of the
golden-lace, and the Pearls of the Graces of Jesus Christ, they are very
precious. It Is not in regard of our duties, as in regard of your flowers, or
posies: let a flower, or posy be never so sweet, they receive not any of the
sweetness from the bosom that it sticks in: the posy does sweeten the bosom,
but the bosom does not sweeten the posy. I but now, the duty that is stuck in
the bosom of Jesus Christ, is sweetened by the bosom, by the bosom that it
sticks in. Pray mark therefore what is said in the 11. of the Canticles for
this purpose. (Says the Spouse at the 12. ver.) When, (or while) the King
sits at his table, My spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. My
Spikenard: what is that? The Graces, and the duties, and the services of Gods
People, they are His Spikenard: this Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof,
while the King sits at his talbe; while it is in the presence of Jesus
Christ; whilst the posy is in His bosom it smells sweet, else it does not. Now
God the Father, (I say) He has so ordered things, that He may take a
complacency, and contentment in the duties, and services of His People, and
therefore it is that all their Graces they come from Jesus Christ, by virtue of
Him.

It will be Objected yet. Proverbs, and the 1. verse it is said, (as some
translations read it) The preparations of the heart are of man, but the answer
of the tongue is from the Lord. If a man can prepare his heart, that is a great
matter: but now (says Solomon) The preparations of the heart is of man, but
the answer of the tongue is from the Lord: Surely therefore, all is not of
Grace, and all is not of Christ.

By way of Answer,

First, The meaning of this place cannot be according to this Objection: for
then, (as Bradwardine does well observe) the greater should be given to man,
and the lesser should be given to God: for it is a greater thing for a man to
Prepare his heart, then for him to speak words when his heart is prepared. And
then again (as Austin observes) this would be contrary to other Scriptures: for
our Savior Christ, Joh. 15.5
He says, Without me ye can do nothing: Yes, might a man say, according to
Solomon's Doctrine, I can prepare my own heart, and that is a great duty. And
so; whereas the Apostle says, We are not able for to think a good thought: 2
Cor. 3.5.
A man might say, yes, but according to Solomon's Doctrine, I am able to prepare
my own-heart. The meaning therefore, of this place, cannot be according to this
objection.

The scope therefore, Balaam; he prepared his heart for to curse the people;
but God came between his heart and the preparation, and he gave an answer of
blessing: contrary to the preparation of his heart. That is the scope of the
place, to show the vanity of the preparations of our hearts to any busyness,
unless we take God along with us.

Thirdly. Hebrew, the words may be read thus: The heart preparations of man,
and the answer of the tongue from the Lord: giving both heart, and tongue into
the hand of the Lord. And if it be so, that after a man has prepared his heart
unto any work, God is able to come between the heart and the lip, and to give
in another answer into the mouth then what was intended in the heart: this
shows, that all is of God, that all is of Grace; and so this place does rather
confirm the Doctrine that I am now upon.

I but yet it will be said then. Grant it, Beasts a power to bring forth their
like: He gave unto Plants, unto Herbs a power to bring forth their like: He
gave unto Man a power to bring forth his like; and so, Grace being but a
creature, He gave also unto Grace, a power to bring forth gracious actions
without fresh assistance, only by ordinary concurrence: yet because that this
first habit is infused and comes from God, this is said to be from Christ, and
from Grace; so that though all is of Grace, and all is from Christ, yet all is
not from Christ in regard of fresh assistance.

Give me leave to answer this. Yes, fresh assistance too.

For although in the beginning God made a Covenant of works with man, and then
gave that Grace, that he had a power to bring forth it is like: Yet now the
Lord, has brought us under a better Covenant, a better Covenant than the
former was. In the First Covenant that God made with us, and with Adam; the
Lord gave man a great stock of Grace, but gave him no promise of perseverance;
but now he has. In the First (indeed) God gave man a great stock of Grace; but
Satan being a stronger than man, came upon him, and beguiled him of it. Now
though the Lord does give a Christian less grace in his hand for the present;
yet He has laid it up in so safe a hand, that though Satan, a stronger than
he, does come down upon him, he is not able to wrest it from him, or beguile
him of it, because it is in the hand of Christ, that is a stronger than he: And
Jesus Christ, by a Compact with the Father from all Eternity, has engaged
Himself to do it, to give forth Grace, and Assistance to all the Elect,
according to all their needs. So that (I say) now, all Grace is from Jesus
Christ in regard of fresh assistance. Therefore the Psalmist prays thus: Lord
open thou my lips, Psalm. 51.15.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Lord, though thou have given me
habitual Grace, yet if I have not fresh assistance from thee, for to open my
lips, my mouth will not show forth thy praise. Psa. 119.18.
And so again, Lord open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. And
to this purpose it is in the 17. Psalm, and the 5. verse, (says David) Hold up
my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. (Mark I pray) David ye
know was a godly man, he had a habit of grace: Now Lord (says David) as for
the business that is between Saul and me, thou know I am in thy way: yet
Lord (says he) though I be in thy way, and have a habit of Grace, yet if thou
do not hold up my steps; if thou do not give me fresh assistance, I shall
fall, I shall slip: Hold up my going in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.
Does not the Apostle say, Phil. 2 13
The Will, and the Deed is from God? You may observe, that the Graces of Gods
People, they are called in the new Testament, Gal. 5.22
The fruits of the Spirit: They are not called the fruits of a former habit,
but they are called, The fruits of the Spirit. And indeed, if all grace were
not from Jesus Christ in regard of fresh assistance; truly, then might a man
have wherein to boast: (as Bradwardin reasons the case) For (says he) though a
child have his being from his father; his Education from his father; Learning,
Military skill: yet notwithstanding, the valor of an action being his own, he
has in opposition to his father wherein to boast: True, I confess indeed, I had
my being from my father; I had my Nature from my father; I had my Education
from my father; I had this Skill from my father: But the prowess, and the
valor, and the spirit of the action is all mine own; and he has wherein to
boast. So if he has the Habit only from Christ, he has wherewith to boast:
True, I had the Habit, the Grace from God; I but the spirit of the action, that
is mine own; he had wherein to boast. But there is no room for boasting: and
therefore all Grace is from Christ in regard of fresh assistance.

It will be yet said, fresh assistance too: Why is it said, that we Repent; and
we Believe; and we Obey? for if all Grace in regard of the very work, be from
Christ; if Jesus Christ do work al our works; Why is it not rather said, That
Christ does Repent; and Christ does Believe; and Christ does Obey?

I answer, No. You know the Persons that are Responsal: Responsal: So now, you
are Responsal: and therefore, though ye have all strength from Christ to do it,
yet you are said to Repent, and Believe, and Obey. The Devil is not said to
commit Adultery, and commit Murder, yet by his instigation it is done. The Sun
does work with the Tree, when the Tree does bring forth fruit and yet it is not
said that the Sun brings forth an apple, or brings forth fruit: because the Sun
does work as a universal Cause, and the Tree as a particular Cause. So now,
though Jesus Christ does work in all your workings; yet He is not said to
Repent, or Believe, or to Obey; because He works as a universal Cause; and you
work as a particular Cause Only behold here the mirror of Grace: All is of
Christ; and yet all is Ours: all is ours in Denomination, and al is Christ's in
Operation: all is ours in regard of Encouragement; and all is Christ's in regard
of Glory: al is ours in regard of Reward; and all is Christ's in regard of
Honor. Here Is Grace! here is the mystery of Grace! but still all, whatsoever
Grace a man has, he has it from Jesus Christ.

I but,

What good! strength? The way to have Him to become your strength, is to count
Him so; Look I pray upon the 31. Psalm, the 2. and 3. verse, Be thou my strong
Rock, for an house of defense to save me: for thou art my Rock, and my
Fortress. Be thou my Rock, for thou art my Rock: What kind of Argument is
this? Yes, it is a good argument: The way to have Christ our Rock, is to account
Him our Rock: My very resting upon the Promise, does make it mine: and your
very resting upon Jesus Christ does make Him yours: and what will make you rest
more upon Him, then to see that all is from Him?

Again. Would you have your hearts warmed with love unto Jesus Christ? indeed
our whole life should be nothing else but an expression of love to Christ, as
Christ's life, and death was nothing else but an expression of love to us: Now
says a gracious soul, Is this true indeed, that all Grace is from Christ? that
whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ? that there is
not a good thought in my heart, but runs through the heart of Jesus Christ
before it does come at mine? what infinite cause then have I to love Jesus
Christ!

Again. Would you live in Dependence upon Christ, for Grace, for Truth: the
serious consideration of this truth will help you to it. I confess indeed,
(will some say) when I look upon my self, I am a man or woman of such poor
gifts, or parts, that I have no hope, I am afraid I shall never attain to the
Truth of the time; but is it so, that all is from Jesus Christ? whatever Grace
the Saints have, they have it from Jesus Christ? Why may not I know the Truth
of the time as well as another? I will yet wait on Jesus Christ.

Again. Would you walk Humbly? Be very humble, and get a ferious, and deep
humiliation for sin committed? the study of this truth will help you do it. You
know what the Prophet Isaiah says: Oh! Lord, (says he) woe is me, Isa. 6.5.
I am undone, I am undone! Why? what is the matter? Oh! (says he) mine eyes
have seen the King. If you look into the 3. Chapter of Matthew, you will find
there, in John the Baptist, such a self-humbling speech, Christ-advancing
speech, as you shall not meet with many of the like again: Sales he, (at the 11
verse) Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: or as other Gospels has it: Whose
shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. Beloved! I pray confider it a little:
John, then which there was not a greater, the great Preacher that all the
Country followed: John cries out and says, Whose shoes latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. What made him think thus? what wrought his heart into this
humble this self-denying frame? The very Doctrine we are now upon: says he, I
indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but He that comes after me is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost and with fire. As if he should say thus: I may baptize you
outwardly, but the efficacy of al these ordinances it is from Jesus Christ, and
therefore, because the efficacy of every ordinance is from Jesus Christ, says
he, as for me, I am not worthy to bear His shoes, to undo His latchet.

Yet further (in the general) Would you be Fruitful? would you be fruitful in
your life and conversation? People, they complain of Barrenness: Would you be
Fruitful? Observe what course the Gardener takes with the Apricock: This is a
fruit (says he) that will not grow every where; but surely, if it will grow
any where, it will grow upon the back of this Chimney, the warm heat, the heat
of the Chimney will nurse it up: Or else it will grow against that Wall, I Will set
it in the face of the Sun, that it may have the smiles of the Sunbeams, and
then it will grow: he sets it there, and then it grows, and brings forth a
pleasant fruit. Do thou complain thou art not fruitful; what is the reason?
may be thou grow'st in the shade; may be thou grow'st in the shade: but come
and bring forth thine heart, set it in the Sun, under the warm beams of the
love of Jesus Christ; see if thy heart be not fruitful then. And beloved, what
greater love then this, That Jesus Christ has dyed for sinners? that He has
dyed for sinners? that He has purchased all Grace for sinners? and He keeps
their stock in His own hand, to give it out unto them according to all their
wants? Here is love! Here is grace! This is the way to be fruitful:

I come to the Application.

Is it so, Applic.
That all Grace is from Christ that whatfoever Grace the Saints have, they have
it from Jesus Christ; Christ Meriting, and Christ Working: That all our
Efficiency; and Sufficiency; and Al-sufficiency if from Christ: That He is the
great Joseph, the worlds Joseph; the Lord Keeper of all our Graces; the
Lord-Treasurer of all our comforts; Then, Oh! what infinite cause have we all,
to advance, and lift up the Name of Jesus Christ, to hallow Jesus Christ, not
verbally, but really. Commanded ye are to honor your parents: they give you a
Being, and yet by that Being, you are brought forth under the wrath of God; but
yet honor them, because you have your being from them: I, and by your birth,
and by your nature exposed unto the wrath of God for ever: Yet honor them,
because you have your being from them.

And shall we honor our parents because we have our outward being from them?
and shall not we honor Jesus Christ, from whom we have the being of all our
Graces, the being of our souls unto all Eternity? What infinite engagements are
upon us all to honor Jesus Christ.

You will say unto me:

First. Ye cannot honor Jesus Christ, Unless that you do offer up your own
Christ unto him: I say, unless you offer up yor own Christ to him; I mean, your
natural Christ to him. Some there are, that make a Christ of their goad
meaning, and think to be saved thereby; rest upon that, and think to be saved
thereby. Some rest upon an honest, and sober Conversation, and think to be
saved thereby. Some rest upon their Duties, inlargments in Duties; and think to
be saved thereby. Some rest upon their very resting; trusting is not to be
trusted to: but some rest upon their very resting, and think to be saved
thereby. Some rest upon those Enjoyments, and Sweetnesses that they meet withal
in duty, and think to be saved thereby. Beloved! you may observe That when the
Lord commanded His People in the old Testament to honor Him, He commands them
to sacrifice such things to Him, which other Nations did make their Gods: they
should sacrifice sheep, and oxen, and birds; such things they should offer up
unto God, that others did worship as God: Plainly teaching this, That he that
will honor God, must give that unto God which the world makes it is God. So say
I, if you would honor Christ, you mst give that up unto Jesus Christ, which
other men do make their Christ. Many false Christ's there are that are made by
men: you cannot honor Jesus Christ, if you don't give up those to Him.

Again. You cannot honor Jess Christ, If you count it a small matter to belong
to him. A servant that honors his master, does count it a great matter to
belong to Him. And therefore David, he does title some of his Psalms so: A
Psalm of David the servant of the Lord: He does not say, A Psalm of David the
King of Israel; but, A Psalm of David the Servant of the Lord: Counting it more
honor to be the Lords Servant, then to be King of Israel; he counted it a great
matter to be the Lords Servant, because he honored the Lord. Those that honor
Christ, they look upon the things of Christ as great matters: the words of
Christ, as great works: and the Ordinances of Christ as great matters; and a
great matter to belong to Christ: and if they lose any thing, or lose any
friend; they will relieve themselves here; Oh! but yet I belong to Jesus
Christ, yet I belong to Jesus Christ.

Thirdly. and give the worst to Him. Abel honored God, and he offered the best;
and because he offtered the best, therefore he honored God. If I be a father,
Mal. 1.6 and 8. Pro. 3.9.
where is mine honor? (says the Lord.) Why bring ye the lean, and the maimed,
and the feeble? Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase, (says Solomon.) Observe therefore, what is your best, and
what is your substance, and what are your first fruits? and give them up to
Christ. Young men, young men and women; the best of your years; the best of
your strength, the best of your time is to be given to Christ: ye cannot honor
Jesus Christ, and give Him the worst: Oh! that the old people would be much
humbled; and the young people would be much encouraged: you cannot honor Jesus
Christ, and give the worst to Him.

Fourthly. And despise the choice work of Christ. What is the choice work of
Christ? Grace, Grace is the choice work of Christ, that comes out of His hand;
and the worst name that you can give it is; to call it Hypocrisy. Some there
are, that looking upon the lives of godly men, they say: I but he is all
Hypocrisy, and they are Hypocritical. Yea, and some poor souls there are, that
when they look upon their own souls, they conclude and say; I but, it is all
Hypocrisy; I prayed at such a time, but it was all in Hypocrisy: I but what if
it be the Grace of Christ? what if it prove so? Surely, surely ye cannot honor
Jesus Christ, and despise the choicest works that come out of His hands.

Again. When He does trust unto Him, and rest upon Him for help at a dead lift
(as we speak commonly) and the more a man does rely upon Jesus Christ in
straights, and in the time of Temptation, the more he does honor Jesus Christ.
Abraham gave glory to God, he believed above hope, and under hope; and because
he believed above hope, and under hope, therefore he gave glory to God, when he
considered his own body. Man or woman, would thou therefore now honor Jesus
Christ? Say, True, I confess indeed I Have finned much; and when I look, upon
my self, I know no reason why such a wretch, so great a finner as I should be
saved: but because the way to honor Christ, is for to rest upon Him; and I have
dishonored Jesus Christ enough already, therefore now, through the Grace of
God, I will cast the weight of my poor, guilty soul upon Jesus Christ; yea, for
that very reason will I leave the weight of my guilty soul upon Him, because
thereby I may honor Him.

Agtain. The way to honor Jesus Christ, is, So to walk, and so to live; as the
men of the world may speak well of the ways of Christ by your Conversation.
Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may glorify God etc. The men of
the world, will then speak well of the ways of Christ, when a Christian, that
has the Name of Christ in a special manner put upon him, when he does that
through the strength of Christ, which the men of the world cannot do: pray for
those that persecute you; do good to those that do ill to you: when a man is
Abundant in the Work of the Lord, Constant therein, and Humble. For Abundant,
you know what our Savior says: In this is my Father glorified, Joh. 15.8.
that ye bring forth much fruit. One Sun in the firmament, honors God the
Creator more, then a hundred little stars. One strong Christian, that does much
for God, honors Him more then Twenty, then a hundred weak ones.

I but though a man have Abundance of Grace, and be Abundant in the work of the
Lord; yet notwithstanding, if he be not Constant therein, he does not cause the
way of Christ to be well spoken of: what will men say? I, he is wound up to a
great height for the present, but stay a little, and you will find Him down by
and by.

Yea, though a man be Abundant; and Constant: yet if he be not Humble, he does
not honor the way of Christ: when a man is Abundant in good, Constant therein,
and walks Humbly; what says the world then? I, there is the man, if al
Professors were such; I, there is an Humble man, there is a self-denying man; I,
if you were all such, if you were all such, then I should like the ways of God
the better. Take heed therefore, unto your lives, that you so walk, as that the
ways of Jesus Christ may be well spoken of by you.

In the Seventh place. Then own Him: own Him in evil times, and stand for Him
in the times of general decliningt. Honor est Testimonium de alicujus
Excellentia: Honor is the Testimony of a man's Excellency: when I testify of an
Excellency in aman, then I honor him; and the more I testify of an Excellency
in a man, the more I honor him. Now the less the Truth of Christ is; and the
more despised the Ordinance of Christ is, and the more I suffer for it; the
more do I testify of an Excellency in Jesus Christ: What! suffer the loss of
all for that which the world counts little worth! o! if there be such an
excellency in a Truth, a small Truth, a despised Ordinance; What an Excellency
is there in Christ Himself! Observe therefore, what those despised Ordinances
are, and labor to bear them up, those Truths that the world counts small Truths,
be willing to lose much for them; stand for them in times of general declining;
own Jesus Christ in evil times; otherways you cannot honor Him.

I have done. Be willing to stoop unto any work, (though it lies much below
your condition) for Jesus Christ; and say, that you are not sufficient unto
such a work: when you have done the work, set the Crown upon the head of the
means, that is most properly Christ's. Some means are Natural, and some
Institutional: Some means that are near unto Christ: Some means that ye use in
a work, that are more properly Christ's: Choose to set the Crown upon the head of
the means that is nearest to Jesus Christ. Thus doing, ye shall honor Jesus
Christ. And Oh! my Beloved, Why should not we all now set our selves for to
honor Him? not in word, but in deed to honor Jesus Christ? He has done all for
our profit, why should we not do all for His honor? God the Father honors Jesus
Christ, why should not we honor Jesus Christ? you that have had the experience
of this Truth, as I make no question but there are many here, that have had the
experience of it; that whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have it from
Jesus Christ: you (I say) that have had the experience of this Truth; Oh! labor
now to advance, to lift up the Name of Jesus Christ: Oh! that our whole life,
might be nothing else, but a Christ-advancing life! you that have the
experience of it, labor, not in word, but in deed to lift up the Name of Jesus
Christ.

SERMON VI.
JOHN, 1. 16. Preached at Margrets newfishstreet. Dec. 22. 1645.
And of His Fullness have all we received, even Grace for Grace.


THREE Things (ye heard) are to be noted in this last Clause, as it stands in
relation to the former part of the verse:

First. It notes An Abundance of Grace.

Secondly. It notes thus much: That whatsoever Grace the Saints have, they have
it from Jesus Christ. And of these Two I have I have spoken already.

The Third now follos. It notes also, An Answerableness of Grace in every
Christian unto the Grace of Christ. of whose Fullness we have all received, Even
Grace for Grace; Grace Answerable to His Grace. We have not only received
Abundance of Grace from Christ: but whatsoever Grace, or Holiness there is in
Jesus Christ, there is somewhat in the Saints that is Answerable thereunto.

And this now suits with your ordinary expression: When the Seal falls upon the
wax, and the wax receives it rightly; ye say, there is upon the wax, Stamp for
Stamp, Character for Character, Image for Image: So here, Grace for Grace, that
is, whatsoever Grace there is in Christ, there is the like stamp upon the heart
of every Christian.

This also suits with that expression of Scripture: Mat. 5.38
An eye for an eye; and a tooth for a tooth: That is, an eye answerable unto an
eye; a tooth answerable to a tooth: So Grace for Grace, that is answerable
Grace: whatsoever Grace, or holiness there is in Christ; Something in a
Christian that Answers thereunto.

Take Grace for Favor, Mat. 3.17 2 Samuel 12.25.
for the Favor of God: And is Jesus Christ called the Beloved of God? This is
my Beloved Son: So are the Saints too; Solomon called Jedidiah, The beloved of
God.

Take Grace for Privilege. Is Jesus Christ called the Son of God? This is my
beloved Son: So are the Saints too: Every Son whom he loves etc. Heb. 12.6
Is He called an Heir, Heb. 1.2
The Heir of all things? The Saints are said to be Romans 8.17.
Heirs and Coheirs with Jesus Christ. Is He called 1 Pet. 2.6.
Elect and Precious? So are they too; 1 Pet. 1.2.
Elect and precious. Is He called Gods Zach. 13.7.
Fellow? (as ye have it in Zachary) The Saints they are called His Fellows:
Heb. 1.9
Who is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows; That is, above the
Saints. Is He called the Light? Joh. 8.12.
The Light of the world? The true Light? They are called Light too: Ephesians. 5.8.
Ye were darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord.

Take Grace for Assistance. And had Jesus Christ felt an Assistance from God
the Father? As ye read at large in the 22. Psalm: so have the Saints too; 1
Cor. 12.9. Joh. 17.9 Ibid. Joh. 1.14 Act 7.55
My Grace is sufficient for thee.

Take Grace for Holiness, or Sanctification. And is He said to be Sanctified?
For this cause have I sanctified my self: So are the Saints also said to be
sanctified: That they also may be sanctified. Is He said to be Full of Grace?
Full of Grace and Truth: So are the Saints too: (Some of them) Steven, full of
Grace: and Mary full of Grace. Oh! what a glorious mercy is here before us now?
Whatsoever Grace, and holiness there is in Christ; somewhat in the Saints that
is Answerable thereunto. Let us awaken, and stir up our selves for to look into
it.

Ye read of a fellowship that the Saints have with Christ; in that 1 Epistle
of John the 1. Chapter and the 3. verse. (...). Communio, 1 Cor. 1.2 Societas
Gal. 2.9.
That which we have heard and seen, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with His
Son Jesus Christ. He does exhort them to fellowship with them, with the Saints,
upon this ground and motive, because their fellowship was with the Father, and
with the Son: He does assert this fellowship with the Father, and with the Son;
with the most ingenious asseveration; And truly our fellowship, may be you will
think this no great matter, truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
His Son Jesus Christ. And so in that known place in the 1 Corinths: 10.16. The
cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?
(As you read it) it is the same word fellowship: And in the 1 Cor. 1.9. ver.
it is said, God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of His
Son Jesus Christ our Lord: The same word there too, The word that is used in
the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said, Act 2.44
That the Disciples had all things common. Look therefore, as it is in a
Society, where they have all things Common. such is the fellowship that is
between Christ, and the Saints: They have not any Sin, but it is imputed to
Jesus Christ, though it be great or small: and He has not any Grace, but it is
communicated to all the Saints; has not any Grace, but they have some Grace or
other that is Answerable thereunto: This is a great matter.

Would you know the reason now? Grace for Grace, Grace Answerable to His Grace.

First of all. There is a glorious, and blessed union between Christ and every
Christian: a union beyond all expression. It is compared indeed, unto the union
that is between the Head, and the Members: the Root, and the Branches: the
Husband, and the Wife: but though they come up unto what Christ intended, yet
they all fall short of this Union that is between Christ and a Christian: for
the Head is not in the Members, nor the Members in the Head, mutually, but
Christ in them, and they in Christ: I in you, Joh. 14.20.
and you in me; says He: It is a union of mutual in-being, not a union of
affection only, such as the stones have, when they lie together in a great
heap: but rather, such as is between the wine and the water when they are put
together, saving that they are not mixed together: Christ is not mixed with a
Christian, a Christian is not mixed with Christ; Christ is not a Christian, a
Christian is not Christ: but there is a union of mutual in-being. Now you know,
when the fire gets into the Iron is united to it, is in it; the properties of
the fire are communicated to the Iron; the Iron forgets his own blackness, and
shines with the shining of the fire, and burns with the burning of the fire. And
as a coal, a char-coal, though it be never so dark, and black a body, when the
fire comes, gets into it; the properties of the fire are communicated to it,
and it burns like the fire it self, and melts like the fire it self, and shines
like the fire it self. So, when the Lord Jesus Christ is united to a soul, look
what Excellencies there are in Christ, what Graces in Christ, the same are
Communicated to it: the soul shines with Christ's shining, and warms with His
warming; there is Grace Answerable for His Grace. You know, there was a blessed
union between the second Person, and our Nature, our flesh, the second Person
takes our Nature upon him, and being united to our flesh, by virtue of the
hypostatical union, the idioms, and properties of the one, are given to the
other, God has no flesh, God has no blood; and yet we read in the Acts of
the Apostles, of the blood of God, because of the union: the properties of the
flesh, and of man's nature are given to God. Ephesians. 4.10.
So says the Apostle: He that descended is the same also that ascended. God
does not descend, for He is every where; but by reason of the union, what is
proper to the flesh is given to God. And so now, in this mistical Union, there
being such a glorious, and blessed union, between Christ and a Christian;
whatsoever Grace, or Excellency, or property is in Christ Himself, there is an
Answerableness of Grace, an excellency wrought in the heart of every Christian;
he has Grace for Grace, he has stamp for stamp.

And again, Secondly. The Lord Jesus Christ is our second Adam, a Common person
between God and us. Now look as it was concerning our fore-father Adam, being a
Common person; look what nature he had, we have: He was made up of soul and
body; and so are we, His body had legs, and arms, and other members; and we
have member for member; we have head for head, and arms for arms, and legs for
legs: And so, he sinning, we have sin for his sin, pride for his pride, and
unbelief for his unbelief; because he was a Common person. So I say, Jesus
Christ, being our Second Adam; look what Grace he had, the Saints have; they
have Grace for His Grace, they have Holiness for His Holiness. The Apostle
says, in the 5. of the Romans: That as by one man's offense, death came: So
through the gift of Grace, Grace has abounded. But not as the offense: (says
he at the 15. verse) So also is the Free-gift: For if through the offense of
one man, many be dead; much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace, which
is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Now, if we should not have
Grace for Grace from Christ, as we had sin for sin from the first Adam; how
should Grace superabound? Our Lord and Savior Christ says himself, I have life
in my Self, The Son has life in Himself: Joh. 5.26.
which laid to that expression which you have in the 1. of Genesis, speaks to
our purpose; the 11. and 12. verses, God said, Let the Earth bring forth grass,
the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose
seed is in it self: And so again, at the 12. verse, Whose seed was in it self.
That is, these Creatures had a power in themselves to bring forth their like.
And so says Jesus Christ, as other Creatures had seed in themselves to bring
forth their like: So have I life in my Self, and am able to bring forth my
like; and so He does: for He is our Second Adam; and therefore, as we had sin
for sin from the First Adam; we must have Grace for Grace from the Second Adam
also.

Thirdly. There is an incomparable, and glorious, blessed love between Christ
and a Christian. Love, loves to make a thing loved to be like it self. Love in
an Inferior is of an Imitating Nature: and love in a Superior is of a
Similitating Nature. Now therefore, if there be love between Christ and a
Christian, they must needs be very like; and love there is: Christ loves the
Saints above all the world; and the Saints love Christ above all the world.
Only Christ's love exceeds: for when the Spouse speaks of Christ in the
Canticles, she calls Him, My beloved, in the Concrete: but when He speaks of
her, He calls her my love my dove, in the Abstract. Jesus Christ had loving
thoughts toward the Saints before the world was: as ye read in the 8. of the
Proverbs, and the 29. verse. Says wisdom, (and so Christ) there: When He gave
to the Sea His Decree, that the waters should not pass His Commandment: when
He appointed the foundations of the earth: Then I was by Him, as one brought up
with Him: I was daily His delight (verse the 31.) Rejoicing in the habitable
part of His earth: and my delights were with the sons of men. Jesus Christ was
then in the bosom of His Father, He had enough to take up His heart with full
delight; and yet notwithstanding, before the Saints were, His love was toward
them, and His delight was in them: Surely, if He loved them so much before they
had a being, when they have a being, He will exercise, and put forth that old,
and ancient love of His in more abundance, toward them. When a man loves a
Maid, or a Virgin: while she is in her fathers house, she is set a part for
him: but now afterward, when she leaves her fathers house, and all her kindred,
that she may only cleave unto him; then his heart is drawn out more: How am I
engaged (says he) to love this woman, that has left all the world to come
unto me. So there was love in Christ toward the Saints while they were but set
a part for Him in Gods Decree: but now when they shall leave their fathers
house for Him, will He not then delight in them? See what is said in the 45.
Psalm: Hearken, O daughter, (at the 10. verse) and consider, and incline thine
ear: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house: So shall the King
greatly desire, (or delight) in thy beauty. But delight in them, and love them
he cannot; unless they be like unto him: for the lover loves to make a thing
loved to be like himself, or himself to be like to it: The lover would (if he
could) melt himself into a One-ness with the thing loved. Indeed our love is
scant, and we cannot do it. Moses, (of whom the Law is signified) might chip,
and pare his wives nails, but he could not change her countenance. A man may
love his wife, and bestow much upon her; but he is not able to change her
countenance, to make her to be like himself: But Jesus Christ has this
happiness above all the world; His love has this happiness above all other
love, that He is able to melt the person loved, the soul loved into His own
likeness: and therefore, wherever Jesus Christ sets His heart upon any soul, to
delight in any; He draws His Image upon them, makes the soul to be like unto
Him: what Grace He has Himself, He does communicate it unto that soul, that
there is an Answerableness of Grace, Even Grace for Grace.

Again, There is the same Spirit in a Christian, Rea. 4. Joh. 15 26.
that is in Christ. I will send (says He) the Comforter, the Spirit of truth,
and He shall come unto you. The Spirit does not only come to them; but is said
to dwell in them, and to be shed abroad upon their hearts. Now if a Beast had
the spirit, and the soul of a man; he would work like a man, he would speak
like a man: and if a Plant, if a Tree, if an Herb had the life of a Beast; it
would taste like a Beast: And if a Stone, if that had the life of a Plant, it
would grow like a Plant. So now, if a Christian have the Spirit of Christ, he
must work like Christ, he must needs be like Christ: Now the same Spirit He
has, a Christian has the same Spirit with Christ, and therefore needs must be
like unto Him, and have Grace for His Grace. Somewhat in a Christian,
Answerable to every Grace of Christ.

You will say unto me: How can this be? Incommunicable Properties, Personal
Excellencies of Christ; Are all men Saviors? Are all men Mediators? Are all men
Christ's?

No, capable of: We have member for member with Adam, every man, head for his
head, and legs for his legs; but every man is not the first Adam, that every
man is not capable of. So Jesus Christ, He is made like to us, but He is not a
sinner, that He was not capable of: And so we have grace for grace, Answerable
Grace; it is to be understood in things that we are capable of: We are not
Saviors, we are not Mediators, we are not Christ's. In some of those things that
we are not capable of: yet there is somewhat in a Christian, that in some other
kind is Answerable thereunto: As now for example, When our Lord and Savior
Christ was Baptized, the Heavens opened, and the Holy Ghost fell down upon Him
in the shape of a Dove: The Holy Ghost does not so fall down upon men now, but
yet it is shed abroad in the hearts of all that are godly. He is the great King,
and the Priest, and the Prophet of his Church: All the Saints are Kings, and
Priests, and Prophets; but not to that height as He was. To open this a
little, that I may clear the point.

Is our Lord and Savior Christ a Prophet? and as a Prophet does He teach His
people? the Saints; in that of the Revelation, Rev. 11 3.
The Two Witnesses are said to Prophecy in sackcloth. They are said to
Prophecy too.

Is our Lord and Savior Christ a King? and as a King, does He Overcome, and
subdue Satan? and our lusts? and the world? 1 John 5.4.
So do the Saints too. This is your Victory whereby ye Overcome the world, even
your Faith. As a King, Does he, Overcome, and sit down in His Throne? So do
they too: In the 3. of the Revelations, and the 21. verse: To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame,
and am set down with My Father in His Throne. (Mark I pray;) Christ has a
Throne on Earth: (Says He) As Lovercame, and am set down with my Father in His
Throne in Heaven: So those that overcome shall sit down; That is, Matt. 8.11.
have Communion. Many shall come from the East, and from the West; and shall
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac: That is, have Communion with them. So here,
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit down with me in my Throne: They shall
have Communion with Jesus Christ in his Throne. As a King, does the Lord Jesus
Christ Rule the Nations, Psa. 2.9.
and break them in pieces with a rod of iron? So shall the Saints do in their
generation, and in their way. Look I pray into the 2d of the Revelation, the
26. verse: And he that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end; To him
will I give power over the Nations. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron:
(Mark) And he shall rule them with a rod of iron: As the vessel of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received of my Father. He does not
say, Even as I received this Doctrine of my Father, but as I (which you read
of in the second Psalm) received this Power from my Father: they shall
communicate with me in this Power: Even as I received of my Father, So shall
they receive it; they shall have Communion with Him in this.

Is Jesus Christ a Priest? and as a Priest, Does He Sacrifice? So do the Saints
too. The Apostle Exhorts the Romans, That they offer up themselves a reasonable
sacrifice. As a Priest, Romans 12.1
does He make Intercession? So it is said concerning the Saints, in the 8. of
the Romans: The Spirit of God that is upon them, makes Intercession with groans
that cannot be expressed. As a Priest, does Jesus Christ, as our great
High Priest, Enter into the Holy of Holiest? that you will say belonged unto
the Priest alone, and none might enter into the Holiest, and the Holy of
Holiest but the Priest. So do the Saints too: See I pray, what Communion, and
fellowship the Saints have with Jesus Christ: Says he, in the 10. of the Heb.
and the 19. ver. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest
by the Blood of Jesus; by a new and living way etc. Is our high Priest entered
into the Holy of Hollest as a high Priest? You shall have Communion in His
Priestly Office too: and as He entered into the Holy of Holiest: so shall you
too. Thus you see, there is an Answerableness in the Saints, with what is in
Christ. And indeed, herein does our Spiritual Regeneration, go beyond our
Generation: For, though a child be like unto the father in this, that he is a
man like the father, and he has a head like the father, and arms, and legs
like the father: yet his feature may not be like the fathers, lineaments not
alike: But now, in our Spiritual Regeneration, there is such a likeness; as
whatsoever Grace, or Holiness is in Jesus Christ, there is somewhat in all the
Saints that is Answerable thereunto.

By way of Application then: Applic. 1
If this be so; That the Saints do receive from Christ's Fullness, Grace for
Grace; Grace Answerable to the Grace of Christ: That whatsoever Grace, or
holiness there is in Christ, there is somewhat in all the Saints that is
Answerable thereunto. Then what abundance of men and women are there, even
living under the Gospel, that have no present share of saving interest in Jesus
Christ. Me thinks I hear this Doctrine crying aloud, and saying, stand by
profane men, stand by: You that are merely Civil, and moral people, stand by:
And all Hypocrites, stand by: as having no share and interest in Jesus Christ.

As for Profane men: they will be Drunk, and Swear, and commit Adultery and
Lie, and break the Sabbath: But would Jesus Christ do so? They count it the
life of their life, and the soul of their soul, to be at a merry meeting, a
jovial meeting: but would Jesus Christ do so? When Jesus Christ was upon the
earth, He went up and down doing good, and scattering good, communicating good;
and they go up and down scattering their sins: and is this Grace for Grace? is
this Answerable? I appeal to you.

As for those that are merely Civil, Moral: Though they will not swear great,
and gross Oaths; yet swear by their faith, and by their Troth: but would Jesus
Christ do so? They carry a secret spleen, and envy at the power of godliness,
and those that have it: but would Jesus Christ do so? They frame up their
Religion, and their Worship according to the Times; if Authority command it,
they will they will do it whatever it be: but would Jesus Christ do so? When
Jesus Christ was upon the earth, He was Zealous, The Zeal of thine house has
eaten me up: Ioh. 2.17
but they are formal, and they are Lukewarm: Oh! is this Grace for Grace? is
this your Answer ableness? and are these in Jesus Christ? As for those that are
Hypocrites: They have always some secret sin or other, some backdoor or other
that they may go out at: but had lesus Christ so? They lie contemplating, and
chewing of the Devils Cud; and are indulgent to their base thoughts, their
sinful thoughts; but was Jesus Christ so? They savor gifts, and expressions
more then Graces: but did jesus Christ do so? They, though they seem to be
mortified, and dead unto the grosser part of the world, meat, drink, and
clothes: yet they are no way mortified, and dead unto the finer part of the
world, their Names, and their Credits: Was it thus with Jesus Christ? Indeed an
Hypocrite, through the strength of Education, living under the Gospel, may set
himself to imitate Christ: but there is an Artificial imitation; and a Natural
resemblance. A father may have two sons; The one that is unlike him, but
imitates him: the other that does naturally resemble the father, and imitate
him too: Such are the Saints, being made partakers of the Divine Nature; they
naturally care for the things of Christ: hypocrites do not so. Behold! here is
the Character of a Christian indeed, he has Grace for Grace, whatever Grace
there is in Christ, he has somewhat Answerable thereunto. Oh! how few men and
women are there in the world, that have a saving share and interest in Jesus
Christ!

Secondly. If this Doctrine be true: What a happy, Appli. 2.
and blessed thing is it for a man to be in Christ! Behold! the Dignity of the
Saints! Beloved! here is glory on this side glory; it is the glory, and the honor
of a man to be like to God: it is the glory, and honor of a Disciple to be like
his Master: it is the glory, and honor of a Child to be like his father: it is
the glory, and honor of a Christian to be like unto Jesus Christ: Every
Christian, has the Image of Christ drawn upon him. Had our Lord Jesus, the
Great, and Mighty Potentate, only come by a poor soul, and cast His Skirt over
him, and said unto the soul, wear thou my Livery: it had bin a great honor to
belong to Christ, to wear His Livery: But behold! here is more than so, the
Saints do not only wear His Livery, but they have His Grace: and their Grace is
of the same nature with the very Grace of Christ; as our Grace should a bin of
the same nature with Adams, if Adam had stood. Yea, not only their Grace is of
the same nature; but look what Grace Christ had, they have Answerable to it.
Had this great and royal Loadstone, that draws all men's hearts after him; only
touched our hearts that we might have followed him; what a Mercy had it bin!
But behold! here is more than so: the Saints they have Grace for Grace;
whatsoever Grace, or holiness there is in Christ, somewhat in a Christian
Answerable thereunto. Oh! Dignity! Oh! Dignity! how can a Christian but be
welcome to God the Father, that does not come only in the Name of Christ to
Him; but brings the Image of Christ too with him, Grace for Grace. Oh! who
would not be Encouraged to get into Jesus Christ? Oh! you that are in Christ,
do you know what privileges you walk under every day? You, sometimes, are
ready to envy at the men of the world: but I pray, Would you now change your
condition with them? Such a one, he has passion for passion; and pride for
pride; and sin for sin with the world: and you have, Grace for Grace with Jesus
Christ. Here Is Dignity! here is Privilege indeed!

But you will say;

Surely, proud of it, for then you shall not be like to Christ; Who though He
thought it no robbery to be equal with God the Father; He humbled Himself, and
became of no reputation. Beloved, you know that all Talents lents are to be
improved; and the greater the Talent, the more improvement is to be made; and
improvement is to be made of the same kind. It Is our wisdom to observe what
work God is a doing upon our souls, and to help forward that work. If God be
working Faith in our hearts, it is our duty to help forward the work of
Believing. If God be working Patience in our hearts, it is our duty to help
forward the work of Patience. Look now, what work that is, that God is doing in
our hearts, and lives for us; that work we are bound to help forward: Now has
(therefore) God drawn the Image of Jesus Christ upon your hearts, so that there
is an habitual likeness in your souls unto Jesus Christ? Then it is your duty
to labor for an actual likeness; to be like unto Him in all your working; to
live as He lived; and to do as He did; and to speak as He spoke: labor more and
more to be like unto Him in your lives.

And if you say, How should that be? The Apostle tells you: Whom beholding, as
in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.
we are changed from glory to glory, according to His own Image: The serious,
frequent beholding of Jesus Christ, is the only way to be like unto Him
Beloved! your lives, they are divided into two parts: There is a Doing part:
and a Suffering part: As Christ's Obedience was divided into Active, and Passive
Obedience. Would you in the Doing part of your life be like unto Christ? Behold
Him in His Doing: Omnis Christi Actio, est instructio. Every Action of Christ
may be our instruction: Nothing in Christ not imitable; some things more
especially. For Example: Our Lord and Savior Christ, He made it His great
business and design, To bear witness to the Truth: For this Cause came I into
the world, Joh 18.37.
That I might bear witness unto the Truth.

Again, He would stoop to any work, though it lay much below Him: wasn His
Disciples feet: lay His Excellencies, at the feet of their Infirmities.

Again, When He went upon any work, He was much in Prayer first. Judas knew His
Praying place.

And when He was at Gods work, He would not know His own Natural Relations: And
therefore says He to His Mother, Moman, My time is not yet come: He does not
say, Mother, Joh. 2.4.
My time is not yet come: but Woman. in Gods Work, He would not know His own
Natural Relations.

If He had to deal with man: He had a high esteem of the Saints though they
were never so low: And He had a low esteem of the wicked, though they were
never so rich.

He did (again) so exercise one Grace, as He might exercise another. He would
so rejoice in God, as He might grieve for sin; not His own, but ours: and He
did so grieve for sin, as he might rejoice in God. He was very Zealous, yet he
was Wise too: He was wise, and yet he was Zealous too.

He was a Lamb, and a Lion: a Lamb in his own Cause; and a Lion in Gods Cause.
Oh! that in these thigns you would labor to be like unto Him. It would be
infinite: indeed it would be beyone me, if I should single out all his Graces
that were eminent in Him. He was a Heaven of Grace, full of shining stars.
Behold Him in His Doings: The only way for you to be like to Him in your Doing,
is to behold Him in His Doing.

And so for His Sufferings. Ye shall observe, He would not suffer till He was
called unto it. Therefore He stood so precisely upon His Time: Joh. 7.8.
My Time is not yet come.

And when He was called unto it, He would not be put out of His way. If they
cast water upon Him, it made Him flame the more; Mat. 16.23 Isa. 53.7
Get thee behind me Satan. In all His sufferings, He had an especial eye to
other men's good: then He went very quietly; and meekly: As a Lamb dumb before
the shearers, so He opened not His mouth. And He was more sensible (which I
pray mark) of Gods withdrawing from Him in His sufferings, than of all the
pains, disgrace, and misery that He did undergo. And therefore, when He was
upon the Cross; says He, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.6.4
The Sun did forsake Him too; the Sun did withdraw his light; and yet He does
not say, Oh! Sun, why do thou thus forsake me? The Disciples al forsook Him:
and yet He does not cry out, Thomas, Why do thou now forsake me? Peter, why
do thou now forsake me? He cries not out of them His body was nailed to the
Cross: and he does not cry out and say, Oh! my hands; Oh! my body; Oh! the pain
that I endure: but here he cries out of this: Oh! My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me? He was more sensible of Gods withdrawing from Him, tnan of all the
other miseries that He did endure. Oh! my beloved, that you would labor now,
for to be like unto Jesus Christ; in your Doing: in your Suffering for to be
like to Him. The sight of a gracious Christ, will make us gracious, if any
thing will do it. Labor now, to be like unto Him, more and more. This is your
duty that does flow from hence. You that are Saints, you that are Christ's, you
that have received Grace for Grace; Christ expects, work for work, and doing
for doing; that you should shine as He shined; and that you should live as He
lived; that you should so walk, and be in the world, that those that do live
with you may say; Here Is a man, or woman that is like to Christ, that has
received Grace for Grace: now we see this Doctrine true; I cannot think of any
Grace of Christ, but I see it shining forth in this man and woman. This is your
Duty.

Thirdly (by way of Application) If this be true: Appli. 3.
That the Saints, and People of God, do receive of Christ's Fullness, Even Grace
for Grace: How infinitely are we bound unto God the Father, for our Lord Jesus
Christ! glorious is the fellowship, and communion that the Saints have with
Christ, (as ye heard) they have not only fellowship with Him in His sufferings,
to have suffering for suffering: but they have fellowship with Him in His
Graces, Grace for Grace: and this fellowship has God the Father brought you
into. Mark therefore, that place again which you have in the 1 Cor. 1.9 God is
faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. By whom ye were called unto this fellowship. Therefore still the
Apostle, he blesses God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: Blessed be God,
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Not barely, Blessed be God, but,
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Beloved! Ye know there are Two great Gifts, that the Scripture makes mention
of. First God makes the world, and Man: and having made man, He gives all the
world to man: there is one Gift, and a great Gift. Man having fallen, and lost
his former Happiness; Christ comes into the world, the second Person becomes
man; and this man he gives unto the world.

First He gave the world to man: And Secondly, He gives Christ, this man, unto
the world: and His second Gift is the greater Gift: it is a greater Gift when
Jesus Christ was given unto the world, than that the whole world was given to
man. For now, take the world; and though it has many glorious pieces of Gods
workmanship; His Power, and Wisdom: yet God may give all the world to man, and
not give him Himself: but when He gives Jesus Christ to man, He gives Himself
with Him. Though there be many several pieces, beautiful pieces of Gods
workmanship in the world; yet they carry with them but the Footsteps of God:
Oh! but Jesus Christ He is the express Image of the Father; and when He gives
this express Image unto a soul; as Christ is the express Image of the Father,
so the soul becomes the express Image of Jesus Christ. Ye know what the Apostle
says, concerning our Savior Christ: Col. 2.9.
(mark) In whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily: That is, look what
Attributes, and Excellencies are in God, the same are in Jesus Christ as
Mediator: Whatsoever Attribute is in God, as God; the sameshines forth in Jesus
Christ as Mediator. The Fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily: and the
Fullness of Christ dwells in every Saint Spiritually. Jesus Christ, He has
Perfection for Perfection; He has Attribute for Attribute; He has Excellency
for Excellency with God the Father. And every gracious godly soul, he has
Grace for Grace from Jesus Christ: Of his Fullness have we received, Grace for
Grace: As the Fullness of God the Father dwells in Him bodily, so the Fullness of
Christ dwells in every Christian Spiritually.

And this fellwoship has God the Father called you unto: By whom we have
fellowship: 1 Cor. 1.9
this has God the Father called you unto. Oh! how infinitely are you bound unto
God the Father, to honor, and bless the Father! When ye look upon the Son, me
thinks you should bless the Father: and when ye look upon the Pather, you
should love the Son. As a mother does; when she looks upon her Child, she loves
the father; and when she looks upon the fatehr, she loves the Child again: So a
Christian, when he looks upon Jesus Christ, he should bless the Father; and
when he looks upon the Father, he should bless Jesus Christ, and love Jesus
Christ: Dear Father, thou have not only given us thy Son, but given us thy Son
in such a way, that we should have Grace for Grace, Answerable to His Grace: is
this after the manner of men? Oh! therefore, why should we not all say, Blessed
be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Oh! you, you that love Jesus
Christ, bless the Father: and you that bless the Father, love Jesus Christ:
take your selves to be infinitely bound unto god the Father, who has given you
such a Christ as this, of whom you should have Grace for Grace.

I have done. Only I would leave one Exhortation whith the Saints, that have
received of Christ's fullness thus, Grace for Grace: It Is thus, mark it I pray.

Is this true, That of His Fullness ye have all received, Appli. 4.
Grace for Grace, Answerableness of Grace? that ye have fellowship with Jesus
Christ in all His Graces? Then be for ever contented to have fellowship with
Jesus Christ in all his Sufferings. And truly, well may ye be contented, if you
have fellowship with Christ in His Sufferings; if you have Suffering, for
Suffering, ye shall have Grace for Grace, and Glory for Glory; if ye partake
with Him in His Sufferings, ye shall partake with Him in His Graces, and
partake with Him in His Glory. I say, well may ye be contented to have
fellowship with Him in His Sufferings, for if you have suffering for suffering,
you shall have Comfort for Comfort: if you have fellowship with Him in His
sufferings: you shall have fellowship with Him in His Comforts too. (Mark ye)
When Jesus Christ Suffered, Had He a Deity to support Him? So shall you have.
When Jesus Christ Suffered, Had He Angels to minister to Him? So shall you have.
When Jesus Christ suffered, Did He see the travail of His Soul? So shall you
see it. When Jesus Christ was lift up, He drew al men after Him: So shall you
do: when you are lift up for the Truth upon the cross; you are apt to think,
now will the Truth suffer, now will the Cause of God fall to the ground: But
remember, if you have fellowship in His Graces; if you have fellowship with
Christ in His Sufferings; you shall have fellowship with Christ in His Comforts:
This was one of His Comforts; when He was lift up upon the Cross, then He drew
all men after Him: So, when you come to be lift up upon the Cross, then shall
men be drawn after the Truths that you suffer for: and never shall men be more
drawn after the Truths that you suffer for, then when you come to be lift up
upon the Cross to suffer for them. Oh! who would not be willing to partake with
the Lord Jesus Christ in His sufferings, to have fellowship with Him in his
sufferings, to have suffering for suffering? It Is observed, that our Savior
never met with any great dobasement, but at that time, in the midst of that
debasement, there was some breakings forth of Golory. He was born in a Stable,
He was laid in a Manger; here was His first debasement: Here glory breaks
forth; the Wise men come and fall down before Him, and offer gifts;
frankincense, and mirrhe.

Again, He was Baptized: He needed not to have been Baptized; He was clean
enough in his Nature, He put our clothes upon him, stood in our nature: Now,
He hears a Voice from Heaven, Matt. 3.17
saying, This is My Beloved Son.

Again, You read of Him riding upon an Ass: Not riding in a Coach drawn with
Lions, and drawn with Elephants Savior, riding upon an Ass, in a mean way, a
debased way; now breaks forth some glory, now they cry, Hosanna, Hosanna to him.

Again, upon the Cross, there he was most debased; then breaks forth some
glory: The Sun, that stands still, and vails his face, as one astonished at the
worlds Savior: Now does the vail of the Temple rend in sunder, now Glory breaks
forth in the midst of his debasement; Thus it was with Christ. Have you
suffering with him for sufferings? Have you fellowship with Christ in his
sufferings? you shall have fellowship with Christ in his Comforts. Oh!
therefore I beseech you be contented now to have suffering for suffering with
Jesus Christ; and whenever any suffering comes, especially for the Truth,
boggle not at it, be content, and say within your selves, Oh! blessed be the
Lord, that has called me out to this work! I shall have this fellowship with
Christ in his sufferings, I shall now have suffering for suffering, therefore I
shall have Comfort for Comfort, I shall have Grace for Grace, I shall have
Glory for Glory: Oh! who would not be encouraged? I leave this Exhortation with
you, comfort your selves in these words, and never startle at suffering, as
herefore; but make account of this, That if you have Grace for Grace, ye may
meet with Suffering for Suffering; but then you shall have Comfort for Comfort,
and ye shall have Glory for Glory. Think on these things, and the Lord give us
to practice them.

THE SPIRITUALL-ACTINGS OF FAITH Through NATURALL-IMPOSSIBILITIES.
Romans 4. verse. 19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body
now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarahs womb.

Romans 4. verse. 19. And being not weak [or weakned] in Faith. etc.


IN this latter Part of the Chapter ye have the commendation of Abraham's faith;
Preached at Margarets Newfishstreet. Fev. 23. 1645.
described from the Subject or Matter of that he believed, in the 18. and 19.
verses. From the Manner of his believing, He staggered not, (at the 20. verse)
at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, etc. From the
Cause of his faith, the sight of Gods Al-sufficiency and faithfulness, being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised he was able also to perform. From
the Effect of his Faith, He gave glory to God.

First of all for the Subject, or the Matter that he believed; more plainly
expressed in the 18. v. Who aginst hope believed in hope, that he should become
the father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken, so shall thy
seed be: Aggravated and enlarged in this 19. verse; The Matter that he believed
was enclosed with many difficulties, he believed that he should be the father
of many Nations, and that in his seed all the Nations of the world should be
blessed, herein he had an eye unto Jesus Christ; but now his own body was
dead, being about an hundred years old, and Sarahs womb dead, yet
notwithstanding says the text, Being not weak in the faith, he considered not
his own body now dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb.

You will say, Abraham considered not his own body being now dead, when we read
in the 17. Chapter of Genesis, and verse. 17. (unto which Story this Chapter
relates) it is said, That Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed in his heart,
and said, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and
shall Sarah that is ninety years old, bear? Did not Abraham here, consider
the deadness of his own body? and the deadness of Sarahs womb? why does the
Apostle say thus then?

Some answer it thus, Abraham, which we read of in the 12. of Genesis; but that
cannot be, he was not then an hundred years old; He considered not his own body
now dead when he was about an hundred years old, and so it is said, he was an
hundred years old in the 17. Chapter, of Genesis and the 17. verse; therefore
it must relate unto that.

Others, they answer it thus, That Abraham hideed at the first did consider his
own body, and did doubt through unbelief: but afterward Abraham recollected
himself, and got over that unbelief; but the Apostle he speaks the contrary
in the 20. verse, He staggered not at the promise through unbelief.

Others, they answer it, by laboring to sind out some mystical interpretation
of those words, Shall a child be brone unto him that is an hundred years old?
and shall Sarah that is ninety years old bear? as if Abraham (say they) had
said thus, Lord, thou have some secret meaning in these words, I pray thee
speak it out unto me, and tell me plainly thy meaning; and therefore, (say
they) God answered to that purpose in the 19. verse, And God said, Sarah thy
wife shall bear thee a son indeed. I mean according to my words, Sarah shall
bear thee a Son indeed.

But we need not strain for any mystical interpretation, or expression: when
Abraham says, Shall a child be bron unto him that is an hundred years old? (In
that seventeenth of Genesis and the seventeenth) they are words not of
Doubting, but words of Inquiring: Abraham desiring to be further satisfied, and
rightly to understand the meaning of the promise, and rightly understanding the
meaning of the promise, says the Apostle, He did not much mind, he did not
thoroughly mind, he did not stand poring upon, or considering the deadness of
his own body, or the deadness of Sarahs womb.

There are three things (especially) considerable in these words.

Frist of all, That Abraham's body and Sarahs body are dead, after God gives out
a promise of a great seed of his.

Secondly, That notwithstanding this, yet Abraham believed and is commended for
it, He being not weak in the faith, considered not his own body being now dead.

And thirdly, That in all this he had an eye unto Jesus Christ, as I shall show
you afterward; Accordingly I would take up three observations thus.

First, When God intends to fulfill his promise by giving any special blessing
to the children of Abraham, he does first of all put the sentence of death upon
the blessing, and upon all the means that do lead unto it.

Secondly, That then, and then especially it is the duty of all the children of
Abraham to trust in God.

And thirdly, That no difficulty can stand before faith; true, saving,
justifying faith carries the soul through all difficulties, discouragements,
and natural impossibilities to Jesus Christ.

I begin with the first at this time.

When God intends to fulfill his promise by giving any special blessing to the
children of Abraham, to believers, he does first put the sentence of deathupon
it, and upon all the means that do lead unto it.

A promise of a great seed like the stars of heaven, and the sand upon the
seashore, is given to Abraham; but before it is fulfilled, Abraham's body is
dead, and Sarahs womb dead; the sentence of death put upon the mercy, and the
means that do lead unto it; and herein Abraham is held forth for our example,
it was written not for his sake alone, (at the 23. verse) but for us also, to
whom it shall be imputed (at the 24. verse) And as thus it fell out with
Abraham, so it falls out with all the children of Abraham, with all believers,
when God intends to give any special or great mercy by fulfilling his promise,
he does first of all write down the sentence of death upon the mercy, and upon
the means that do tend unto it.

The Saints and People of God, lsa. 62 12.
they are called the Redeemed of the Lord, not only because they are redeemed
from hell and from wrath, but because that they have their mercies and
blessings in a way of Redemption; there is a line of that great mercy of
Redemption that runs through all the mercies which they have; they have
Health redeemed our of the hand of Sickness, they have Liberty redeemed out of
the hand of Straitness, they have peace redeemed out of the hand of War,
they have Assurance redeemed out of the hand of Doubting and Unbelief, they
have Mercy redeemed out of the hand of Misery, they have Joys and Comforts
redeemed out of the hand of Grief; they are the redeemed of the Lord,
whatsoever great Mercy or Blessing they have, they have it in a way of
Redemption; Thus it was with Abraham. And was it not thus with Joseph? (I shall
not have time to speak of the Patriarchs all of them) Joseph you know had a
promise by way of vision, Genesis 37.
That his sheafe should be higher then all the sheaves, and all the sheaves of
his Brethren should bow down to his, the Sun and the Moon should bow down
before him (his Father and mother;) this promise was afterward fulfilled when
his Brethren went down into Egypt, and bowed before him there, and his Father
went down into Egypt; but first of all Joseph is sold into Egypt, the sentence
of death put upon the Mercy; the promise did bring forth, but it had a sore and
a hard labor first.

And was it not thus with the People of Israel? they had a promise of great
increase like the sands upon the sea, and that they should be brought into the
Land of Canaan; first the sentnece of death is put upon both these, their Males
are to be cut off from Egypt, and before they come into Canaan, they must go
into a howling wilderness; thus the sentence of death passes first upon the
mercy before they do come to it.

And was it not thus with David? David had a Kingdom promised him, that he
should be the King of Israel, but first of all David must be thrust out of the
Kingdom, he must into the wilderness, he must be hunted up and down there
like a partridge, David must be a Traitor first before he can be a King, and
David must be a Rebel first in the eyes of the King before he can come to the
Kigndome and to the Throne; he had the mercy afterward, but first the sentence
of death was put upon it.

So Job; a great and a large and a comfortable Estate that God gave unto him,
but first he is plundered and spoiled of all, a sentence of death passes upon
all his comforts; And is not this Gods dealing with his People still? look I
pray into the 11. of the Revelation, and ye shall see how the two witnesses are
to fare; After three days and an half, (at the 11. v.) the Spirit of life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them which saw them and they heard a great voice from Heaven; saying unto them,
Rev. 11.
come up hither; But I pray mark, they are killed first; at the latter end of
the 7. verse, He shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them, and their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt; and they of the People, and
Kingreds, and Tongues, and Nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and
an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves: There is a
Spirit of life enters into them afterward. I but first of all a sentence of
death passes upon them; this is Gods way and manner of dealing with his People,
with the children of Abraham, with those that are true Believers.

What Reason for it? This seems somewhat strange: Not a blessing or a mercy of
any great importance, or concernment, but the sentence of death passes upon it
first: What Reason for this? Why is God pleased to take this way with his own
people, the Children of Abraham?

First of all, That he may be most of all seen therein. Beloved! God does not
only give us these outward creature comforts, for to supply our Wants, but to
bear up the honor of his own greatness. You have not fish out of the water,
only to supply your wants: nor fruit from the earth, only to supply your
wants: nor light from the Sun, only to supply your wants, but to bear up the
honor of Gods greatness also. When he gives unto his people, he does give in
such a way, as may most of all bear up the honor of his own greatness: if it
were only to supply their wants, then possibly, the sentence of death should
never come upon the second cause: but now, it is also to bear up his own
honor the honor of his own greatness and that is done this way.

Hereby God is known to to be a living God: so long as there is life in the
means, God is not so well known to be a living God: but when all means are
dead, and yet the mercy comes, Oh! says a soul, now I see that God is a
living God.

Hereby the Power of God is made known; he must needs be great in power, that
can say to things that are not, Be; and give a Resurrection unto dead things:
so long as there is strength, and ability in the means, men do not so much
consider the power, and the All-suffciency of God: but when all means are
strengthlesse, and all means are dead, and yet the mercy comes; Oh! says a
soul, now I see that God is a God Almighty, God All-sufficient.

Hereby he is made known under the name of Jehovah; a Being that gives a Being
unto all other Beings; faithful in fulfilling his promise: so long as there is
a being in the second cause, and in the means; God is not known by the name
Jehovah: but when there is a sentence of death put upon the second cause, and
yet the mercy comes: Oh! now says a soul, I see that God is Jehovah, a Being
that gives a Being to all other Beings. Therefore God does it. 2. Reas.


And then again secondly, God does go this way with his people, with
believers, the children of Abraham, That they may learn more to trust unto
him, to trust unto God alone: You know what the Apostle says in the first of
Timothy the fifth chapter and firth verse, She that is a widow, and desolate
trusts in God. We seldom trust in God, till a desolation come upon the
means: A widow that is desolate, trusts in God; when desolation comes upon
the means, then we learn for to trust in God. One that does learn to swim,
so long as he can touch the bottom, can touch the earth with his foot, he
does not commit himself unto the stream: but when he can feel no bottom,
then he commits himself unto the mercy of the waters: Now so long as a man can
stand upon the second cause, he can feel the bottom with his feet, he does
not commit himself to the stream of mercy: but when once the second cause is
gone, and he cannot feel the bottom; then he commits himself unto the
stream of mercy. And you shall see the Apostle gives you this account of it,
in the second of Corinths, the first chapter, and the ninth verse, But we had
the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves,
but in God, which raises the dead. This is another reason, why God is pleased
to go this way.

Again, It is fit that all believers should be conformable to Jesus Christ. It
was thus with Christ. we read in that second of the Philippians, of our Lord
and Savior, That God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every name.
But see first of all, a sentence of death passes upon his name, He was made of
no reputation (verse the seventh) he was made of no name first: And being of no
reputation, took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of man: wherefore God has highly exalted, and given him a name which
is above every name. He brought salvation, life to ligth; he spoiled Satan but
first of all he was spoiled himself, and a sen tence of death passes upon him
before he brought things unto life and he gives you to understand thus much
himself, and here he holds forth himself for our example; in the twelfth
chapter of John says he, at the twenty third verse, The time is come that the
Son of man should be glorified. Well, but how? Verily, verily, I say unto
you, except a corn of wheat fall to the ground and die, it abides alone: but
if it die, it brings forth much fruit. Thus he comes to his glory, he must
die first, and so he must come to glory. If any man serve me, (says he at the
twenty sixth verse) Let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my
servant be. This is the way that Christ went, and this way God took with
Christ. Love loves to be like unto Jesus Christ: and Faith loves to go in the
garment of Jesus Christ: as with him, so with the Saints.

And then again fourthly, That the comforts of his people may be the more
sure, and steadfast. If our comforts hang at the girdle of the creature, they
are most uncertain: but if they be laid up in God, in his promise, upon his
power; then they are certain. He that is engaged in the crowd, must be carried
too and fro in the crowd: And he that is in a ship, must be carried as the ship
is. If a man stand upon a bank of Ice, he is apt to slide; but if he stand
upon dry ground, he stands more sure: All the second causes, they make but a
bank of Ice; and when a man stnads on them; and his comforts on them he is apt
to slide: the only dry ground is Gods power, and Gods faithfulness, and his
promise.

That a man's comforts therefore may not slide, but may be more sure, and
steadfast; God takes this course with his people, putting a sentence of death
upon the mercy, and upon all the means that do lead unto it, before he gives
it out unto the soul.

I but you will say, Abraham, he does first put the sentence of death upon it,
and upon all the means that do lead unto it: then surely, I am none of the
children of Abraham, I never had any skpeciall mercy yet given unto me; I do
not find that it has been so with me.

No, what then? Because your experience don't speak it,

But you will say,

Yes. Ordiance to his people in the way of a special mercy, but first of all
the sentence of death came upon the business, and upon all the means that did
lead unto it?

When did the Lord ever give any grace to his people, but first of all the
sentence of death past? when ever did the Lord give any encouragement in duty
to any of his children, but first a sentence of death past? When ever did the
Lord give any great enjoyment of himself to any of his children, but first a
sentence of death past? When ever was a poor soul made fruitful, but first a
sentence of death past? Oh! never any more barren then I, never any more dead
then I; Our Lord and Savior Christ, he promises his Disciples, that he would
send them the Holy Ghost, the Comforter: but before the Comforter came, he goes
away himself from them, and they were left, and never in such a sad condition
as immediately before the Comforter came. And if you mind it here, though
Abraham had many acts of Faith, yet this act of faith is singled out from all
the rest of the actings of Abraham's faith; wherein Abraham is held forth as a
pattern for all believers. The grace of a godly man, is his souls
Resurrection, We are risen, being risen with Christ, by grace we rise: Now
says the Apostle; it is in regard of the Resurrection, is with seed that is
sown: it first dies, and then it rises. The Saints, and people of God, they
have all their graces, and all their comforts in a way of Resurrection. This is
the way therefore God takes with his people. Only, take along with you, these
three or four cautionall considerations.

First, There are some blessings and mercies that are more common and ordinary;
some that are more special and greater. I do not say, that this is true
concerning every common and ordinary blessing that a believer has, that he
has no blessing, no mercy; but first of all a sentence of death is put upon
it, and upon all the means that do lead unto it, but (I say) its true
concerning the great, and the special blessings and mercies. We read of
Abraham that he had other children, it was not so in regard of them, but Isaac
was the great blessing; it was so in regard of Isaac. The children of Israel,
they had their daily bread, and their water; their daily provisions, we do not
find it in regard of them: but they had Manna from heaven, and they had water
out of the Rock, they had special water, special bread, so in regard of
these. And therefore if you look into Exodus 15. you shall find there at the
last verse. They came to Elim, where were twelve Wels of water, (according to
the twelve Tribes, every Tribe had twelve) and threescore and ten palm trees,
(according to the number of those that went down to Egypt,)But now before they
had these twelve Wels of water, yea read at the 22. verse, that they went
three days in the wilderness, and found no water, at the 25. verse, you read
of waters they had that were very sweet: but before that, the water was bitter
it was called Marah, And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the
waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called
Marah. And the people murmured against Moses, saying, what shall we drink? and
he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree, which when he had cast
into the waters, the waters were made sweet. The special waters and blessings
of Gods people come to them thus.

Again, in another man's hand. It was a great mercy, even to Isaac, that by him
all the Nations of the world should be blessed; but the sentence of death was put
upon this mercy in Abraham's hand, as well as in his own; Thou come it may be
to the preaching of the word, and thou art converted by such a sermon; thou
do not see how the sentence of death was put upon this mercy before thou
had it: may be the sentence of death was put upon it in the Ministers hand,
in the Preachers hand, may be he had laid aside those Doctrines, and those
Truths, and thought to preach upon another matter; may be the sentence of death
was put upon thy mercy in his hand: so sometimes it is in another man's hand.

Again, yet it is much according to the life of the mercy that is afterward.
If the life be great, the death is great, If the life be small the death is
small. And sometimes the sentence of death falls mostly upon the apprehension:
as it was with Hagar; she was in the wilderness, and she thought she should
die for want of water: only (said she) I will not see my child die, and there was
a Well by. So that now, here the sentence of death lay mostly upon her own
apprehension. And thus you have it also with Joshua of whom you read in the
first of Joshua; the Lord makes him a great promise: now therefore arise,
(says he at the second verse) go over this Jordan, thou and all this people;
every place the sole of your foot shall tread upon; that have I given unto you.
And at the latter and of the fifth verse. I will be with thee, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee. Now if you look into the seventh Chapter, you find
that Joshua had rent his clothes (in the sixth verse) and fell to the earth upon
his face, before the ark of the Lord, until even-tide, and Joshua said alas,
O Lord God, wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to
deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had
been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan, why? what is the matter? you
read there went up 3 thousand men of the Israelites, and thirty six men of them
were smote by the men of Ai. Here was cause now of fear, but no cause of such
expressions as did fall from Joshua: a sentence of death passes upon the mercy,
but it lay mostly upon the apprehension of Joshua. Sometimes it falls more upon
the apprehension, and less upon the thing, sometimes it falls more upon the
thing, and less upon the apprehension: but always more or less, when God
intends any great or special mercy to his people, to the children of Abraham,
he does first cause the sentence of death to pass upon it, and upon all the
means that do lead unto it.

You will say then, it: But one thing seems very strange to me; that the Lord
should give out a promise, first a promise given out, and then comes the
sentence of death upon the mercy, and upon the means that do lead unto it.
What should be the meaning of this? why does the Lord deal thus, give out a
promise first?

A promise is given out twice. At the first,

When the Lord does first give out the promise, a sentence of death then
passes, that he may show you where the mercy lies. As the mother does deal by
her child; shows the child where the meat stands: child, thou art not yet fit
for it, thou shall have it in due time, look, here it stands. Or as a father
that shows the child where the money lies: child, time is not yet, but there
the money lies, there is the bag it is in, none shall take it from thee. So does
God do: you think that the Mercy lies in the second cause; No, says God,
here, here is the bag that it lies in. Therefore he does first give out the
promise, that he may tell the soul where the Mercy lies, show the soul where
it is.

And then again.

As for Example: If I would pay a man my money down presently, I would not give
him a bond: but my very giving him a bond, argues, I am not to pay him
presently. So the Lord, he gives out a promise, and you think now, you must
have it presently: No, (says the Lord) but because a sentence of death is to
come, and thou shall not have it presently; therefore I give out the promise.

And again thirdly, may be borne up against all discouragements, when the
womb of the second Cause shall be dead. God sees that his child, or servant,
is going to a great storm: there is such a child of mine (says God) he is going
into a great storm, and his Faith will be put to a great stresse; therefore I
will furnish him with Cables, and good Anchors; I Will throw him out a promise.
You think, because God gives you a promise, because God gives you Cables,
because God gives you Anchors, therefore you shall come to land presently: the
Lord does therefore give you a promise, because he does see that a storm is
coming: you mistake the way of God in his promise, this is Gods way, he gives
out a promise, and then causes the sentence of death to pass upon the
business, and upon all the means that do lead unto it.

I come unto the Application.

Whilst I stand upon this truth, Applicat.
me thinks I see matter of great, and everlasting encouragement to all the
Saints and people of God: be not discouraged, but rather keep silence, wait,
and stay upon God when the darkest times go over your head; when the sentence
of death is put upon the Mercy, and blessing which you do most desire. This is
Gods way, when he intends any great Mercy to any of his children, he puts a
sentence of death first upon it. Oh! when death sits upon the means, Psalm.
116.11.
then we conclude all is dead, the Mercy dead, all is gone; and we are very apt
to have despairing thoughts, and to make despondent conclusions. I said in my
have (says he) all men are liars: Samuel says, I shall have a Kingdom; the
sentence of death is put upon the business; All men are liars. Psalm. 31.22.
So in another place: I said in my have, I am cast out of thy sight: shall I
see the face of God? nothing but death upon all the means; Isai. 38.11.
I am cast out of thy sight. So with Hezckiah, I said (says he) I shall be
cast out of the Land of the living. And so now adays: I thought indeed that we
should have had a Reformation; but now nothing but sad Division: I thought we
should have had free enjoyment of all the Ordinances: but now the sentence of
death put upon all. I had thought I should have had Assurance, and never
doubted again; but now death put upon it, and upon all the means that do lead
unto it: all is dead, all is gone: Oh! we are very apt to be much discouraged,
and to make strange conclusions when death comes upon the means: it is a hard
thing to keep from such conclusions: For the business comes to a Vote (as it
were) it comes to a Vote before the Soul. The question is (says the Soul)
whether I shall be saved or no? As many as are for the Affirmative, say, I: I,
says the Promise. As many as are for the Negative, say, No: No, says
Threatenings; and, No, says guilty Conscience; No, no, no, says a thousand
sins. The question is, whether I shall be delivered or no? I am in such an
Alliction, and straitness; the question is whether I shall be delivered or no?
As many as are for the Affirmative, say, I: I, says the Promise. As many as
are for the Negative say, No: No, says Providence; No, say all second Causes,
and all the means round about; No, no, no, say a thousand sins. Now my
beloved, its a hard thing for a poor Soul to give an Affirmative with the bare
Promise, when all else gives a Negative: but the reason is, because this truth
that now I am upon, is not by you; were but this truth by you, it were easy to
give an Affirmative with the bare Promise, when death sits upon all the means.
As for example: Suppose our Army by in the field, engaged with the enemy; a
Troop routed, a Regiment routed, a Wing routed; Come, (says a carnal
Soldier) fellow Soldiers, shift for your lives, for we are all undone and
spoiled: Nay, not so, stay (says the believing Soldier) this is Gods way;
when God intends any great Mercy to his people, he does first of all put the
sentence of death upon it, and upon all the means that do lead unto it: and
therefore, come, fall on, fall on, brave hearts, fall on; for this is Gods way:
ans so it proves many times.

Or suppose a man be in some personal strait or affliction: the Devil, the
Tempter he comes; ye see in what strait ye are; there is no means at all for
your deliverance, you had as good take such and such an indirect course; why
should you wait any longer? Nay, says the Soul, but I have learned
otherwise: when God intends any great Marcy to his children, he does first of
all put the sentence of death upon it, and upon all the means that do lead
unto it: and therefore I will wait on God still, I may be in Gods way, this
may be Gods way; it may be the Lord is in a way to give me a greater Mercy then
ever I had in all my days. Oh! my Beloved, that you would but gird this truth
upon your thigh, how might you cut off all discouragements as they rise upon
you.

You will say, Beasts: some things there are that die, and do rise again, as
Men: The sentence of death is upon the Mercy that I do much desire; and did I
know indeed, that it should rise again, it were a matter of great Encouragement
to me, but that I do not know.

For Answer, may be of Mercy, is a sufficient ground for our reliance and
support of the Soul upon God. Mark, there is two acts of Faith; the Faith of
Reliance, and the Faith of Assurance; Assurance, that causes Joy; Reliance that
causes Quietness: Accordingly there are two Objects of Faith; A shall be of
Mercy, that is the Object of Assurance; A may be of Mercy, that is the Object
of Reliance. Ye shall observe therefore, that when the Lord would call out his
people to an act of Reliance upon him, he holds out a may be of mercy to them:
Zeph. 2.3.
Seek the Lord, ye meek of the earth; seek righteousness, seek meekness;
it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger; ye know the place in
Zephaniah: And if you look into the 1 Samuel the 14. Chapter, ye shall find,
that this may be was that encouraged Jonathan (at the 6. verse) Jonathan said
to the Young man that born his Armor: Come, and let us go over unto the
garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the Lord will work for us; for
there is no restraint with the Lord to save by many, or by few. It may be the
Lord will work for us, for there is no restraint with the Lord, to save by many
or by few. This encouraged Jonathan, and hereby he incourages his
Armor-bearer. So, when a man can say thus: it may be the Lord will show Mercy
to me in such a work, or in such a business; there is no restraint with him;
it causes the Soul to rely on God. Now this Doctrine, it holds forth a may be
to you, a may be of Mercy to you; though you have not an Assurance that this
mercy that has the sentence of death upon it, will certainly rise again; yet
notwithstanding, seeing it is Gods way, this is Gods way with the Children of
Abraham; when he intends to give a special Mercy, he does put a sentence of
death upon it. This holds forth a may be unto you, a may be of Mercy this
Doctrine holds forth unto you. Why therefore (my beloved) should we not rely
upon God, when the sentence of death is put upon the means, upon all the
means that does lead unto the Mercy that you most desire?

But you will say unto me; Is there no way,

I shall speak but two things unto that, briefly.

A Christian may have some persuasion of the Resurrection of his Mercy when the
sentence of death is put upon it; by the frequent visitings of the promise;
mark, when God intends any special Mercy to his people, he gives out a
promise; then comes the sentence of death: but if he intends to fulfill the
promise; he does cause the promise frequently to visit the Soul, even when the
sentence of death is upon the business; often to knock at the door of the
Soul. When there is Good Will between two Young people kept from marrying by
their Parents, and the Young man often is at the house; ye say, surely, if the
Parents were but dead, there would be a marriage quickly, by the frequent
visitings. So now, when the promise does frequently visit the Soul in the time
when the sentence of death is upon the business, it argues that the Mercy is
not quite dead. Moses had a promise in a vision: the Bush burning, and not
consuming; Israel in Egypt, and not destroyed: Moses, he carries this promise
along with him in his bosom: indeed we do not read of it till Moses comes to
die; and when Moses comes to bless the People: Deu. 33.16.
The good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, be with you. This same promise
kept Moses company all along; and though the sentence of death was often put
upon the business, yet notwithstanding, in that the Mercy came and visited
him, it argued that this promise was not quite dead. So by the frequent
Visitings of the same promise; Job. 14.9.
Though the Tree be cut down; yet through the sent of those waters it shall
rise again.

But especially, By the First Fruits of the promise. When the Jews kept the
Feast of the First Fruits; they knew that the Harvest was not far off. And
so, when the First Fruits of a Mercy comes, we may know that the Mercy, or
blessing is not far off. Beloved, God does use to give the First Fruits of a
blessing, before the great blessing comes. It Is a good speech of one says he:
God does with the same seal, seal diverse matters; one Mercy is made a seal
to another. God does give one Mercy, as a pledge of another, and as a seal of
another. And so our Savior Christ does, in that 9. Chapter of Matthew, we
read of a certain Ruler, that came to him for his Daughter; and he said, (at
the 18. verse) My Daughter is ever now dead, but come, and lay thine hand upon
her, and she shall live. Here was his unbelief, that he should say: Come and
lay thine hand upon her; Christ could have healed her, without coming to her:
But Jesus arose, and followed him. And behold a woman (at the 20. verse) which
was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched
the hem of his garment: Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said,
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy Faith has made thee whole. And the woman was
made whole from that same hour: And when Jesus came into the Rulers house, and
saw the Minstrels, and the People making a noise: He said unto them, Give
place, for the maid is not dead, but fleepeth: And they laughed him to scorn.
He did a miracle in the way, as a pledge unto them that he would do this
miracle also, that he would raise up his daughter: and by this miracle that he
did in the way, he did give them a seal of the miracle following, of the Mercy
following. Thus he does many times.

Thus he dealt by David: the Lord made David a promise of the Kingdom, to give
him the Kingdom, bring him to the Throne: David, he is thrust out into the
Wilderness: well, when he is there, Saul he persecutes him, hunts him; Saul,
comes so near him, as that Saul is on one side the hill, and he on the other,
nearer: But even there Saul is delivered into the hand of David. This now, this
Mercy here in the Wilderness, was a pledge to him of the Kingdom afterward.
So now is it with you: has the Lord given you a promise of some great
blessing, or some great Mercy? and thereupon does the sentence of death come
upon it, and upon all the means that do lead unto it? In the interim, between
the promise, and the fulfilling; does the Lord deliver you from some affliction
that rises up in your way: the Interim-mercy, the deliverance being of the same
nature with the Mercy promised, is a pledge unto you, that the Mercy shall rise
again; though the sentence of death be now upon it. And thus you should look
upon things.

But while I am upon this, It Is enough for the Reliance of the Soul upon God,
A may be of Mercy: I say, a may be of Mercy, is enough for the act of Reliance.
And this Doctrine always hold forth this truth unto you, that there is a may
be; because, when God intends to fulfill his promise, by giving any special
blessing, or Mercy to the children of Abraham; he does first of all put the
sentence of death upon the blessing, and upon all the means that do lead unto
it. Shall we not then wait upon him? keep silence in the day of trouble.

I Will give you two or three encouragements hereunto, and so I will wind up all.

Beloved, Abraham had diverse sons, but the jewel was Isaac, the dead Mercy:
Hannah had diverse children, but who like Samuel? the found Mercy? Mercy once
lost, and then found, is a choice Mercy, it is the greatest Mercy. First I say,
If ever you come to find the Mercy you have lost; if ever that rise which the
sentence of death is put upon, it shall be the greatest Mercy. Job had a good
Estate: but when all was plundered, a sentence of death came upon all: when he
came to his comforts, and his Estate again, then it was done. Some have
observed concerning Joseph, that according to the several links of his
Affliction, were the pearls in the crown of his Mercy: There Is observed some
eight or nine. I shallnot have time to enlarge my self in them; only thus:
Joseph he is sold by his Brethren into Egypt; Answerable unto that, Joseph's
Brethren come down to Egypt, and worship before him. Joseph is accused for
wronging his Mistrisse, sad reproaches cast upon him; Answerable to that, a
Herald proclaims before him: This is the man whom the King honors. Joseph is
thrown into prison, the irons enter into his soul; Answerable to that, a
chain of gold is hung about his neck. Joseph a poor stranger, brought as low,
as ever man was; Answerable to that, he is made next in the Kingdom to
Pharaoh. Beloved, if the dead Mercy rise: as your bodies when they rise, they
rise in glory: So when the Mercy rises, surest. That is most certain, that is
certain after uncertainty. Whose assurance was like to Thomas's? Oh! says
Thomas, My Lord, and My God; two My's, My Lord, and My God; it came out of
doubting. A Tree that stands after shaking, stands the most firmly: Assurance
after doubting is the strongest Assurance, surest Assurance. As it is the
greatest Mercy; so I say, it shall be the surest Mercy, if ever the Mercy rise.

And then again, Lastly: sweetest Mercy. The children of Israel, they had
wholesome meat, and water, and drink: but the sweetest water was that, which
they had after no water: water out of a rock, that was like honey: And a Mercy
that comes out of a rock, that comes from out of the sentence of death, from
under death; it shall be the sweetest Mercy. You know what the Father of the
Prodigal says, when his son was come home: he calls his friends together: Lak.
15.32.
Come (says he) and make merry with me; for this my son was dead, and is now
alive: Calls his friends together, and speaks thus unto them. So shall it be
with the Soul, when the Mercy lost, is found, when the Mercy dead is raised:
then the Soul shall call in his friends; Come, O my friends; Come, I Will tell
you what the Lord has done for my Soul: here, here is a Mercy dead, and it is
now alive: Come, make merry with me, O my friends; this my Assurance it was
even dead, and it is now alive: Oh! this Blessing, this Blessing it was dead;
but it is now alive: Come and make merry with me, O my friends; for this Mercy
was dead, and it is now alive. Thus I say: if this Mercy rise that has the
sentence of death upon it; it shall be the greatest Mercy; it shall be the
surest; and it shall be the sweetest Mercy, that ever you had in all your
days. And therefore, who would not wait upon the Lord? who would not wait
upon the Lord, when the sentence of death is put upon the Mercy, and upon all
the manes that do lead unto it? Oh! my beloved in the Lord; that you would but
possess your hearts of this one Truth, this Mercy: how quiet would your Souls
be under all the distempers, and the troubles of the time; National
distempers, Personal distempers. When you look upon the troubles that are
abroad; yet your hearts would be quiet, and you would say, well, but yet
notwithstanding, we may be in the way to the greatest Mercy that ever England
saw; why should we be thus discouraged? Oh! my Soul wait upon God, this is
Gods way; he never gives any great Mercy to any of his people; but first he
does put a sentence of death upon it, and upon all the means that do lead unto
it: And therefore, notwithstanding all, yet we may be in Gods way: Therefore,
Oh! my Soul, wait on him.

Thus much for this time.

Romans 4. verse. 19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body
now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of
Sarahs womb.


THe words (as ye heard the last day) are spoken concerning Abraham:
Preached-at Margarets New fishstreet. March. 2. 1645.
And they hold forth three great Truths unto us.

The First is this: That when God intends to fulfill his promise, by giving any
special blessing to the children of Abraham: he does first put the sentence of
death upon the blessing, and upon all the means that do lead unto it: Abraham's
body is dead, and Sarahs womb is dead; when God had promised him a great seed.

The Second is this: When God is thus pleased to put the sentence of death upon
a blessing, or the means that do lead thereto: Then, and then especially, it is
the duty and commendation of all the children of Abraham to believe in God, and
not to stand poring upon the means, and the deadness thereof. He considered
not his own body being dead, nor the deadness of Sarahs womb.

The Third is this: That no difficulty can stand before Faith: true saving,
justifying Faith, carries the Soul through all difficulties, discouragements,
and natural impossibilities to Jesus Christ. Thus it was here with Abraham: he
being not weak in Faith, he had an eye unto Jesus Christ.

I have done with the First; and my desire is now at this time, to dispatch the
Second.

When God is pleased thus to put the sentence of death upon a blessing; or the
means that do lead unto it: it is the duty of the children of Abraham then to
trust in God; not to stand poring upon, or considering of the means, and the
deadness thereof.

Thus it was here with Abraham: God made Abraham a promise that his seed should
be like the sand, and like the stars for multitude: But Abraham's body is
dead, and his wives body is dead: Notwithstanding, Abraham considered not the
deadness of the means. And in all this he is held forth for our Example, as
you heard the last day. As he did therefore so must we do.

The Doctrine is somewhat large. I shall break it asunder into three parts, and
endeavor to clear up these three Propositions unto you, for the proof of the
whole.

First, That a mere rational considering of the means, and the deadness
thereof: is a great, and a special enemy to the work of believing.

Secondly, That when all means fail, it is the duty, and commendation of the
children of Abraham, then to believe.

Thirdly, That so to do, is exceeding pleasing to God, and most acceptable.

First, That a mere rational considering of the means: the straitness, or
scantinesse; narrowness, or deadness of the means, is a great, and a
special enemy to the work of believing.

Abraham being not weak in Faith, considered not his own body being dead. If he
had considered, he might have been hindered in his Faith.

Ye read of Zacharias (that good man, Father of John the Baptist) that when
the Angel brought him tidings of a child, in way of his special Mercy; he
would not believe it. And in the 1. of Luke, and the 20. verse: ye read how he
was punished for it: Behold, thou shall be dumb, and not able to speak, until
the day that these things shall be performed, because thou beleevest not my
words. But what hindered him? what kept him off from this work of believing? you
shall find at the 18. verse; too much attendance unto, and considering of the
means, and the deadness thereof. Zachary said unto the Angel, Whereby shall
I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. He looked
too much upon, and considered, he stood poring too much upon the means; and
this was the enemy unto his Faith. You know Beloved, that the Scripture has
laid a flat opposition between Faith, and sense. We live by Faith, says the
Apostle, and not by sight, or by sense. The reasons drawn from sense, are
sense: and when a man does live by reason drawn from sense, and bears up his
heart therewithal, he does live by sense. If you live by Faith, you don't live
by sense: if you do live by sense, you don't live by Faith. They are as two
buckets, the life of Faith, and the life of sense; when one goes up, the other
goes down: the higher Faith rises, the lower sense and reason: and the higher
sense and reason, the lower Faith. That is true of the schools, Reason going
before Faith, weakens, and diminishes it: But Reason following upon Faith,
increases and strengthens it. Besides, you know Paul says; Not many wise etc.
Why not many wise called? Those that are wise, they consider the things of God,
and of the Gospel in a mere rational way, and therefore not many wise are
called: it hinders them from the work of believing: Luther says well: If you
would believe (says he) you must crucify that Question, why? God would not
have us so full of wherefores. And if you would believe, you must go blindfold
into Gods command: Abraham subscribes to a blank, when the Lord called him out
of his own Country.

Besides, You know the great field that Faith has to work in; the large and
vast Orb, and Sphere that it has to move in.

Faith can go into the Old Testament, and run up as high as Adam, and come back
again to the Soul, and tell the Soul: I have seen a man whom God has pardoned
that damned all the World; and why may he not pardon thee? Faith can run up
to Heaven, and come home again to the Soul; and say, I have seen the Glory
there: be of good comfort, there is enough in Heaven to pay for all. Faith can
run unto Gods All Sufficiency, to Gods Omnipotency; and having viewed that
well, it returns to the Soul home again; and says, be quiet, there is enough
in God alone: and Faith having placed, and seated it self upon this high Tower
and Mountain; Gods Omnipotency and All Sufficiency; it has a great prospect,
it can look over all the World, and look into another World too: but now
Reason, it gets upon some little Molehill of Creature-ability; and if it can
see over two or three hedges, it is well And therefore; Oh! what a pain is it
to Faith, to be tied to Reason. I suppose you will all say, that if a man were
able to go a journey of two or three hundred miles a foot, he were a very good
footman: yet if you will tie him to carry a child of four or five years old
with him; you will say, it would be a great luggage to him; and the man would
say, pray let this child be left at home: for though he may run along in my
hand half a mile, or go a mile with me; yet notwithstanding I must carry him
the rest of the way: and when I come at any great water, or to go over any
hill, I must take him upon my back; and that will be a great burden to me. And
thus it is between Faith and Reason: Reason (at the best) is but a child to
Faith: Faith can foot it over Mountains and Difficulties, and wade through
Afflictions, though they be very wide: but when Reason comes to any Affliction,
to wade through that, and to go over some great Difficulties; then it cries out
and says, Oh! Faith, good Faith go back again, good Faith go back again:
No (says Faith) but i will take thee upon my back Reason: and so Faith is fain
to do indeed; take Reason upon its back: but, Oh! what a luggage is Reason to
Faith? Oh! what a burden is Reason to Faith? Faith never works better, then
when it works most alone. The mere rational considering of the means, and the
deadness thereof, is a great and special enemy to the work of believing.
That is the First.

The Second Proposition is this; That when all means fail, and seem to lie
dead before us; then it is the duty, and commendation of all the children of
Abraham, to believe: That is, to believe the thing may be, and so to rest, and
rely on God in Christ. Thus it was here with Abraham.

And has not the Lord commanded by the Apostle, saying; Let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to the hand of
God, as into the hand of a Faithful Creator? the 1 of Peter 4.19. When ye are
scrupled about your Election or Reprobation, you look upon God, as a Potter,
that has power over the clay, to make it either a Vessel of honor or
dishonor: But when you are to believe, then you are not to look upon God as a
Potter, that works out of clay, or out of materials; but as a Creator, that
works out of nothing; yea as a faithful Creator, that will be sure to work
out of nothing, whom you shall be sure of. Thus then you are to look upon him.
You know the place in the third of Habakuk, and the 17. verse: Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stals; yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation; the Lord God is my
strength etc. Thus Habakuk believed. Beloved, we are so to believe as the
promise runs; Gods promise is the rule of our Faith: look how that speaks,
so may we believe. The promise and Faith is the buckle and claspe fit for one
another. Now the Lord does not only promise to help the children of Abraham,
Isai. 41 17.
but he promises to help when all means fail: When the poor and needy seek
for water, and there is none. I pray look into that third of Jeremy, and the 8.
verse: Behold, (says the Lord) I will bring them from the north Country: his
people scattered here into the Land of the North. And gather them from the
coasts of the Earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with
child, and her that travaileth with child together, a great company shall
return hither. The Lord promises to bring them back to their own Country
from the Land of the North.

I but may some say, blind man, and I shall never find the way home again.

Says he, blind.

Oh! lame man, and I shall never be able to go so far.

And with them (says he) the blind and the lame.

Oh! with child, surely, I shall never be able to return to my own Country.

Yes, with child.

I, travail about that time: surely I shall be left behind, I shall never
return to my own Country.

Mark, traivaileth with child, and a company shall return. God does not only
promise help, but he promises to help the children of Abraham when all means
fail.

And if you look into the New Testament you will find, that several promises
which are given out in the Old Testament, upon special and extraordinary
occasions, assuring help beyond means; are brought down into the
New Testament for us to apply there. When the Devil came to tempt our Lord and
Savior, to turn stones into bread: says our Savior, Man lives not by bread
alone, but every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Math. 4.4
Now if you look into the eighth of Deuteronomy, and the third verse, you will
find, that those words were spoken upon an extraordinary occasion, help beyond
means: He humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna,
which thou knew not, neither did thy fathers know: that he might make thee
know that man does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of the Lord.

And so here in this fourth of the Romans, Abraham believed, when all means
failed, he believed the promise, and he is brought down for our example, that
we should believe the promise also when means fail. And if you look into, and
consider the eleventh of the Hebrews, where you have a catalogue of many
believers, ye shall find, that many of them, believed when the means failed,
beyond means, and yet they are all brought down, and made mention of for our
example.

Surely, therefore it is the duty of the children of Abraham to believe when all
means fail, and seem to be dead before us: Means for the Soul, Means for
the Body, Means for the Family: Means for the Churches.

Take this for the reason: Such a Faith is to be exercised unto God, as is
suitable unto that God in whom we do believe. If the God in whom we do believe
were a God that did help only by means, then we were to trust so unto him:
but being he is such a God as works beyond means, we are to exercise a faith
toward him, suitable to this God in whom we do believe. So in regard of our
Love; We must love God with a love worthy of God. Now if a man should only
love God, for benefits and blessings that he receives from him: and not for the
holiness, and excellency that is in God himself; this love were not worthy of
God. So in regard of our faith: if we should only believe God in regard of the
reason, and experiences, and means; this faith were no way worthy of God. I
will believe a man, I will believe the worst of men, the vilest man, so far
as I can see him, and shall I believe God no further? We must believe with a
faith worthy of God; faith is not worthy of God, unless we believe beyond
means; this is the faith that is worthy of God; this is the faith required,
and commended. Take but one Scripture for it more. In the seventeenth of Luke,
there were ten Lepers came unto Christ, desiring cure, saying, Jesus, Master
have mercy on us (at the thirteenth verse) When he saw them, he said to them go
show your selves unto the Priests. And it came to pass as they went they were
cleansed. It seems they were not cleansed then as he spoke, they were not
cleansed when Christ says, Go and show your selves to the Priests: for it is
said, as they went they were cleansed. Why then should they show themselves to
the Priests? They were to show themselves to the Priests, to bring an offering
for their cleansing: yet, says our Savior, go show your selves to the
Priests: They were to believe that they should be cleansed, although they saw
themselves full of Leprosy.

So, although a soul sees himself to be full of Leprosy, yet notwithstanding
it is to rely upon Jesus Christ, and to believe as if he were fully cleansed:
This is the second Proposition.

The third will make out this the more full: Thus to believe when all means
fail, is exceeding pleasing to God, and most acceptable.

This kind of faith Christ commends in Thomas: Joh. 20.29
Thomas (says Christ) thou have believed because thou have seen; but blessed
are those that do believe and have not seen. Blessed is any man that does
believe, though his hands may be full of sense: but of all believers, blessed
is that believer, that believes beyond sense, that believes and has not seen.

There are two especially that Jesus Christ does commend for believing: Mat
15.28 Mat. 8 10
the Canaanitish woman; and the Centurion. To the one, says he, O woman great
is thy faith. Concerning the other: I have not seen such faith, no not in
Jsrael. And both of these believed above hope, and under hope, when the means
in view, seemed to chide them off from believing. In that eleventh of the
Hebrews, many of the Saints are commended for their Faith: They had other
graces, wherein they did excel: Moses was a Meek man, he is not recorded
there, and commended for his meekness, but for his Faith. Sampson was a stout,
and a resolute man: he is not commended there for that, but for his Faith. They
had other excellent graces, but this grace of Faith is singled out to wear the
Crown: Heb. 11.39
They all obtained a good report through Faith. That wears the Crown of all
other graces. And you shall find that that Faith was mingled with many
weaknesses: Rahab, one of those believers, what a deal of weakness passed
from her, in her believing. Yet notwithstanding, though their Faith was clogged
with many weaknesses, yet their Faith is commended, and most of them believing
beyond means, and when all means failed: plainly speaking out this truth to
us: The great acceptance that such a Faith has with God. Beloved! this faith,
believing when all means fail, and lie dead before us, turns God about; (as
we may speak with reverence) and make God, of an enemy, a seeming enemy; to
become our friend. If you trust unto your friend, for a kindness; he will do
it because you rest on him: if you rest upon an enemy, he fails you: but if
you rest on God, he will therefore do it because you rest on him, and he will
become your friend by your resting on him. Oh! I have been a great and a
wretched sinner: Yet notwithstanding, I know there is infinite riches of grace
in Christ, and therefore says the soul, I will rest on him: yea Lord, though
thou kill me, yet will I rest upon thee. I, (says the Lord) will thou now rest
upon me, now I frown, now I chide, now I have a rod in my hand, now I have a
sword in my hand to kill thee (as it were) will thou now rest upon me? Well,
be of good comfort, thou art mine for ever: Man, or woman, go in peace, good is
thy faith. This resting thus upon God, when all means fail, it melts Gods
anger into love.

And besides, it is that faith that is most successful, Chronicles the
thirteenth Chapter, and you shall find there, that Abijah going to war with
Jeroboam, had not more then half so many as Jeroboam had. Abijah set the
battle in array with an Army of valiant men of war, even four hundred
thousand chosen men: A great Army. But Jeroboam had as many again. And
Jeroboam also set the battale in array against him with eight hundred thousand
chosen men, being mighty men of valor. I pray now let us consider, how went
the day? Read the seventeenth verse. Abijah and his people slew them with a
great slaughter: so there fell down of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men:
Five hundred thousand chosen men slain. How came this about? Read the
eighteenth verse. Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time,
and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of
their Fathers. Or as some books have it, because they stayed upon the Lord God
of their father. The means was too scanty, it was short; they rested upon God
beyond the means, and see what great success they had upon this: they were
but four hundred thousand, against either hundred thousand; and they slew five
hundred thousand men. So successful is this work, and this way of believing.

It is this faith that now I am speaking of; believing when all means fail,
and lie dead before us: that does honor God especially; which does justify the
soul: It is the soule-saving faith of all. Pray look into the seventh of
Luke, and consider it well. It is said at the last verse. Jesus said to the
woman, they Faith has saved thee, go in peace: but here is no mention at all
before of her Faith: There Is mention of her love, in the forty seventh verse,
I say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much.
There Is mention before of her tears, at the eight and thirty verse. A woman in
the City; which was a sinner, brought an Alabaster box of ointment, and stood
at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and
did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed
them with the ointment. Here Is mention of her tears, here is mention of her
Liberality, and Bounty, and Love to Jesus Christ: and yet our Lord and Savior
Christ, does not say thus: woman, thy tears has saved thee, go in peace:
Woman thy Repentance, and thy Humiliation has saved thee, go in peace, he does
not say, thy Love to me, and thy Bounty to me has saved thee, go in peace,
woman: No, but our Lord and Savior, he saw a secret work of reliance upon
himself in this woman, for she was a great sinner, and he says unto her,
woman, Thy Faith has saved thee, go in Peace. This is the soule-saving faith,
thus to believe when all means fail, and seem to lie dead before you. Surely
therefore, to do thus, must needs be exceeding pleasing to God, and most
acceptable.

And so I have done with those three Propositions: Applic.
and now come to the Application.

If these things be so: Oh! what manner of Faith should we have? Will ye only
believe when means are strong, and have life in them? Ye have read of the
unbelief of the people of Israel when they were in the wilderness: being in
the wilderness, they wanted much outward provision, ordinary provision; and by
occasion thereof they murmured, full of unbelief, in so much as the Lord was
angry with them, and slew them, so that they never came into the Land of
promise. But I pray, what was their unbelief, for which God did slay them? Was
it this that they did not believe when they had means? No, but that they did
not believe when all means failed, when all outward means failed; that is
their unbelief.

Beloved, we have their promises, we have their Example, we have more means of
faith then they; and shall not our Faith rise higher then theirs? Shall not we
believe an inch beyond the means? You have heard the Doctrine: It Is the duty of
all the children of Abraham to believe when means fail, it is exceeding
pleasing to God, and it is most acceptable. Oh! What an encouragement is here,
to believe above hope, and under hope, and when death sits upon the lips of the
second cause, and speaks nothing but terror! Some there are, that say, they
can believe for their bodies, but they cannot trust God for their Souls when
means fail: Some say, they can trust God for their Souls when means fail,
but they cannot trust God for their Bodies: some say, they can trust God for
Themselves but they cannot trust God for their Families; what shall become of
my wife and children? Some say, they can trust God for their Families; but they
cannot trust God for the Church; when a strome rises, they cry out and say,
Lord, carest thou not that we perish? though Jesus Christ be in the ship with
them.

We are very ready, and apt to hunt after the means when we want them: and to
rest upon them when we have them. And there is a great propensnesse in us to
doing, rather then unto believing; before conversion: and in the point of
conversion.

Before conversion: says the young man, Mat. 1916.
What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? And in the point of
Conversion, in the second of the Acts, What shall we do to be saved? And Paul
himself, Act. 9.6. Act. 6.30.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? The Jailer too, What shall I do to be
saved; What shall I do? But I pray mark the Apostles answer to the Jailer,
when he cried out and said, Oh! What shall I do? The Apostle does not say, go
fast, and pray, though he had need to do that: but the first work that the
Apostle does put him upon, is, Believe and thou shall be saved, This is the
work.

And therefore, John 6.28, 29.
when some came to Christ, and ask't him this question, Master, what shall we
do that we may work the works of God? says Christ, This is the work of God,
that ye believe in him whom he has sent. And of all workings of Faith, this
same believing when all means do fail, and seem to lie dead before us, is
that which is most pleasing to God. Oh! that we could learn, Oh! that we could
learn this point, to believe when the sentence of death is past upon a
business, and upon all the means that do lead unto it.

You will say,

True, Master (say they) We have fish't all night, and caught nothing;
nevertheless at thy command we will cast in again. Luke 5.5.
The same God that has commanded you to keep the ten Commandments, commands
you to believe when all means fail.

And whereas ye say, ye are afraid to believe when you have no means, because
God has commanded you to use the means, and now means are wanting.

I shall desire you to consider with me but these four things.

First of all, Thou say, means fail,

Beloved, there is a time when God does purposely take away the means to try a
man's Faith. God does first try our Faith, before he does feed our sense. When
our Lord and Savior Christ, was to work that great miracle, feeding so many
thousand with five barley loaves, and two small fishes, we read in the sixth
Chapter of John, and the 5. verse thus, Jesus lift up his eyes, and saw a great
company, and said to Philip, whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?
Why did our Savior Christ thus put Philip upon it? read what follows. And
this he said to prove him: He took away the means; and this he said to prove
him. There is a time when the Lord does sometimes take away the means on
purpose to prove thy Faith; how do thou know, (man or woman) whether this be
not the day and the time? Thou say, thou can not believe, because means
fail; it may be it is the time of thy trial, God sending this time of purpose
to try thee.

Again secondly, Consider this; lusts, but to supply our wants. Possibly there
may be means to supply thy want, though not means to supply thy lust. When
our Lord and Savior Christ fed so many thousand, what did he feed them with?
Five barley loaves and two fishes; not with Turkey, not with Partridges, John
6.9.
not with Quails, not with Chickens; but with barley loaves.

It may be thou have a barley loafe-meanes, but thou have not Chicken-meanes;
and because thou have not means to supply thine appetite, and to supply thy
lust, thou say thou have no means, and all means fail: Oh! this is very
ordinary among some people; because they have not means to satisfy their mind
and their lust, therefore they say, that all means fail. I beseech you
Beloved, consider whether there be not this great mistake, when you say, that
all means fail; only a failing of means to supply your appetite and your
lust, but not a failing of barley loave-meanes; whether there be not always
that means left by God.

In the third place, means which was none before. Poor Soul, thou stand'st
quaking and shaking at a distance and say, Oh! there is no means but
contrary means: Come up to that contrary means, come up to it in a way of
believing, and thy very coming up to that which thou look upon as contrary,
through thy faith will be made a means to thee. When the Apostle Peter was in
prison, the Angel comes to him, strikes off his chains, and bids him go out
presently; Peter does not say thus, what should I stir for? Lord, Sir, there
is an iron gate to go through, there are so many guardes of Soldiers to pass
through; Peter does not say so, but rises in a way of believing, comes to the
iron gate in Faith, and when he comes at it, the iron gate does open: And so it
will be with you; indeed if you come unto that which seems a contrary means,
in a natural way, the iron gate still continues shut; but Oh! if you would use
your Faith, come up unto that which you look upon as the most contrary, in the
way of believing, faith has such a power from God, to put life into that
means that lies dead before you.

And in the fourth place: preventing mercy? You may boldly expect him in that
way. Does the Lord walk toward you in an extraordinary way? (as in these
times he has toward us, though an unworthy people:) I say, does the Lord
walk toward you in an extraordinary way? Has he done so heretofore? You may
expect him in that way. Now I appeal to you, you that are the people of God;
has not the Lord walked toward your Souls in an extraordinary way? Has not
the Lord said concerning Christ, His name shall be called wonderful? Isa. 9.6.
As you are known by your name, Richard, or Thomas, or John; so Jesus Christ
shall be known by this name among his people, Wonderful: working wonders.

Has not the Lord said, His way is in the deep? Beloved, Psa 77.19
the Lords way is in the deep, toward his people, and toward the wicked:
toward his people, his way is in the deep when he walks toward them. Behold
(says he by the prophet Jeremy, speaking concerning the times of the Gospel) a
new thing will I work, I will do a new thing, a woman shall compass a man;
you read it; but as Calv in reads it, Ier. 31.22.
A woman shall lay Siege to a man. That is, the weaker shall take the stronger.
And, says the Lord, never tell me it is a new thing; and such a thing as was
never done before, I Will never stand upon that, I le do things never done
before, I Will do a new thing (says the Lord) I will lead you in a way that was
never went, never trodden before; I Will do a new thing. And when the Lord walks
in an extraordinary way toward you, now his way is in the deep. His way is in
the whirlwind (says the Prophet) Oh! beloved, Nah 1.3.
shall we tie God to means then? True, God has commanded you to use the
means when you have them: But where has God forbidden you to trust in him
when you have no means? Thus Abraham did, he considered not his own body being
dead, nor Sarahs womb being dead; for this his faith is commended; So shall
you be. Oh! that our faith were right: Oh! that we could learn to live by
faith, at a higher rate then ever yet we have done. Time yet may come, for
ought we know, that you may find more use of this point.

But you will say unto me, I am afraid I shall presume:

Mark. I shall only tell you what it is to presume, to this) praesumo; is to
take a thing before it is given, or offered: Mercy it is always offered to a
poor sinner: Jesus Christ came to save sinners, and die for sinners; thou
can not take mercy before it is offered. For a man to think that he shall fly
in the air with wings like a bird, this is to presume for a man to put God
upon provision for his lust, this is to presume: for a man to put God upon
extraordinary, where ordinary may be had, this is to presume.

But for a man to rely upon God for necessities in extraordinary cases, when
ordinary cannot be had; this is no presumption, but Faith. Mark, I say, to put
God upon extraordinary, when ordinary may be had; this is presumption: But to
rely upon God for necessities in an extraordinary case, when it cannot be had
in an ordinary; this is no presumption at all. Beloved, it is presumption in the
highest degree for you and me, (poor creatures) to tie up the hands of God,
to labor to do it is dangerous.

As for example: one poor Subject to go to his Prince, and tie up his hands
and feet, or to go to his Palace, and nail up all his doors, and leave him
but one little wicket to come out at; this is presumption. And so, for a man to
tie God to means, to tie God to a time, to tie God to this or that means, to
tie God to means in general: this is presumption. (Mark) Some there are that
tie God to a Time: Oh! if mercy does not come by such a day, or such a time, I
am undone for ever. Others they will not tie God to a Time, but they will tie God
to this or that particular means: Oh! if mercy come not that way, or by that
means, I am gone, I am lost for ever. Others, they will not tie God to time, nor
to particular means; but they will tie God to means in general, they will not
believe God a whit beyond means, and so tie God to means in general: Ah,
what is this but rank presumption? for a poor creature, to tie up the hands
of his Creator! the fin that you seek, and think to avoid, you fall into:
This is presumption.

And beloved, do you know how prejudicial this is to your selves? As a
dishonor to God; so a great hinderance to your selves to do thus: it turns
God out of the way of his mercy; Nay, (says God) seeing you will have no mercy
but in a road of means, you shall have none but in a road of means; so
mercy comes thin, and scant, and by little drops; whereas otherwise mercy
would come thick, and full, and large.

Hereby you are put upon indirect means to get out of trouble: pray, what is
the ground that causes men to use indirect means to get out of trouble? is not
this at the bottom? you think means must be used; this is at the bottom.

Beloved in the Lord, as you do desire God may not be dishonored, that Mercy
may come full and not scant unto you, learn to believe at another rate then
ever you have done; when all means fail and seem to lie dead before you,
then believe: so for thy Soul, so for thy Body, so for thy Estate.

You will say, How should I do this?

I shall only speak a word to it, and so wind up all,

Know, that thou may trust God, that thou may find Mercy, that thou
may believe in such a case as this is. Beloved, therefore thou have not
believed in such a case heretofore, because thou did think thou might not
believe. But now know from the Lord, it is no temptation, it is no presumption,
in such a case as this thou may lean thy poor guilty soul upon God this
day. I am loath to make comparisons between one duty and another; but if there
be any compares, this act of believing when all means seem to lie dead before
us, is more then all thy prayers and tears: Thou criest out and say, Oh!
that I had tears in prayer, Oh! that God would enlarge my heart in prayer, Oh!
that God would break this hard heart; and blessed be the Lord indeed when so
it is.

But now, art thou in such a case? have thou a prospect of all thy sins, and
all means seem to lie dead before thee? and do thou now go unto Jesus
Christ, saying to him, Ah, Lord, I have been a great and a wretched sinner; yet
now, hearing of thy free and rich grace, I do throw my self upon thee; Lord,
if thou killest me, yet I will trust in thee; through thy grace, I will never
return again unto folly; only Lord, I do lean my Soul upon thee; as for
comfort, Lord give me comfort when thou will; only, I lean my Soul upon
thee? I tell thee, this act of thy Faith is more pleasing to God, then thy
twenty years tears, then thy twenty years prayers, if there be any compare.

But why then (my Beloved) should you look at this as a matter of presumption,
to trust upon God and upon Christ in this condition? know it is your way unto
Jesus Christ when all means fail; Oh! it is the only way for your deliverance,
deliverance from your sins, and the fear of your sins; carry this rule
home along with you; deliverance is then nearest when Faith works highest, and
Faith then works highest when all means are lowest. Do not stand poring then,
(Christian) don't stand poring upon the deadness of the means, or the
deadness of thine own heart. As the sight, beholding, and gazing upon beauty,
is a snare, and a temptation to those that are given to wantonness: and the
sight of much gold and silver and fine houses, a temptation to those that are
given to worldliness: So, the sight, and beholding of the deadness of the
means, is a great snare and temptation to those that are given to doubting and
those that are given to unbelief. Does the means therefore lie dead before
thee at any time? Soul, man, or woman, go to the Lord, and say thus, Ah! Lord,
turn away mine eyes from beholding this same dead means; away, away to the
promise, when all means fail, now bear thy self at length upon the promise,
go unto Jesus Christ, throw thy self now at his feet, and say, Lord though
thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee, if I perish; I will perish here. Do
this and live.

And thus I have done with the Second Proposition. And so much for this time.

Romans 4. verse. 19. And being not weak (or weakened) in faith, he confidered not
his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the
deadness of Sarahs womb.


THe words are spoken of Abraham: and they hold forth Three great Truths, as
ye have heard.

First, That when God intends any great mercy, or blessing to the children of
Abraham; he does first put the Sentence of death upon the blessing, or mercy,
and upon all the means that do lead unto it.

Secondly, That then, and then especially, it is the duty of all the children of
Abraham, of all believers then, for to trust in God.

Thirdly, That no difficulties can stand before Faith: true saving, justifying
faith, carries the soul through all difficulties, discouragements, and
natural impossibilities to Jesus Christ.

I have done with the two former, and am now to speak unto the third.

No difficulties can stand before Faith: True saving, justifying Faith, carries
the soul through all difficulties, discouragements, and natural
impossibilities to Jesus Christ.

Abraham had a promise given him, that his seed should be as the stars of
Heaven: and that in his seed all the Nations of the world should be blessed. Upon
this promise, Abraham's body is dead, and Sarahs body is dead: Now Abraham
believes. Being not weak in Faith, he considered not the deadness of his own
body. And in this he had an eye unto Jesus Christ: for this was imputed to him
for righteousness; and herein he is held forth as an example to us that
believe with a justifying faith, in this chapter. So that where ever there is
true, saving, justifying faith, it carries a man through all difficulties,
through all natural discouragements.

For the clearing whereof, I shall deliver my self in these four things.

First, I will show you, That the way to Jesus Christ is clogged with many
difficulties, and natural discouragements: this as a rice unto all the rest.

Secondly, That true, saving faith, will carry one through all these.

Thirdly, That nothing else can do it.

And Fourthly, What it is in true, saving, justifying Faith, that does is? How
this Faith comes to do it?

First, The way to Jesus Christ is clogged with many difficulties, or natural
discouragements. No sooner does a man begin to look after Christ, but
difficulties, and natural discouragements do arise; and they are pressed by
Satan with much violence. When the children of Israel began to make out of
Egypt, Pharaoh doubles their task, and labors to make their way grievous, and
troublous. And so soon as a soul begins to look after Christ; Satan, and the
world labors to make his way troublous. The Devil is the great hunter of
Souls: So long as the Game goes well with the hunter, and he is going into his
snare, he makes no noise; but if once the Hare, or the Game begin to decline
the snare, and go another way, then he hoopes, and he hollowes, and he makes a
noise, that he may scare it into the snare again. And so, as long as men are
going into the Devils snare, he makes no noise; but if once they begin to turn
aside from his snare, then he raises Town and Country, and a great noise is
made to scare the soul in again He knows that a candle may be easily blown
into light, when it is new put out. Paul met with no buffetings of Satan, till
he had been taken up into the third heavens and seen the glory there. So long
as Paul went on in his Pharasaicall way, he met with no opposition: and so long
as a man goes on in the way of the world, or in some Pharasaicall
Devotionall-way, that is not the way of the Gospel, he meets with no
opposition: but when once the Lord takes him (as it were) into the third
heavens, and shows him the glory of Christ, then Satan begins to buffer him.
Nature within us, that stands and says, Will you go to Christ? it is impossible
that ever you should get him. And the world without: Will you go to Christ? you
will lose all your friends: Will you become a fool too? What with the world,
and what with the flesh, and what with the Devil, the way to Jesus Christ is
clogged with many difficulties.

And this will appear yet further, if you consider the Nature of Faith and the
worth of it. It Is a grace, a Gospel grace, a precious grace, whereby we do come
to Christ. I say, It Is a grace; Nulla Virtus sine lapide. When our Lord Jesus
Christ was crucified, they rould a stone over his sepulcher, and when the
Disciples came, they said, Who shall roll away the stone? Mark 16 3
And as our Lord himself had a stone roul'd upon him, so the more of Christ is
in any virtue, the greater stone, and the greater difficulty is rould upon it;
every virtue, and every grace, has one stone or other that is roul'd upon it:
but the more of Christ in any thing, the more, the greater is the stone that is
roul'd upon it. Faith is an excellent grace. 1 Pet. 1.7.
The trial of your Faith is more precious then gold, says the Apostle; what
is Faith it self then? It is the Intelligencer of the Soul, the directrix or
Queene-regent of all the graces, it sits at the stern, and guides the whole
Vessel. It Is that grace that gives a Being unto a Christian, other graces the
Well-being. It is that grace that brings Christ and the Soul together: It is
that grace, that covers the defects of all other graces; Ephesians 6.16.
It Is called the shield; a shield does not only cover the body, but the rest of
the armor; Faith does not only cover the Soul, but the defects of all other
graces. There is an excellency in grace: excellent things and jewels they are
hard to come by. Therefore by it we come unto Christ. He that comes over the
River, must come from that side of the water, if he will come to this: And he
that comes to Christ, he must come from his old Customs, and his own
Engagements, and his own Righteousness: this is a hard thing. I may say in
some respects, it is harder to believe, then to keep the ten Commandments,
because there is something in nature toward them. Christ is the way to Heaven,
and Faith is the way to Christ (understand it rightly) Faith is the way to
Christ; now therefore it being so hard a work to believe, surely, the way to
Jesus Christ must needs be laid with many difficulties, and natural
discouragements. But that is but the rice.

Secondly, True, saving, justifying Faith, will carry us through all
difficulties, discouragements, and natural Impossibilities to Jesus Christ.
It Is that grace that is opposed to the sinful (...) that the Apostle speaks of;
He being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body (...) he staggered
not; the word you translate staggering, in other places it is translated
doubting, Nothing doubting; but the same word is translated also; discerning;
Not discerning the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.29. And, so the word will fully bear
that signification. When a man looks upon things with an eye of reason, he
makes a discretion of Dijudication of things: some things are facile easy; some
things are hard. But when a man looks by faith, upon the power of God, there
is not that discretion there. All things are easy to the eye of faith, that
looks at the power of God. You shall observe therefore, that when our Lord and
Savior himself, would bear up the hearts of his disciples over all
discouragements, he directs them to this work of believing with a saving,
instifying faith; you know the place, Let not your hearts be troubled, John
14.1.
ye believe in God, believe also in me. An Hebraisme, noting a Similitude: The
father works hitherto, and I work. That is, as the father works, so I work.
So here, ye believe in God, believe also in me. That is, as ye believe in God
the father, so believe also in me; ye believe that God the Father is able to
provide for you: believe in me, that I am able to satisfy for you. If you would
not have your hearts troubled that I am now to leave you, at the many
discouragements that you are to meet withal; it is not enough for you, that you
believe in God, as God; but you must believe in me also, as your mediator, and
rest upon me: True, saving, justifying faith, is the only means to bear up
your hearts through all this trouble, And if you look into the 17. of Luke,
you shall find, that when our Savior Christ would teach his Disciples how to
do a hard work, he does point them unto this justifying faith. And the Lord
said, (at the sixth verse) If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, you
might say to this Sycamine-tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou
planted in the Sea, and it should obey you. You will say, This is a faith of
Miracles. You may be pleased therefore to observe, that our Savior Christ uses
this, and the like expression upon three several occasions. Once upon occasion
that his Disciples could not cast out the Devil out of some that were possessed.
Once upon occasion that the fig tree was dried up and withered. And once here
upon occasion that the Disciples said, Lord increase our faith: when they
thought it was so hard a thing to forgive a man so often as Christ required.

First, our Savior uses this and the like expression of removing a Sycamine
tree, and the mountains; upon occasion that the Disciples could not cast out
the Devil. And of that you read in Matthew. 17.20. and there (indeed) he
speaks of the faith of miracles. Why could not we cast him out? (verse 19.)
Jesus said unto them, because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, if
ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain,
remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove, and nothing shall be
unpossible unto you. Here he speaks of the faith of miracles, because thereby
we should be able to cast out the devil; which plainly speaks a miracle.

He uses again this like expression, upon an occasion of the drying up of the
fig tree. And concerning that you read in Mark 11.20. As they passed by, they
saw the fig tree dried up from the roots. Peter calling to remembrance, says
unto him, Behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away. Jesus
answering, said unto them, have faith in God. And verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall say to this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into
the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, etc. Here the faith called for, is
both faith of Miracles, and a justifying faith too: a faith of miracles, it is
brought in upon occasion of this miracle, Christ says if he has faith, he
shall not only do this, but he shall remove mountains, But here is a justifying
faith also intended, for he says, Have faith in God, (at the 22 verse) so you
read it. But in the margent of your Bible, it is, have faith of God; when as
the Scripture speaks of a justifying faith, it uses to speak in such an
expression as this. So Paul says, Gal 2.19.
I live by the faith of the son of God, speaking of justifying faith, not by
faith in the Son of God. So in Rev. 14. it is called the faith of Jesus: and
then it seems to run very largely, somewhat too largely, if it were only a
miraculous faith, faith of miracles that were here intended. For I say unto
you, whosoever shall say unto this mountain, be thou removed, The faith of
miracles and gifts only to some, unto another the gift of faith; not to all,
says the Apostle. And then here it is opposed to doubting, the same word that
is used here in my text concerning Abraham, who believed, and staggered not:
says he here, Whosoever shall say to this mountain, be thou removed, and be
thou cast into the sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, or shall not stagger
in his heart: it is the same word that is used there, the same opposition. So
that I take it, both are here intended: one primarily, the other secondarily.

But now in Luke 17. there is an other occasion, that this expression is
brought in by our Savior Christ: he says unto his disciples, (at the third
verse) If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; if he repent, forgive
him; if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a
day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him: And the
Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our faith: And the Lord said, if you had
faith as a grain of mustard seed, you might say unto this Sycamine tree, etc.
Here is no miracle here, that these words is brought in upon: why should our
Savior put that upon a faith of miracles, in doing a work of Christianity,
the forgiving the brother so often thus? the faith that is to bwe exercised in
prayer, and in forgiving our brother ordinarily, is not the faith of miracles:
but the faith he here calls for, is a faith that is to be used in prayer, and in
forgiving of our brethren: surely, this is a saving faith, a justifying faith
that is here intended. And as one says well, what is all the work of faith,
but an the removing of mountains? when take our sins, that stand up and hinder
the light of Gods grace from shining in our hearts, and remove them off from
our selves unto Jesus Christ, to his blood, that they are drowned, as in the
bottom of that Redses, what is this but to remove mountains? when we take our
carnal Reason, and our High thoughts, and bring them into obedience unto Jesus
Chirst, what is this but to remove mountains? when our great and manifold
Temptations are laid level, that the promise may come into the soul freely,
what is this but to remove these mountains? Mountains rose up in the way of
Zerubbabell when he was to build the Temple: Zach. 4.7.
Who art thou, O Mountain? Temptation, and Corruption, Mountains; and the
Curse of the Law, a great mountain. Would you therefore now remove these
mountains? walk over these natural impossibilities? there is no such way as to
get a justifying, and saving faith, says our Savior. What a bundance of
Difficulties did Noah's faith carry him through? The Lord commanded Noah to
build an Arc; Noah, he might have said thus: Lord, thou have now commanded me
to build an Arc: I was never brought up to that trade; I have been a preacher
many years, but I never yet was a Wheele-wright, never yet a Ship- Carpenter:
And Lord, If I do go about to build an Arc, the whole world will jeere me:
what will this old man do? will he ride in a Ship upon the dry ground? And
when I have built the Arc, Lord How shall I do to get in all the Creatures
into the Arc? And if the Creatures do come, they will tear me in pieces; the
Lions and the Bears they will prey upon me. Yea, Lord, And if they do come into
the Arc, and into the ship, the very stench of all the beasts will poison me:
yet notwithstanding all these Difficulties, and all these discouragements, Noah
prepared an Arc, Why? For he believed, and he believed with a Saving,
justifying Faith.

So, if you look into the New Testament, that is full of this: What abundance
of difficulties did the wise men go through that came to worship Jesus Christ!
They were commanded to go worship him that was borne King of the Jews: They
might have said thus: What is the King of the Jews to us? We know no such
King: Shall we go out of our own Kingdom, and out of our own Country to
worship the King of the Jews? The despised people of the Jews? When they came
at Jerusalem; the learned men, the Priests, and those that were of that
Country; they knew none such: when they came at the place where Christ was
borne, they found him in a Stable; and they might have said: Is this the King
of the Jews? Is this his Palace? What? A Stable for his Palace? What? Are
these horse, are these his Courtiers? Is this a King? It Is impossible he should
be a King: Yet not withstanding, they went: Why? because they believed, and
this their Faith carried them through all.

What abundance of difficulties did Matthewes Faith carry him through? The Lord
commanded Matthew to follow him: Matthew follow me (says Christ) and so he
did: Mat. 9 9.
But he might have said thus: Whether shall I follow this man? I have a good
calling, I have so many hundreds coming in by the year from the Custom House;
this man has not whereon to lay his head: I shall be a beggar; all my friends
will call me a fool: Notwithstanding, Matthew leaves all and follows Christ:
Why? He believed, with a saving, justifying Faith.

What abundance of difficulties did Zacheus's Faith carry him through? Zacheus
(says our Lord to him) have, Luke 19.5.
and come down; for I must abide with thee this day: he came down, he received
him into his house; and being there he says, Lord, behold, verse. 8 9.
the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if there be any one that I have
wronged by false accusation, I restore unto him fourfold. Mark, what a hard
work he went through: The half of my goods I give to the poor. Pray let us
compute it a little: Suppose his estate was a thousand pound. Lord, (says he)
the half of my goods I give to the poor, there is but five hundred left.
Suppose he had wroung'd a man to the value of a hundred pound: Lord, (says he)
I restore fourfold; then there is but one hundred left of a thousand: What a
great matter was this? Yet this Zacheus did: Why? Oh! Zacheus (says Christ)
This day is Salvation come to thine house, for so much as thou also art the son
of Abraham: He believed as Abraham did, with a saving, justifying Faith. So
then, thus you see, that true saving, justifying says; carries a man through
all difficulties, discouragements and natural impossibilities to Jesus Christ.

But in the third place. Nothing else can do it, conviction of the good ways
of God cannot do it: Saul was convinced that David was a righteous man: 1 Samuel
24.17.
O my son David (says he) thou art more righteous then I; and yet he
persecuted him. Conviction, bare conviction will not do it.

Resolution will not do it neither: Resolution to turn to God and to become a new
man, or woman, that will not do it: bare Resolution will not do it. Many Resolve,
thta will not do it. And therefore says our Savior to Peter; Luk 22^13
Peter, I have prayed that thy Faith fail not: Satan has desired to winnow
thee; and, Peter, thou have said, though all men forsake me, thou will not;
thou have taken up a great Resolution, but Peter, it is not Resolution will do
it, if any thing hold, it will be thy Faith: and therefore Peter, I have prayed
that thy Faith fail not. He does not say, I have prayed that thy Resolution
fail not: NO, Peter, I have prayed that thy faith fail not. You have read
what Hazael resolved, when the Prophet told him he should be a great
persecutor, rip up women with child: Oh! says he, Does my Lord look upon me as
a dogs head, and yet he did it. Resolution will not do it: Resolution will not carry
one through Temptation, and difficulties.

Again, Moral virtues will not do it. The yound man that came to Christ, he was
a great moralist: when our Savior told him he should keep the Commandments,
that he might obtain eternal life, Lord, Mat 19.20
(says he) all these have I kept from my youth; and Christ looked upon him and
loved him, he was a fine Moralist, but notwithstanding he did not follow
Christ, he went away, and was very sorrowful. Bare morrall virtues will not do
it, for they are dead things: You see how it is with a man's shoe, though the
Leather be never so thick, yet be going upon the stones and the gravel, the
Leather wears thin, and wears out: But if a man goes barefoot, though the
skin of his foot be tinner, the skin does not wear out, but grows thicker: as
Indians, they go barefoot, and their skin of their feet wears thicker, by
going upon the gravel, and upon the stones: What is the Reason? The Leather of
a man's shoe is a dead thing, but the foot is a living thing. And so Faith is a
living thing, and will carry a man over gravel and stones, and difficulties:
but morrall virtues, they are but dead things, and though they be never so
thick, they will grow thin, and wear out, and come to nothing. Bare morrall
virtues will not do it.

And then again, Gifts, and Parts, and Gospel inlargements cannot do it, they
leave black ashes upon the Soul; they are a blaze, they make a great blaze:
Straw that is burnt, makes a great blaze, but it leaves black ashes upon the
harth: So, where these are, without saving Faith, they may make a great blaze,
but the end of them is black ashes upon the Soul. Jedas, ye know, he had great
Gifts, and Gospel-parts; but that would not do it, would not carry him through
all his Temptations, and difficulties to Jesus Christ. Pray do but compare
Nicodemus and Judas: Nicodemus was but in his Catechism of Christianity, when
Judas was a preacher: Nicodemus comes to Christ by night, when Judas preaches
Christ openly: but in the end, Nicodemus ownes Christ, when he is dead; and
Judas betrays him when he is living. Nicodemus had a true, saving-faith; Judas
had only gifts; Gosper gifts, and Gospel-enlargements, that will not do it
neither.

And then again, The experience of Gods former dealings, providentiall
dealings and preservation; that will not do it. You know how it was with those
Spies that was sent into the Land of Canaan: there were two sorts of Spies:
There were good Spies, and there were bad spies: The good Spies brought up a
good report of the Land: and the evil Spies, brought up an evil report.

How? Why? Consider but a little. The good Spies they met with many troubles
when they were sent out to spy out the Land: feign to be hidden in Rahahs
house: and then they fled to the mountains, and there they lay: They come
home, and they say, The Lord has delivered this people into our hands The
other Spies now, that brought up the evil report; they met with no such hard
fare that we read of: and yet they come home, and they say, The men of the
Country are the children of Anak, and the Cities are walled up to Heaven: they
had experience of Gods preservation in a special manner, and yet
notwithstanding, that would not do it. Bare experience of Gods preserving
mercy, that will not do it, 1 John. 5.4 2 Co^ 1.2.4.
it is only faith will do it, saving justifying faith, will do it: This is the
Victory whereby you overcome the world, your faith: By faith yea stand. Look
upon your dangers under a Sea-notion, and Faith it is called your Anchor. Look
upon your dangers under a land-notion, and faith it is called your Shield:
nothing but faith can do it?

You will say to me,

Give me leave to stay here.

First, Faith shows the soul the glorious, invisible things of God and of his
grace; and brings them near unto the soul. It was a hard thing for Moses to
leave all the pleasures, and profits, and preferrements of Egypt: he did it
though, choosing rather the afflictions of Pharaoh with Gods people; Why? says
the. 11. of the Hebrews, He saw him that is invisibel: But how did he see him?
By faith (says the text) by faith he saw him that is invisible. Faith opens
the eyes for to see that a man has more with him, then against him: and the
works of God, in Christ, are not seen by the world: Gods pardoning mercy, not
seen by the world: The Union with Jesus Christ, and the privilege thereof;
not seen by the world: The satisfaction of Jesus Christ for a poor Sinner, not
seen by the world: The great Power of God not seen, or if so, yet at a
distance, it don't much affect. Faith is the substance of things not seen:
Heb. 11.1.
it does not only show a man things that are otherwise unseene, but brings them
near; Salvation near; pardoning mercy near; the Privileges of Union with
Christ near; Christ's satisfaction near: and so when Difficulties and
Discouragements do arise, says the soul through faith, Why should not I be
satisfied with any condition, seeing Christ has satisfied for me? I am one
with Christ, Christ is a common person: When Christ died, I died: when Christ
rose, I rose: when Christ ascended, I ascended: Christ sitting in Heaven, I sit
there. Thus faith, it elevates, and raises up the soul into heaven, it carries
it over all difficulties and discouragements that it can meet withal.

Again, true, saving faith; 2. 1 Cor. 3.22.
it tells the soul that all things are its own. All things are yours, (says
the Apostle) things present, and things to come, life and death; all things are
yours. Faith speaks the same language: All things are yours (Soul) all things
are yours: Difficulties are yours, and natural impossibilities are yours;
things present are yours, and things to come are yours. Will you be afraid of
that which is your own? Will the owner be afraid of his own dog: a mastiffe,
he falls upon a stranger, and worries him, and a stranger is a afraid of him;
but the owner is not afraid, he leapes and fawnes upon him, but does not worry
him. Says faith, all these Difficulties, and all these Temptations, they are
your own, they will not worry you; they may leap upon you, they may fawn upon
you, but they will not worry you; they are all your own; part of the purchase
that Jesus Christ has made for you, all these are your own, Faith holds this
steadily upon the soul, and so a man breaks through Difficulties.

Again thirdly, it shows a man greater excellencies in Christ, then all
difficulties, and nature all Discour agements can amount unto on the other side.
You know how it is with a dog, the Greyhound, if he sees the game a great way
off, he gives it over: but when he comes near, he will rush through the very
bushes for to take the Hare, throw himself upon his back that he may take it,
a natural hope makes him do it: Faith, it raises a mighty hope in the soul,
presents the soul with many Excellencies, and raises a mighty hope in the
soul for the obtainment of them: it does spread more Excellencies before the
soul, then can be lost by the hand of Difficulties: for example: If a man has
been a Prodigal, and now is returning to Christ: the world says, friends
say, if you take this course, you will lose all; you will lose all your
acquaintance, lose your liberty, lose your estate, may be lose your life: Be it
so (says faith) though thou losest thy friends, thou shall gain better: and
though thou losest thy liberty, thou shall gain better: and though thou losest
thy life it self, thou shall gain a better; it is but a while neither (says
faith) that thou shall lose these things, and thou shall have them better, in a
better Edition. When a man's eyes are open to behold the Excellencies of Christ,
then they are shut to outward Discouragements. When a man has beheld the Sun
in its glory, his eyes dazzle to the things that are below: Now Faith opens a
man's eyes to see the Excellencies of Jesus Christ, and so the soul is carried
through Difficulties and Discouragements, though they be never so many.

Again fourthly, it inables the soul to leave the success and the event of
all unto God himself. Nothing strengthens the hands of Difficulties and
Discouragements, so much, as solicitude about success and event of things:
True saving faith helps a man to leave the success to Christ; it does commit
the soul unto God, unto Christ; there is a mutual committing between Christ
and a believer: Christ commits himself unto a believer, and a believer commits
himself again unto Christ. Christ commits himself unto a believer: you know
what is said in the Gospel, John 2.24. Psalm. 37.5.
He did not commit himself unto them, because they did not believe him:
arguing, that he did commit himself unto others that did believe him. And
believer commit themselves unto Jesus Christ. Commit thy way unto the Lord;
there is a mutual way of committing: Christ, he does commit his Grace; he does
commit his Spirit; he does commit his Truth unto a believer: a believer commits
his Estate, and his Name, and Himself again unto Christ: Christ commits his
work unto a believer; and a believer commits the success of the work again
unto Jesus Christ. Faith now leaves the event, and the success unto Jesus
Christ; and therefore, when Difficulties and natural Discouragements arife,
and say, What will thou do now? What will thou do now to be preserved? What
will thou do to continue now? What will thou do to be delivered now? What will
become of you now? Oh! Satan (says a believer,) thou have mistaken the
question; My question is not, What shall become of me? I have left the success
of things to God: but my question is, What shall I do for God? My question is,
How shall I love Jesus Christ? My question is, How shall I be like unto Jesus
Christ? My question is, How shall I serve my generation, and own Jesus Christ
in these times? This is my question, Faith, true, saving faith, it leaves the
success and the event of things unto Christ, and so thereby the soul is
carried through all Difficulties and natural Discouragements unto Jesus Christ.

In the fifth place. True, is that grace whereby the soul takes up the yoke of
Christ, and the burden of Christ upon his soul. Christ's burden, does unburden
all other burdens, the very taking Christ's burden upon a man, does ease him of
all other burdens. This may seem strange to you, that the taking of a new
burden, should ease one of the former: if a man be carrying coals or wood, the
taking of a new burden would not ease him of the former; but the burden of
Christ (Belove) is of another nature. Austin distinguishes them; there is a
burden burdening, and a burden supporting: he expresses it thus; The feathers
that a bird or a foul is clothed with, they have a weight in them, the wings
and feathers have a weight, a pound of feathers is as heavy as a pound of lead;
there is a weight in those feathers, yet notwithstanding, they bear up the
burden of the body; though there be a weight in them one weight bears up
another: Or as it is with your coaches, the wheels are heavy; yet
notwithstanding, being fastened unto the coach, unto the body of the coach,
makes the body to go away the lighter, though they be heavy in themselves, So
now it is here, the burden of Jesus Christ it makes all other burdens to go away
the lighter. Faith, true, saving Faith, it is the grace that takes up the
burden of Christ upon the soul, and so thereby all other burdens are made the
lighter, and difficulties and discouragements overcome.

In the sixth place. it does teach a man for to pick out the love of God, from
under the anger of God. God never makes his Pills so bitter, but he mighles some
Sugar withal: and true faith can find it out. When as our Lord and Savior
Christ said, Ioh. 2.4.5.
woman what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come: The next words
that she says is, to the servants, Whatsoever he bids you do, that do. They
wanted wine, she came to him for wine, and he answered her so: it may seem an
hard answer, yet says she to the servants, whatsoever he bid you do, that do.
For our Savior had said, my hour is not yet come: implying therefore, that he
would do it. Implycation is enough for Faith, for Mary's Faith. Faith, it
acquaints a man with the ways of God, and acquaints a Soul what Gods ways
are: it tells the soul, that when Christ seems to be the greatest Enemy, he
intends the greatest friendship. He (says faith) does then intend for to raise
us up, when he seems most for to cast us down: whereupon, when difficulties
and discouragements do arise, Is this his way indeed? (says a believing
soul,) why then shall I be borne down with so many discouragements, though
they be never so many?

In the seventh and last place: fills the soul with Gods infinity, or
infiniteness. Gods way is not as your way (says Faith) nor his thoughts as
your thoughts; but as the Heavens are above the earth, so are his thoughts
beyond yours, and his ways beyond your. Faith lodges this principle into the
Soul, that God is infinite; and having laid that principle there, when
difficulties and discouragements do arise, saying, you see now into what
distress you are brought, now you see there is no hope at all for you
deliverance; true indeed, says the Believer through the strength of Faith, I
see there is no way in any one reason, but God is infinite; I see many
difficulties, but God is infinite: the soul by Faith being filled with the
apprehension of Gods infiniteness, hereby is carried through all difficulties
and discouragements to Jesus Christ.

I have not time, I see, to tell you how Faith works by love, which much
watter cannot quench, stronger then death. And how Faith is strengthened with
the strength of the power of God that it lays hold upon. As the Ivy is strong
by the strength of the oak that it graspes upon: so Faith is strong by the
strength of that God that it graspes upon.

But the thing is sufficiently proved, No difficulty can stand before saving
Faith; True, saving, justifying Faith, carries the Soul through all
difficulties, discouragements, and natural Impossibilities to Jesus Christ.

I come to the Application.

If these things be so, Applic.
Then if difficulties and natural discouragements do arise; (who is there
among you, but meet with some or other in your several places?) see here the
way how for to grapple with them; strengthen your Faith, exercise your Faith;
Resolution (you are mistaken) resolution will not do it; (Christian) here is thy
strength. Conviction will not do it, Moral Virtues will not do it, Evangelicall
Gifts, and Parts, and Inlargements will not do it; Experiences of Gods
preservation of you will not do it; (Christian) here is thy strength: But Oh! let
not your strength be cut off in the lap of any Dalilah. True, justifying Faith
is your strength, that is your shield. The Heathen could say, when he was sore
wounded, Is my shield whole? if that be well, all is well: So say I, if your
shield be well, if your faith be well, if your true justifying saving faith be
well, then all is well. Thus you shall be able to look difficulties and
discouragements in the face, though they be never so great.

You will say unto me,

Take heed that you do not stand poring too much upon them. Abraham considered
not the deadnes of his own body, Sarahs body; But if you will behold them,

First, Exercise your faith in the promise, before you do speak with those
difficulties. Some there are that stand poring so much upon difficulties and
natural discouragements; that they have spent the strength of their spirits:
So that when the promise comes, they have no strength at all in their spirits
to entertain the promise with. If the Rope or Cable be never so strong, that
is thrown out into the water, if a man be drowned before the Rope or Cable come
at him, what matter is it though the Cable be never so great? Some there are
that stand poring so much upon natural discouragements, that their hearts are
even sunk, and drowned before the promise comes: and how can the promise help
you then? therefore say, Come first promise, Come first promise.

And then again, Look upon them as they are your Trial, and many times the
devils Engines to work your hearts off again: I say your Trials, and the
devils Engines to work your hearts back again. When you were in your natural
condition, then your heart was quiet, your conscience quiet, and the devil
quiet, and your friends quiet, and did not speak evil of you: Now you begin to
look toward Christ, now conscience condemns, now the Devil accuses, now your
friends, your former friends they speak evil of you. I appeal to thee (man or
woman) in thine own soul, do thou not think that thy former condition, was
an ungodly condition? yes: and then quiet; then conscience quiet, then friends
quiet, then Satan quiet: and now conscience accuses, and now Satan accuses, and
now friends speak evil. Oh! therefore, say, surely, this is nothing but a
Temptation: and believe it (beloved) it is half a victory over a Temptation,
to know that a Temptation is but a Temptation.

In the third place. Now, now especially; set thy self with all thy might to
venture upon Jesus Christ: Faith is nothing else but the Souls venture: it
ventures to Christ: it ventures on Christ: it ventures for Christ.

It ventures to Christ, in opposition to all legal torrours. It ventures on
Christ, in opposition to all our own guiltiness. It ventures for Christ, in
opposition to all Difficulties, and discouragements: The proper nature of faith
is to venture: and what need we venture, if there were no difficulties?
Difficulties properly call for venturing. (Mark it) Do difficulties arise? Now
set thy self to venture upon Jesus Christ.

If a man be to go home over some water, or River, and the water rises, he
says with himself, how shall I get over this water? The longer I stay, the
more it rises: he begins to go into it, and he comes back again: but (says
he) there is no other way, as good first, as at the last; I must venture, I
must over, there is no other way; and so he ventures. So say I now unto thee:
This thou must come unto at last (poor soul) Difficulties, and discouragements
arise, to stave thee off from Christ; at the last thou must venture upon Jesus
Christ, at the last you must venture, notwithstanding all your guilt: you begin
to do it, and you are ready to go back; but know this, first or last you must
venture upon Christ: had thou not better do it at the first? Oh! therefore,
when ever any difficulties do arise, put thy self upon faith: say, come, O my
soul, here is a difficulty, now venture on Jesus Christ.

In the fourth place, That the more and greater difficulties your duties or
your graces are recovered out of the hand of, the more comfortable they will be
to you. (I pray mark it) I say, duty, or grace, recovered out of the hand of
difficulty, is the most comfortable. You know how it was with David at Ziklag:
the enemy had come upon him, taken away his wife, and all his comforts; a
sentence of death was upon all his comforts: David, he follows after,
overtakes the enemy, recovers his wife, and all his comforts, and there he had
the greatest spoil of all spoils; he sent unto all his friends of his spoil,
he never had a greater spoil. So I say, does difficulty, or discouragement
break in upon your duty? Morning duty? Evening duty? Or any grace? Follow after
it: if thou strikest this difficulty in the hinder part, and recoverest thy
duty, or thy grace out of the hand of the difficulty, thy duty and thy grace
will be more comfortable then ever it was.

And then in the Fifth place, Study Jesus Christ more, and labor for a clear,
and a distinct knowledge of Jesus Christ. Faith in Scripture phrase, it is
called knowledge, the knowledge of Christ By his knowledge he shall justify
many: Isa. 53 11.
to know, and believe, they are put together; the more you know, the more
clear and distinct knowledge you have of Christ, the stronger your faith: the
less knowledge you have of Christ, the weaker your faith; a weak faith is apt
to be blown down with every wind: Abraham being not weak, he considered not
his own body, so he staggered not. The weak fire, it may be put out with
fuel, casting of much wood upon it; the strong fire, it increases, and grows,
even by throwing on of water that is contrary; a weak faith is borne down
instantly. Art thou therefore weak, and have newly begun to look toward Jesus
Christ? Oh, labor to get stronger faith; and that you shall do, by growing in
the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Study Christ more; his life more; his death
more; his fullness more; the merciful dispositon of Jesus Christ more: Thus
shall you be able to grow strong, and shall work through all difficulties, and
discouragements unto the Lord Christ.

Yet you will say to me:

I Will speak but to this, and so I Will wind up all.

First of all, consider your call, often consider your call,

In the second place, consider this, That the more you believe in the face of
difficulty, the more you please God. Nothing so pleasing to God, as believing
in the face of difficulty. God will trust him with much, that trusts much to
God: God will break through many difficulties to save thy soul, if thou can
break through many difficulties to come to him. There Is no grace does more
honor God, then Faith; of all graces it honors God most: and of all the
pieces of faith, none do more honor God, then believing in the face of
difficulties. When therefore any difficulty or natural discouragement does
arise, say, the Lord pardon me; Oh! I have dishonored God enough already: is
this the way for to honor God, to believe in the face of difficulties, and
natural discouragements? Here now I have more opportunity to do it; the Lord
help me, now will I set my self to believe.

In the third place, Sometimes when you meet together, speak unto one another
of the great things that God has done; the great things that God has
promised; the great things that Faith has done. As words of anger do draw out
anger, so experiences do draw out Faith. Only I pray take heed, when ye speak
of your experiences, and what God has done, that ye don't lay, or ground your
Faith upon your experience, but upon the promise. It Is a good speech that
Parisiensis has, Experience (says he) It Is like the crutch, the lame man's
crutch, it does uphold the lame man, but it don't cure him: And so, an
experience, it stays up thy soul for the present, but experience cannot cure
you of your unbelief; it is only the promise cures you of your unbelief. It Is
said in the 106. Psalm, concerning the children of Israel, When they saw the
Egyptians lie in the sea before them, then they believed in God, and sang his
praise: And the next words that follow, are, They soon forgate his works. I,
when as we believe the word only because of experience, no wonder that we
soon forget our experiences, and all. Therefore take heed, tell of your
experiences, draw out your experiences for to strengthen your Faith, yet lay
not your Faith upon your experience, but upon the Word.

And again in the fourth place. Above all things, consider what great
difficulties Jesus Christ has broke through to come to you. Ye read of him so
described in the Canticles, He comes leaping over the mountains; many are the
mountains, that Jesus Christ came leaping over to come to you. Passion-worke
is greater and harder then Creation-worke: he came leaping over the mountains
of work. Oh! shall Jesus Christ come leaping over mountains, and difficulties
to come to my Soul, and shall I go over no mountains, and break through no
difficulties to get to Jesus Christ? think what difficulties he broke through
to come to you.

And lastly, Never speak with your difficulties or discouragements apart from
the promise. If a man be travailing in the rode, and a thief can sunder him
from his company, draw him alone into the woods, a hundred to one but he takes
his purse, if he save his life. And if the Devil can part you from the
promise, take you into the woods, where you shall see nothing but darkness,
difficulties, and discouragements; a hundred to one but he spoils you of all
your comforts: (man or woman,) does difficulty arise therefore? natural
discouragement arise? Away to the promise, and say unto them when they come, I
will never speak with you, unless it be in the presence of a promise.

Oh, but Gods providence seems for to cross his promise.

Be it so; yet thou may believe,

Oh, but I have a threatening set on upon my heart.

Be it so, yet thou may believe the promise,

I but Jesus Christ has withdrawn from me,

Be it so, yet thou may go to the Promise. Christ does therefore withdraw
from thee, that he may draw thee to him. Joseph he cannot conceal himself
long, his bowels and compassions will not let him.

Wherefore then, whenever any difficulties, or natural discouragements do
arise upon you, come to this conclusion, now therefore will I trust in God, now
therefore will I venture upon Jesus Christ; O my soul, now venture, now
venture and say, Lord, such and such difficulties are risen; thou have called
me to this work: difficulties arise upon me, surely thou have called me to this
work: they are not therefore to make a stoppage in my proceedings, but to draw
out my faith: now therefore, I do here lay the wait of my poor guilty soul
upon thee, do with me what is good in thine eyes: Ah Lord, my prayers are dead,
my affections dead, and my heart dead: but thou art a living God, and I bare my
self upon thee. Beloved, if ye can believe, all things are possible; if you
cannot believe, all things are unpossible; faith will make a thing easy though
it be never so difficult: as unbelief does make a thing difficult though it be
never so easy. This is a certain truth: no difficulty can stand before faith:
true saving justifying faith carries the soul through all difficulties,
discouragements, and natural impossibilies to Jesus Christ. Oh therefore, as
you desire to grapple with the difficulties that you do meet withal, stir up
your selves in a way of believing; for you have hear that nothing else can do
it. The Lord teach us to believe at a higher rate then ever yet we have done.

EVANGELICAL Repentance.
MATTHEW 3.2. Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Preached at
Clapham. May, 10. 1646.


MATTHEW 3.2. Or thus, Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven has approached


THESE Words, are the words of John the Baptist, when he first began to preach
the Gospel of Christ; and if ye look into the next Chapter, the 4. of Matthew.
and the 17. verse. ye shall find, That our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Himself
does preach the same Doctrine, in the same words, Jesus began to preach, and to
say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Our Savionr Christ, the
better preacher, is not ashamed to tread in John's steps, and words: John
honored Christ, and Christ honored John. Ministers should strengthen the hands
one of anoter. And if ye look into the 10. Chapter of Matthew, ye shall find,
That when our Savior sent out his Disciples for to Preach the Gospel, he
commands them to preach the same Doctrine too, in the same words (verse the 7.)
Go ye, preach, saying; The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. But here is no, Repent?
Yes, that was in their Commission too, as ye may read in the 6. of Mark and
the 12. verse (they would not preach a word beyond their Commission) And they
went out, and preached that men should Repent. So that their Commission also
was to preach thus, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven has approached, or has
drawn near unto you. Surely, there is somewhat more than ordinary in these
words, That John and our Savior Christ, and all the Disciples should begin
thus, for to preach in these words, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. They were all Ministers of the Gospel: and the Ministers of the Gospel,
are not barely to preach Repentance, but they are to preach Repentance upon
Gospel Motives, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

In the words ye have an Exhortation, Repent ye: A Motive unto the work of
Repentance, for the Kingdom of Heaven has approached.

Repent ye] That is, be not only sorrowful for sin committed, but mend your
lives. Repentance is sometimes taken in a large sense for Amendment of life.
Sometimes Repentance is taken only for Godly sorrow, in a more strict, and a
narrow sense.

Sometimes it is taken largely, For the Amendment of our life: not only for
godly sorrow, but all obedience, and reformation. And so it may be taken here;
as ye may perceive by the 3. verse. where this word, Repent, is explained,
Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; for this is He that was spoken
of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Preparing the way of
the Lord, and making straight paths, all one with Repentace. There is a Iegal
Repentance: And there is an Evangelical Repentance. Some think it is a Legal
Repentance that is here required; and there upon they urge a necessity of Legal
preparation before a man does come to Christ: as there is a John Baptist before
Christ; so (say they) there must be a Legal work of necessity before a poor
soul can have any admittance to Jesus Christ.

But I pray consider the words, and you will find; That not a Legal repentance;
but Evangelical is here required. Did our Savior Christ Himself preach Legal
Repentance? They are the words of our Savior Christ; He uses them too.

The Repentace is, as the Consideration is that this work is to be founded on,
as the motive is. What Is the motive? The Kindom of Heavcn is at hand, Repent;
let your Repentance be upon this ground, because the King-dom of Heaven has
approach't, because the Kingdom of Heaven has drawn near. He does not say,
Repent, because the Kingdom of Hell is near, but because the Kingdom of Heaven
is near: the Motive being Evangelical, the Repentance is so, it is not a Legal,
but an Evangelieal Repentance that is here required. Besidesw these words,
Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, are not spoken only to the
ungodly, but unto the godly also of those times who were to prepare the way of
the Lord, and to make straight their paths. And therefore, not to be
understood of a Repentance only preparatory to that in the heart.

But what then are we to understand here by the Kingdom of Heaven?

The Kingom of Heaven sometimes in the language of the new Testament Notes,
Messiah: the Kingdom of grace, Christ, and all his benefits, grace, mercy, and
free remission published in the Gospel, in the several dispensations, and
administrations thereof: this is called the Kingdom of Heaven, for this motive,
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, is set and used here in opposition unto the
motives that was used among the Jews: when the Jews were Excited, and put
upon any duty, they were stirred up thereunto upon such motives as these: for
the Kingdom of Canaan is at hand; If you do so and so, God will bring you into
the Land of Canaan, and give you that Land. Now under the Gospel, here are
other motives, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Not like those
Jewish motives, The kingdom of Canaan is at hand, or the Kingdom of the
Jebusites is at hand; Christians are not only or especially to be stirred up by
such motives as those, but by higher, and greater motives, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hadn. And may carry an Hebraisme with it, The Kingdom
of Heaven: that is, a heavenly Kingdom: as the Law is called the Law of fire,
in the Hebrew, a fiery Law. The Jews expected the Messiah, and dreamed of an
outward, glourious, and pompous Kindgom: Now says John the Baptist, The
Messiah is come, his Kingdom is come; but it is not an outward, glorious, and
pompous Kingdom; but it is an heavenly Kingdom, and therefore, Repent, and
prepare your selves for the receiving of it, make your way plain, for the
Kingdom of Heaven, an heavenly Kingdom is now at hand.

Is at hand] we read it; but according to the original rather thus, The
Kingdom of Heaven has approch'd, Appropinquavit: As if he should say thus, Do
you turn to God, because God has turned to you: do you draw near to God,
because the kingdom of grace, and free-remission has drawn near to you.

There are Two Notes that lie here before us, that I shall commend unto your
consideration.

The First is this, That the Kingdom of Heaven, of Grace, Mercy, and of
free-remission does approach unto us before we do come unto it.

And Secondly, That the appropinquation, or drawing near of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is the highest, and greatest argument, and motive in the world unto
true repentance.

The Kingdom of Heaven, (I say) the Kingdom of Grace, Mercy, and Free-remission
of sin, does appreach to us, before we draw near to it. Repent, turn ye; for
the Kingdom of Heaven has approached, or it has come to you, and therefore do
you come to it.

Thus it lies in the words: And thus you will find it alla-long.

Thus God has promised: This Christ has parabled: Thus God fulfilled.

Thus God has promised. Thou shall hear a voice behind thee: What voice is
that? but the voice of mercy, and the voice of grace, and of free-remission.

Thou shall hear a voice behind thee: Isa. 30.21.
When thou art going away from God, and when thou have thy back upon God; thou
shall hear a voice of mercy behind thee; it shall follow after thee before thou
do come to it.

And thus ye have a clear parable for it, which you may read, fully speaking
this truth, in Luke 14.16, 17, 18. and so on, A certain man made a great
supper, and bade many; And sent his servant at Supper-time, to say to them that
were bidden, Come, for all things are now ready. And they all with one consent
began to make extuses: So that the Servant came (at the 21. verse.) and showed
his Lord these things. Then the Master of the house being angry, said to his
Servant, Go quiekly into the Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in hither
the poor, and the maimed; and the balt, and the blind. (Mark) here are
invitations of mercy sent out to those that never thought of it. And the
Servant said, Lord, it is done as thou bast commanded, and yet there is room.
And the Lord said unto the Servant again (at the 23. verse.) Go out into the
highways, and beages, and compel them to come in, that my house may be
filled. See I pray, how the kingdom of Grace, and Mercy, and Freeremission is
broughe near unto a people, before ever they did make after it.

And this (I say) you shall find fulfilled. So God has dealt by the world. So
by particular Kingdoms, and Nations in the world. So by particular Towns, and
Countries in a Kingdom. So by particular Families in a Town. And so by
particular persons in a family.

Thus God has dealt with the World, He has brought near the Kingdom of Grace,
and Mercy, and free-remission to the World, before ever the World did make
after it. When the whole World had sinned in the fall, and lay in wickedness,
and never thought of returning unto God; God so loved the world, Joh. 3.16
that he sent his only begotten Son to them. When Adam did not think of Christ,
nor the world in him; the Lord gives out a promise, The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpents head. Genesis 3.15
Thus mercy, and grace made it is approach toward the world, before ever the
world did seek after it.

So in regard of a Nation, in regard of a Kingdom in the world: Go (says our
Lord and Savior Christ unto his Disciples) and teach all Nations. The Nations
did not come to Christ and say, Lord, the Jews have refused the Gospel, and
therefore we beseech thee that the Gospel may be preached unto us, and we will
receive it: No, but before ever they sent any such message to have the Gospel
come down to them, the Gospel is sent to them, Go (says our Savior) Go preach
to all Nations. But Lord (they might say) Suppose that in those nations we meet
with such a man as Herod, such a man as Pilate; shall we preach the Gospel, and
free remission of sins then to such a one? Go (says Christ,) I make no
exceptions; Go, and preach to all Nations. But suppose that a Judas come in
when we are preaching the Gospel. Says Christ, I make no exceptions, if a
Judas will come and submit, Go, preach to all, Go preach the Gospel, Go
preach to all Nations.

And was it not thus with the Nation of the Jews, as ye read in the 16.
Chapter of the Prophecy of Ezekiel, when they were first taken into Gods love?
None eye pitied thee, (at the 5. verse) to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion on thee. Verse the 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted
in tlsine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live. And so it will be with this
people the Jews again, when they shall be converted in the latter days of the
world: The Lord speaks so concerning them by the Prophet Esaias: I was found of
those that sought me not. And in the 66. Isa. 65.1
Chapter of Esaias and the 7. verse, it is said concerning the Jews that are yet
to be called, and the preventing love of God toward them: Before she
travailed, she brought forth: before her pain came, she was delivered of a
man-child.

Thus it is also with particular Towns in a Kingdom, or in a Nation: the
kingdom of grace, of heaven is brought near to them before they do seek to it.
The Apostles went and preached unto several Towns; Iconium, and Derbe, and
Lystra; before those Towns did call for the Gospel. And if you look into the 4.
Chapter of Matthew, you find, That our Savior Christ came and dwelt in
Capernaum (at the 13 verse) which is upon the seacoast, in the borders of
Zabulon and Naphtali: That it might be-ful filled which was spoken by Esaias
the Prophet, saying, The Land of Zabulon, and the Land of Nephtali, by the way
of the Sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles: The people which sat in
darkness, saw great light: and to them which sat in the region and shadow of
death, light is sorung up. While they were sitting still in their sins, and in
the very shadow of death, Christ goes among them, and causes a glorious light
to shine upon them: they did not go out to the light, but the light did come
out to them first.

So it is also in regard of a particular Family in a Town: it is said concerning
the Jailors family, that they were all baptized, they all believed: but how?
did the Jailors family come and seek after the Kingdom of Heaven, before the
Kingdom of Heaven was brought unto them? No, The Apostles, were brought into
prison, God works a miracle; the Kingdom of Heaven, grace, and free remission
is brought to the prison, and is brought to the Jaylors family, before ever the
Jailor did stir after it.

And so ye know it was with the family of Zacheus: Luke, 19 9.
Zacheus (says our Savior) This day is salvation come to thine house. Pray
consider it a little, did Zacheus's house go to seek for salvation? or rather,
did not salvation come and seek for Zecheus's house? Indeed Zecheus out of a
curiosity ran and got up into a tree that he might see the outside of Jesus
Christ: but our Lord and Savior Christ, calls him down, Zacheus (says he) I
must dine with thee: invites himself, he carries salvation unto his family.

Thus God deals by Families: He deals thus by the World, He deals thus by
Nations, He deals thus by Towns, He deals thus by Families.

And he deals thus by particular Persons also: Was it not thus with Matthew the
Publican? He sat (ye know) in his Custom House, and Christ came and found him
out there; he did not first go and seek after Christ, but Christ came first
unto him, and found him out in his trade, and said unto him, 1 Timothy 1.13.
follow me. And was it not thus with Paul? Says Paul, I was a blasphemer, and
a persecutor: But I obtained mercy. I was breathing out threatenings against
the Saints, and against the Disciples of Jesus Christ: but as I was breathing
out threatenings against them, the holy Ghost breathed upon my heart, and met
me in the way, and unhorst me, and showed me mercy: the Kingdom of Heaven did
approach unto Paul, before ever Paul sought after it.

And as it is with a particular Person in regard of his first Conversion, and
first Repentance: So in regard of his After-Repentance: Peter sins, and before
ever Peter repents, Christ looks back upon him; that is the first, then Peter
wept bitterly. Johah sinned, and sinned greatly in running away from God: before
ever Johah could find in his heart, for to seek unto God, God works a miracle:
provides a chamber of preservation, even in the belly of destruction, in the
Whales-belly for him. God brought near his pardoning mercy, and grace to him,
before ever Jonah came near to it.

And as it is in regard of a man's first, second, and after Prepentance: So it is
also in regardof a man's Comfort, and Consolation. O Lord, (says David) Make me
to receive joy, Psalm. 51.8. Psa. 77.2
and comfort; that the bones that thou have broken may rejoice: My soul
refuses comfort, (says he) As if he should say thus: Lord, I have been a
great Surgeon at other men's hearts, and I have been able to set their bones
that have been out of joint: but now mine own bones are broken; I have fallen
greatly, and now my own bones are broken, I cannot set mine own bones; My soul
refuses comfort, and the promise is to my heart-like a bank of Ice, that my
heart slips off: and Lord, if thou do not uphold my heart with a promise, I
shall never have comfort: Make me to see comfort, O Lord.

Thus you see, where ever you look in the Scripture, it is full of the truth
that is here before us, namely, That the Kingdom of Heaven, grace, mercy, and
free-remission does approach unto us before we draw near to it.

Evidences of it.

The First is, Taken from our own Condition: purse, or if you lose a ring, it
will lie where it was lost unless it be taken up: but now, if a sheep be lost,
the sheep wanders up and down, and does not lie where it was lost, but wanders
up and down over one mountain to another, through one thicket to another,
through one dirty place to another: and of all creatures, the lost sheep does
not seek the way home again: A dog lost will seek the way home again; a Cat,
and such like creatures lost, will seek the way home again: but a sheep lost,
does not seek the way home again. Now we are all lost sheep, wandering up and
down: One, he wanders over the mountain of Pride: another through the thicket
of the World: another through some unclean Slough: but all wandering, and no man
able to find his home, till he be first found. Therefore says our Savior
Christ, Luke 19.10
I came to seek, and to save those that are lost. He does not say barely, I
came to save those that are lost; but I came to seek, and to save those that
are lost. And truly, we must be sought all along. Says David, in the 119.
Psalm and the last: Lord, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, O seek thy
servant. We have need of continual seeking, as long as there is continual
wandering: we have need of such a shepherd as may seek us out. But first of all
the Kingdom of Heaven does seek us out before we do seek it: when we are found,
then we seek, but we never seek, till we are first found.

A Second Evidence, I take from Christ's willingness for to save sinners. There
is an infinite willingness in our dear Savior for to save poor sinners. He
came from Heaven for that end and purpose: If a man come a thousand miles upon
a business; will ye not think he is willing to do it? Jesus Christ came from
Heaven for this business, for to save sinners; Is He not then willing to do it?
I may say that Jesus Christ is more willing to save sinners, than sinners are
to be saved by him. The Prodigal goes home to his father; but when the father
sees him after off, he runs: the Prodigal goes, and the father runs to meet him
with mercy.

Yea, and our Savior Christ seems to be most willing to save the greatest
sinners: the greatest Saints have bin made up out of the greatest sinners. When
the Lord Jesus Christ was upon the earth, did he not carry his grace, and
mercy, and the doctrine of free remission to the greatest fine^rs? Peloved,
consider of it I pray you, The greater the sinner is, the more is Christ
honored in getting out his Pardon, and in satisfying for such a finner, and so
he will love Christ the more. Look I pray into the 7 Chap. of Luke, Simon
(says Christ) I Will propound thee a parable. Master, say on (says he) Then
says, our Savior (at the 41 verse) There was be certain Creditor, that had two
Dobters; the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty: And when they
had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of
them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he
forgave most. And he said unto him, thou have rightly judged. Those that he
forgives most unto, will love most. Jesus Christ loves to be greatly honored,
and loved, and therefore he is willing to save the greatest sinners. But now,
the greatest sinners are most opposite unto what is good, they don't seek after
what is good: Surely therefore, if Jesus Christ would save sinners, and the
greatest sinners; of necessity the Kingdom of Heaven, and of Grace, must
approach unto us, before we draw near to it.

But you will say, Zech. 1.3 Jam. 4.8
The Scripture seems to be contrary unto this Doctrine: For has not the
Scripture said, Turn unto the Lord, and he will turn unto you? Draw near to
God, and he will draw near to you? How is this therefore true, That the kingdom
of grace, mercy, and free-remission, does first draw near unto us, before we
draw near unto it?

Yea, Has not our Savior Christ said, Matthew. 9 13.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance? That is, such as
are sensible of their sins: Surely therefore, a man must be sensible of his
sins, must be sensible first, before the kingdom of Heaven, of Grace, Mercy,
and Free-remission be brought near unto him.

For Answer, The Scripture is clearly with us, Joh. 4.19. Joh. 15.16.
The Apostle John speaks out expressly, We love him, because he loved us first.

And says our Savior, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: I have
chosen you, you have not chosen me.

And whereas it is said, That we should turn to God, and he will turn to us: And
draw near to God, and he will draw near to us. That is, He will draw near unto
you again, he will turn more unto you; not as if we should begin to turn to
him, and first draw near to him, before he does first draw near to us at all:
But, draw near to him, and he will draw near to you: And turn to him, and he
will turn to you: That is, he will draw more near to you; and he will turn
unto you again.

And whereas it is said, That Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance: That is, such as are sensible of their sins; and men must be
first sensible, before the offer of grace, mercy, and free-remission be made
unto them.

I beseech you turn unto the place where the Scripture lies: it is in the 9.
Chapter of Matthew at the latter end of the 13. verse. I am not come to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance. This (say I) is not to be understood
of sinners only Sensible of their own sins, but sinners indeed. Christ came to
call sinners indeed, yea, before they are sensible of their sins. For the word
(Sinner) here, must be understood as the word sinner before is, in the 10. and
11. verse, As Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many Publicans and
sinners came and sat down with him, and with his Disciples. When the Pharisees
saw it, they said unto his Disciples, why eats your Master with Publicans and
sinners? He did eat with those that were not sensible of their sins: Sinners
there, are not to be meant of those only that were sensible of their sins;
Christ did not only eat with those that were sensible of their sins. Now he
gives this account of it, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance: That is, sinners, such as he names before, such as he did eat
withal; and they were not only such as were sensible of their sins.

Again, Our Savior Christ gives this account, at the 12. verse, The whole need
not the Physician, but those that are sick. To answer to this Objection, That
our Savior did eat with sinners, and converse with sinners. Says he, I am a
Physician; and Physicians, are to go to those that are sick only. There is this
difference between me a Physician, and other Physicians: for I come unsent for;
but other Physicians come when sent for. I, as a Physician come to Call my
Patients: but other Physicians are Called in by their Patients. Now (says he)
I am a Physician, and I come not to call the righteous, but sinners, I come to
Call my Pationts. Physicians don't only go to those that are sensible of their
disease; but if a man be past sense, his friends send for the Physicians, and
the Physician goes: So does Christ here, Comes unto his Patients when they are
not sensible of their disease many times.

Again; This suits with that which goes before. Go (says he, at the 13 verse)
and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not saerifice. Sometimes
this phrase, this sentence is to be understood concerning bodily mercy: But
here it is to be understood of mercy to the soul Go ye and learn what that
means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Ye object to me, that I converse
with Publicans and sinners, not with those that are righteous in their
generation, go and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: I have more delight in conversing with poor sinners, that with those
Jews that do offer sacrifice.

Ang again, Gonsider what sense would here be, if this should be the meaning; I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners: That is, I came to call those that
are sensible of their sins, Then the meaning must be this: I came not to call
the righteous, but men that are penitent, men that are sensible of their sins,
and are penitent. If by the calling the sinners we are to understand those that
are sensible only; then the sense must be this, I came not to call the
righteous, but men that are penitent. No, no, Christ came to call sinners, poor
sinners; although they were never yet sensible of their sins, the Lord Jesus
Christ came to call sinners, which are so indeed.

This Doctrine then stands notwithstanding that Objection.

But you will say,

For Answer, scope of the Parable cannot be according to the tenure of this
Objestion; for then it should be contrary to the former Parable, of the lost
sheep.

Indeed, The Prodigal says he will repent, before he goes to his father: Luke.
15.18, 19.
I will return to my father, and I will say, I have sinned against Heaven, and
against thee; and I am not worthy to be called thy Son: but he never says so
till he came to his father: after his father had fallen upon his neck, and
forgiven him, and showed mercy to him, then he said so, and not before. And
(says the text) when his father saw him a far off: Notwithstanding he had
resolved to go home, yet he was far off from mercy: his father saw him a far
off; and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kis't him,
preventing of him by his grace: this makes it more prevalent.

But yet you will say,

What says the Apostle in Romans 4.5. He justifies the ungodly, not in their
sins, but from their sins, through Christ. It Is not in Gods love, as in our
love: you love, because the thing loved is lovely: but Gods love, does make
lovely: your love finds lovely: and Gods love makes lovely. You love a person
because of some beauty: but Gods love does make beautiful. You love a person
because of some good you do find before you love: but Gods love brings the
goodness with it, Gods love makes the person good that he does love. His love
is the original and root of all our obedience, and sanctification. Though the
Root lies under ground, all the branches are beholding to it: and the fruit
have their sap, and life from it. So though Gods reconciling love lies under
ground, and ye see it not, yet it is the Root of all your obedience, of all your
sanctification. Ye may observe therefore, that in the Epistle to the Romans, to
the Galatians, to the Hebrews; when the Apostle would stir up the Romans,
Galatians, Hebrews to holiness of life: that he lays his Exhortation upon the
Doctrine of freegrace, love, justification by faith alone, and the sulness of
Christ's satisfaction for poor unworthy sinners. In the book of the Romans, he
begins to state the Doctrine of free justification of sinners: and remission by
Christ alone. In the book of the Galatians, he begins with free-remission of
sins, and justification by faith alone: So in the book of the Hebrews: But the
end and conclusion of all these Epistles to the Romans, Galatians, Hebrews,
is, Obedience, Repentance, and holiness of life. As if this were the great Root
that all our obedience did grow upon, even free remission of sins, and
Justification by faith alone. And if justificiation do go before our
sanctification, then of Necessity there must be an approaching of the Kingdom
of Heaven to us, before we do come to it.

Give me leave to give you Two, or Three Reasons of it, and so I will come to
the Application.

First of all, Jehovah, that all flesh may see his glory. What is the glory of
God? His free grace is his glory. And therefore ye shall observe, that when
Moses begs to see Gods glory, Lord (says he) show me thy glory. Exo. 33.18, 19.
The Lord made him this answer, Moses, would thou see my glory? What?
otherwise than thou have seen it in the Mount? Moses, here is my glory: I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy: The Lord read him a lecture of his
freegrace: Moses, here is my glory, my free grace is my glory. And how can Gods
freegrace be more seen, and manifest than in such a way. Causing the Kingdom of
Heaven, of grace, and free remission to draw near to us, even before we do stir
toward it.

Secondly, Luke: (the same that Inamed before) consider it well, at the 37.
verse, Behold, a woman in the City which was a sinner (it seems she was a very
wicked woman, a sinner) when she knew that Jesus Christ sat at meat in the
Pharisees house, brought an Alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet
behind him weeping, and began to wash his seet with tears, and did wipe them
with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the
ointment. What Is the reason of this? Says our Savior Christ, I say unto thee,
(at the 47. verse) Her sins, which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved
much. She wept much, because she loved much: and she loved much, because much
was forgiven her.

The Papists and those that do follow them say indeed, That her forgiveness was
a fruit of her love: because it is said here, Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven, for she loved much. But good people makr it, and you-will find, that
first of all there is forgivenss, and thereupon the woman loved: and her loving
much, was but a sign of her being much forgiven. For this is suitable with the
latter end of the 47. verse: Her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she
loved much. Much forgivenss is the ground of loving much: and loving much, is a
fign of much forgiveness: for it follows, But to whom little is forgiven, the
same loves little.

And this suits also with the Parable that ye have before, at the 41. and the
42. and the 43. verses. (Which is brought in upon occasion of this woman's
loving thus much.) A certain Creditor had two debtors: the one ought five
hundred pence, and the other fifty: and when they had nothing to pay, he
frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. Mark the
scope of the parable, and you will find it is to show, That love flows from
forgiveness. The Papists, (and others that cleave to them) therefore, go
against the scope of this Parable.

And now my beloved, if all our love be upon forgiveness, and forgiveness goes
first; Oh! what free grace is here? We Repent, and we Weep because we love; and
we love because we are forgiven: but forgiveness goes first: Oh! what grace!
and love is here! Paul was so taken with this, that to me he seems to be more
taken with it, than with the vision that he had in the third Heaven, says he,
I knew a man (whether in the body, 2. Cor. 12.2.
or out of the body) a man (says he) wrapped up into the third Heaven, and heard
unspeakable words, which is not lawful to be uttered. And this Paul speaks of
but once. But says Paul, I was a blasphenter, 1. Tim. 1.13.
I was a persecutor; but I obtained mercy: This story he tells three times: he
tells the other story but one time; but this story, this story of free grace;
how he was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and how he obtained mercy; this was
never out of his mind. As if he were more refresh't with the thought of this,
than with the other. And I pray what then? Do but observe Paul, who gracious he
is: how humble he is: how thankful he is: how ready to serve Christ: how ready
to serve the Churches for Christ: how ready to suffer for Christ upon all
occasions: Oh! how gracious did this make him. Thus it is with a poor soul, that
has tasted of the free grace of God in Christ; the heart is more taken
herewithal, than with the thoughts of Heaven: Ah, says a poor soul, I was
going on in such a sinful way; or I lay sleeping and snorting in my sins; and I
know not how, before ever I was aware, the Kingdom of Heaven did approach unto
me, and the Lord in his free grace showed mercy to my family, and to my poor
soul: Oh! therefore, any thing for Jesus Christ; Oh! I will spend, and be
spent, Oh! any thing for Jesus Christ. The sight of Gods grace, does make one
gracious; and therefore Christ does take this way, Causing the Kingdom of
Heaven, grace, and free remission, to approach first unto us, before we do draw
near to it.

There is one Reason more, I will but name it.

Christ does so order things in the dispensations of his grace, that no flesh
might glory in it self, or in any thing that it has, or does: that no flesh
might rest in any duty, in any service, in any suffering; but only upon grace,
upon Christ alone. Beloved! we are very unwilling to come unto any duty; and
when we have done, we are then as apt to rest upon it, as ever we were
unwilling to come unto it. But what is the reason that men are so apt to rest
upon their duties, but because there are these secret thoughts, that they come
to Christ, before he does come to them. Let the heart be possessed with this
truth, That Jesus Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and of free grace, does
approach unto us, and come near to us, before we draw near to it. And then he
will not rest so much upon what he is, does, or suffers. A man in this case
is like unto a Silk-worme; you know how it is with that worm: it makes a fine
web, a fine work; and when it has done, it dies in it, afterward it eats a
hole through the work, and it comes out with wings, a quite other creature than
it went into it. So it is with a poor Christian: he makes a fine work of duty,
and then he dies in it; but through the manifestations of Gods free grace, he
does, as it were, eat a hole through all, and he comes out with wings flying
away from his duties, not so as to neglect the performance of them, but so, as
not to rest upon them: flies away from (in regard of resting upon any) duty;
and only upon this ground, because (says he) God did draw near to me, grace
did draw near to me, mercy did draw near to me, before ever I drew near to it:
and therefore why should I rest upon any duty, perform it I will, but through
grace I will not rest upon it.

By way of Application; Applic. 1
Let us I pray consider with our selves, whether God has dealt thus by our
souls or no: Has the Kingdom of Heaven approch't, and drawn near unto us,
before we drew near to it? if not, truly (for ought that I know) we are yet
under the Law: and all our mournings, and walkings Heavenward, they are but
Legal: If God love you indeed, He shows kindness, and mercy to you, before you
do come to him.

It Is with Gods darlings, as it is with the worlds-darlings. You have some men
take a great deal of pains, rise early, and go to bed late, and yet the world
does not smile upon them: these are the world's enemies. Some take pains, and
grow rich thereby; these are the worlds friends, Others there are again, that
before ever they take any pains the Lord is upon them with the worlds
blessings; these are the worlds darlings. So I say, God has his darlings; and
if thou art one of Gods darlings, He does cause the Kingdom of Heaven, Grace,
and Free-remission to appear and draw near unto thy soul, even before thou do
draw near to it. Has God dealt thus by any of you? Oh! contemplate, consider
seriously the sweetness of this grace. Beloved! preventing grace, is sweet
grace. The Lord gave a Grown, a Kingdom to David; but the best Pearl in all
the Crown, that his eye was most upon, was Gods preventing mercy: Psa. 21.3.
Lord (says he) thou have prevented me with the goodness of thy blessing. As
if he had said thus; Lord, thou have not only given me a kingdom, made me a
King over thy people; but when I was a poor Shepherd, keeping my fathers
sheep: thou did prevent me with thy love. So may a poor soul say, Ah, Lord,
thou have not only given me a kingdom, but thou have prevented me with thy
love. It Is a great matter, that the great God of Heaven and Earth should answer
our prayers, give us any mercy upon our request: I, but that the Lord should
give us the greatest mercy before we come for it. Pray good people mark it a
little, Ye shall observe, that the greatest mercies that ye have; ye have them,
and they are given unto you before you come for them. There are some great
mercies that a Christian has: as Conversion of his soul, Justification,
Remission of sin: Some lesser mercies; as comfort, and peace, and outward
plenty. As for these lesser mercies, God gives them when we do come for them:
but as for the great Mercies; Remission of sin; Justification of our persons;
Conversion of our souls, God is upon us with these mercies before we come for
them: Oh! what grace is here! Oh! what glorious, rich grace is here! What!
shall be not stand and admire at the glory of this free grace of God in Jesus
Christ!

You will say unto me:

Let me tell you: Duty.


First of all; Be sooner at Heaven gate with your duties hereafter, than ever
you were before. When as a Master comes into his servants Chamber in the
morning, and takes him abed: if the servant have any ingenuity, the servant
says, this my Masters coming thus early, is plainly a rebuke to my sloth; and
therefore (God willing) I will be up sooner another day. So now, when as the
Lord does thus prevent us with his grace, and is at our bedside with his
grace, when we lie sleeping, and never think of mercy, and grace; an ingenious
soul should say thus: What is all this, but a plain rebuke to the slothfulness
of my duty? Come, up prayer, up duty, oh my soul be up sooner: Yea, through the
Lords grace I will be up sooner at Heaven gate in duty than ever I was before:
His preventing grace teaches me thus much, that I am not soon enough at Heaven
gate with my duty.

Again, 2. Duty.
Has the Lord prevented any of you with grace, and caused the Kingdom of
Heaven to draw near to you before you drew near to it? Do you do the like:
labor in your love to be like to Christ, to be like to God. We stand upon our
terms when we have to deal with men, upon our terms of State. had Jesus Christ
stood upon terms of State when. he came to save sinners, what had become of us?
We say, we will forgive such a man for wrong done to us, upon his
acknowledgement: Oh! but did Christ do so? Did not Christ prevent us? Beloved!
ye see how it is with the water, it moves downward; but if the fire get into it;
if there be water in a pot, upon the fire, and fire get into the water, the
fire makes it move upward, it moves according to the nature of the fire then.
So now, if the love of Jesus Christ get into our hearts, it will make us move
like unto Christ: How does the love of Jesus Christ move? Oh (says Christ)
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Luke 23.34.
Christ did not stay for acknowledgement: a poor, and a low thing for a
Christian; Enough for a Heathen to say so, I will forgive such a man for wrong
done to me upon his acknowledgment. Let our love be like unto Christ's, and
labor to prevent others with our love, as Jesus Christ has prevented us.

Thirdly, Then let all men waith upon others, 3 Duty.
with all longsufforing, and patience, for their Conversion, and the revelation
of truth unto them. Thou art a Parent, and desire thy Child may be Converted,
and have taken a great deal of pains with him for his Conversion, and yet it
will not be. Thou art a governor of a family, and would fain have such a
servant converted to Christ, and have taken a great deal of pains; and yet it
will not be. A friend you have, and you would fain that he knew such a Truth, and
much pains you have taken to beat such a Truth into him, and he don't take it,
and you are ready to be angry: but remember this, The Kingdom of Heaven draws
near to us before we draw near to it: Grace must come to thy Child's soul first
before it does come to Christ, Mercy must come to the soul: and the Lord must
come and bring truths unto the soul. What is then to be done? Then be not angry
with him: wait with all long suffering, and all patience, and go to God; go to
God for thy Child; go to God for thy friend; go to God for thy servant, upon
this ground, Because the Kingdom of Heaven must come to us first before we can
come to it.

But Especially, 4. Duty.
and Fourthly, Trust in the Lord for ever. Oh! all you that are the servants of
the Lord, upon this ground, Trust in the Lord for ever. Does the kingdom of
Heaven approach, and draw near to us, before we draw near unto it? Then say
within your souls, Doubting shall be no more.

Some there are, that doubt of their salvation, because of the lgnorance that
is in them: darkness causes fear: they don't know the merciful disposition of
Jesus Christ, and so they doubt of his love. The Devil, as he labors to change
himself into an angel of light; so he labors to change Christ into an angel of
darkness. But beloved, ye have heard of the merciful, sweet disposition of
Jesus Christ: he is willing to save sinners, and the greatest sinners; brings
near the Kingdom of Heaven to us, before we draw near to it: Oh! will thou
doubt again? poor Christian, will thou doubt again?

Some there are, that doubt of their salvation, because they are afraid their
duties shall not be accepted, prayers shall not be accepted: Oh! if I could but
be persuaded (says one) that the Lord would hear my prayer, and accept of my
duty, then I should know indeed I should be saved: but I am afraid the Lord
does not hear my prayers, and accept of my duties; and therefore I fear I shall
not be saved. Man or woman, where ever thou standst, or art; hear the Word of
the Lord. Does the Lord cause the Kingdom of Heaven to approach and draw near
to us, before we draw near to it? will the Lord be found of those that seek him
not? and will he not be found of you that do seek him? Will the Lord come with
his grace, and make an offer of grace, and mercy to a sinner, and a great
sinner? and will not the Lord receive you, when you do come unto him? Think of
this: and surely then you will say, Doubting shall be no more.

Some there are, that doubt of their salveation, because they cannot pray;
their hearts are dead: pray I cannot, and hear I cannot, and read I cannot,
perform duty I cannot; and therefore I have cause to fear I shall never come
to Heaven. Well, but though you cannot, Man, or Woman, Christian; pray as thou
art able, and hear as thou art able, and read as thou art able: the Lord
Christ is of this sweet disposition, That. he does canse the Kingdom of Heaven
to draw near to us, before we draw near to it: Oh! therefore, you that are the
servants of the Lord, Trust in the Lord for ever; for ever trust in the Lord:
and let doubting be no more.

I conclude all with one word of Exhortation, Applic. 2
and it is unto those that have not yet submitted unto this Kingdom of Heaven,
this Kingdom of Grace: Is there a truth in this Doctrine? That the Kingdom of
Heaven, grace, mercy, and free remission, does approach unto us, before we draw
near unto it? and that because (indeed) we are not able to draw near to it,
before it draws near unto us? Then all you, that have not yet submitted unto
this Kingdom of grace, and the offer of grace, and mercy in the Gospel: when
ever any offer shall be made unto ye, take heed that ye neglect not so great
salvation. You see how it is with the seaman: because the seaman is not able
to raise a wind; or turn the wind when it is raised; he lies upon the seacoast
ready, waiting upon the wind: and when the wind turns, then he hoists up his
sails, for says he, now the wind is come about, and if I lose this gale, I am
likely to lose my voyage: I cannot turn the wind, I cannot make the wind. So I
say to you, man or woman, young man, or old; has the Lord brought a gale upon
thine heart at any time? a gale of mercy, made a tender of mercy, and free
remission to thee? Oh! for the love of God, and of thy own soul, take heed how
you lose this opportunity: is the wind come about? (the Spirit blows where it
lists:) is the wind come about? Up with thy sails, up with thy sails, take
heed how you lose this opportunity that now you have. Little do you think, that
the Kingdom of Heaven may be in such a motion as you despise: the Kingdom of
Heaven may be knocking at your door, the door of your heart, by such a hand as
you little think of. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of musterd-seed,
Mat. 13 31, 32.
which indeed is the least of all seeds; but it grows to that bigness, that the
fowls of the air come and make there their nests: When you see a little
musterd-seed, you will say, it is impossible; can ever this musterd-seed grow to
that bigness, that the fowls of the air should there make their nests? The
Kingdom of Heaven is like Christ himself: Can this be the Messiah? it is the
Carpenters son; can this Carpenters son be the Messiah? So the Kingdom of
Heaven is like a grain of musterd-seed; comes with a small motion: May be a
Child makes a motion to his father, Oh! father, let there be prayer in our
family, Oh! let there be reading the Word in our family. May be the servant
comes and makes a motion to the Mistrisse; Oh! Mistrisse, let us go to such a
Sermon, let us go to such a meeting, let us go to prayer: The Kingdom of Heaven
may come in such a motion: by the hand of a Child, by the hand of a servant:
take heed therefore if you have not submitted to this offer; Oh! take heed,
take heed how you neglect so great salvation: I say the Kingdom of heaven may
come in such a small motion as you despise. And therefore, if ever the Lord
breath upon any of your hearts; if the wind come about; man and woman, up with
thy sails, now for thy life, now for thy Eternity; if this gale be lost, may
be thou shall never have such a gale again: The Kingdom of heaven does
approach, and draw near unto us, before we draw near unto it: well therefore,
when it comes, see that you accept of it.

SERMON II.
MATTHEW 3.2. Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Preached at
Margrets Newfishstreet. March. 16. 1645
Or has approached.


THESE Words are part of that Sermon which John the Baptist preached, when he
first began for to preach the Gospel. They contain, ye see, at the first view,
An Exhortation to Repentance, with a motive, or encouragment thereunto: For the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

I take it for granted, that ye understand what is the notion of Repentance.
And my design is not to fall into the common place of Repentance; but only to
speak to it so far as it has relation to this motive.

Some there are that think these words are to be understood of a Legal
Repentance; as if John the Baptist's Ministry were a legal Ministry; and in
that sense he himself a forerunner to Jesus Christ. This (me thinks) is to
lowen the Ministry of John the Baptist. And if you look into the 1. Chap. of
Luke, you will find, that John's Ministry was not a Legal Ministry, but a
Gospel Ministry: (the 76, and the 77. verses) Thou Child shall be called the
Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to
prepare his ways: To give knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the
remission of their sins. And if ye look into the following verse to the Text,
ye shall find the interpretation of this Repentance: Repent ye: for this is he
that was spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. So
that preparing the way of the Lord, and making his paths straight; is all one
with that which is going befoe. Now is any one able to make his paths straight
before he do come to Christ? why then do we come to Christ if we be able to
make our paths straight before we do come unto him?

And besides, As the Motive is, such is the Repentance that is founded on it.
The motive here is Evangelical: Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. The motive is Evangelical, surely therefore, the Repentance here
required, is not a Legal, but an Evangelical Repentance.

But what is it then? what is here meant by the Kingdom of Heaven? and the
Kingdom of Heaven being at hand, or approaching?

In the language of the new Testament, the Kingdom of Heaven is sometimes put
for the Kingdom of Glory: Sometimes it is put for the Church of Christ under
the new Testament: Sometimes it is put for the Gospel, and the preaching of the
Gospel: Sometimes for the whole Kingdom of Grace. I take it here for the whole
state of the Messiah: the Kingdom of grace, the preaching of the Gospel, and
the dispensations thereof. And he says here, That the Kingdom of Heaven has
approach't: therefore do you turn, therefore do ye repent.

There are these Two Notes that lie before ye.

First, The Kingdom of Heaven does approach unto us, before we do come unto it.
Repent ye: or turn ye: because the Kingdom of Heaven has approach't unto you;
So in the beginning.

Secondly, That the appropinquation, approaching, or drawing near of the
Kingdom of Heaven, is the highest, and the greatest motive in the world unto
true Repentance.

I have spoken to the former in a Congregation not far distant: and my desire
is to speak unto the Second.

The appropinquation, approaching,

This is the Motive that John uses here; thus John begins, when he began for to
preach the Gospel. And if you look into the 4. the next Chapter, ye shall find,
that our Savior Christ begins to preach Repentance upon the same Motive: verse
the 17. from that time Jesus began to preach, and say, Repent: for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand. The same words. And if ye look into the 10. Chapter of
Matthew, ye shall find, that when he sent out his Apostles for to preach, he
put the like words into their mouths also: (at the 7. verse) And as ye go,
preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

There the word, Repent, is not you will say: But if you look into the 6. of
Mark, and the 12. verse: ye shall find that it is said there, Then they went
out, and preached, that men should repent. It was part of their Commission: and
thus they were to preach Repentance upon this motive, That the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, or the Kingdom of heaven is approaching. Surely therefore,
this is the great Motive, the motive of motives. In the invitation to the great
Supper spoken of in the Gospel: what is the motive used, for to bring men unto
the supper, but this? Come, for all things are now ready: Mercy is ready, the
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ is ready, Come, for all things are now ready:
this is the motive that is used there. And if ye look into the 12. Chapter of
Paul to the Romans, ye shall find at the 1. verse, That when the Apostle does
exhort them, to present themselves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God: he persuades by this motive of mercy: I beseech you therefore, brethren,
by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice. I
beseech ye therefore. That Therefore, sends us unto the former Chapter, to
enquire what these mercies were. At the 30. verse of the former Chapter, he
says unto them, For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet now have
obtained mercy through their unbelief. The Jews were cast off: and the
Gentiles (these Romans) received to mercy, the Kingdom of Heaven did come to
them, the Gospel effectually preached to them, the Doctrine of freeremission of
poor sinners: Now (says he) I beseech you by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice. The Scripture is full of this.

But for our better opening, and clearing of this Truth: Let us I pray descend
into the particulars of Repentance, and consider how the grace, and mercy, and
love of God in Christ (which is the substance of this Kingdom of Heaven) has
an influence upon them all; and how all of them are caused thereby.

First, Adoni-bezek had his fingers, and toes cut off, you know what he said:
Thus have I done. Afflictions do un-leave a man, take off his leaves: when the
leaves are off the hedges, ye see those birds-nests, that ye could not see
before when the leaves were on: And so, when affliction has made one naked,
and taken ones leaves off, a man is able to see those nests of corruption in
his own heart that he never did see before.

The Apostle says, By the Law is the knowledge of sin: but now, though by the
Law, as by a rule, we come to the knowledge of our sin; and by Affliction we
are helped to see the nests of our own hearts: yet notwithstanding, a man
cannot see his sins fully but by Gospel Light; it is a work of the Spirit to
convince of sin: I will send the Spirit, the Comforter, and he shall convince
the world of sin. And where does the Spirit breath, but in the Gospel, the
Kingdom of Heaven, the preaching of the Gospel? Received ye the Spirit (says
the Apostle) by the works of the Law, or by the preaching of faith? When once
Esaias the Prophet had had a fight of Christ, he cries out, Vae mihi, I am
undone: We is me, I am undone, I am unclean.

Again, Luke, ye may see what work it had: A woman, a great sinner comes to
Christ, and she washes his feet with her tears: what made her do so? She loved
much, for much was forgiven her. So that the more the love and mercy of God in
Chrst is opened in the Gospel, or does make it is approach unto a soul, the more
the soul is set a weeping and mourning for sin committed.

Again, Ezekiel will tell ye, in the 20. of Ezekiel. the 41, 42, and 43.
verses: Then shall ye loath your selves when I am pacified; or when God had
shown them mercy, caused his love to approach unto them: Then should they loath
themselves. It Is not all your Afflictions: nor all my Threatenings (says God)
that will make ye to loath your selves: but when ye see my love, my grace, my
pardoning mercy; then shall ye loath your selves: not your sins only, but your
selves also.

Again, A Repenting person does not only loath himself for his sin: but he is
ashamed of it: What fruit have ye of those things whereof ye are [now] ashamed:
not before, but wereof ye are [now] ashamed. So long as a man walks in the
dark, he does not blush, he is not ashamed though his Clothes be ragged, and
torn, and his naked flesh appears, because he is in the dark: But if he come
to the light, then he blushes that his nakedness appears: And so long as men
are in their sins, and are in darkness, they are not ashamed of their sins;
because they are in darkness: But when once they come to the light, then they
blush, and then they are ashamed: What light is that that will ashame one of
sin? there is light enough in hel-fire, for the damned there to read their
sins by, but that don't make them ashamed: where the light of the Gospel, the
opening of the Kingdom of Heaven is, and pardoning love is, there is shame. Ye
shall see therefore, how Ezra bulshes, when he considered the love of God, and
their sins together: in the 9. of Ezra and the 6. verse. And he said, O my God,
I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face unto thee, my God: Why? for our
iniquities are increased. Is that all? No, says he at the 8. verse: for a
little space grace has been showed us from the Lord our God, to give us a
remnant to eseape, and to give us a nail in his Holy place: we were bondmen,
yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage: And now, O our God, what shall
we say after this? after this? The sight of their own sins, and the remembrance
of Gods love together, made him blush. Ye know the place in Ezekiel, Then shall
ye be confounded, and ashamed, when I am pacified toward ye. The more a man
knows that God is pacified toward him, the more he is ashamed.

Again, David had Saul at a great advantage, and spared him: Saul breaks forth
into this expression, O my son David, thou art more righteous than I: O David!
thou art a righteous man, but I am an unrighteous man. So when the soul sees
what infinite advantage the Lord has it at, and how the Lord spares; then the
soul breaks forth, and says, The Lord is righteous, I am unrighteous, I am
unrighteous: this works an acknowledgment.

Sixthly, unto himself, and his former self: he does labor to undo what he had
done before sinfully: he does labor to unsay what he had said before wickedly.
Before the Jailer was converted, he clap't up the Apostle into close prison,
and either he whipped him there, or else being whipped, he did not relieve him, and
wash his wounds: But the Jailer Repenting, mark how he walks contrary to
himself: Repenting, he opens the prison door, he washes the Apostles wounds,
brings him into his own house, sets meat before him. Those Sorcerers Acts, 19.
repenting, burnt their books, which before they prized, and studies much. How
did Manasses walk contrary to himself, when he once Repented?

Well, But what is that that will bring the soul to this disposition, to walk
contrary to ones former self? If you look into the 116. Psalm, ye shall find
there how the Psalmist eats up his former words: I said in my have, all men are
liars: It was amiss in me, I eat my words, I am sorry for it: what made him do
it? Says he at the 3. verse, The sorrows of death compassed me about, and the
pains of hell gate hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow: Then called I upon
the Name of the Lord; O Lord I beseech thee deliver me. (at the 5. verse)
Gracious is the Lord, and righteous: yea, our God is mercisul. Now having had a
taste of Gods grace, and God mercy, now he eats his former words. And so the
good man Hezekiab: I said (says he) I am cut off from the land of the living:
Isa. 38.11.
He did eat his words, I repent, it was suddenly done: How was he wrought off
to this? He had tasted of the love, and grace, and goodness of God; and this
made him do it. So that now, look into the bowels of Repentance, and the
several workings thereof, and ye shall find there is no such way, or means, or
motive to bring a soul unto Repentance, as the approaching of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the word, and work of Gods grace, and love of God in Jesus Christ.

Would you know the Reason? Briefly thus.

Repentance is a fruit of faith. Ye have a notable expression of godly sorrow
to the height, in the 12. of Zachary, the latter end of the 10, 11, and 12.
verses, (speaking of the Call and Conversion of the Jews.) They shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only son: and shall be in bitterness for him, (the
latter end of the 10. verse) as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.
Bitterness upon bitterness, and mourning. And in that day (at the 11. verse)
there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Megiddon: And the land shall mourn, every family apart, the
family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart. Here is great
mourning, and sorrow; What caused this? says he at the 10. verse, They shall
look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn: They shall look upon
me whom they have piercit. This is the eye of faith, and all true mourning, and
sorrow does come from thence. All tears of Repentance flow from the eye of
faith: the more a man by faith is able to see a pierced Christ, the more his
heart is pierced for sin committed: the more by faith a man is able to see a
wounded Christ, the more will his heart be wounded for sin committed. Faith
works Repentance: but what works faith? Surely the Gospel, the preaching of
the Gospel: Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the preaching
of faith? He does not say by the preaching of the Gospel, but by the preaching
of faith: The Gospel is called faith, not only because it is the Cbject of
faith; but that by which faith is wrought.

Again, As Repentance is a fruit of faith: So also it does flow from love. Amor
doloris causa; Love is the cause of grief. The more a man loves another, or
apprehends that he is loved of him; the more he grieves, if he has any way
injured him. If you at un-awares do strike another, and one tell you that he is
your enemy; ye grieve not, ye are not troubled; unless it be in regard of some
mischief that may come to your self: But if one tell you, that he is a friend,
a specialfriend; that grieves you. So now if by my sins I have stricken at God:
if I look upon God as an enemy, I am not grieved much, I am not troubled much:
But when I consider him as my father, the best friend I have in the world; and
consider how by my sins I have stricken at him; this makes me grieve: Oh! that
ever I should wound the name of him whom my soul loves! She loved much (says
our Savior concerning the weeping woman) she loved much, for much was forgiven
her: He does not say, she wept much, for much was forgiven her: there was no
mention before of her love, but only of her weeping; and yet says our Savior,
she loved much: because he would show what it was that drew up the sluice of
these tears: it was her love. And what causes love? Love causes love. The
more a man sees, and apprehends the love of Christ toward him, the more his
heart is drawn out in love toward Christ again. And what greater act of love
than this? That the Kingdom of Heaven approaches, that the Kingdom of Heaven
should come, and make it is approach to such a poor sinner as I am: Surely
therefore, the approaching, or drawing near of the Kingdom of Heaven, is the
highest, and greatest motive in the world unto true Repentance.

You will say, Experience seems for to speak the contrary: for, arguments drawn
from Hell, and the wrath of God, seem to be more powerful, and efficacious in
the working of Repentance. I have (will some say) sometimes considered the
wrath of God, and let out my heart upon arguments drawn from thence; and then I
have bin much humbled, broken; been much affected: yea, the truth is, I have
been more humbled, and more broken, and more affected, and more troubled for
sin; than when the Gospel, the word of the Kingdom has been preached, and
opened unto me: How therefore is this true? Experience seems to speak the
contrary.

I answer, Quicquid recipitur etc. Every thing is received according unto the
receiver. A legal spirit does relish and savor most of those arguments which
are drawn from Hell, and from the wrath of God: But an Evangelical Christian,
those that are drawn from love and mercy. But for the more full Answer to this,
pray consider with me, these Six, or Seven Distinctions.

First, It Is one thing for a man to be troubled in Conscience: and another
thing to be humbled for sin committed. Those that are Damned in Hell, and lie
there despairing, must needs be troubled in Conscience; how could they despair
else? Take a soul that has the work of the Law upon him, and a mere work of
the Law; and in some respects, he may be more troubled in Conscience: but a
Christian that has a work of the Gospel upon his heart, is notwithstanding
this, more humbled for sin committed.

Again, It Is one thing for a man to be pricked in heart: and another thing for
a man to Repent. Ye shall find therefore, that in the 2. of the Acts: it is said
concerning diverse, That they were pricked in their heart, and said, What shall
we do? Peter said nnto them, Repent. They were pricked in their heart, and
said, what shall we do? and he said, Repent. Possibly then, a man or woman may
be pricked in the heart, and yet not Repent. Those that have the work of the
Law upon them, may have more legal prickings: but those that have the work of
the Gospel, they Repent more.

Again, It Is one thing for a man to Repent of sin considered, in genere entis:
and another thing, in genere moris. Sin may be considered in regard of the
mischief, and inconvenience that does come thereby: Or in regard of the moral
evil of it. It Is said concerning Judas, That when he saw what became of things,
he Repented. And a Malefactor, a murderer, when he sees what shall become of
him, that he must die for his sin; he may Repent of his sin, in genere entis;
wishing that he had never done it: and yet my be not Repent, in genere moris.
Ye read concerning Esau, in the 12. of the Hebrews, That he sought his
birthright with tears; but found no room for his Repentance. He Repented, he
Repented with Tears; but found no room for his Repentance. What Repentance was
this? Says Austin: He greived that he had lost his birthright; not that he
had sold his birthright. So there was no room for such a Repentance. And so
now, take a man that has the work of the Law upon his soul, and he may be much
troubled, he may Repent, and he may have more Repentings in regard of the evil
that does come by sin: but the other more in regard of the evil that is in sin
it self.

In the Fourth place, It Is one thing for a man to be broken with the weight of
sin: and another thing to have his soul thawen, and melted for it. There is a
great deal of difference you know, between the breaking of the ice with your
hands, or with a staff; and the thawing of the ice, melting by the thaw. When
you take a staff and break the ice with your hands, though you break it in one
place, it freezes in another: but when there is a thaw, then it melts, then it
breaks every where. So now it is in regard of legal breakings: Here Is a man
has a work of the Law upon his soul, he breaks for his Drunkenness, and he
breaks for his Swearing, and he breaks for his Wantonness: Oh! but he freezes
in Unbelief, in another place; he freezes in Unthankfulness: But when a
gospel-work comes, it makes a general thaw, a man is broken every where. And
this is more.

Again, It is one thing for a man to have more sorrow, grief, Repentance in
the Ore: and another thing to have a more sorrow, grief, and Repentance that
is well Refined. As now, suppose a man take a hand full of gold in the Ore; it
seems to be a great deal more than a twenty shilling-piece: I but, because much
of that is to be taken away, a great deal of Earth is to be taken away, it is
less in the worth. Thus it is between Legal Repentance, and Evangelical: The
Legal Repentance may seem to be more in bulk: I but, a great deal of that is to
be taken away: Much unbelief to be taken away: many sad, despairing conclusions
to be taken away: a great deal of Mercinariness to be taken away. And therefore
ye shall observe, That when the father had kiss't the Prodigal, he left out the
Mercinary piece that he spoke of before he came home. Says he (at the 18.
verse) I will arise, and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son: make me as one of thy hired servants: (in the 15. Chapter, the 18. and 19.
verses) verse the 20. He arose and came to his father: his father saw him, and
ran and fell on his neck, and kiss't him, had compassion on him: ran, and fell
on his neck, and kiss't him: And the son said unto him, Father: (Now see
whether he makes good his words, that he said he would say when he came to his
father) I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son: But his Father said to his servants, Bring forth the best
robe: He leaves out that, Make me as one of thy hired servants. One kiss from
his father had fyled off all the mercinary disposition. Oh! much, much of the
Legal-work is to be taken away: In Evangelical Repentance, there is much in
little: in Legal Repentance there is little in much.

Again, It Is one thing for grief, sorrow, Repentance to be more in view, sense,
and noise: and another thing to be more in spirit, and in profit. As now for
Example: The rain does sometime fall in a storm, and when it does so, it makes
a great noise: the earth has not time for to take it at the first into it is
bosom; it runs down the streets in great abandance, and it stands in some
places, in great plashes of water: At another time the rain falls by small drops,
and makes no such noise; but yet notwithstanding, it falls to the root of the
Corn, and profits more: for when the rain falls so in a storm, it lays the
Corn; the Corn (I say) is laid by it. So now, sorrow, and grief sometimes falls
in a storm, as in Legal Repentance; and it is great in view, stands in great
plashes of water: Oh! but then it does lay our Duties, it lays our Assurance,
it lays our Faith: Evangelical Repentance, that makes no such noise, but it
falls to the root of the graces, and don't lay your comfort, it don't lay your
Assurance, it don't lay your Duties. And so it is more in profit.

Lastly, Sorrow, grief, and Repentance; may take ones own heart much, or the
heart of God much: ones own heart may be much affected, or the heart of God may
be much affected: Beloved! we are apt to love our firstborn: and though Legal
repentance does not always go before the work of the Gospel; (for what legal
work was there in Matthew before he did come to Christ? or what Legal work was
there in Zacheus before he came to Christ?) yet often times it does: I say yet
often times it does: and this being the firstborn of our soul, we go to God
with both our Repentances Legal, and Evangelical: and we say, Lord, lay the
hand, Oh! lay the right hand of thy blessing upon my first born, oh! let that
inherit: But the Lord deals here, as old Jacob did, when Joseph brought his
two Children before him to be blessed: Jacob crossed his hands, and for Joseph's
sake he laid the blessing upon the younger. So now does God do; you would have
me to lay my blessing (says God) upon your firstborn, upon your Elder, upon
your Legal Repentance. No, says God, I have said, The Elder shall serve the
Younger, and I will cross my hands; and for Joseph's sake, because there is more
of Christ in this younger, therefore here will I lay the hand of my blessing.
Beloved! the heart of a Christian, a gracious man, is never more drawn out in
grief than upon the apprension of love in jured: The greater love, and the
greater injury is presented, the greater is the grief: When the Kingdom of
Heaven comes unto a poor soul, there is the greatest love presented; sin
against that, is the greatest injury: when therefore a man is senfible of his
sin under that notion, then is his heart most affected and drawn forth in godly
sorrow. Surely therefore, The approaching, and the drawing near of the Kingdom
of Heaven, is the greatest motive, and argument under Heaven unto true
Repentance.

By way of Application: If these things be so, poor soul, thou may hear that
voice, and those words too soon another day: But this I say, Friend, the
greatest motive under Heaven has been used to move, and turn thee; and yet
thou art nothing moved, and stirred therewith: O! whereby shall thy soul be
brought unto Repentance? Go (says our Savior Christ unto his Disciples)
preach, Repent: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: if they receive ye, your
peace be upon them: if not, it shall be more easy for Sodom and Gomorah, than
for that City, than for that people, at that great day. Oh for the Lords sake,
take heed when ye hear the Word of the Kingdom, take heed that ye don't lose
it: Repent, and then turn to God.

But if these things be so (in the Second place) Then here we see the reason,

Oh! but the Promise don't belong to me: the Promise is made unto those that
are weary, and heavy laden, and I am not so.

Mistake not good people, The invitation is made to the weary, and heavy laden,
but the promise is made to Coming. There are Two things in that speech: Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden. Here Is an Invitation: and
here is a Promise: The Invitation is made indeed to those that are weary, and
heavy laden: Oh! but the Promise is made to Coming, the Promise is made to
Coming.

But that is all one (you will say) for then it seems I am not invited, if the
invitation be made to such.

God does not speak every thing, in every Scripture: But man or woman, art thou
not invited by some other Scripture? Pray what think ye of that in the 9. of
the Proverbs: Wisdom has built her an house: (that is, Christ, compared with
the former Chapter) she has killed her beasts; she has mingled her wine; she
has furnished her table. She cries upon the high places of the City. What does
she cry? read the 4. verse: Who so is simple, let him come in hither: as for
him that wants understanding, ye read it: it is, As for him that wants
heart, Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. The
Invitation is made to simple ones: who so is simple, let him turn in hither.

Oh! But I have such an heart as never any had: I want a heart unto all that is
good. Mark, As for him that wants heart, she says to him, Come, eat of my
bread. How think ye? is the Invitation here made only to those that are weary,
and heavy laden? And if ye consider that place in the Gospel which ye know. The
Invitation to the great supper. The servants are sent forth to call in those
that were bidden, and they excuse themselves: But they were bidden, they were
invited: were they weary, and heavey laden think ye? Well, he sends out again,
and invites others. Look upon the text: were they weary, and heavy laden too?
Go (says he) Go, Go to the highways, and go to the hedges, and compel them
to come in: were they weary, and heavy laden too? And if ye look into the 3. of
the Revelations, ye find there, that our Savior says at the 20. verse:
Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in, and sup with him, and he with me. Our Savior Christ here
stands knocking, and offers the greatest mercies that can be; fellowship, and
communion with a poor soul: I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me. What greater blessing, or mercy can you desire than fellowship with
Jesus Christ? Says Jesus Christ; If any man will open, I will come in, and sup
with him, and he with me. Here Is mutual fellowship; Christ stands, and offers
this, he stands knocking. But I pray, what door does he knock at? whose door
does he knock at? Oh! my beloved, it is a Laodicean door: Laodiceans, what are
those? Lukewarm: I would thou were hot, or cold; but seeing thou art
Lukewarm, I will vomit thee out of my mouth. Lukewarm person worse than
profane; and yet behold, Jesus Christ stands at a lukewarm persons door:
knocking and tendering mercy to a lukewarm Laodicean person.

I but stay, May be they were weary, and heavy laden first, before they were
invited.

Read the 17. verse. Because thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing: and know not that thou art wrethed, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked. Were these weary, and heavy laden, think ye?
And yet at this door, behold! at this door the Lord Christ stands knocking! Oh!
grace! Oh, glorious, rich grace! Oh! you that have stood at a distance from the
promise, and dared not draw near to the promise; said it did not belong to you,
you were not invited to mercy: Consider, do you consider what great enemies ye
are unto your own breakings, and humblings that ye do so much desire? The
approaching of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Doctrine of grace, and of
free-remission unto a poor sinner, is the greatest means, and motive in the
world to break ones heart. Oh! therefore, as ever you desire to have your
hearts broken, and to be humbled; look much to the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Doctrines thereof, and never say, it does not belong unto you.

But Thirdly, The Kingdom of Heaven has approach't. Beloved! has not the
Kingdom of Heaven approach't unto our Nation? Take the Kingdom of Heaven for
the Kingdom of Glory: and in these dying times, how has the Kingdom of Heaven
approach't in that sense! Take the Kingdom of Heaven for the State of the
Church: and how many Church-truths has broken out in these days, that were
not known before? Take the Kingdom of Heaven for the Gospel; and the preaching
of the Gospel: how has God gone up and down in these latter times, even in
these times of trouble, preaching free grace to poor England? Witness all these
Victories ye have had, notwithstanding all your sins. Oh! England, England; now
Repent, and turn unto the Lord: Surely, if ever, the Kingdom of Heaven is come
to you: yea, has not the Kingdom of Heaven approach't unto many of your souls
in particular? are there not some here, great sinners, that have been invited
to mercy? are there not some here, great sinners, that have received mercy?
has the Kingdom of Heaven approach't unto you? and will not you Repent? and
will not you turn to God? and will not you amend your lives?

You will say, This work is not now to do: we have Repented already.

But pray give me leave: Have ye, have ye Repented upon Gospel-Motives? have ye
Repented upon this ground, because the Kingdom of Heaven has approach't? Oh!
how many legal Professors are there among Professors? As there are Two sorts of
men in the world; Some that live in dark places, and prisons: And others that
walk up and down in the light. So, some there are among Professors, some legal,
that woak up and down in the dark, and see no light: Others again, that walk up
and down in the light of the Gospel: many, many legal Professors.

Beloved, The more Evangelical your Repentance is, Job; See what the holy Ghost
says there. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man percieves it not: (here is man
in his natural, pure natural state) In a dream (at the 15. verse) in a vision
of the night; when deep sleep falls upon men, in stumbrings upon the bed:
(that is, before a man is aware.) Then he opens the ears of men: and seals
their instruction: That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride
from man. What then? He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the
multitude of his bones with strong pain: So that his life abhors bread, and
his soul dainty meat. Verse the 21. His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot
be seen: and his bones that were not seen stick out: His soul draws near to
the grave, and his life to the destroyers. Here Is Legal work. Then comes the
Gospel. If there be a messenger with him, an Interpreter, one of a thousand, to
show unto man his uprightness: Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver
him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom. Then at the 25. verse:
His flesh shall be fresher than a child's, he shall return to the days of his
youth. His flesh shall be fresher than a child's. Thus, Evangelical Repentance
is a friend both to soul and body: Mere Legal Repentance eats out the strength
of ones spirit, even of ones very body.

Again, I will send (says Christ) the Comforter, and he shall convince the
world of sin: what sin? of sin, and of unbelief. Oh! says the soul that
Repents Evangelically; who more guilty of unbelief than I? Oh! never any one
more Ignorant of Christ than I: Oh! the unkindness of my soul toward Christ!
Legal Repentance, it pitches upon some breach of the Law, and there it rests.

Again,

Again, When your Repentance is Evangelical: Psalms of one special Penitential
Psalm of David: the 51. Psalm. But when was that made? A Psalm of David,
when Nathan the Prophet came to him: that is, after the Prophet Nathan had been
with him. And what did Nathan the Prophet say to him? Says Nathan, Thy sin is
forgiven thee. Upon that message, David falls into a Penitential Psalm, a
Psalm of Humiliation, and of Repentance. The more a man has assurance that
his sin is pardoned, the more he does grieve for it.

And the more Evangelical your Repentance is, Luke, had much forgiven her
freely; she came and brought her precious boxes, and powered them out upon Jesus
Christ. So, when a soul has tasted of the free love of God in Christ; then, no
boxes of ointment too precious to power out upon the feet of Jesus Christ.

Further, The more of the Gospel,

And Seventhly,

When the Gospel approaches, when the kingdom of Heaven draws near to a soul,
and Christ therein; the heart is meekned, and made like to Christ. The Law is
called a fiery Law, the Law of fire; Comapred unto Hagar; And says the
Apostle, The children of the bondwoman, will persecute the children of the
freewoman, of Sarah. And what is the reason that there is so much bitterness
among Professors? but because there is no more of the Gospel, and of the
Kingdom of Heaven, in our Profession. Beloved in the Lord: Ye see into what sad
times of Discord, and Bitterness we are now brought: As ever you do desire to
be free from this spirit of Bitterness: as ye do desire that ye may not have a
hand in opposing your fellow servants, and acting a spirit of bitterness
toward the Children of God: Oh! labor for more of the Gospel, get more of it
into your Repentance, and into your Obedience: Oh! let us labor to be more
Evangelical than ever we have been.

I had need call upon my own heart for this: and give me leave to measure your
own hearts by mine. Beloved! I don't now come to call for Repentance barely,
but I come this night unto you, calling for refined Repentance,
Gospel-Repentance: these are refining times: your public Worship refined, the
Government refined: Christians had need refine all their Duties, and all their
Graces, and all their Comforts, and all their Assurance: we had need even take
our whole garment; and look into every seame, brush every seame, there is so
much dust gotten into it. Oh! labor, labor to be more Evangelical, to get
more of the Gospel of Christ into all your Duties. The Gospel is the
Ministration of life: And the Ministration of the Law; is called the
Ministration of death. The Ministration of the Gospel, called the Ministration
of righteousness: the Ministration of the Law, is called the Ministration of
Condemnation. The Gospel, is called a Glorious Gospel, a Glorious Gospel: as ye
do desire that Glory may be upon you, get more of this Glorious Gospel into
you: more of the Gospel into all your Duties, into your Repentance: Which that
you may do: Now even Repent, that ever you have been so Legal in your
Repentance. A man will never be Evangelical in his Repentance, that does not in
some measure, grieve that he has been so Legal in his Repentance.

And to end all: If at amy time, Man or Woman, thou do find thy heart dead,
and dull, and say thou can not pray, thou art unapt, and thy heart's
hardened: Then go, go to the word of the Kingdom, go to the Gospel, go, lay out
thy soul before the word of the Gospel: consider the Kingdom of Heaven, the
word of the Kingdom, free remission unto poor sinners; and this is the only way
for to break your heart: for certainly, this is a truth that I have spread
before you, (think of it:) The appropinquation, approaching, or drawing near of
the Kingdom of Heaven; is the highest, and the greatest motive in the world
unto true Repentance.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, Of the Second VOLVMNE.
A
Abundance ABundance of grace. Page 71 Acknowledge, see Forgive Adam Difference
between the first and Second Adam 21. Page 117 Advance Several advances of
grace since the beginning of the world Page 71 Affliction Affliction in some
measure shows sin Page 242 Alsufficiency God will have his alsufficiency seen
Page 157 Alsufficiency in Christ Page 93 Answerable, see Grace Appointment
Things are rather done by Gods appointment than by the use of the means Page 50
Assistance Fresh Assistance comes from Christ Page 101 Assurance brings
comfort, and how Page 43
B
Beholding Frequent beholding Christ makes us like to him Page 125 Believers
Gods infinite care over Believers Page 62 Believers must trust in God Page 157
Believers must be conformable to Christ Page 158 Saints should believe when all
means fail Page 179 To believe when all means fail is well pleasing to God Page
180 How to believe when means fail Page 189 All things are possible to him that
believes Page 214 See Fear and Union Blessings Some blessings are more common
than others Page 160 See God Boldness Saints may come with boldness to the
throne of grace, and why Page 24
C
Care see Believers Christ Christ's care over weak ones Page 4 Christ
condescends to man Page 5 Christ as kind after death as before Page 6 Christ is
above Moses Page 10 Christ has paid all our debts Page 11 Christ is the desire
of all nations Ibid Spending for Christ makes men receive from Christ Page 16
Why Christ put on our flesh Page 22 Christ gives freely Page 27 How Christ is
fully honored Page 61 All comes from Christ Page 63 Christ is Commissioned by
his Father Page 97 Christ's willingness to save sinners Page 224 Christ most
willing to save the greatest sinners ibid Christ draws near to those that are
not sensible of their sins Page 226 Christ orders things so that no flesh my
glory Page 230 See Love, Holiness, upbraid, Want, Glory, Prophetical, Priestly,
Kingly-office, Union, Grace, Willingness, Work, Happiness, Alsufficiency,
Grace, Honor, Spirit, Throne. Civil Merely Civil men are not answerable to the
grace of Christ Page 122 Christian see Spirit Comfort The Comforts of the
Saints are sure Page 158 Comfort is brought in to men before they seek for it
Page 223 Contention All Contention arises from scantiness Page 47 Conversion
see moment Creator Men should commit themselves unto God as unto a Creator that
works out of nothing Page 177
D
Debt see Christ Death The sentence of Death put upon blessings and the means
to obtain them Page 154 The sentence of Death put upon mercies in another man's
hand Page 161 The sentence of Death is according to the life of the mercy Page
162 Why God gives the promise first and puts the sentence of Death upon it
afterward Page 163 When the sentence of Death is put upon a mercy, how to know
whether it shall rise again Page 167 The Devil is the great hunter of souls
Page 193 Difficulties The way to Jesus Christ is clogd with many Difficulties
Page 193 See Faith Divisions The way to take away Divisions Page 59 Duties see
Obedience
E
Encouragement Encouragments to come to Christ Page 88 Excellency The
Excellency of believers Page 33 Experience Experience is many times a false
rule Page 159
F
Faith What are enemies to Faith Page 175 The large field of Faith Page 176
Faith must be suitable to God Page 179 Faith wears the crown of all graces Page
180 True Faith is most succesful Page 181 Faith is the means to get Faith Page
186 Faith carries a man through all difficulties Page 199 Nothing but Faith
will do it Page 200 Faith shows the soul the invisible things of God Page 202
Faith tells the soul all things are it is own Page 203 Faith opens the eyes of
the soul to see the excellency of Christ Page 204 Faith enables a man to leave
the success of all things to God ibid Faith picks out the love of God from his
anger Page 206 How to raise ones Faith to break through all difficulties Page
208 Faith opposes Legal terrors Page 209 How to raise Faith when it is sunk
Page 201 Fear Fear in believing answered Page 184 Forgive We must Forgive
others without their Acknowledgment Page 235 Freedom Our Freedom comes from
Christ Page 50 Friendship How the Friendship between God and man was procured
Page 8 Fullness Fullness the meaning of the word Page 3 There is a Fullness of
pardon in Christ Page 4 Difference between a Fullness of sufficiency, and a
Fullness of efficiency Page 9 Fullness in Christ, what it is Page 9 Fullness in
Christ's Prophetical office Page 10 Fullness in Christ's Priestly office Page 10
Fullness in Christ's Kingly office Page 10 How all creatures partake of the
Fullness of Christ Page 20 Fullness of grace in a believer may sometimes be hid
from the world Page 31 Difference between the Fullness of the world and the
Fullness of Jesus Christ Page 32 The Fullness of Christ makes us firm Page 40 See
Love, Holiness
G
Gifts Great Gifts the Scripture mentions Page 128 God Gods eye is over his
children Page 8 Gods people should trust God perfectly Page 14 God infinitely
contented in Jesus Christ Page 99 We can do nothing without God Page 100 God
will be seen in his blessings Page 156 God is the being of al beings Page 157
We may boldly expect God in his accostomed ways Page 186 God justifies the
ungodly Page 228 God will be known to be God Page 229 Gods darlings Page 233
Men must labor to be like God Page 234 See Believers, Power Trust Glory Eyeing
of Christ's Glory makes us glorious Page 15 Gospel Difference in holiness
between the Law and the Gospel Page 6 Grace Grace, the meaning of the word Page
3 Benefits arising from all Grace being in Christ Page 104 The Saints Grace is
answerable to the Grace of Christ Page 122 The Infinite Treasury of Grace in
Christ Page 22 Christ as Mediator received not grace for himself, but for
others Page 23 The grace of God may be gainsayed, but it cannot be overcome
Page 30 Christ is the universal cause of grace Page 31 Grace is given out by
proportion Page 32 All grace comes in a way of receiving Page 46 Grace is
supernatural Page 54 All is from grace Page 66 Difference between the times of
the Law, and the times of Grace Page 77 Grace is much opposed Page 80 See
Boldness, Retinue, mystery, Abundance, advance Guilt ought not to keep a man
from Christ Page 12
H
Happiness The happiness of a man in Christ Page 123 Hypocrites not answerable to
the grace of Christ Page 123 Fullness of Holiness in Christ Page 6 See Gospel How
we should honor God Page 107 I Ignorance Ignorance ought not to keep a man from
Christ Page 12 Encouragements Encouragements to Saints Page 164 Insufficiency,
see Nature
K
Kingdom Kingdom of Heaven, what it is Page 247 Kingly Office of Christ, how
wronged Page 18 See Fullness
L
Law, see Gospel A Legal spirit relisheth arguments best that are drawn from
hell and the wrath of God Page 247 The Lives of the Saints are very pleasant
Page 65 Long-suffering Christians ought to wait upon others with Long
suffering. Page 235 Love There Is a fullness of love in Christ Page 4 Wherein the
fullness of Christ's love consists Page 5 The love of Christ draws men to him
Page 40 The love between Christ and christians described Page 117 Love causes
Love Page 247 Lusts God does not give to supply our lusts but our wants Page
185
M
Man Man unable to rise when he is fallen Page 50 Man cannot stand of himself
Page 51 What it is that causes men to use indirect means Page 189 Mercy The
more mercy a man sins against, the greater is his sin. Page 87 See Death
Mystery The great mystery of Grace described Page 82 Moment Conversion done in
a moment. Page 54 Moses, see Christ
N
Name The Saints ^^^ht to lift up the Name of Christ Page 106 Names of Christ,
and the reason of them Page 95 Nature The Insufficiency, of Nature oscerted
Page 49. 92 Natural see Powers Neglect see Opportunity
O
Obedience Duties of Obedience are not taken away by faith Page 58 Office The
Saints imitate Christ in his Offices Page 120 Opportunity Opportunities must
not be neglected Page 237 Opposed see Grace
P
Powers All natural Powers rise against Conversion Page 81 God will have his
Power seen Page 156 Pray We ought to Pray for whatsoever Grace we have Page 56
Presumption It Is no Preshmption to take a thing when it is given Page 188
Preparation Preparation to good comes from God Page 52 Priestly-Office How the
Priestly-office of Christ is wronged Page 18 See Fullness Profane Profane men
are not answer able to the grace of Christ Page 122 Prophetical-Office How the
Prophetical Office of Christ is wronged Page 17 See Fullness Promise So much as
we rest upon a promise, so much of it we make our own Page 16 It is a hard
thing to give the afirmative to a bare promise Page 165 We have the promise of
our forefathers Page 183 See Death
R
Rebellious Christ received gifts for the Rebellious Page 41 Redeemed Who are
the redeemed of the Lord, and why Page 154 Reliance Encouragements to Reliance
upon God in Christ Page 170 Remission Remission brought near to people before
they at all make after it proved Page 220 Repentance What Repentance is Page
216 Repentance both Legal and Evangelical ibid Repentance brought near to
people before they make after it Page 223 How many ways Repentance is known
Page 242 What causes Repentance ibid Repentance is a fruit of faith Page 245
Difference between Legal and Evangelical Repentance Page 248 The reason why no
more men repent than do Page 252 The benefits of Evangelical Repentance Page
255 Retinue The Great Retinue of Grace Page 81
S
Saints Saints must be contented in sufferings Page 129 See Christ, Gospel,
Believers Fullness Scantiness see Contention Self All self-boasting is hateful
to God Page 61 Sheep We are all as lost sheep Page 223 Sentence see Death
Services All our services in this world are our waiting upon God Page 60 Spirit
The same Spirit that was in Christ is in Christians Page 119 Sin see Mercy
T
Throne Christ has a throne on earth. Page 120 Treasury, see Grace Trust We
ought to trust in God for ever Page 236 See God
V
Ungodly, see God Union What the union between Christ and Believers is Page 21
Union between Christ and men how it is taken Page 65 The union between Christ
and the Saints is very glorious. Page 115 Universal Universal causes seldom
produce particular effects, without the concurrence of particular causes Page
31 Upbraid Christ upbraids not men with sin Page 4
W
Waiting, see Service Way, see Difficulties Want All that want should come to
Christ Page 12 Wheels Fear and love are the wheels of every Motion Page 59
Willingness Christ's willingness to communicate Grace to the sons of men Page 25
Our williness to receive proceeds from Christ's willingness to give Page 27
Wonderful God will be known by his name Wonderful Page 187 Work No power in
heaven nor earth can let Christ's work Page 28 World Reason why the goods of
this world satisfy not the soul of man Page 35 Who are the worlds darlings
Page 233
FINIS.

