THE WORKS OF WILLIAM BRIDGE, Sometime Fellow of Emmanuel College in
CAMBRIDGE, NOW Preacher of the Word of GOD at Yarmouth.

The third Volumn.

VIZ.

1. The Spiritual life, and In-being of Christ in all Believers. 2. The Woman
of Canaan.
London, Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

To the Reader.
I Thought good to give thee notice, That these Sermons were taken from the
Authors mouth when he preached them, and so were those also that were lately
published; the several titles whereof you may see in the Margin of this
Epistle: The Titles of the several Pieces that are lately published of Mr.
William Bridge.
The first Volumn.
1. The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2. Satan's power to tempt, and Christ's
love to, and care of his people under temptation. 3. Thankfulness required in
every condition.
The second Volumn.
1. Grace for Grace, or the overflowings of Christ's fullness received by all
Saints. 2. The Spiritual actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 3.
Evangelical repentance.

A word spoken is soon forgotten, but what is written remains, and may do you,
your children, and childrens children good; and this is the intent and desire
of the Author. When you view this mite of his, you may see something of Christ
in it, let it be your care to see what you can find of Christ in your selves:
Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? This Work
advises you, not to rest upon Notions, for then you do no other then feed your
precious souls with fancies, which is as unfitting, and more dangerous food for
your souls, then the husks were for the Prodigals body: It Is a Real Christ, not
a Notional Christ, must satisfy your souls: We all know there is store of gold
in the India's, but we are never the richer for it, unless we have it in
possession; neither is it our hearing of Christ, nor our knowing there is a
Christ, but our having of Christ in possession that benefits our souls: Have
thou a proud heart? read this Book, and it will teach thee humility; Have thou
a despairing heart? read this Book, and it will teach thee to believe; Have
thou a legal heart? read this Book, it will teach thee to be Evangelical; Have
thou a secure heart? read this Book, it will teach thee to be Watchful; Have
thou a froward heart? read this Book, it will teach thee to be meek: If thou
would come to Christ with a Budget of duties upon thy shoulders (old Adams
proud principle) then thou must not look here, for he labors to empty thee of
thy own righteousness, and send thee naked to Jesus Christ, who came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: If thou look for quaint
speculations, and eloquent expressions of humane wisdom, which administer as
little comfort to the Pastor, as edification to the People; in truth here is
nothing to please fantastical cars with whimseyr, it was neither spoken nor
written for any such intent; the words were spoken for edification, and were
(by the desire of friends) written for the same intent: If then thou levest
plain dealing, and to benefit thy soul, read, and this Book will teach thee to
leave the success to God; When Paul has plantted; and Apollo has watered, it is
God must give the increase: Art thou a sinner? here is mercy for thee, here is
Christ for thee: Art thou a drunkard? here is water of life for thee, which if
thou drinkest, thou shall never thirst again: Art thou covetous? here is riches
for thee, spiritual riches, durable riches that will not sade: Art thou
profane? read this, and it will teach thee to be holy: Art thou a saint? here
is comfort for thee, even the holy Spirit the comforter: Art thou in darkness?
here is light for thee, Jesus Christ the true light, that lightens every one
that comes into the World, He shall be ten times more constant to thy soul,
then the sun in the Firmament: Art thou weak in parts? weak in Faith? weak in
grace? read this Book, and (if the Lord be pleased to speak to thy soul) here is
strength for thee, even the mighty God: Art thou poor? El. Gibbor.
here is Christ, and the earth is his, and the fullness thereof, it is laid up in
his hand for thee, it is the purchase of his blood, he has bought it for thee,
it is thy own and he does but keep it for thee, and thou may go boldly to him
for it; though thou art loath to borrow, and ashamed to beg, yet thou may go
boldly for thy own. This Book (courteous Reader) will teach thee to depend on
God, to wait on Christ for all: He feeds the young Ravens, be tends the
Sparrows, he clothes the Lillies, therefore be sure he will not let his
children want, whatsoever storms be without: Keep Christ, and thou shall have
Peace, yea, the Prince of Peace within; then thou shall have peace when all the
world is in trouble, then thou shall be kept safe in the hour of temptation,
which shall come to try all those that live upon the face of the earth: Prepare
a place for the Lord Jesus Christ in thy heart, and he will provide a Mansion
for thee in his Fathers house, where thou shall sin no more, nor sorrow no
more, but God shall wipe away all tears from thy eyes: Always remember, thou
have here no abiding place, but seek one to come: This (courteous Reader) is
the course and aim of the Author in this Treatise for thy benefit, he spends
his spirits, that thou may be happy, that thou may grow up from strength
to strength, till thou come to be a perfect man in Jesus Christ; and this
also is the earnest desire and prayers of him to Almighty God, for thee, who
is, and shall always remain,

Thine to love and serve in the Gospel, William Greenhil.

READER,
THough there be other literal faults, and some redundant its and there is, yet
you will please to mend them with your own pen, and consider the Authors
absence from the Press.

Errata.
PAge 6. line 14. for them read it. p. 9. l. 11. dele not. p. 10. l. 2. for
proxi r. proxim eni'. p. 22. l. 33. for and made alive, r. and not made alive.
p 31. l. 25. for into the world, r. into the other world. p. 37. l. 29. dele
me. p. 44. dele quest. Answ. in the Margin. l. 30 dele but. p. 51. l. 25. for
prey r. praise. p. 75. l. 5. dele so is Christ. p. 76. l. 15. for but if, r.
for it is. l. 16. for dwell r that dwells. p. 77. l. 26. for smiles r.
smiled. and for in l. 29, 33. r. into. p. 81. l. 29. for their r. there. p. 83.
l. 20. after the words of Christ, add barely p. 101. l. 8. for Moses r.
Joshua. p. 103. l. 34. for Legi r. Lege. p. 105. l. 12. for first r. last. p.
108. l. 12. for Dominus and reginae r. Domina and regina. p. 109. l. 13. dele
two p. 199. l. 13. for rigorous r. vigorous.

THE CONTENTS Of the Third VOLVMNE
SERMON I
GALATIANS. 2.20.
TEXT Opened Page 2
Doctrine 1 Every godly, gracious man, is a living man, and lives a spiritual
life Page 3 Explication 1 What this spiritual life is. 1. A supernatual
perfection Page 3 2 It arises from our Union with Christ by the Spirit Page 4
3 By it we act, move, and work toward God Ibid
2 How it may appear, that every godly, gracious man, is thus a living man
Proved 1 By vegetative life Page 5 2 By sensitive life ib. 1 They are sensible
of their sins Page 6 2 Of the hiding of Gods face ibid 3 Of the miseries of the
Churches Page 7
3 By rational life ibid

How it may appear that others are not in this state of life Page 8 Objections
answered Page 9. 10

Application. Comforts for the Saints 1. It is above the life of Adam in
innocence Page 12 2. It is the most pleasant life ibid 3. It is the most
communicative life Page 13 4. The Lord looks upon all our former sins under a
mollifying consideration ibid
Object. I am afraid I have not this spiritual life, because I am dead, cold
and stiff. Answered There is a deadness opposite to liveliness as well as a
death opposite to life Page 15 There is a difference between the coldness of a
living man and the coldness of a dead man ibid
Object. I am afraid I am not alive because I do not grow Answered 1. Do you
grow out of love with your own righteousness? Page 16 2. Are you less subject
to be offended than before Page 17 3. Do you grow more off from youth full
things that godly men look to ibid
Object. I am alive to the world. Answered Page 18


Duties flowing from this spiritual life 1. We should live at a higher rate
than the world does Page 20 2. Our hearts should not run too much after the
things of this world Page 21 3. Our comunion and fellowship should be more with
the living ibid
Exhortation to those that are dead in sins, to come to Christ Page 23
SERMON II.
Gal. 2.20.
Doctrine 2. Our Justification by faith alone is no enemy but a real friend to
our spiritual life Page 26 Explication. 1. What is meant by Justification by
faith alone. Page 27 2. How does it appear that free Justification by faith
alone is the original of all our holiness? 1. By contraries Page 29 2. By the
parallel between the first and second Adam Page 31 3. By the sense of free
remission of sin Page 32 Instanced in 1. Repentance Page 33 2. Mortification
ibid 3. Obedience Page 34

3. Objections Answered Page 34. 35 4. What there is in free Justification by
faith, that does advance our holiness 1. The more a man forsakes his own good
for Christ, the more is Christ engaged to give his good to him Page 36 2. God
does never suffer any man to pass under relation but he writes the Law of that
relation in his heart ibid 3. The more a man agrees with God, the fitter he is
to walk with God Page 36 4. As by seeking Justification by works, a man is
estated in the covenant of works, so by seeking Justification by faith alone, a
man is estated in the covenant of grace Page 37

Application. Hence we see the reason why men are no more gracious Page 39
Object. I fear my obedience was never right, because I have turned aside to a
covenant of works. Answered Page 41 Object. My obedience is not right because
it is so little Answer 1. Do thou limit thy self? Page 42 2 Do thou
oppose them that have much? ibid
Object My obedience is not right because I do not find the visible characters
of Justification, upon my Sanctification Answered. 1. Do thou mourn for sin
because it is pardoned? Page 44 2. Is there a meeting of all graces in thee?
ibid
Object. Suppose I have not stood clear from my own doings in matter of
Justification, how shall I do to do it? Answered. 1. Be humbled in the sight of
God Page 46 2. Study much the transaction of things between God the father and
Jesus Christ ib. 3. Acquaint your souls with the difference between the
covenant of works and the covenant of grace ibid 4. When your duties are
highest let your souls go beyond them ibid 5. When they are lowest you have an
opportunity to stand clear from them Page 47

SERMON III.
Gal. 2.20.
Doctrine. Every true believer that seeks Justification by faith alone is a
self-denying person Page 50 Explication. 1. What it is for a man to deny
himself. Answered Page 51
2. Whereby it may appear that the Gospel works this grace in the heart of man
Answered. 1. If the Law cannot do it the Gospel must Page 52 2. He that lives
under the Gospel is of a disposition contrary to the world Page 53 3. He is
tender of intrenching upon Gods prerogative Page 54 4. The more truly a man
repents the more sensible he is of his own unworthiness ibid
An objection. How does the Gospel only do this, seeing moral men, Heathens and
Papists have spoken and written much for humility and self-denial. Answer 1
Though they be humble, yet they are proud of humility. Page 56 2 It Is only in
some particulars ibid 3 He is ruled by reason, and not by the spirit ibid 4
There is no mystery in it, as there is in a Christians: For 1 A Christian
cries out, what shall he do to be saved: and yet he expects not to be saved by
doing Page 57 2 He accounts himself less than the least of all Gods mercies,
and yet he thinks God has done more for him than if he had given him all the
world ib. 3 He prizes every duty though never so small: and yet counts all dung
in respect of Jesus Christ ib. 4 He looks upon himslf as the greatest of
sinners: and yet would not change condition with a Drunkard, etc. for all the
world. ib. 5 He mourns under reproaches: and yet triumphs over them ib. 6 He
counts all he does nothing: and yet praises God for every thing. ib.


4 What there is in the Gospel to being a man's heart to this frame Answered 1
The more of Gods glory a man sees, the more humble he is Page 58 2 The more
self-denial a man sees in Christ, the more he denies himself Page 60 3 The more
a man sees himself a debtor to Christ, the more humble he is Page 61 4 When
Christ comes into the soul all other things must out ib.


Application. How hard a thing it is to Believe. Page 62 Reply We hope we all
have faith Answer Are there not some that, 1 Cannot deny themselves in outward
things Page 64 2 Seek themselves in spiritual things ib. 3 Stint themselves in
the service of God Page 65 4 Prescribe ways to the Lord ibid 5 Have strange
repetitions to themselves ib. 6 Were never sensible of their own pride in
spiritual things Page 66
Motives to Self-denial 1 The more you deny your selves in spiritual things,
the surer you shall be to keep them. Page 68 2 The more humble you will be in
other things Page 69 3 The more you deny your selves in spiritual things, the
more ye shall be exalted in them. ibid How may we be able to deny our selves in
spiritual things 1 Reflect upon thy defects in every duty thou performest. Page
70 2 Observe much the incomes of the Spirit of the Lord upon thy soul Page 71 3
Study the way of the Gospel much ibid

SERMON IV
Gal. 2.20.
Doctrine Christ is in all believers Page 74 Explication How Christ may be said
to be in a believer 1. By way of power ib. 2. By way of presence ib. 3. In
regard of his essence ib. 4. By way of spiritual manifestation Page 75 5. By
way of personal union ibid
Objection Then a believer may say, I am Christ Answered 1. This union is a
voluntary not a natural act Page 78 2. It is by contact, not by composition
ibid 3. It is by application, not by mixture Page 79 4. There is a great
difference between the in-being of a spiritual thing in a material, and the
in-being of one material thing in another ibid
Objection What difference is there between this union and and the hypostatical
union? Answered 1 Though we are united, yet are we not assumed Page 81 2 There
is no personal Union. ibid 3 It is accidental ibid 4 It is only to make him a
member of the body, not a Mediator Page 82
Object. How does it appear that Christ is really in the soul of a Believer?
Answ. 1 Faith lays hold upon Christ Himself Page 83 2 Christ is in a Believer
as a Believer is in Christ ibid 3 How would there else be three that bear
witness ib.

What benefit comes from this? 1 A Believer shall have glorious Communion with
Christ Page 84 2 Christ's love is infinite toward Believers Page 85 3. A
Believer has something more than any Hypocrite can attain unto ib. 4 Then a
believer shall never spiritually die again Page 86 5 He may come with boldness
to the Throne of Grace. ib.

Application 1 Admire at the unspeakable love of Christ Page 87 2 No wicked man
dares to oppose any of the people of God Page 88 3 Abundance of comfort to
believers ibid
Object. I fear Christ is not in me, because I do not find him working in me
Answ. 1 Whose servants are they that ordinarily come into and go out of your
souls? Page 89 2 Do you find your souls in some measure naturalized to the work
of Christ? ib. 3 Did you ever find that Christ was in you? Page 90 4 Do you not
find some workings of grace, according to that station you have in the body of
Christ? Page 91
Duties flowing from hence. 1 Why should we meddle with any thing that is
distastful to Christ Page 93 2 Why should we not be contented with our
condition whatsoever it be ib. 3 Why should we not venture upon any service of
God all though it be beyond our strength Page 94
Exhortation. Labor to get a share in this great mercy Page 95
SERMON V
Gal. 2.20.
Doctrine Christ has a greater hand in the spiritual actions of a believer
than himself has. Page 98 Explication 1 Christ lives in each Believer ibid
Object. What need then have they of Ordinances? Answered Page 100
Object. What need of Teaching? Answered Page 102

2 How it may appear that Christ lives so in each Believer, that he has a
greater hand in his actions than himself 1 By scripture Page 104 2 By
instances, in our 1 Conversion Page 105 2 Performences ib. 3 Obedience Page 106
4 Suffering ib. 5 Assurence ib.


Reason Because man should not have wherein to boast Page 106 Objection. Surely
there are few believers in the world Answered Page 107

Questions propounded 1. What does ordinarily sway the great actions of your
lives? Page 108 2. Do you find a secret disposition to all the Commandments of
God? ib. 3. Do you find your souls carried to what is good beyond your own
disposition? Page 109 4. Do you find your soul is carried to what is good
beyond what is intended? ib. 5. Were you never persuaded that Christ lived in
you? Page 110
Practical Meditations. 1. Now I see the in-being of Christ in the soul is no
fancy Page 112 2. Here Is a vast difference between a godly and a wicked man
ibid 3. What desperateness is it to oppose the Saints of God ibid 4. What an
evil it is for a Saint to say his duties are hypocrisy Page 113 5. What reason
a believer has to be thankeful to God ibid 6. What an engagement here is for a
poor believer to come to duty though his heart be dead ibid 7. What heavenly
lives believers should lead Page 114 8. We all should admire the infinite love
of Christ ibid

THE CONTENTS Of the WOMAN Of CANAAN etc. On Matthew, 15.21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28.
DIvision of the text 1. From whence Christ came Page 198 Observation None more
rigorous opposers of of the Gospel than learned men Page 199
2. Whither he went ib. Observation The wonderful dispensation of God Page 200
3. The plaintive, a woman Page 201 Observation If faith be true it lays aside
all ones own righteousness
4. Her first temptation Page 202 Observation It is no new thing for believers
to have no present visible answer of their prayers Page 204 If this temptation
fall upon you, do as she did 1. she still acknowledges he was able to help her
ib. 2. That it is his Office to help ib. 3. She does not rest upon her own duty
ib. 4. She propounds her misery ib. 5. She continues praying Page 205


5. Her second Temptation ib. Observation 1. A man's temptations may rise higher
after prayer, and yet he pray aright Page 206 2. Gods dealing with man may
sometimes run cross to his promise ib. 3. Gods people may be tempted about
their election ib. 4. When a Saint is so tempted, his best way is to lay by
dispute and fly to mercy ib. 5. As temptations arise so shall faith increase ib.

6. Her third Temptation Page 207 Observation It is no new thing for believers
to have their unworthiness objected to them ib.
Her answer Page 208 Observations. 1. You cannot speak so meanly of a believer
but he speaks as meanly of himself ib. 2. A true believer thinks honorably of
Jesus Christ even then when he suffers the greatest reproaches to be cast upon
him ib. 3. True says finds out a promise even in the very refusal ib. 4. The
least of Christ is highly prized with a true believer Page 209 5. Faith rises
above our nature ib. Hence you see if you be tempted with consideration of your
own unworthiness, how to give an answer to those temptations ib.

7. Her victory Page 210 Question Why does Christ rather commend her faith than
her other graces? Answer Faith commends Christ above all other graces ib. If
the Lord Jesus commend faith so much, then labor to strengthen faith ib.
Observation The strength of faith does not lie in the assurance of our
salvation Page 211 How many have strong faith that think they have no faith at
all ib.
Lesson We ought to believe in the face of all discouragment Page 212
Objections Answered Page 213



THE CONTENTS OF CHRIST'S COMING etc. On MATTHEW, 25.6.
TEXT opened Page 2
Doctrine Christ comes at midnight Page 5 Explication 1 Christ will come again
ib. 2. How it may appear that Christ will come at midnight 1. When he comes
with converting grace he comes at midnight Page 7 2. When he comes with
comforting mercy he comes at midnight Page 8 3. When he comes with outward
deliverances he comes at midnight Page 9 4. At his last coming he will come at
midnight ib.

Reasons 1. Christ loves his people should watch for him Page 9 2. He would not
have them be proud of mercies Page 10 3. He loves to come so, as he may be most
welcome ib.
Application 1. This Doctrine looks wishly upon such 1. as Christ comes against
Page 11 2. as Christ comes for Page 13

Duties flowing from this Doctrine 1. Trust in the Lord for ever Page 14 2. Why
should those that are employed for Christ, be unconstant because of opposition
Page 15 3. Why should we not go meet him with some present of thankfulness Page
16
Application 2. Then his personal coming is not far off Page 19 Wakening
observations 1. A most desperate sleep is to come upon all professors
immediately before the great coming of Christ Page 20 Desperate because 1.
Universal ib. 2. In the midst of trouble Page 21

2. They shall never wake again till Christ come ibid 3. There are two sorts of
sleepers some keep their oil Page 22 some spend their oil Page 22


THE CONTENTS Of the SAINTS HIDING PLACE etc. On ZEPHANIAH, 2.3.
TEXT Opened. Page 2
Doctrine 1 God has his days of Anger. Page 5 Application 1 It is not
unlawful to be angry Page 7 Applic. 2 How infinitely are our souls bound to
Jesus Christ by whom we are delivered from the wrath to come Page 8 Applic. 3
What just cause there is why godly and faithful Preachers should be sent into
all places of the Kingdom Page 9 Doct. 2 In the days of wrath God is exceeding
willing to hide his own people Page 11 Object. How is it so many of his dear
servants have fallen in these late wars Answered Page 12 Applic. Behold a shelter
in time of a storm Page 13 Whom God has by promise engaged to hide, 1 Those
that hide the Saints of God Page 14 2 Those that keep the word of Gods patience
Page 15 3 Those that fear not the fears of men ibid 4 Those that are
flourishing in Religion, notwithstanding opposition Page 16 5 The meek of the
earth ib.

Doct. 3 Though God be willing to hide his people, yet many times he leaves
them at great uncertainties Page 17 Doct. 4 When Gods wrath is abroad and his
people know not what will become of them, then especially it is their duty to
seek God Page 19 Object. But the wrath of God is pacified toward us Answered I
would it were Three Reasons why it is not 1 The plague is begun Page 20 2 We
are so angry one with another ib. 3 The former sins God has been punishing for
all this while, live still amongst us Viz. 1 Idolatry, and Superstition Page 21
2 Opposition to the Saints ib. 3 Oppression and Injustice ib.


Question What shall we do in this case? Answered 1 Seek the Lord Himself Page
24 2 Seek Righteousness 1 The Righteousness of Christ ib. 2 Righteousness in
opposition to Oppression and Injustice Page 25 3 Righteousness in seeking the
Truth Page 27 Only in seeking this part of Righteousness, observe these Rules 1
Do not despise any Truth because it is old, nor neglect any Truth because it is
new ib. 2 Be as plain and open-hearted as you can ib. 3 Rest not upon any means
though never so great, nor despise any means though never so small Page 28 4
Look not for grapes among thorns ib. 5 Do not so hold the greater, as to
neglect the less; and do not so seek the less as to forget the greater Page 29


3 Seek meekness Page 30
Doct. 5 If any man can do any good in the day of Gods Anger, either for
himself or others, It is the meek of the earth Page 30 1 They have the promise
ib. 2 They most honor Christ ib. 3 They leave their cause to God Page 31 4 They
are most fit for Gods service ib
Applic. How little is this Nation beholding to those that are of a frow ard
and perverse spirit. Page 31 Exhortation To meek ones, go to God, improve your
interest. Page 33
The Titles of the first and second Volumns of the Works of Mr. WILLIAM BRIDGE,
lately puplished.
I. The great Gospel-Mysterie of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
opplied from Christ's Priestly-Office. II. Satan's power to Tempt; and Christ's
love to, and care of his people under Temptation. III. Thankefulness required
in every condition. IV. Grace for Grace; or, The overflowings of Christ's
fullness received by all Saints. V. The Spiritual actings of Faith through
Natural Impossibilities. VI. Evangelical Repentance.
THE Spirituall-Life AND IN-BEING of CHRIST In all BELIEVERS.
Preached at Stepney. July, 2. 1648.

GALATIANS, 2. part of the 20. verse. -- Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.


IN this Epistle, the Apostle Paul does industriously prove, That a man is
justified by faith in Christ alone, and not by the works of the law. Which he
plainly affirms at the 16. verse, Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. But
if a man be not justified by the works of the law, then a man may live as he
lists, may cease from working. Not so (says the Apostle) for so, we our selves
should be found sinner, and Christ would be made the minister of sin, which God
forbid: (verse 17.) yea, and I should build again the things which I have
destroyed, and make my self a transgressor: (verse 18.) But I through the law,
am dead unto the law, that I might live unto God. (verse the 19.)

But if a man be justified by faith alone, and so by the death of Christ; then
a man is crucified with Christ: and if a man be crucified, or if you be
crucified with Christ, how then do you live? Yes, (says he at the 20. ver.) I
am crucified with Christ, Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me.

Nevertheless] or now I live. [I live] that is, a spiritual life. There is a
Natural life: and there is a Spiritual life. He does not here speak of the
Natural life, when he says, Nevertheless I live; because he adds, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me: that is, Spiritually. And when he says, I live: he
speaks it in the Person of every Believer: not in his Own Person, but he
personates a Believer all along. I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I
might live to God; I a Believer. And, I am crucified with Christ: I a Believer.
And, Nevertheless I live. All along he does personate a Believer, and does not
speak in his own Person, but in the Person of a Believer. And he says here,
Nevertheless I live. He had said before, That we are justified by Faith alone,
and not by the works of the Law: and that a Believer was crucified with Christ.
Now (says he) This Doctrine that I have preached unto you, is no way opposite
unto our Spiritual life, or unto our Holiness; yet, now I live, or,
nevertheless I live. From whence then you may observe these Two things.

First. That every true Believer, every Godly, Gracious man, is a living man,
lives aspiritual life, is in the state of life. Secondly. That our
justification by faith alone, and our being crucified with Christ; is no enemy,
but a friend unto this Spiritual life. Nevertheless, I live.
Every Godly, Gracious man. is a living man, is in the state of life; lives a
Spiritual life.

And this ye have most expressly, in that 6. Chap. of John, at the 40. verse.
This is the will of him that sent me, That every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. But though he shall have everlasting life hereafter, it may be he
has not this life for the present: Look therefore what he says at the 47.
verse. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes on me has everlasting
life. It Is not said, He shall have everlasting life, but he has everlasting
life; everlasting life is begun in him already. And that ye may be the more
sure of it, he gives you a double Verily; Verily, verily I say unto ye, He that
believes on me, has everlasting life. But how can this be? Nay, how should it
be otherwise? for a man's life is, as his meat is: and says our Savior, I am
the bread of life, at the 48. verse. Then at the 54. verse. Whesoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life: For my flesh ( at the 55.
verse.) is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; he that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him: As the living Father has
sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me, even he shall live by
me. So that ye see, this Chapter is full of it, here is a cloud of winesses: I
say therefore, That every godly, gracious man, is a living man, and lives
another life from the life of the world, a spiritual life, and is in the state
of spiritual life.

For the opening of this Truth unto ye, We must first of all enquire, What this
Spiritual life is. Take therefore this description of it: It is that
supernatural perfection of soul, whereby a man being united unto Christ, by the
Spirit, is able to act, move, and work toward God as his utmost end.

[It is a supernatural perfection] There is some perfection in every life: Life
is the greatest good and perfection: Death is the greatest evil. Therefore when
the Lord theratned Adam, to punish him for eating the forbidden-fruit, he
says, The day thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2.
thou shall die the DEATH. Death is the greatest evil, and so Life is the
greatest good and perfection. And this the Devil knew full well, Joh, 2.4.
when he said, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life. So that life is a perfection. But I say, this Spiritual life, It is the
Supernatural perfection of the soul. And therefore in the 4. chapter of the
Ephesians, and the 18 verse, This life of the Saints, the very life of the
Saints is called The life of God. It Is a supernatural perfection of soul
therefore.

it rises from our Union with Christ by the Spirit. A man is united to God by
faith, and by the Spirit: and as our outward life does arise from the union
between the soul and the body; and though the body be never so fair or full,
yet if it be not united to the soul, it is but a dead carcass: So our Spiritual
life, it does arise from our union with Christ; and though a man have never so
many moral virtues, and his conversation be never so fair, yet if not united to
Christ by the Spirit, he is but a dead man, spiritually a dead man. And
therefore says the Apostle here in the Text, Nevertheless I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me.

whereby a man is able to act, and move, and work toward God as his utmost and
last end, And therefore says the Apostle in the former verse, I through the
Law, am dead unto the Law, that I may live to God. To God, as my last and my
utmost end. And when a man is able to act, and move, and work toward God, as
his last, and utmost end, then he is said to live spiritually. So that then ye
have this description of our spiritual life; I repeat it again. It is that
supernatural perfection of soul, whereby a man being united unto Christ, by
the Spirit, is able to act, and move, and work toward God, as his utmost end.

Secondly. Whereby may it appear, That every godly, gracious man, is thus a
living man, made partaker of this spiritual life, so as to he able to act, and
move, and work toward God as his utmost end?

vegetative life, the life of Plants and Herbs. The Sensitive life, the life of
Beasts. And the Rational life, the life of Man. And I will show ye, That the
Essential properties of all these lives, are in a Spiritual way in the godly;
and then the Argument will lie thus: If the Essential properties of all these
lives be in a spiritual way in every godly man: then certainly, every godly,
gracious man, is a living man, and in the state of life; living another life
from the life of the world.

plants and herbs, or of flowers, and what is the Essential property of the
Vegetative life? It is to grow; no sooner has a thing the Vegetative life, but
it does grow. All plants, and herbs, and flowers, they grow, and trees they
grow, because they have this Vegetative life. And so the Saints do, they grow
in grace. It Is said of them in the 84. Psalm, They go from strength to
strength. It is an Hebraisme, and it notes Augmentation; From, To, notes
Augmentation. And the like Hebraismes ye have in the New Testament. In Romans
1.27. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, from faith to faith. It
notes the augementation of faith. And so in 2 Cor. 3. ult. But we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory. It notes an augmentation of glory. And so, They go
from strength to strength. That is, they grow in strength; it notes, an
augmentation of their strength. But suppose they do want the Means, and want
the Ordinances, do they grow then? Yes. It is that which is said in the same
Psalm; Though they walk through the valley of Baca, and be in a dry place, where
no water is; yet they go on from strength to strength. And, we ALL with open
face beholding as in a glass, the mirror of the Lord, are changed from glory to
glory. Not some, but all; all believers, and all the godly, they do grow in
grace. And this ye know, is the difference between a Painted child, and a
Living child, Take a living child, and though he be but little, and very weak,
yet he grows bigger. But now, a child that is painted upon a wall, a painted
child grows not: and if a man come to ye and say, What Is the reason that this
child does not grow? two or three years agone he was as big as now he is? you
will easily answer, because he is but a painted child, he is not a living
child; if he were a living child he would grow. Now the Saints and people of
God, they grow in grace, and therefore they are living children: they are living
children, and therefore they grow in grace.

Essential property of the Sensitive life, of the life of Beasts, of the life
of Birds? (for they live another life than the life of Trees, and the life of
Flowers, and of Herbs) what is the Essential Property of that kind of life? The
Essential property of that kind of life is, To be sensible of good or evil
suitable unto them. And so the saints and people of God are: they are sensible
also, they are not past feeling, as it is said of wicked men, but they are
sensible of things suitable to them. Indeed, they have not the sense and feeling
of things as they would, or do desire: but there are Three tings which the
Saints and people of God are all sensible of. They are sensible of their Sins;
especially if they be committed against their knowledge. They are sensible of
the Hiding of Gods face from them. And they are sensible of the Churches
miseries.

sins: Romans 7.23, 24.2 Cor. 12.10.
And therefore Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am! I find a law in my
member: O wretched man that I am! Ye read in other places of his Epistles, he
says, He will rejoice concerning his Afflictions and Infirmities. He tells us
how he was stoned, and how he was imprisoned, scourged, whipped: and in all that
he does not cry out, O wretched man that I am! But now finding the law in his
members, he is more sensible of that than of any affliction; here now he cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver!

Hiding of Gods face: The people of God are the most sensible of that too. For
ye know what David said, Psalm. 42.10.
As a sword in my bones, while they said unto me, where is now thy God? The
Lord had hid his face from him: Oh! (says he) This is a sword in my bones,
while men say unto me, Where is now thy God? And so our Lord and Savior Christ,
when he was upon the cross, he cries out, Matthew. 7.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? He does not cry out unto his
Apostles, and Disciples, why have you forsaken me? They all left him, and yet
he did not say, Oh! Thomas, Oh! Peter, Oh! Matthew, Oh! al my Disciples, and
Apostles, why have you forsaken me? And the Sun had withdrawn his light; and he
does not say, why have thou forsaken me? He felt many pains, being pierced
through, nailed unto the Cross; and yet He does not cry out and say, Oh! what
pains, and tortures do I feel? But, as sensible of this more than of all His
outward torment, He cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And
as it is with the Head, so it is with the Members.

Miseries of the Churches. Jer. 9.1
Ye know how it was with Jeremiah; O that my head were a fountain of tears,
that I could weep day and night for the slain of my people. Thus (I say) a
godly man, though he have not the sense and feeling of his sin, and of other
things as he would have; yet these Three things he is especially sensible of:
Sensible of his own Sin, especially that committed against knowledge. The
Hiding of Gods face from him. And the Miseries of the Churches. Surely
therefore, he is alive, he has this Essential property of this life in a
spiritual way, and therefore he is alive, and in the state of life.

Reason, the Rational life, the life of Man: And what is the Essential Property
of that life? It is, To understand, to know, and to reflect upon a man's own
actions, whether they be Good or Evil. A Beast does many actions: but a Beast
has not power to reflect upon his own action, to consider whether it be Good
or Evil, when he has done the action. Herein a man is distinct from a Beast. A
Beast understands not, knows not, is not able to reflect upon his own action,
and to consider whether it be good or evil when he has done it. But now a Man
that has this Rational life is; and the more of man in a Man, the more he is
able to reflect upon his own action. Look I pray into the 46. Chapter of
Isaiah, and there ye shall find this to be the Essential property of a Man: at
the 8. verse, Remember this, and show your selves men. Wherein? bring it again
to mind, O ye transgressors. Reflect upon your own action, and consider what ye
have done, and thus ye will show your selves to be men, to have the life of men
in you. And upon this account, when as the Prodigal bethought himself, then he
is said to return unto himself. Now every godly, gracious man has this power,
to reflect upon his own action. And therefore converting Ephraim is brought in
thus, Jer. 31.19.2 Cor. 13.5.
Smiting himself upon his thigh, saying, Oh! what have I done? And in that of
the Epistle to the Corinthians, it is said, Know ye not, how that Christ is in
you, unless ye be reprobates. That is, unless ye be Reprobates, ye may know
that Christ is in you. A Reprobate indeed, does not reflect upon his own
action; but as a beast he goes on: he Prays, (may be) and does not reflect
upon his Prayer when he has done: He Hears the Word, and does not reflect upon
his Hearing when he has done: he Sins against God, and does not reflect upon
his own action, and Sin, smiting himself upon his thigh, saying, Oh! what have
I done? But now, every godly, gracious man does thus reflect upon his own
action, and is able to do it. So then, take the Argument in the whole, and it
lies thus: If a godly, gracious man, have all the Essential Properties of those
Three lives, in a spiritual way and manner; then certainly he is in the state
of life, and does live a spiritual life. Now (as ye have heard) Every godly,
gracious man, has all the Essential Properties of al these Three lives, in a
spiritual way and manner; and therefore, certainly he does live a spiritual
life, he is in the state of life.

But how may it appear, that others are not in this state of life? that a
wicked man is not in the state of life? that a wicked man is a dead man,
spiritually dead? that the godly, and the godly only, are made partakers of
this spiritual life, and that others are not?

Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life. Joh. 5.40.
But look into the 3. Chapter of John, and the 36. verse, and ye shall find
these words. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life. Shall not see life; (mark those
words) he shall not come within the view, or sight of life, or of the good
things of life. He does not barely say, He shall not live: No, but he shall not
see life, he shall not see the good things of life. So that plainly then, He
that believes not, is a dead man, spiritually a dead man, and lives not this
spiritual life.

But all motion does not come from life: can a man act, move, and work, and not
be alive? Even wicked men, they Pray, and they Hear, and they Read, and they
Meditate, and they Act, and Move, and work toward God, and they do many good
things, and have many Moral virtues; and can all this be, and yet no life in
them?

work toward God as his last and his utmost end? There is a Twofold End: There
is an Hither-End, or a Proxy: and a Remote-End: A Hithermost-End, and a
Remote, or ones Utmost End. A wicked man indeed, he may have God at the
Hither-End of his action; but Himself is at the Utmost End. Look I pray into
the 2 of Samuel, the 3. Chapter, at the 17, and 18. verses, and there you shall
read to this purpose. Abner had communication with the Elders of Israel,
saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be King over you: Now then do it,
for the Lord has spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David, I
will save my people Israel. Here now he has God in his eye, and the fulfilling
of the Lords promise; here is one End, why he would bring about the Kingdom to
David: For the Lord has spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant
David, I will save my people Israel. But now look a little higher, and you
shall see, what his Utmost End was, in bringing about the Kingdom to David: He
falls out with the son of Saul; and Saul's son comes to him, and says, Wherefore
have thou gone in unto my fathers concubine? verse, 7. Whereupon Abner was very
angry (at the 8. verse) Then was Abner very wrath for the words of Ishbosheth,
and said, Am I a dogs head, which against Judah does show kindness this day
unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and
have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day
with a fault concerning this woman? So do God to Abner and more also, except,
as the Lord has sworn to David, even so do I to him: to translate the kingdom
from the house of Saul, and to set up the Throne of David over Israel. (Mark
Here was Self; he would be revenged of him: Indeed, he set God at the
Hither-End of the action; but it was Self that was at the Utmost End of the
action. And so it is with a wicked man; though he may have God at the
Hither-End of his action; yet Himself is at the Utmost End of his action. It Is
not so with a godly, gracious man; but though Self may be at the Hither-End of
his action; God is the Utmost End: and if you ask him, Neighbor, Friend, why do
you thus Pray, and Hear, and Read, and Meditate? Oh! (says he) that my poor
soul may be comforted; for I am one that am of a troubled spirit: Well, but why
would you be comforted? I would therefore be comforted, That I might serve God
the better. Here his own comfort is at the beginning of the action, but God is
at the utmost-end. Take a wicked man, (I say) and though he does act, and move,
and work toward God; yet he wants a supernatural perfection, he is not united
to Christ by the Spirit, he does not act, and move toward God as his
utmost-end. But now, every godly, gracious man does, and therefore He, and He
alone is the living man, that has this Spiritual life, that is in this state
of life.

Is all a Civil man's Civility nothing? and are all Moral Virtues nothing? are
all these then good for nothing?



thou united to Jesus Christ by the Spirit? then thou art alive, and in the
state of life, made partaker of this Spirittual life. And do thou know what
it is to be made partaker of this Spiritual life? do thou know what a life
it is that now thou live? It is a life, better and beyond the life that thou
should have lived in the state of innocence: for as the second Adam is more
excellent than the first Adam was; 1 Cor. 15.45.
The first man Adam was made a living soul; but the second Adam was made a
quickening Spirit. So that life that comes from Christ the second Adam, is
better and beyond that life that you should have had from the first Adam in the
state of innocence.

Of all lives, this Spiritual life (that now I am speaking of) is the most
Pleasant life. In the 36. Psalm, says the Psalmist concerning the godly, (at
the 8. verse) They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house:
and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. Now, as Austin
does well observe upon that place, The River has many waves, one following
upon another: and so are the pleasures of the Saints, the Spiritual pleasures;
one wave, one pleasure following upon another; and it is a deep river. Oh! but
a River may be dry. Nay, it cannot be dry if it be maintained with a Fountain,
and with Springs. Now see what follows, (at the 9. verse) They shall satisfy
themselves of the river of thy pleasures: Why? for with thee is the Fountain of
life. So that, if a man do but enjoy God in Christ, and be united unto Christ
by the Spirit, he has this life, which shall be as a river of pleasures
maintained with a Fountain. Yea, this life it shall know no end. Your lives
now, they run into death: but this life, this Spiritual life, it shall know no
end. The Apostle argues unto the Romans, that they should die no more, because
they had communion with Christ in his death: Romans 6.10
And therefore (says he) In that he died once, he shall die no more. And so,
you having communion with Christ in his death, you shall die no more: once
alive spiritually, and ye shall die no more. Who can go to Heaven and pull
Christ out of Heaven? In the 2. Chapter of Paul unto the Ephesians, the 5. ver.
says the Apostle there, Even when we were dead in trespasses and sins, has he
quickened us together with Christ: and he has raised us up together, and made
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Here Is sitting together in
heavenly places with Jesus Christ; and we are raised up in Christ. So then, if
once ye have this Spiritual life in Christ, ye shall never die again
Spiritually.

And this life (that now I am speaking of) it is of all other lives, the most
Communicative life. A Man does communicate life unto his Child; but his Child
is not able presently, as soon as it is born, to communicate life unto an other
child. One Beast does communicate life unto another; the Sheep communicates
life unto the Lamb: but the Lamb as soon as it is brought forth is not able to
communicate life to another, and beget another. And so, the Herb communicates
life to another, but not presently as soon as it is an Herb. But now, no sooner
does a man partake of this Spiritual life, but he is presently able to
communicate life unto another: When thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. Luke, 22.32.
No sooner was Paul made alive by another, but he presently goes and
communicates this life unto his brethren.

And let me tell you one thing more: Though your sins have been very great
while you were in the state of death, before you were made partakers of this
Spiritual life: yet when once ye come to partake of this spiritual life, the
Lord will look upon al your former sins under another consideration, a
mollifying consideration. Luke, 15.32
This my son was dead (says the father of the Prodigal) and is now alive: that
is all. He does not say, This was a Whoremonger, or this was a Riotter, or this
was a Spend-thrift, and now he is returned and come home to me for meat: No,
but in mollifying terms, only thus, This my son was dead, and is now alive. And
ye know what is said of David, David committed a great sin in the murder of
Vriah: and yet says the Lord concerning David, He turned not aside to the
right hand or to the left, 1 King. 15.5
save only in the matter of Vriah. He does not say, Save only in the murder of
Vriah; but in a mollifying term, he says only so, Save only in the matter of
Vriah: a mollifying term: Why? because that David had repented of the Sin, and
now the Lord does not look upon it, but under this mollifying term; Save only,
in the matter; not in the murder of Vriah, but in the matter of Vriah. And so,
if thou do repent, and turn unto the Lord thy God, though thy sins have bin
very great in the state of thy death, yet if once come to be made partaker of
this Spiritual life, the Lord will look upon all thy former sins under other
terms, and mollifying considerations: He will not say, Here Is this poor wretch,
that now I do look upon as a Drunkard, or a Swearer; but he will say thus; This
my son was dead, but is now alive: this my daughter was dead, and is now alive.
Thus the Lord will look upon your former evils, if once ye come to be made
partaker of this Spiritual life. Oh! therefore, what a blessed condition are
the Saints and people of God in, that are made partakers of this same Spiritual
life. I remember it is written of a certain Martyr in the Primitive times, a
woman; when she was brought before the enemies of the Gospel, they put diverse
questions to her, and she answered all their questions with one answer, which
was this: Christiana sum, I AM A CHRISTIAN. When they said unto her, Woman, Art
thou married or no. I am a Christian, says she. What Parents have thou, Woman?
I am a Christian, says she. Woman, Where do thou live? I am a Christian,
says she. She answered all their questions with this, I am a Christian. And
so, me thinks a man may answer all objections that are made unto him with this:
I am alive in Christ. But, thou have a dead Estate, much of it is lost at Sea,
or at Land. Well, but I am alive in Christ. But, have thou not a dead Husband,
or a dead Wife, or a dead Child? I am alive in Christ. But, is not thy Name
dead and buried under reproaches? I am alive in Christ. A poor soul may answer
all with this; I am alive in Christ. Oh! what a blessed thing is it, for a man
to be made partaker of this Spiritual life! This is the condition of all the
Saints. Art thou therefore alive, and made partaker of this Spiritual-life?
blessed art thou from the Lord, and thou shall be blessed to all eternity.

I am afraid that I have not this Spiritual life; for my heart is Dead, and
Cold, and Stiff: and dead men, they are Cold and Stiff, very Stiff: and
truly so it is with me; My heart is Cold, and Dead, and Stiff, and therefore I
fear I am free among the Dead, and not free among the Living.

Liveliness, as well as a death that is opposite to Life? And were thine heart
dead, with a death opposite to Life, thou could not feel it. And I appeal to
thee; If that thy soul be alive in opposition to death; have thou not more
cause to be thankful, that thy soul is alive in oppofition to death, than to be
discouraged, that thy soul is dead in opposition to Liveliness?

But there is a differance (ye know) between the coldness of a Living man, and
the coldness of a Dead man. Take a dead man, and if he be cold, it is not al
your fires will put warmth into him, or your Aqua-vitae, or your chafing and
rubbing of him, or your warm beds that will make him warm. But now, take a man
that is cold, and Living; and if ye chafe him, or bring him to the fire, or lay
him in a good warm bed; he recovers his warmth again. And so it is with a godly
heart, though cold, yet bring it unto the Ordinance, either Publicly, or
Privately, and it recovers its warmth again: and has it not been even so with
some of you?

It Is true, A Dead man is Stiff. But have you found your selves in a way of
sin, an evil way; and are ye so stiff therein, as ye will not be put out of
your way, no not by admonition? then ye are stiff indeed. There are two men
that are out of their way, (suppose) The Traveller, and the Thief: The
Traveller is out of his way: and if you come to him and say, Sir, you are much
out of your way: He hearkens to ye, and he thanks ye, and he returns into his
way again. But if ye come to a Thief and say, Sir, you are out of your way, He
laughs, and scorns, and comes not into the way. So, there are some indeed, that
are out of their way; and if you do come to them and tell them, that they are
out of their way; they will bless, and praise the Lord for your admonition,
and labor to return into their way again. But some there are, that if ye tell
them, that they are out of their way, they will rather scorn and jeer at it;
What have you to do to meddle with me? what have you to do to meddle with my
ways? meddle with your own matters. These men are stiff, they are stiff
indeed; why? because they are dead; they are stiff in the way of their sin,
and they will not be stird out, no, not by Admonition, why? because they are
dead. But I appeal to ye, whether is it thus with ye or no? Don't ye say
rather, I praise the Lord, though sometimes, (yea many times) I am out of the
way, and in the way of sin; yet I can rejoice in an Admonition, and bless the
Lord for an Admonition: Yea, this I can speak, though my heart be sometimes
very cold, yet I have found heat, and warmth recovered again, either under a
Public, or under a Private Ordinance: Well then, be of good comfort, thou art
not dead; though thou may be asleep, yet thou may be among the living.

I am afraid that I am not alive spiritually, that I am not made partaker of
this spiritual life, because I do not grow in grace; and this is the difference
between a Living child and a Dead child: the Dead, painted child grows not, but
the Living child grows: and the Lord knows, I do not grow in grace, and
therefore I fear that I am but the painted child of God, and I am not the
Living child.



grows into Christ; and so, the more he grows off from Himself, and his own
Righteousness.



things that the youth of godliness is taken with? Whether do you not find,
that ye are less subject to be offended now, than you were heretofore? And are
you not more grown off from your own Righteousness? Yes, I must needs say this,
through the Lords goodness and mercy to me; though I am not grown in grace as I
desire, yet I am more grown off from my own Righteousness than I was heretofore:
and I am not so subject to be offended at the good ways of God and the people
of God, as heretofore: And (I praise God) I can live off from those things that
the youth of godliness is taken withal: Well, be of good comfort, thou art
grown, and thou art not the painted child, but, for ought I know, thou may
be the living child, dear and precious with the Lord thy father.

But there is one thing yet sticks with me, and makes me afraid that I am yet
dead in my sins and trespasses, and that I am not made partaker of this
Spiritual life, and that is this; I am alive to the World: Can a man live unto
God and to the World too? when I go into the world, and upon my worldly
occasions, then I am very lively; but when I come to Duty, then I am dead, and
my heart dead, and therefore I am afraid that I am not alive to God, and made
partaker of this Spiritual life.

Matthew (the parable of the seed) that there are Three false grounds, unto one
true ground; three unsound hearts, to one sound that live under the Gospel, and
the preaching of the Word; And that ground that goes the furthest and yet falls
short of the truth, is the ground that received the Word; the thorny ground,
and the thorns choked it: It Is the worldly Professor. Three to one, false; and
the worldly Professor goes the furthest, such a one as is choked in Duty with
the world.

But yet notwithstanding, let me tell ye this: Every man is not alive to the
World, or a worldly man; that does use the things of the world, or that is
active, and cheerful in the way of his Calling: For the things of the world,
they are the materials of our grace, that our grace works upon while we are
here below.

Yea, let me tell you further, (and I pray observe it warily) Possibly a man
may see a greater beauty in the things of the world, after conversion, than
ever he saw before. As now, in the case of the Law: while a man is in the state
of nature, then he is under the Law; but when a man is converted and drawn to
Christ, then he is free from the Law; and then when he is freed from the Law;
he sees a greater excellency in the Law, then ever he saw before conversion;
for then says he; Now I see, that the Commandments is holy, just, and good:
indeed, as to the point of justification, he sees a greater emptiness in the
Law than ever he did before; but as to the point of Rule of life, he sees a
greater beauty in the law than ever he did before. So Paul did, as ye read in
the 7. of the Romans. So in this case: though as to the point of Satisfaction,
a man after he is converted sees less in the creature than ever he did before;
yet as to the point of Christ's purchases, looking upon the creature as the
purchase of Jesus Christ, Christ has purchased these for me; he sees a greater
beauty in them now than ever before: for (says he) Christ has purchased
these, and all these are mine in Christ, and Christ has paid for me; Christ is
mine, and I am Christ's, and these are mine, and all is Christ's: Though as to
the matter of Satisfaction, his soul cannot be satisfied, he sees less in the
world than ever he did before; yet as to the matter of Christ's purchase, a man
after his conversion may see a greater beauty in the things of the world than
ever he did before.

Only here, I remember the story of Anselme, walking abroad in the fields, he
saw a Shepherds boy that had taken a bird; and having tied a stone unto the leg
of the bird, the bird offered to fly, and mount up, but still the stone at her
heel pulled the bird back again: Whereupon Anselme falls a weeping; Thus (says
he with himself) it is with men, they sometimes offer to mount up to God in good
purposes, but then they have some earthly business at their heel, and that
makes them fall down again: they purpose, and purpose; and offer, and offer to
mount up to God; but there is a stone at the heel, some earthly business at the
heel, and so they fall down to the earth again. So if it be with you now, if
you have a stone at your heel, a Calling at your heel, an Employment at your
heel, an earthly business at your heel; yet if every day you are mourning, and
lamenting over it, and saying, Oh! what a clog have I at my heel! what a stone
have I at my heel! Oh! Lord, when shall I come to Heaven, that I may be freed
from this clog at my heel? I say, if you mourn, and lament over this clog that
you have at your heel, it rather argues, that you are alive than dead; and
therefore take in all the comfort that has been spoken concerning this Truth;
The Saints and people of God, are in a most comfortable state upon this account.

Is there nothing in this Doctrine but Comfort? is there no Duty that this
Doctrine calls for at our hands? Suppose now, that I be alive, spiritually
alive; that indeed I am not the Painted child, but I am the Living child of
God, and made partaker of this Spiritual life; What is my Duty now that does
flow from hence?



But there are Three things I will propound to you in particular.

Why then should we not live at an higher rate than the world does which have
none of this life? The Beast lives at an higher rate than the Plant, or the
Herb does; why? because it has an higher life than the Plant, or Herb has.
Man (as man) lives at an higher rate than the Beast does; why? because man (as
man) has an higher life than the Beast has. And if a man have this Spiritual
life, he has a life that is higher than the men of the worlds life is: and
therefore, if we be alive, and made partaker of this Spiritual life; why should
we not live at a higher rate? why

should I not say to my own soul thus, (and speak it often) O my soul, Wherein
do thou live at a higher rate than Civil men do? thou have a higher life,
(thou say) why do thou not then live at a higher rate?

Why should our hearts run after the things of the world, so as to feed on them
as our meat, to be satisfied with them? Every life lives upon some meat that
maintains it, and is suitable to it. The Herb has one kind of life, and it has
a meat which suits to it. The Beasts have another life, and they have a meat
that does suit to that life. Man has another life different from the Beast,
and therefore he has a meat that does suit to his life. Now this Spiritual
life, it is another kind of life than the natural life of man is, and therefore
it must have a meat that does suit with it, meat that the world knows not of.
Says our Savior, John. 4.32.
I have meat to eat that you know not of. This life of grace, it is a hidden
life; and therefore the meat thereof that it lives upon, it is an hidden meat.
Then if you are alive indeed, and have this Spiritual life; why do you live
upon these outward things? and why should our hearts run out after these
outward things, so as to live upon them, and make them (as it were) our meat,
for the satisfaction of our souls to live upon.

Why is our Communion and Fellowship together no more living? Why no more
living Fellowship and Communion? why is our Conference no more warm and living?
A living coal warms (ye know:) There is this difference between a living coal,
and a dead coal: Take a Dead coal, and though it be never so great or small, it
sullies and blacks (more or less) but it warms not. But take your Living coal,
which has fire in it, and though it be never so great or small, it does warm,
in proportion, more or less it warms: And if we be as Living coals, why then
is our Conference and Communion together no more warming? When ye go into
Wicked and Ungodly company, there ye meet with dead coals, and there ye are
sullied, and dirtied, and black't by them. (I say) If ye indeed be living
coals, why is your Conference no more warm and living? Oh! what sad times are
we now fallen into? Heretofore, some four, or six, or ten years ago, ye should
not come into a Christians company, but you should have some heart-warming
Conference that you should bless God for many years after. As it is said of
Junius, he came into a poor countrymans house, and he spoke so feelingly of
Christ, that he thought it was not Knowledge only, that would serve a man's
turn, and thereupon he thought of his own condition, and was turned to God. And
we read of the Martyrs in the Primitive times, when they met together, they
would speak much of the Kingdom, the Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven! in so
much, as their Accusers, their Enemies, and Persecutors, charged them, That
they aimed at the Empire, and the Kingdom; whereas they were speaking of a
Heavenly Kingdom, and not of an Earthly Kingdom. But (I say) they were always
speaking of the Kingdom, the Kingdom. And so heretofore, in former times, when
Christians did meet together, then they would speak of the Kingdom, and
something that would warm their hearts together, that they might be the better
all the year after: But now, when we are met together, either our speech is
about News, or some Dispute in point of Religion, or some other thing; yea,
though it be upon the Lord's Day. But if you be living coals, Where is your
living Conference? and your heart-warming-Communion? Certainly, if you be alive
in Christ indeed, and made partaker of this Spiritual life, you will live at a
higher rate than the men of the world do.

Is there nothing in all this Doctrine, concerning those that are dead in sins,
and made alive? has this Doctrine nothing to say to them?

man, and in the state of life, and none else; How many poor dead souls may
this Doctrine find in Congregations! It Is said, that when the Egyptians found
their firstborn dead in their families, there was a great cry through Egypt, a
great cry in every family. And were men as sensible of their souls, as they are
of their bodies; Oh! what a great cry might there be in diverse of your
families! One crying out and saying, Oh! Lord, I have a dead Child, whose soul
is dead. Another, Oh! Lord, I have a dead Servant in my family. Another, Oh!
Lord, I have a dead Wife in my family, whose soul is dead. Another, I have a
dead Husband, a dead Friend. I say, were men and women as sensible of their
souls, as they are of their bodies, what crying! what a great cry this morning
might there be found in this Congregation! But I choose rather to Exhort ye in
the Name of the Lord, for to get this same Spiritual life that now I have been
speaking of: above all getting, to get this Spiritual life. Ye see into what
sad times you are fallen. Who knows how long he shall live? who knows how long
he shall he the owner of his Estate, Liberty, or Life? The Kingdom is full of
blood; and there is a blood-thirsty-disposition that runs through the Kingdom:
and if you and I have our lives taken from us, and we have not a better life;
what a sad condition shall we be in! Wherefore, I beseech ye in the Lord, labor
to get another life, this Spiritual life that shall never be taken from you;
and the Lord give you hearts to do it.

How should that be done?

They will not come unto me, that they might have life. John, 5.40
There are Three things that keep men from Coming to Jesus Christ: one thing
is, Men's Negligence: men think they can repent afterward, and they may have
Christ afterward; and so for the present, they neglect coming to Jesus Christ.
Sometimes (nay always) Unbelief keeps men off from coming to Jesus Christ.
For as faith brings Christ and the Soul together; So Unbelief keeps a man from
coming to Jesus Christ. And another thing is, Unwillingness to part with all for
Jesus Christ. The young man ye have read of in the Gospel, went away sorrowful,
when Christ said to him, Go and sell al, to come to Christ: so he did not come
to Christ upon that account. And so, when we come to men and women, and say,
You must come to Christ, and leave all your former Company; Nay, (say they) I
can have Christ better cheap, upon better terms; and I cannot leave my Company,
and my merry meetings, and so they come not to Christ. But I beseech you in the
Lord, Come unto Jesus Christ; Oh! what ever thou have been, Come unto Jesus
Christ that you may have life.

I have been long dead in my trespasses and sins, and I fear there is no hope
of life for me.

Lazarus, that had been four days dead and stank again; and Christ speaks to
Lazarus, and he comes forth. And these Three (says Austin) shows those that
Christ will raise up from the dead again. The first, (the maid that lay in her
fathers house) notes that sort of sinners, that commit Secret sins, and never
come abroad, never come into act. The second (the son that was carried out of
his fathers house, and laid upon the Hearse) notes that sort of sinners, that
sin openly; Swearers, and Drunkards, whose sins are abroad. And the Third,
(that of Lazarus) notes that sort of sinner, that has lien so long in the
grave that he even smells again. Now I pray further observe this, That when
Christ came to raise Lazarus, then Christ prayed, but he did not pray when he
raised the other two; and he groaned over him; he did not groan over the maid,
nor over the young man, but he groaned over Lazarus, to show the difficulty of
raising a poor sinner from the dead that has lien long in his sin. And
therefore, if there be ever a poor soul here that is dead in his sins; Oh! go
to Christ while thou art young, and fall down before him and say, Oh! Lord, I
have a dead heart of mine own, Oh! let me have life from thee. But whether thou
be young or old, here is yet hope; Lazarus raised as well as the young-maid,
and young man; Lazarus, that lay til he stank again in the grave; and
therefore, yet there is hope though thou have lien long. Wherefore, in the Name
of the Lord, I beseech you all, Come unto Jesus Christ this morning. If there
be ever a poor dead soul in this Congregation, as may be some there is, some
Drunkard crept in, some Swearer, some Unclean wanton: Well, if there be ever a
dead soul in this Congregation, now go to Christ that thou may have life:
and I say to thee, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and
the Lord Jesus give us life.

SERMON II. Preached at Stepney. July, 9. 1648.

GALATIANS, 2. part of the 20. verse. -- Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.


YE heard the last day, that two things especially, are observable from these
words:

First. That every godly, gracious man, is a living man, is in the state of
life, lives a spiritual life. And this I have spoken to.

That our justification by faith alone, is no enemy, but a real friend unto
this our Spiritual life.

Nevertheless, (...) and now I live; but now I live. As if he should say, I
never did live before; but now being justified by faith alone, and having the
experience of this great Truth, Now I live. At the 16. verse, he had said, That
a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ; Whereupon it was, or might be objected: If a man be not justified by
the works of the Law, then is he free from the Law, then is he dead unto the
Law, then may a man live as he lists? Nay, not so (says the Apostle at the 19.
verse) For I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live to God:
(quite contrary) That I might live to God, I am dead to the Law. Yea, and
though I am crucified with Christ, yet now I live, and I never did live till
now; but now I live: This very principle of justification by faith alone, is
the fountain, and original of all my spiritual life. And thus indeed you shall
find: for if you look into those three Epistles of Paul, To the Romans, the
Galatians, and the Hebrews; ye shall find, that the Apostle does give this as
the rise unto all his Exhortations unto Holiness of life. In the latter end of
the Epistle to the Romans, the Apostle does exhort unto holy practices, and to
a godly conversation: but in the beginning, he does state, and prove this
Doctrine, of Justification by faith alone. So in this Epistle to the Galatians;
So in the Epistle to the Hebrews: As if the only rise of all our Holiness, and
Godly Conversation were this, Our Free-justification through the Blood of
Christ, by faith alone.

For the opening, and clearing of this great Truth; I shall spend a little time
in the Explication of the terms. First. Justification by faith alone. Secondly.
I shall labor to demonstrate this Truth unto you, That Justification by faith
alone, Is the Fountain, and Original of all our Holiness, and Spiritual life.
Thirdly. Answer to some Objections. Fourthly. Labor to show ye, What there is
in this Free-justification by faith alone, that may, can, or does advance our
Holiness.


Justification by faith alone?

justification, I mean, That act of Gods grace, whereby through the imputation
of our sins to Christ, and Christ's righteousness unto us, God the father does
pronounce us righteous in his sight. This is justification. And this is done by
the Righteousness, and the Blood of Christ only, as the Material and
Meritorious cause; It Is done only by Faith as the Instrumental cause, so we are
said to be justified by Faith alone. Yet not so, as that a man is justified by
faith which has no works; for all justifying faith is full of works: but these
works do not come into our justification: As now, a man's servants, they have
him to bed; Servants have their Master and Mistress to bed, tend upon them to
bed; but they do not go into the bed with them: They are with them again in the
morning, they bring them water and necessary things, but they do not come to
bed to them. Now (says Luther) Justification is that bed, where Christ and a
Believing soul lies: and though good works, Duties, and Prayers tend upon
Christ, and where ever there is faith, there are these; yet this bed of
Justification is kept free, and entire, and only for the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ; and they come not to bed, they come not into this work. Or if you will
thus: Ye know, that when an Israelite was stung in the wilderness, by a fiery
biting serpent, he was then to look upon the Brazen serpent; and by the
beholding of the Brasen-serpent he was cured; the looking of his eyes cured
him. He had other members, there was the Arms, and the Legs, and other members
that did accompany the Eyes; but though there were other members that did
accompany the Eyes, it was the seeing of the Eyes that did cure the person. And
so, though works do accompany faith; and there is no saving, justifying faith,
but works accompany it; yet it is only the beholding of this Brasen-serpent by
the eye of faith, that does cure the soul as to the point of Justification.
When Abraham went up into the mountain to offer up his son, he spoke to his
servants to stay below, Genesis 22.5.
Stay you here till I come again, at the foot and the bottom of this hill: and
so they did. Servants he had, but they stayed below. And so when a man goes up
into this hill of justification, this high mountain, he takes only his faith
with him, and he says unto all his works, and unto all his duties, stay you
below at the bottom of the hill; and there they attend. So that faith,
justifying faith, though it has always works, yet they come not into this
matter of Justification. It Is Faith alone that justifies. This by way of
Explication.

How may it appear now, that this free-justification of a poor sinner by Faith
alone, is the original of all our Holiness and Spiritual life?

Contraries, have contrary Consequences. If the Law, and Justification thereby,
be no friend, but a real enemy unto all our Grace and Holiness, then
Justification by faith alone is a friend to it. But now take the Law, and you
shall find, that justification thereby, is no friend, but a real enemy unto all
our Holiness, and the power of godliness. What greater enemies had the world
ever to the power of godliness, than the Jews were? and they sought to
establish their own Righteousness, and to be justified by the Law. And now a
days, What more bitter, and more fell enemy unto the power of godliness, than a
Moral Civil man? Why? Because though he do not understand himself, yet he does
secretly seek his acceptance with God, by his own doing, and good meaning. A
man can never live to God, that lives in himself: So long as a man seeks
Justification by his own doing, and working, he lives in himself. Therefore
says the Apostle, Phil. 3.9.
I desire not to be found in mine own righteousness, to be found in it. Hope is
the Spring of action. The Plowman plowes in hope, and he sows in hope; Hope is
the Spring of action. Now if a man seeks to be justified by the Law, or the
works of the Law, there is no hope; for all works are imperfect: and if no
hope, (says the soul) why should I work? as good never a whit, as never the
better. That cannot be the Principle of our grace and holiness, which can
neither Convert a man, nor mortify his sins, nor quicken one to what is good,
nor comfort, or free him from temptation. Now I pray, What is it that Converts
a soul to Christ? is it the Law, or the preaching of the Law? Nay, Joh. 16.9
(says our Savior) I will send the Comforter, and he shall convince the world
of sin. But where do I receive the Spirit? Says the Apostle in the next
chapter, (the 3. of the Galatians) O ye foolish Galatians, this would I know of
ye, Received ye the Spirit by the preaching of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? Not by the preaching of the Law. And as for Mortification of sin: Can
the Law do that? Nay, (says the Apostle in the 8. of the Romans) The Law is
weak: What the Law could not do, being weak, God sent his own Son, to condemn
sin in the flesh. So that the Law cannot mortify sin, the Law cannot do it.
And as for our Quickening unto what is good; Can the Law do that? Nay, (says
the Apostle) The Law is a dead letter; and, the Law is the ministration of
death: And can that which is a dead letter, and the ministraction of death,
quicken us unto what is good? certainly it cannot. And as for our Temptations,
and freedom from them; Does the Law do that? Ye know, the Apostle triumphs,
Romans 8.33
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? And who shall lay any
thing to may charge? shall the Anger, and Wrath of God? shall Satan, or mine
own Conscience? I will not be much afflicted (says he:) why? for, It is God
that justifies. He does not say, for it is Moses that justifies: but it is
Christ that died, and God justifies, not Moses. Sampson (ye know) found
honey-combs in the body of the dead lion; not in hives at home, or trees
abroad; but he found honey-combs in the body of the dead lion. So does a poor
tempted soul find all the honey-combs of comfort, in the body of the dead Lion
of the tribe of Judah, not in his own hive. I have read of a certain man, that
was much in prayer, fasting, and reading; and the Devil came to him and told
him, Friend, Why do thou Pray so much, and Read so much, and Fast so much?
it is all to n purpose, for thou shall go to Hell at the last, thou shall never
go to Heaven: Says he, As for that, I leave that to God; it is not my
Question, whether I shall go to Heaven, or Hell: but my Question is, How shall
I serve God, and live to God? Had he now sought Justification in a away of
works, and by the Law; could he have ever bin able to have answered to this
temptation? Ye may see what the Apostle says, in the 7. chap. of his Epistle
to the Romans; he gives you a Similitude thus: As a woman; so is the sold of
every man: So long as a woman is married unto one man, she brings forth
children unto him, and not unto any other, but is dead unto all others: but
when that man dies, she is free to marry; and she marries another, and she
brings forth children unto him. Now says the Apostle (at the 4. verse.)
Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him, who is raised from
the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. So that so long as a man,
is married to the Law, he can never bring forth fruit unto God. Now then, thus
lies the Reason: If that the Law, and Justification thereby, be no Friend, but
a real Enemy unto all our Holiness: then (contraries having contrary
consequences) Justification by faith alone is a friend, and no Enemy unto our
Spiritual life and Holiness.

Adam. Christ is our second Adam. Now says the Apostle in the 5. of the
Romans, As by the sin of one, death came upon all men to condemnation: so by
the Righteousness of one, life comes unto many. Well, but how came condemnation
upon all men by the sin of one? The first Adam, he was a common person, he did
stand for all mankind; when he sinned, all mankind sinned: and therefore as soon
as any one is born, the sin of Adam being imputed to him judicially; that
imputation is the original of all the Unholiness that is among the children of
men. So our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being our second Adam, he is a Common
person, stands in the room of all the Elect; he was obedient, not for Himself,
but for Them; Christus non meruit sibi. Obeyed not for Himself: and he died not
for himself, but for them, righteous for them. When therefore, a man is born
into the world, is regenerate by faith? then all that Righteousness of Christ,
the second Adam, is imputed to him.

And this imputation of his Righteousness by faith, is the original of all that
Holiness that is in our lives, thus: As all the Unholiness, and Wickedness that
is in the world, does flow from the imputation of the first Adams sin: So all that grace and holiness that is in the world, does flow from the imputation of
the second Adams Righteousness. Now by faith alone, this Righteousness is
imputed, and does become ours, and therefore, Justification by faith alone, is
the principle and original of all our grace and holiness.

be the cause of our Holiness: then Justification by faith alone must needs be
a friend unto it. For these Two, Free-remission of sin, and justification by
faith alone, go together, and are ordinarily taken for one. And therefore, in
the 3. of the Romans, The Apostle having said, (as the 24. verse) Being
justified freely by his grace; he says (at the 28. ver.) That a man is
justified by faith: and saying, That a man is justified by faith, he says,
That a man is justified freely by grace; these are put together. Now,
Free-remission of sin, and the sense thereof, is the Cause of al our Holiness.
Ye know what the Apostle says, Tit. 2.11, 12.
The grace of God has appeared unto all men, teaching us to deny Ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, and soberly in this present world.
All Holiness comes from thence, The apparition of grace, Free-remission of sin.
And ye know what it is that does hatch the Chicken: it is not the fire that does
hatch the Chicken; nor is it the cold water that does hatch the Chicken; but
laying of the eggs under the warm feathers of the living Hen. Come to a man or
woman that has many eggs that are yet not Chickens, within a month or two,
these are al become living Chickens: Say you, How comes it to pass, that all
these are now living Chickens? What! did you lay these eggs unto the fire? No,
for then they would have been roasted. What! did you lay these eggs in the cold
water? No, then they would have rotted; but I laid them under the warm wings of
the living Hen, and so they are become chickens. So you come to a living soul,
a living heart, and you say, Friend, how came you to be thus enlivened, and
quickened? a month or two ago, I heard you complaining of your dead heart, Oh!
my heart is dead: but how came you to be thus enlivened, and to be thus
quickened? Did you go and lay your heart against the fire of the Law? No, that
would have scorched me, and tormented me. What? did you go and lay your heart
in the cold world? No? that would have rotted me: How then? Truly, after all my
fears, and after all my doubtings, I went and laid my cold heart under the warm
wings of Divine-love, and so it came to pass that I am thus enlivened, and I am
thus quickened, as you see this day, for the which I bless the Lord for ever.
Three things there are, that do make up a gracious Conversation: Repentance for
sin past; Mortification of sin present; and the Obedience of faith, or
Obedience.

Now as for Repentance: look I pray what is said in the 7. Chapter of Luke, and
see what is the Cause of that: You read there a story of a great Sinner, that
became a great Penitent, (at the 37. verse.) Behold a woman in the City which
was a great sinner; and she came and stood behind Jesus (at the 38. verse)
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the
hairs of her head. She wept much; Why? for (says the text at the latter end of
the Chapter) she loved much. But why did she love much? She loved much, because
much was forgiven her. So then, Remission is the Cause of Repentance. And have
ye not so much expressly, in that 16. Chapter of Ezekiel, and the last verse. I
will establish my Covenant with thee, that thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done. So that, this shame, and
repentence comes from pacification. And as for this matter, Luther had so great
a fight into it, that (says he) before I was justified by faith alone, and saw
into this matter of Free-remission; I looked upon that word, Repent, as a
terrible word, I did even hate that word; and I wished that there had been no
such word in all the book of God: but after once that word, justitia, was
opened, the righteousness of faith; and after once I understood this Doctrine
of Free-remission, and Justification by faith alone, then I loved Repentance.

As for the Mortification of sin: Ye know what the Apostle says, Let not sin
reign in your mortal bodies, Romans 6.12. and 14.
or have dominion over you: why? for ye are not under the Law, but under grace.
So then, it is being under grace that does mortify sin.

And as for the matter of Obedience: Ye know what the Psalmist says, There is
mercy with thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130 4
that thou may be feared: That is, that thou may be Served, that thou
may be Obeyed. So that, Obedience also, comes from the sight of mercy, and
of Free-remission.

Now, if Free-remission and the sense thereof be the Cause of our Holiness,
then surely, Justification by faith alone, can be no Enemy, but must needs be a
real friend unto all our spiritual life.



Law, in the new Testament is taken Two ways: Either it is taken for the
Covenant of Works, thus: If you keep the Ten Commandments perfectly, you shall
live for ever; this is the Covenant of Works; Sometimes the Law is taken for the
Ten Commandments, the Rule of man's life. In the first sense a Christian is
dead unto the Law, and is freed from it: but in the second sense, a Believer, a
Justified person, is more bound to the Law, to observe it as a Rule of life,
than ever he was. Only you must know, there is a Twofold Bond: There is the
bond of Love; and there is the bond of Fear: as there is the Law of Love; and
the Law of Fear. Love, and the bond of Love; is stronger than Fear, and the
bond of Fear: for Fear is servant to Love, Fear is the hand maid to Love; for
ye never Fear the losing of any good thing, but what ye first Love; Fear is the
servant to Love, and therefore Love is stronger than Fear, and the bond of Love
stronger than the bond of Fear. Now though a Justified person be not bound unto
the Law, with the bond of a servile-Fear; yet he is bound unto the Law, with
the bond of Love; and so he is more obedient, as the bond of Love, is stronger
than the bond of Fear. A man must needs be obedient unto Christ, that takes
himself to be none of his own, but Christ's. Therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
6.20
Glorify Christ with your body, because ye are bought with a price, and because
ye are Gods. So long as a man seeks to be justified by works, and by the Law,
so long he looks upon himself as his own: but when a man sees that he is
justified by faith alone, then he looks upon himself as Christ's; that he is not
his own, and so he is more obedient unto Christ than ever be was before.

men sin the more as they hear more of this Free-remission, and Justification
of a poor sinner by faith alone? Oh! says one, God is merciful, and gracious,
and therefore I will now live as I list, and repent afterward: If this
Doctrine, this truth, and this Grace of God, be the Principle of all our
Holiness; How comes it to pass, that men sin more hereby?

Blackmore? and if fire do warm, how comes it to pass, that it does not put
heat into the Dead man? and if the Sun do enlighten, how comes it to pass, it
does not enlighten those that are blind? I may ask you the reason likewise: But
I will tell you the reason; the reason of this is, Because men are contrary unto
God; and all that do make this use and application of the Lords mercy and
grace, they are contrary unto God; for God works good out of evil: Now a wicked
man being contrary unto God, he works evil out of good. God works the greatest
good, grace, out of the greatest evil sin: a wicked man, he works the greatest
evil, sin, out of the greatest good, Gods love and grace. Why? because he is
contrary to God. But now, take this Truth, and this Grace of God, as it is in
it self, and so it is a very real friend unto all our grace and holiness.

What is there in this Justification by faith alone, or Free-remission, that
does advance our Holiness? how comes it to pass? what is there in this, that
has such an influence upon our lives, to make us the more holy, the more
heavenly?



Relation, but he does write the Law of that Relation upon his heart. For
example, If the Lord does cause a man to pass under the Relation of a
Magistrate: God will write the Law of that Relation upon him, and give him
ability to it. If God do cause a man to pass under the Relation of a
Minister; God will write the Law of that Relation on him. If God do cause a man
to pass under the Relation of a Husband, or a Father; God will cause the Law
of that Relation to be written upon his heart. Now when a man is justified by
faith alone, then he becomes the Son of God; To as many as receive him, he
gives power to be called the Sons of God; even to as many as believe on his
Name. John, 1.12. I say When a man is justified by faith alone, he becomes the
Son of God, he passes under that Relation; therefore then does the Lord write
the Law of that Relation of a Son upon his heart, and thereby he is made more
Son-like by his obedience.

Amos 3.3
Can two walk together, unless they be agreed? Now when a man is justified by
faith, he is Reconciled to God; reconciled to the Justice of God; reconciled to
the Anger of God; reconciled to the Law of God, the Law is his friend. Now
before a man was justified, the Anger of God was his enemy, and the Justice of
God his enemy, and the Law his enemy; but now being justified, he is reconciled
to God: reconciled to his Anger; that is satisfied by Christ: reconciled to the
Law; that is satisfied by Christ; thus he is made a friend to God, he is agreed
with God, and with the Law, and so he can walk with God, and so he is the more
obedient.

Works, and seeking Justification by Works, a man is Estated in the Covenant of
Works: So by Faith, and seeking Justification by Faith alone, a man is Estated
in the Covenant of Grace. When a man is Estated in the Covenant of grace, God
is engaged to give grace unto him, to make him Holy. For that, I pray do but
read what ye have in that 36. Chapter of Ezekiel, at the 25. verse, and so
downwards: Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh: And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. First, I pray mark here,
That the Lord does promise Remission of sin, although it be never so great: I
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and wash ye from all your filthiness, and
from all your idols will I cleanse you. But says a poor doubting soul, Though
the Lord do thus wash me, I am so foul, and so unclean, that I am afraid I
shall never be cleansed. Yes, (says the Lord) I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean. But though I be clean, and cleansed from my guilt,
and my sin pardoned; yet notwithstanding, I have such a naughty, filthy heart,
as I shall foul my self again. See what follows, A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you. Oh! but my heart is so hard, like
a stone, that I shall resist this mercy of God. Nay (says he) And I will take
away the stony heart cut of your flesh: I will take away the Resistance, the
stony heart out of your flesh. But though it be so; as long as my nature is
unchanged, I shall never do that which is right. Says God, I will change your
nature for you; I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh. I will make such a change in you, That whereas
before, Naturally, ye were as hard as a stone, now I will make you as soft as
flesh. But though the Lord do thus change my Nature, yet notwithstanding, I
shall never be able to order my conversation aright, I shall never be obedient.
Mark what follows, I will put my Spirit within you, and I will cause you to
walk in my Statutes: I will make you obedient, says God. Oh! what streams of
mercy are here! But I pray, mind the Fountain whence these flow; They al flow
from this fountain of Free-remission: The first is, I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and cleanse you from all your idols: I will forgive you freely. I
but, though this be set first, it may be this is not the Cause of the rest, how
shall it appear, that this Free-remission is the Cause of all our holiness? Then
(I pray) look into the 8. chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (where this
Covenant of grace is repeated) at the 10. verse, For this is the Covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel, says the Lord, I will put my laws into
their minds, and write them in their hearts: and they shall not teach every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall
know me, from the least to the greatest. Why? for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.
So that Remission is the Cause of Sanctification: I will thus and thus
sanctify, says the Lord; For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more: this is the Cause of all
that. Now I say, When a man is once estated in this Covenant of grace, the Lord
(ye see) is engaged then for to make him holy. And as by works, and seeking
Justification by works, a man is estated in the Covenant of works: So by faith,
and seeking Justification by faith alone, a man is estated in the Covenant of
grace; and so the Lord is engaged for to make him holy. So that, thus you see
now, This Free Grace of God, Justification of a poor sinner by faith alone, it
is no enemy, but a real friend unto all our Holiness, and Spiritual life. No
wonder therefore, that the Apostle says, And now I live.

Gracious, no more Heavenly, no more Holy, no more Spiritual in their lives;
because they think not of this, they study not this, they never had the true
sense of this; Even because they do not stand clear from their own Duties, and
their own Doings, as to the great matter of Justification, and acceptance with
God. Is the Free-remission of sin, and Justification by faith alone, the
Fountain and Original of all our Holiness? Then why stand ye gazing upon your
own Duties? upon your own Prayers, and Mournings? Would ye live? I know you
would: Skin for skin, Job, 2.4.
and all that a man has will he give for his life. But, would you live
Spiritually? would you live an Eternal life? that life that never dies? that
Communicative life? that life that is better than you should have had in the
State of innocence? Then do you stand clear from all your own Doings, and
Duties, and Workings, as to this great matter of your Acceptance with God the
Father. Do ye think that Jesus Christ will present a Duty, or a service unto
God the Father, that steps into his room, and place, and Office? What is the
Place, and room of Christ? He is our Savior; and the Mediator between God and
man, that stands between God and man, for to cause Acceptance with God the
Father: if then you Pray, Hear, Read, Mourn; and think by all these to fetch in
your Acceptance with God the Father; Do you not bring your Duty into the room
of Christ, and into the place of Christ? and do ye think, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, will ever present such a Duty unto God the Father, as steps into his
room and place? What a sad thing is it, for a man to draw his own Works, or his
own Doings into his Acceptance, or Justification! for a man to turn aside to
the Covenant of Works.

But when may a man be said, for to draw his own Works, or Duties into his
Acceptance with God the Father? Or when may a man be said, To turn aside to the
Covenant of Works?

Abraham, though the father of the faithful, went into Hagar, the type of the
Law. And so now the children of Abraham, (Believers) do too much go into Hagar
still, and to the Law still. When a man cannot, dares not rely upon Jesus
Christ, till he first sees his own Duty, and his own Prayer, and Inlargment in
Duty; then he does this too much. When a man does measure all his Acceptance
with God the Father, by his own Performance; if I be Enlarged, then I am
Accepted; if I am straightened, now I am not Accepted; then he does this too
much. When a man will not come to Christ, till his heart be first quickened,
and warmed by some particular word; then he does this too much. But Oh! you,
you that are godly, labor I beseech ye in Christ, to stand clear from your own
Duties, and Doings. The more distinct knowledge ye have in this Truth, and the
more ye walk in the sense of it, the more Spiritual and Holy ye will be.

If these things be so; then do I fear that my Obedience was never right, for
truly, I have even turned aside to a Covenant of Works, the Lord knows I have:
I remember the time, when I had Legal-breakings, and all my Obedience has
flowed from thence: Is Free-remission, and Justification by faith alone, the
fountain and springhead of all our Obedience, and Holiness? then seeing that
Legal-breakings have been the springhead of all my Obedience; then do I fear
my Obedience was never right; Oh! I fear that I have been wrong all this while,
that I have been but an Hypocrite all this while, and have deceived my self,
and been under the Law all this while.

Jacob and Esau: it is said, That the Elder shall serve the Younger. Genesis 25.23.
That is (says Luther) in a spiritual way: the Elder, the Law, shall serve the
Younger, the Gospel: and the Elder Sin, shall serve the Younger Grace. Now,
have your former Legal-breakings, made you more for to prize Grace? and to
prize Christ? and to prize Free-remission, and Justification by faith alone?
Here then, the Elder does serve the Younger. And what though Legal-breakings
were first, and were the Elder in your heart, yet so long as the Elder does
serve the Younger, thou have no reason to be discouraged in this respect.

I fear that my Obedience and my Holiness is not right; because it is so
little, and so scant; Free-remission the fountain of all our Holiness, that is
a full Fountain: and if my Holiness were a stream from that Fountain, it would
be more full and more abundant: The Jews, they knew little of this Truth,
Justification by faith alone, and yet they were Holy; David holy, and Moses
holy, and Josiah holy: is this the fountain of all our Grace, and of all our
Holiness, Free-remission and Justification by faith alone? Then the more
discovery there is of this, the more Holy we should be: but alas, I find my
Holiness, and my Obedience so scant, and little, that I am afraid it can never
come from so full a fountain as this is.

Luther professes, that when he was a Monk (as it seems by his writings he was
fifteen years in a Cloister.) Says he, When I was a Monk, I was a great deal
more Holy then, according to the outward appearance, than I am now: then I
Prayed, and then I Fasted, and then I Macerated my body, and then I went
meanly; but now I Eat, and I Drink, and I Cloth my self as others do; and yet
now one little Prayer, is more accepted with God, than all my fifteen years
Prayers before: why? because (says he) then I prayed in a way of Works, and
sought Justification in a way of Works; but now I have had a taste of this
Justification by faith alone, and a little from thence is more pleasing unto
the Lord, then all the fifteen years before.

But who ever you are that make this Objection, Give me leave to propound these
Two Questions to you.



Jews in that 9. of the Romans, and the 31. verse. But Israel which followed
after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness:
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law: for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. They stumbled at Christ,
they stumbled at Christianity, they stumbled at the corner stone. And so now,
Moral and Civil men, that seek acceptance (though they do not understand
themselves) in a way of working; they oppose those that are more godly that
have the power of godliness. But ye know, a spark of fire, though it be but a
spark of fire, it will not oppose the flame; though it be not so great as the
flame, yet it will not oppose the flame: it opposes the water, but it does not
oppose the flame of fire. And so, if a man have grace, though it be but a spark
of grace, yet notwithstanding, if it be in truth, it will not oppose a flame:
But now Civil and Moral men, that walk in a way of works, and are under the
Law; Oh! how do they oppose those that have the power of godliness! that have
more grace than themselves! that are in a flame for Christ! them they oppose.
Is it so with you that make this Objection? Oh! No, I praise the Lord (your
soul will say, if it speak in truth) though I have but little, the Lord knows,
I do not oppose them that have much: I rejoice rather in those that have more
than my self, yea, I rejoice in those that have the power of godliness. And
Lord! thou know, I do not stint, and limit my self: Oh! I can never be godly
enough, and I can never Repent enough, and I can never mourn for my sins
enough: Well, be of good comfort, this may be no other stream, then what flows
from this blessed fountain, Free-remission, and Justification by faith alone.

I fear that upon all this account, my Obedience, and my Holiness is not right;
for I do not find the visible Characters of Justification, upon my
Sanctification: Justification by faith alone, is the fountain of all our
Holiness; Then if my obedience were right, it would taste of my Justification,
and of Free-remission, if my Holiness were right, it would savor of
Free-remission: but I do not find any visible Characters of Justification, upon
my Sanctification; I do not find that my Sanctification does relish, or savor
of Free-remission, or Justification by faith alone, and therefore I fear al is
naught, my obedience has been naught and wrong all this while.

from ones own soul, many times?

But what are those Visible Characters of Justification, which are engraven
upon a man's Sanctification, so that when a man does see them, he may say,
Surely! here is a Sanctification, that is no other, than that which flows from
Free-remission, and Justification by Faith along?



Is it not thus with thy soul in truth? Do not you find it thus? That now you
look upon the very Justice of the Lord, as your friend, the Justice, and
Righteousness of the Lord as your friend? That now ye are reconciled (as it
were) to those Duties, that heretofore you looked upon as your Enemies? That
now you rest upon the Lord Christ, that you may be Obedient; and your very
resting upon Christ, makes you obedient? your very beholding of Christ, changes
you from glory to glory: as the Apostle speaks. 2 Cor. 3.18
If you would speak in truth from your soul, you would say thus; Lord! thus
it is with me: Now I am reconciled to that Duty that before was an enemy to me,
and now these Works, Duties, and Graces are reconciled: for now, the more I
can rejoice in God, the more I can mourn for sin; and the more I Believe, the
more I can Repent: Heretofore, the more I Believed, the less I Repented, my
Believing was my Security; but now I see these works, and Duties, are friends
to one another, that now, the more I Repent, the more I Believe; and the more I
Believe, the more I Repent, all these works are reconciled in me. And Lord,
thou that know all things, know, That therefore I grieve for my sins,
because thou have pardoned them: and therefore I desire to obey thee, because
thou have forgiven me. Well then, here are the Visible Characters of thy
Justification, upon thy Sanctification, And therefore be of good comfort
notwithstanding this Objection.

Only let me tell thee this: It may be thou have not stood enough at a distance
from thy own Doings, and Duties, as to the matter of thy Acceptance with God.
But, would you be more Spiritual, and Holy in your lives? labor more and more,
to stand at a distance from all your Duties and Doings, as to the great matter
of your Acceptance with God the father.

Suppose that I have not stood clear from my own Doings as to the matter of
my Justification, or Acceptance with God the Father; what shall I do, that now
I may stand clear in this matter? that so this fountain, of Free-remission, and
Justification by faith alone, may be opened upon my soul, and my Spiritual life
thereby, may be more enlarged, and increased?

Some things by way of Answer to this, and so I have done.









then know, that now ye have an opportunity to stand clear from your own
Duties, and Workings, as to the matter of your Acceptance, and Justification by
faith alone. If I have a friend in my house, that lives in my house with me,
whom I would not have privy unto a Work, or a business; I Will take the
opportunity to do the Work, when that friend is out of doors: now (say I) he is
abroad; if he were at home, he would be prying over my shoulder, and he would
have a singer in the business, and he would see it; but now he is abroad, now I
will take the time to do it. My brethren, your Duties, Prayer, and Humiliation,
they are all friends to your Justification: but when Prayer is out, and Duty is
out, and abroad, and out of sight, and not at home; Now take your time to be
clear in the matter of nesting upon Christ ad one, and say, Now my Prayer is
gone, and Duties gone, and all out of sight, Oh! Lord, now I have an
opportunity to rest upon Christ alone: had my Prayer been at home, and Duties
at home; they would have been peering, and prying into this Work, but now they
are all out of sight, now I will rest upon Christ, and his righteousness alone.
This is certain, that this Justification by faith alone, and Free-remission of
a poor sinner, it is the great fountain and principle of all our Grace and
Holiness: and therefore, if you would be more Gracious, and more Holy; I
beseech ye in the Name of Christ, study it much, and walk in the sense of it.
And what is the reason, that many Professors are no more Holy, and Humble; but
waspish, and peevish, and harsh, and of a rugged disposition? but because they
have not studied the Gospel more, and Free-remission, and Justification by
faith alone, and they have not the sense of this upon then hearts; poor souls,
you want the Experience of this: you think (some of you) there is no such way
to be Holy, and Gracious, as to have Legal-breakings, to have the Law pressed
upon you: but I do here tell you in the Name of the Lord, and I lie not, That
Justification by faith alone, and Free-remission, is the principle of all our
Obedience, and all our Holiness. And when Paul came to this, and the sense of
this, Now I live, (says he.) And so will thou say, (poor foul) when thou
come to the sense of this Truth; I was dead before, but now I live: indeed, I
was down, and my heart dead, when I hung upon my own Duties, but now I live.
Now there fore, as you desire to live, and live spiritually, the Lord give you
hearts to live in the sense and experience of this great Truth, Justification,
and Free-remission by faith alone.

SERMON III. Preached at Stepney. July, 16. 1648.

GALATIANS, 2. part of the 20. verse. -- Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.


THE Apostle Paul, having spoken of our living to God, in the former verse: of
our spiritual life, in those words, Yet now I live. He proceeds unto the
Properties of this spiritual life; and those are Three. First, It is a
Self-denying life: Yet not I. I live, yet not I. Secondly, It is a
Christ-advancing life: But Christ lives in me. Thirdly, It is, The life of
Faith: And the life which I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son
of God.

Yet not I. The words hold forth a Self-Depression, or Self-Annihilation. The
words are spoken in the Person of a Believer. So that in all these I's: I
through the Law; and I am crucified; and, I live; Paul does personate a
Believer, one that seeks Justification by faith alone, according to the tenure
of the Gospel. And so the Observation is this.

The way of the Gospel, is a Self-denying way. Though a Believer, that seeks
Justification by faith alone, and not by the Works of the Law, does live a
spiritual life, and so does act, move, and work toward God: yet he cannot
endure to write an I, upon his own Performance. Yet not I. He will Obey God:
but he will not have an I, to be written upon his Obedience. He will Pray to
God: but he will not have an I, to be written upon his Performance. Yet not I.
I live, yet not I. Where ever the Gospel comes in Power, it does work this
Self-denying frame of soul and spirit. And thus it was with Paul, in regard of
his own Person, as ye read in the 1 Cor. 15. chapter, speaking with relation
unto the other Apostles (at the 10. verse) I labored more abundantly than they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. I labored more
abundantly than they all, yet not I. I have been a Preacher of the Gospel, and
have been a means to convert many souls unto Jesus Christ; Yet not I, but the
grace of God with me. I have comforted many Afflicted souls; yet not I. I have
been a means to plant many Churches; Yet not I, but the grace of God with me.
He will not have his work defiled with Self, or this I to be written upon what
he does. And so it is with every Believer, more or less; this is the way, and
this is the spirit of the Gospel: where it comes in Life, Truth, and Power,
thus it is.

For the clearing of this great Truth unto you. First, I shall spend a little
time in the Explication, and show ye, What it is for a man to deny himself in
spiritual things. Secondly, I shall labor to give you some Demonstrations of
the Truth. Thirdly, Answer One Objection. And Fourthly, show ye, What there is
in the Gospel, or the way of the Gospel, that can work a man's heart to this
frame.

What it is for a man to deny himself in Spiritual things?

Natural Self: as, a man's Parts, Wit, Reason, Will, Affections, and
Inclination, are called ones Self. Then there is a Sinful Self: and so a man's
Corruption, Lust, and Sinful Disposition, is called ones Self. And then there
is a Religious Self: and so a man's Duties, Graces, Obedience, Righteousness,
and Holiness, are called ones Self. Now though a man is to deny all these; yet
I am not at this time to speak of the Commonplace of Self-Denial, this
Scripture does not lead me to it: but only of Self-Denial in Spiritual things,
Denial of Religious Self. There is a great difference between a man's denying of
his Sinful, and of his Religious Self. When a man does deny his Sinful Self for
Christ; then he is wholly to leave, and forsake his sin, and that Self. But
when a man is to deny his Religious Self for Christ; he is not to leave, and
forsake his Duty: only, in point of Justification, he is to renounce all; and
in point of Sanctification, he is to attribute the strength, the power, and the
glory of all his Graces, and Duties, unto Jesus Christ, and to himself nothing:
and when a man in point of Justification, does renounce all; and in point of
Sanctification, does attribute the strength, the power, and the glory of all
unto Jesus Christ, and unto himself nothing; then he denies himself in
Spiritual things.

For there is a Twofold denial of ones self, even in Spiritual things. One
that is opposed to Self-Seeking: And another that is opposed to Self-Advancing.
When a man seeks himself, he makes himself his End: When a man does Advance
himself, he makes himself his Prey. Now though a man be to deny himself in
opposition to all Self-Seeking; yet that is not the Argument that lies here, it
is not the Argument of this Scripture; but a man is called upon by this
Scripture, to deny himself in opposition to Self-Advancing: I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me.

But yet again, (that we may rightly understand things) Though every Believer
is to deny himself in spiritual things, and so to depress himself; yet
notwithstanding, he is not to speak evil of the grace of God within him. For,
there are Two things in every Duty, or Service. There is something of Gods; and
something of a man's own: something of the Spirit of God, something of a man's
own. Now though a man may trample upon all his Duties, and upon all his Graces,
as to the point of Justification; yet as to the point of Sanctification, he may
not mis-cal the Graces of God in him, and his Duties, saying, These are nothing
but the fruits of Hypocrisy; for then he should speak evil of the Spirit, whose
works they are. A man tramples, and treads upon the Dirt; but he will not
trample upon Money, upon Gold and Silver; why? because that is a precious
metal, or has the stamp, or the image of the Prince upon it. Now, our own
Duties, our own Righteousness, and Holiness, as to the matter of Justification,
they are nothing worth, and so we trample upon all: but as to the matter of
Sanctification, they have the image of Christ upon them, they are precious
metal; and therefore, for a man to say, This is Hypocrisy, and all is nothing
but Hypocrisy; this is not Self-Denial: properly, Self-Denial in Spiritual
things is; as to the matter of Justification, to renounce all; and as to the
matter of Sanctification, to attribute the strength, the power, and the glory
of all, unto Jesus Christ, and to ones self nothing: and when a man does
attribute all the strength, the power, the glory of all to Jesus Christ, and to
himself nothing; then he is said to deny himself in Spiritual things. This by
way of Explication.

Whereby may it appear that the Gospel works this grace in the heart of man?

Deny himself in Spiritual things; but rather it will make a man to Seek
himself in Spiritual things: For, what is it to preach the Law: but when I
shall come from God, and tell ye, That if ye do keep the Ten Commandments, and
fail in nothing; ye shall be Saved: but if ye fail in any one point ye shall be
Damned, and lost for ever: This will not make a man to Deny his own
Righteousness, but rather to Seek himself, his own Salvation, to avoid
Damnation, and seek himself in Spiritual things. But now, when I come to ye,
and speak thus unto ye from the Lord, That if you do throw down all your own
Righteousness, at the feet of Christ, and rest only upon him; ye shall be
saved: this will make a man to deny all his own Righteousness, and deny himself
in Spiritual things: and this is the Gospel. And the Gospel must needs do it.
For, what is the Gospel? but the Voice of Christ, the Preachings, and the
Sermons of Christ? Now look as it was with the first Adam; the first lesson,
that the first Adam did learn, practice, and teach his posterity, was, To
Advance himself in Spiritual things. Genesis 3.5.
The day that thou eatest (says Satan to him) thou shall not die; but thine
eyes shall be opened, and thou shall be as God. Which he believed, and did eat,
and so labored to Advance himself in Spiritual things: The first lesson, that
ever he learned, and taught his posterity, was, to Advance himself. So the
second Adam; the first lesson that ever the Second Adam (Christ) put in
practice, was Self-Denial in Spiritual things. Phil. 2.6, 7.
For (says the Apostle) He thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet
humbled himself unto the form of a servant, and became of no reputation. This
was the first thing. Now (I say) the Gospel is nothing else, but the Voice of
Christ, the Sermons, and Preachings of Jesus Christ the Second Adam, and there,
and there only, is this lesson to be learned.

Have not I built this great Babel, Dan. 4.30. Luke, 18.11, 21.
for the honor of my Majesty? have not I built it? And ye know what the
Legal-Pharisie said, Lord, I thank thee, that I am not as other men; no
Extortioner, and the like: I fast, I pray, I give alms. He writes an I upon
what he does. Now the spirit of a Believer is contrary; and though a Believer
say, I pray, yet he will bite that I in again, and he will say, yet not I, but
the grace of God within me. He is of a disposition contrary unto that of the
world, and therefore cannot write an I upon what he does.

Isa. 59.19. Isa. 43.25. Luke, 13.32
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, says God. I, even I am he. So
in many places. Go (says our Savior Christ) tell that fox Herod, that I work
to day, and to morrow. This is the great Prerogative of God, and of Christ, for
to write an I upon what they do. Now Believers, they are very tender of doing
any thing that may entrench upon Gods Prerogative, and therefore they cannot
write an I upon what they do, but deny themselves in Spiritual things.

Luke, 15 18, 19.
I will go unto my father, and I will say, I am not worthy to be called thy
son, make me as one of thy hired servants. In my fathers house there is bread,
and I Will go home, and be contented to be one of my fathers, hired-servants.
Before he went out, no Room in his fathers house was good enough for him; but
now upon his return, any room in his fathers house is good enough. Before he
went out, No Diet, no meat and drink in his fathers house would serve his turn,
but away he goes: but now in his return, In my fathers house there is bread
enough (says he) And let me be as one of thy hired servants. Thus sensible of
his own unworthyness, and with self denial. Why? because now Repentance had
taken hold on his heart. Well, the more therefore a man does Repent, the more
sensible he is of his own unworthyness, and the more he will deny himself in
Spiritual things. But I pray what is it that does cause true Repentance? Is it
the Gospel? or is it the Law? Nay, not the Law, but the Gospel. Ye know what
John said, ye know what our Savior said, and ye know what the Apostle said (for
they all preach the same things, the same words) Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. They do not say, Repent, for the kingdom of Hell is at hand;
repent, or ye shall be damned: but, repent, for the kingdom of Grace, Mercy,
and of Free-remission is at hand. So that it is the Gospel that does work
Repentance, and therefore it is the Gospel, and the Gospel only, that does make
a man sensible of his own unworthiness, and to deny himself in spiritual things.

How say ye, That the Gospel only works this? for, have we not heard, and have
we not read, That many Moral-men, Heathen-men, and diverse Papists, that have
written much, and spoken much for Humility, and Self-Denial; yea, and have gone
very far in the practice of it? How therefore, say ye, That this is only the
work of the Gospel? that this only is wrought where the Gospel comes inpower in
the heart of a Believer, that seeks Justification by faith alone?



And indeed, we read of Three Degrees, that the more moderate Papists do make
of Self-Denial, and Humility. The first Degree (says Granatensis, and diverse
others) is, for a man to acknowledge, That all comes from God, and nothing from
himself. The Second Degree of Humility is, to acknowledge, That whatsoever a
man has from God, he has it not from Merit, but from Grace, and mere Mercy.
The Third Degree of Humility or Self-Denial is, for a man, To be Eagle-eyed,
and quick sighted, in beholding another man's excellency; but Mole-eyed, and not
seeing his own Excellency. Even thus far the Papists. So that I grant, men may
seem to go very far herein. But I speak of Self-Denial in Spiritual things: and
do we read of Moral, Heathen men, and the like; that do deny themselves, (it
may be in Words, but I say, in Practice) that do Deny, or have Denied
themselves in Spiritual things?

Plato's house, and saw his house lie very neat: I trample upon Plato's pride
(says he:) But Plato answered again, Not without your own pride. But now, take
a Believer, and he does not only Deny himself, but is sensible of his own
pride, when he is most Humble, in that very thing wherein he is Humble.

Phil. 3.8.
I count ALL things but dung, and dross (says the Apostle) for Christ.



in all his Humility, and Self-denial, wrought by the Gospel. As thus:

He ever cries out What shall I do to be saved? what shall I do to be saved?
And yet he professes, That he does not expect to be saved by Doing. Here Is a
Mystery!

Again, He counts himself less than the least of all Gods mercies: And yet he
thinks God has done more for him, than if he had given him all the world.
Here Is a Mystery!

Again, He prizes every Duties, and every Gift, and every Grace although it be
never so small; prizes it above all the world: And yet he counts al but dung
and dross in regard of Christ. Here Is a Mystery!

Again, He looks upon himself as the greatest sinner, and thinks of every one
better than himself: And yet when he looks upon a Drunkard, or a Swearer, or
the like; professes that he would not change his condition with him for all the
world: He looks upon himself as the greatest sinner, and thinks of every one
better than himself; and yet he says concerning such and such, he would not
change his condition with them for all the world. What a Mystery is this!

Again, He mourns under Reproaches, and the Despisings of men: And yet he
triumphs over them, and is above them. Here Is a Mystery!

Again, He counts himself nothing, and all that ever he does nothing: And yet
he praises the Lord for every little, and thinks that God has done more for
him, in giving him Christ, than if he had given him all the world. Here Is a
Mystery!

Now, as for the seeming Humility, and Self-denial, that is in Heathen, or
Moral, Civil men, there is none of this Mystery: but there is a Spiritual
Mystery that runs along in the veins of all this Gospel-Humility, and
Self-denial.

But, I speak of Self-Denial in Spiritual things: and what Moral, Civil man,
does deny himself in Spiritual things? Dies Lusitanus.
I remember one makes mention of a certain godly man, that was sorely tempted
by Satan, in his time: the man was much in Duty, and Satan comes unto him, and
says, Why do thou take thus much pains? thou do Fast, and Watch; but, O
man, what is there that thou do more than I do? Art thou no Drunkard? or no
Adulterer? Says Satan, I never was Drunk, nor I never committed Adultery:
What? do thou Watch? Says Satan, I never slept. Do thou Fast? Says
Satan, I never ate any Meat, or drank any Beer or Wine. What therefore, O man,
(says Satan) do thou do more than I do? Yes, (says he) Satan, I will tell
thee what I do: I Pray, and I Serve the Lord, and walk Humbly, and Deny my
self. True indeed then (says Satan) I confess herein thou do go beyond me;
for I am Proud, and I have Exalted my self; and therefore, that thou do Deny
thy self, and walk Humbly with thy God; herein indeed, thou go beyond me.
And know, a Christian does not only go beyond Satan, but he goes beyond Moral,
Civil, Legal men: and where ever the Gospel comes in power, it works this
disposition and frame of heart, there it is wrought indeed.

What is there in the Gospel, or the way of the Gospel, which lies in
Justification by faith alone; that can work a man's heart unto this frame, and
disposition?



Job, in the 9. chapter of Job: ye do not read in all that book, that Job does
any where in one chapter, so much Deny himself, as concerning his own
Righteousness (which he stood much upon to his friends) as in this 9th chapter,
verse the 15. Whom (speaking of God) though I were righteous, yet I would not
answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. Verse the 16. If I had
called, and he had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had hearkened
unto my voice. Then at the 20. verse. If I Justify my self, mine own mouth
shall condemn me: if I say I am perfect it shall also prove me perverse. Verse
the 21. Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my
life. Then at the 30. verse. If I wash my self with snow water, and make my
hands never so clean: yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own
clothes shall abhor me. But whence did all this Self-Denial in Spiritual things
proceed now? If you look into the former part of the chapter, ye shall see,
that Job had a great prospect of the glory of God. I know it is so of a truth:
but how should man be just with God? verse the 2. If he will contend with him,
he cannot answer him. God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: verse the
4. Then verse the 5. Which removes the mountains, and they know not: which
overturneth them in his anger. Which shakes the earth out of her place, and
the pillars thereof tremble. Which commands the Sun, and it rises not: and
seals up the Stars. Which alone spreads out the heavens, and treads upon
the waves of the Sea. Which makes Arcturus, Orion, and Plejades, and the
chambers of the South. Which does great things past finding out, yea, and
wonders without number. And now having this prospect of the Greatness, and
Glory of the Lord, he Denies his own Righteousness, Denies himself in Spiritual
things. And ye know how it was with the Prophet Isaiah, in the 6. chapter, and
the 5. verse. Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone: because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. Woe is me, I
am undone, a man of unclean lips. But stay, O thou blessed Prophet, thou art a
great, and have been a great Preacher, a Gospel Preacher: yea, thou art a
Prophet. Well (says he) yet, Woe is me, for I am undone, I am a man of unclean
lips. Why? what is the matter? (At the latter end of the verse) for mine eyes
have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. And if ye look into the former verses of
that chapter, ye shall find, That it was a sight of Christ in his glory, as
will more fully appear, by comparing of that, and the 4. chapter of the
Revelation together at your leisure. But where can a man see the Glory of God,
but in the Gospel? The Gospel is called, The Glorious Gospel: there the Glory
of God is to be seen. With open face there, as in a glass, we behold the Glory
of the Lord.

Phil. 2.6, 7. Luke, 22.42.
from first to last. At the first; He thought it no robbery (says the Apostle)
to be equal with God: and yet he humbled himself, and took upon him the form of
a servant. And at the last: Says he unto his father, Yet not my will, but thy
will be done. And if ye look into the 13. chapter of John, ye shall find there,
that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, takes a towel, and water, and falls down
at the feet of his Disciples, and washes their feet, verse the 4. He rises
from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and girded himself:
and after he had powered water into a besin, he began to wash his Disciples
feet, and to wipe them with a towel. When the Pharisee saw the woman come unto
Christ, and wash his feet, and wipe them with the hair of her head; he wondered,
and said, Surely, if this had been a Prophet, he would not have suffered a
sinner to come so near to him. Did the Pharisee wonder at this condescension,
That Christ should humble himself so far, as to suffer a poor woman to come so
near him, as to wash his feet with her tears? Oh! what condescension is here!
for ever to be wondered at, That the Lord Christ himself, should down upon his
knees, and wash the Disciples feet: that the great God of heaven and earth, the
second person incarnate, should now come, fall down at the feet of sinners. (
Judas among them too) and wash his Disciples feet; When all power in heaven and
earth was in his hands, that with those hands he should wash the feet of
sinners!

But stay a little, It may be all power in heaven and earth was not then given
into his hands. Yes, read for that purpose, the 3. verse (that goes before
this story) Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God; he rises from supper, and laid
aside his garments.

But though all power in heaven and earth, was given into his hands; it may be
he did not know it. Yes, (says the text) Jesus knowing that the Father had
given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to
God: He rises from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and
girded himself: After that, he powered water into a basin, and began to wash the
Disciples feet. Oh! what Self-Denial is here! was there ever such Self-denial
as here? And this, this does the Gospel hold forth unto ye, and only to be
learned in the Gospel.



room for the Prince: So when Christ comes into ones soul, then all goes out,
all other things go out. It Is in our believing on Jesus Christ, as in our
believing on God the Father. Joh. 14.1
Ye believe in God (says Christ) believe also in me. Look how ye believe in
God the Father, so do ye believe in me. Now, as when a man does believe in God
the Father for Provision, for outward Provision; as seeing an Al-sufficiencie
in God to Provide; then he sees an In-sufficiencie in all the creatures to
help, and never before. So, when a man comes to believe in Christ, when he sees
that Al-sufficiency that is in Christ to Redeem, and satisfy for him; then he
sees an In-sufficiency in all his own Duties, and Righteousness, and never till
then. The truth is, A man cannot come to Christ, unless he do forsake all. As,
ye cannot come to this side of the water, or river, unless you come from that
side of the river. Now faith, it is nothing else but a Coming to Jesus Christ:
and therefore, where ever there is true, saving, justifying faith, a man does
Deny himself in Spiritual things: he cannot write an I upon his own
Performance, upon his own Duties.



There are Four streams, that this Spiritual life is divided into: The stream
of Performance: The stream of Obedience: The stream of our Sufferings: The
stream of Enjoyment. True saving faith, and the Gospel, makes a man to Deny
himself in all these.

As for our Performance, and Obedience; ye know what the Apostle says
concerning himself, Thus and thus I was, and thus and thus I have lived: but
now I count all things as dung, and dross in regard of Christ.

As for our Sufferings: I have read of some Martyrs in the Primitive times;
that being in prison, and ready to suffer; diverse came to comfort them, and
called them, Blessed Martyrs. No, (say they) we are not worthy of the Name of
Martyrs: by no means, they would not bear it, that they should call them
Martyrs: Denied themselves in their Sufferings.

As for our Enjoyment: Ye know what the Apostle says, I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all. Phil. 1.23
Nevertheless, for your sakes (says he) etc. I am in a strait. And in another
place, I knew a man (says he) that was taken up into the third heaven, whether
in the body, 2 Cor. 12.2.
or out of the body I cannot say. That was himself, but he would not own
himself in it. And in another place he says, Romans 9.3
That he could wish himself accursed, for his brethren according to the flesh,
that they might receive the Gospel. Oh! what a Self-Denying frame of heart is
here! But where is this Self-Denying frame of heart now to be found amongst us:
How does this I? this same Self, creep into all our Speeches, and into all our
Doings? If it please the Lord to use a Minister in his service: what I-ing is
there! I converted such a man; and I comforted such a man; and it was My
Ministry that did it: Oh! what Self is here! what I-ing is here. So, if it
please God to use a Physician, for the curing of the outward man; It was My
Prescription, and it was My Receipt, and I did it. And if a Christian do but
Pray, or perform any Duty; Thus and thus I said, and these words I spoke; Did
not I tell ye so? I told ye what would come to pass: Oh! what I-ing is there
among people? how does Self, this I and Self creep into all our Speeches, and
into all our Doings! But is this our Faith? and is this the fruit of our Faith?
Every true Believer, that seeks Justification by faith alone, is an Humble,
Self-Denying person; that denies himself in Spiritual things. Then, how few are
there, that have true saving faith! Certainly, this saving, justifying faith,
is another manner of thing than the world takes it to be.

Paul does here, I live, yet not I: and therefore we all now hope, that we have
Faith indeed, for we are able thus to Deny our selves in Spiritual things.



Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. Meekness and Humility go together:
Matthew. 11.29.
Frowardness and Pride therefore go together. Now, when you cannot deny your
selves in your Passions, in your Clothes, in your Company, in a foolish Word
for Christ: Do thou think, that thou can deny thy self, or do deny thy
self in thy Duties, or in thy Righteousness, or in thy Spiritual things for
Christ? Be not deceived.

Head do ye set it down upon? Ye know how it is in Trade, and Merchandising:
Some men trade for themselves; and some trade for others: If I trade for my
Self; when I meet with a loss, I set it down upon mine own Account, and upon
mine own Head. If I trade for Another; when I meet with a loss, I set it down
upon his Account, and upon his Head. Now when you meet with spiritual losses;
whose Account do you set down your spiritual losses upon? upon whose Head? Are
there not many here, that set down their spiritual losses upon their own
Account? Indeed, I have lost such an Opportunity, and I have sinned so, and
therefore shame will come unto me, vexation and trouble. What a dishonor is
this unto Jesus Christ! Some indeed, when they meet with a Spiritual loss,
they set it down upon Christ's Account; and they break their hearts with the
Sense of this. Others, they set down all their spiritual losses upon their own
heads, and their own Accounts; what does this argue, but that they trade for
themselves, and not for Christ: they Seek themselves, and therefore they don't
Deny themselves.





repetitions pass upon their hearts? When you pray all alone, you have no such
repetitions; but when you have prayed, or been Exercising in a Company; does
not your heart run back sometimes, and say; Thus and thus I said, and this and
this I did, and this Expression I had? Has there not been strange kind of
repetitions, after you have performed Duty in Company? Is not here Self? is not
here the I?

more into the presence of God, than pride of Clothes and these Outward things
do, and therefore it is the bolder, and the greater sin; and therefore, who would
not take heed hereof! who would not labor for this Self-Denial? to be humble,
and denying of ones self in spiritual things? Truly, the first step to
Humility, is, to see ones Pride: and the first step to Self-Denial, is to be
convinced of ones Self-Advancing.

I am convinced of mine own Pride, and Selvishness in all my Duties; I can do
nothing, but Self gets in, I write an I upon all that I do, I cannot deny my
self in spiritual things: I have heard of some, that have been so Humble, and
Self-Denying, that they have been willing, and contented to go to Hell if God
would have it so: But as for me, the Lord knows, I am not contented so: I have
a Proud heart, and Self creeps into all that I do, and therefore I fear that I
have not this Faith, therefore I fear that the Gospel never came in power upon
my soul to this day.



Whereas you say, That some are willing, and contented to go to Hell if God
would have it so. I have heard it of some; yea, and that some Ministers have
put people upon this trial, as thus: Art thou contented to go to Hell if God
would have it so? I say, I have heard, that even some Ministers have put people
upon such a trial as this is. But where is their Commission? where has any
Minister such a Commission from the Lord, to put poor people upon such a trial
as this is; Soul! art thou contented to go to Hell if God would have it so? Let
any Minister show me his Commission to put a soul upon such a trial as this is.
And where Soul! have thou a Commission to put thy self upon such a trial? No,
we may have an eye to the recompense of reward; the Lord Christ himself had so,
he had an eye himself unto the recompense of reward: and therefore, though thou
can not bring thy soul unto this height, yet there may be some Humility, even
Gospel Self-denial, that may lie under the leaf. This Gospel Humility, and
Self-denial, it is (as I may so speak) the souls Violet: The Violet (ye know)
it is a very sweet flower; but it lies very low, it hangs down its head, and it
lies under other herbs, obscure herbs; as if it loved to be unseen; but it
smells very sweetly: and if you would find out this sweet smelling herb, and
violet, you must lift up other obscure leaves, and there you shall see it. So,
this Humility, and Self-denial, it lies under other Duties, and under other
Exercises; and if you would see it, you must lift up other leaves: though thou
be not able to attain to that height as to say, Thou would be contented to
go to Hell if God would have it so: yet thou may have this sweet Violet;
though it lie under other herbs, yet thou may see it, and it may be smelt.
Only this: If at any time Self breaks out; if at any time thy soul begins to be
advanced in regard of Duty, or Spiritual things; I do here call upon you, fall
down before the Lord, and humble thy self before him for the pride of thy heart
concerning Spiritual things, and labor to get this Self-denial in spiritual
things. I am not to speak of Self-Denial at large; but I call upon you from the
Lord, to labor to get Self-denial in spiritual things. And take these Two of
Three Motives to it.

Chrysostom, The best treasury to keep any good work in, is, forgetfulness of
that good work. Ye know, that if a man be to travel; the way to keep himself
and his money is, not to go to the Market-Crosse, and there proclaim that he
has so much money about him, or to carry with him in his journey; the only way
for a man to lose his money, is, to let it be known, and to brag of it abroad.
And truly, what is the reason, that so many in these days of ours, have made
shipwreck? Some heretofore have been very forward, had great Gifts, great
Parts; and now they are rotten, they have lost all; Why? because they were
proud of them, and did not walk humbly under them.



Humble thy self, 1 Pet. 5.6
or your selves (says the Apostle) under the hand of the Lord, and he will
exalt you in due time. And let me tell you this: that look what that is wherein
you do Humble your selves before the Lord, therein the Lord will exalt you.
Do thou humble thy self before the Lord in regard of these outward things?
There will the Lord Exalt thee. Do thou humble thy self before the Lord in
regard of thy Parts, and thy Gifts? There will the Lord exalt thee. Do thou
humble thy self before the Lord in regard of thine own Graces? and thine own
Obedience? and thine own Righteousness? Therein will the Lord exalt thee. Ye
know that John the Baptist said concerning Christ, Joh. 3.30 Joh. 1.27
He must increase, but I must decrease. And says John again concerning our
Savior Christ, Whose shoe-latchet I am not worthy to unloose: Or, whose shoos I
am not worthy to carry. Mark how he humbles himself to Jesus Christ: And mark
how Christ honors John; Mat. 11.11. Mat. 8.8
Oh! (says Christ) There Is not a greater among women, than John the Baptist:
Christ exalts him. And so says the Centurion, Oh! Lord, I am not worthy that
thou should come under my roof. Mark how he humbles himself here before the
Lord Christ: And mark what our Savior says of him, Verse. 10.
I tell you, I have not found such faith, no not in Israel. So that look where
thou Humblest thy self, there will the Lord Exalt thee. Soul! do thou desire
therefore, that the Lord would Exalt thy Graces, that thy Gifts and Graces
should be increased? Humble thy self there, and learn to Deny thy self in
spiritual things; not only in regard of outward, but in spiritual things; that
you may say, I live, yet not I.

This is a hard thing: What may we do, that we may be able to deny our selves
in spiritual things?

ashes and throw upon the paper. Will ye do thus for your letters that ye
write? and will ye not do thus for your Duties and Performances? When you have
Prayed, and performed Duty, Go, go and look it over, and there you will find
many Defects; many things to be blotted out, and many things to be put in; and
when you have found the Defects in your Duty, throw dust upon it; and humble
your selves before the Lord.



Christ, but in the Gospel? The more ye see the Free, and Rich grace of God,
the more you will deny your selves in spiritual things: And where shall ye see
the Free Grace of God, but in the Gospel? The more Faith ye have, the more you
will deny your selves in Spiritual things: And where shall ye get faith, but in
the preaching of the Gospel, and in studying of the Gospel? This grace of
Humility and Self-denial in spiritual things, grows only in the garden of the
Gospel, in the bed of the Gospel. There is a Field-Humility; and there is a
Common, or a Field-Self-Denial, as I may so speak. As ye see it is with your
Flowers, and Herbs: There is a garden-Tyme; and there is a Field-Tyme; there is
a Garden-Rose; and there is a Field-Rose: there is a Garden-Hony-suckle; and
there is a Field-Hony-suckle: So there is a Field-Self-Denial, that grows among
Heathen, and among Moral people, that can deny themselves of this or that
particular thing; their Appetite, Clothing, or now and then their Company. And
there is a Gospel-Self-Denial, a Mysterious Self-Denial: But this Self-Denial
in spiritual things, grows no where but in the Garden of the Gospel, there thou
shall see an Humble Christ, and become Humble: There thou shall see a
Self-Denying Christ, and become Self-Denying. Therefore, study the Gospel, and
study the way of the Gospel; You that have walked in a Legal-way, study the
Gospel, and the way of the Gospel. I tell you in the words of the Apostle; If
the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish: 2 Cor. 4.3
If the Gospel, and the way of the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
perish. And therefore, go unto the Lord, and beseech him to open to you the way
of the Gospel: and in this Gospel, you shall be able to learn this Self-denial,
and be able to say, as here the Apostle, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me.

SERMON IV. Preached at Stepney. July, 23. 1648.

GALATIANS, 2. part of the 20. verse. -- Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.


IN these words, ye have another Property of our Spiritual life: it is a
Christ-Advancing life. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. the former
words, Yet not I, hold forth a Depression, and Annihilation of a man's self in
Spiritual things. These words, But Christ lives in me, hold forth the
Advancings of Jesus Christ. He gives the Power, Strength, and Honor of all unto
Jesus Christ, But CHRIST lives in me.

In the words, There are these Three things especially observable: First of al,
The Presence of Christ with a Believer. Christ in me. Secondly, The Efficacy
of his presence. He lives in me. Thirdly, The Constancy of his Effectual
presence: He does not stay for a day, or a night in me, but, He LIVES in me.


And accordingly, there are Three Doctrines, that these words afford. First.
Christ is in all Believers. For he does personate a Believer all along, when he
says, I. (as ye have heard) Christ is in each Believer. Secondly, Christ
lives in all Believers. Thirdly, That Christ does live more in a Believer,
than a Believer does himself. Yet not I, but Christ lives in me.


I shall speak only unto the former.

Christ is in all Believers. Christ is in each Believer. Every Saint and Child
of God, has Christ within him.

This Truth was so commonly known in the Apostles time, 2 Cor. 13.5.
that he says unto the Corinthians. Know ye not, how that Christ is in ye,
unless ye be reprobates? That is, Unless ye be reprobates, ye may know that
Christ is in you. So our savior Christ himself, John. 6.56.
in that book of John, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells
(or abides) in me, and I in him. And so often in the 14, 15, and 16. chapters
o^ J^hn, Christ speaks to this purpose: I in you, and you in me. So that the
Scripture is full of this, Christ is in all Believers, Christ is in each
Believer.

For the clearing of this great Truth. We must First enquire, How Christ may be
said to be in a Believer?

And for that, ye must know, That as God is in the World, and the things of the
World several ways, So Christ is in Believers.

In regard of his Power. He is in all the World: as we say a King is in all his
Kingdom; because his Power extends to all his Kingdom. And so, God is in all
the World, because his Power extends to all the World. And thus Jesus Christ
is in a Believer. But this is not all.

Psa. 139.7, 8.
By way of Presence. Whither shall I go from thy presence? (says the Psalmist)
if I go up into heaven, thou art there etc. And thus also Jesus Christ is in
the heart of a Believer. But yet this is not all.

In regard of his Essnece; Essentially present unto all the World. For every
Attribute of God is like unto God; his Attributes are all infinite, He is
infinite in Wisdom, Justice, Power, and Mercy: and so, he is infinite in his
Essence, and therefore Essentially present unto all the World. And thus also,
Christ is in the heart of a Believer, as God, so is Christ. But yet this is not
all.

By way of special manifestation. And so God was in the Temple, not because his
Essence was more in the Temple than in another place; but he was in the Temple
by way of Manifestation of Himself unto his People there. And thus also, Jesus
Christ is in the hearts of those that are believers, specially manifesting, and
revealing himself there unto them. But yet this is not all neither.

By way of Personal Union, being Personally United to him. As when the Deity by
the second Person, was united unto our Nature, unto flesh: God was in Christ,
Col. 2.9.
in whom the fullness of the Deity dwells bodily, says the Apostle. And thus,
in a Spiritual, and Mystical way and manner, Christ is in all Believers by his
Spirit, the third Person: not only the Graces of Christ, but Christ Himself, in
and by Spirit, is in the heart of a Believer; I say, Christ by his Spirit. And
therefore Chrysostom observes, Whereas it is said, in the 8. of the Romans, and
the 9. verse, That, if the Spirit of God dwell in ye: at the 10. verse
following, it is said, If Christ be in you, Those two being made one, one being
put for the other. Now I say, That Christ that is in a Believer, is not the
Habit of grace only, which the Saints have in their souls, but Christ Himself
by his Spirit. And therefore if ye look into that 5. chapter to the Romans, ye
shall find, That besides the Grace of the Spirit, the Spirit it Self is said to
be given unto us. verse the 5. Because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. Not only the Grace of the
holy Ghost given unto us, and shed abroad in our hearts: but the Spirit it Self
which is given unto us. And so in that 16. chapter of John, where the Lord
promises to send the Comforter. He shall teach ye (says Christ) and he shall
teach ye all things; and he will show unto ye things to come, verse the 13. But
the Habits of grace cannot teach a man, and show him things to come. And what
shall he teach? verse the 13. Whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak.
This is the Comforter, this is the Spirit. Now the Habits of grace does not
thus speak, and hear, and therefore certainly, the Spirit of Christ is in the
hearts of Gods people, and in the hearts of Believers; it is more than the bare
Habit of grace, the gifts and the graces of the Spirit. And to this purpose
it is clearly spoken by the Apostle, in the 8. chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, and the 11. verse, But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you: He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, by His Spirit that dwells in you. This spirit
cannot be meant Habitual grace. But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus
from the dead, dwell in you. So that plainly then, in a Spiritual, and Mistical
way, Christ is in each Believer by his Spirit: and this Christ in a Believer,
is not the Gifts and the Graces of the Spirit, but Christ Himself by his Spirit.

This I confess rises high; but herein I am not alone: diverse Schoolmen, and
Fathers; and of our own Divines concurring with me. The Reverend Mr. Perkins,
it was his speech, That the Person of a Believer, is united to the Person of
Christ. But I shall give you the words of an Eminent Preacher, that is now in
Heaven, as we have them in the Works that he has left. Says he, It has been
a great Dispute among the Schoolmen, Whether a Believer does receive the holy
Ghost it Self, or only the Gifts and Graces of the holy Ghost: But (says he)
it is a Question, where there needs be no Question; and Dispute, where there
needs no Dispute: for the Scripture is clear, That we do not only receive the
Gifts and the Graces of the holy Ghost, but the holy Ghost it Self, for are we
not said to be, the Temple of the holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 6.19.
and this sets out the abundant Kindness, and Goodness of God: As (says he
yet) it is more Kindness to give a man Fruit and the Tree, than to give him
barely the Fruit: So it is abundantly more grace in God, to give a man the holy
Ghost it Self, rather than to give him only the Gifts and the Graces of the
holy Ghost. And indeed, What greater Comfort can there be than this? That
Believers are not only made partakers of the Gifts and Graces of the holy
Ghost, but of Christ Himself, Christ really in all Believers, by his Spirit?

But how can this be? we have ordinarily understood it otherways, and so we
have heard it preached too, That Christ in a Believer, is nothing else but the
Grace of Christ; and the Spirit in a Believer, is nothing else but the Gifts,
Graces, and Operations of the Spirit: and indeed, how can it be otherways? For
if Christ be really united unto each Believer, really in a Believer by his
Spirit, and so made one with him; then a Believer may say, I am Christ, and I
am the Spirit; Which is Montanisme, and which is Blasphemy: and therefore, how
can this be, that Christ is really united to each Believer by his Spirit, and
really in a Believer by his Spirit?

Austin; That walking by the Seaside, he saw a Boy take a Mussel-shell, and go
to the Sea, carrying water with his Mussel-shell into a Ditch that was by, out
of the Sea into the small trench: He asked the Boy, what he would do? Says he,
I will empty all the Sea into that Ditch: And he Smiles, and told him he could
not do it: Says he, No more able are you, with the Mussel-shel of your
Understanding, to carry out the Ocean of the Trinity in a small Tractate and
Discourse of your own. And what is our Understanding, but as a little
Mussel-shell in regard of Christ, and the glory of the Trinity? Surely, we are
not able with this little Mussel-shell, for to carry out all the depth of this
Truth in a small Discourse. But it is a great Mystery. Are ye able to tell me,
How the Child is formed in the Mothers womb? Or, are ye able to tell me, How
the Soul is United to the Body? Who then can tell exactly, How Christ is United
to the soul of a Believer? It Is a great Mystery, one of the great Mysteries of
the Gospel. But because our Savior has said, Matthew. 13.11.
Unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, and to others it is
not; Therefore we should all labor to understand it. And that ye may not be
misled herein (as diverse of late have been) into strange kind of Blasphemous
speeches: I shall give you these Three or Four Propositions, or Distinctions
about it.

Voluntary act, and not a Natural act, and so Christ may Unite himself unto the
soul, so far as it pleases himself: It is not a Natural act, but a Voluntary
act; and being an act wherein he is free, he may Unite himself unto the soul,
so far as he pleases, and no farther. Now the Lord Jesus Christ, has not
united himself so far unto the soul of a Believer, that a Believer should say,
I am Christ, and I am the Spirit: for, then a Believer were to be Worshipped as
well as Christ, if he were Christ.

Contact, or Touching; and joining unto another, by way of Composition. As for
Example, The Sea and the Land, they are joined together, they are united: but
how? not by way of Composition, but by way of Contact; the Sea touches the
Land, and the Land touches the Sea: yet the Land cannot say, I am the Sea; nor
the Sea cannot say, I am the Land: Why? because it is an Union only by Contact,
by Touching, and not by Composition, one being compounded of the other. So the
Union that is between Christ and a Believer, it is by way of Spiritual Contact;
Christ touching the soul by his Spirit; and the soul touching Christ by faith.
I say, it is a Union by way of Spiritual Contact, and Touching; and not by
Composition; and therefore a Believer cannot say, that I am Christ, and I am
the Spirit.

applied unto each other; and another, whereby Essences are mixed together. I Will
make it as plain as I can, thus: Ye see in a heap of Stone, and Wheat, they
both make but one heap: and the Stone may say, I am in this heap, and the Wheat
may say, I am in this heap; but the Stone cannot say, I am the Wheat; nor the
Wheat cannot say I am the Stone: Why? because though they be united, and joined
together in one heap, it is by way of Application of one Essence unto another,
one being applied unto another. But now, take Water and Wine, and mingle them
together, and there every part may say, I am Water, and I am Wine: Why? because
there is an Union by way of Mixture. Now there is a great Union between Christ
and a Believing soul: yet a believing soul though he be really united to Christ
by the Spirit, cannot say, I am Christ, or I am the Spirit: Why? because it is
an Union by way of Application, and not by way of Mixture, as Wine and Water
mingled together: if it were an Union by way of Essences, then a believer might
say, I am Christ, and I am the Spirit: but it is an Union by way of
Application, a believer being applied to Christ, and Christ applied unto a
believer.

Soul, and the Body: the Soul is in every part of a man, tota in toto; the Soul
(says the Philosopher) is wholly in every part; the whole soul of man being in
every part of the body: yet notwithstanding, the Body cannot say, I am the
Soul, nor the Soul cannot say, I am the Body, because they are thus united
together. Why? because here is an Union of a Spiritual thing with a more
Material, which does keep the Natures distinct. Or thus, give me leave to
express it to ye: Iron and Fire being joined together, your Fire is in every
part of the Iron; and yet notwithstanding, though the Fire be in every part of
the Iron, the Iron cannot say, I am the Fire; nor the Fire cannot say, I am the
Iron: Why? because here is a more Spiritual Body, in a more Material Body, and
so the Natures are kept distinct. Or if you will, yet farther: Ye see the Light
in the Air; the Light is more Spiritual than the Air, and the Light is in every
part of the Air; yet notwithstanding, the Air cannot say, I am the Light, nor
the Light cannot say, I am the Air; but these two are kept distinct: Why?
because here is an Union of that which is more Spiritual, unto that which is
more Material. So I say here, Though Christ be really United unto each
Believer; yet notwithstanding, the soul of a Belever is more Material; though
not in it self Material, yet in respect of Christ, the soul is a gross Nature
in regard of the Spirit of Chirst; and being thus (therefore) united, these
Natures are kept distinct; the Spirit of Christ is kept distinct from the
Nature of the soul, and the soul from the Nature of the Spirit: and therefore,
the soul of a Believer, though united really unto Christ by the Spirit, cannot
say, I am the Spirit, or I am Christ.

But if we look (will some say) into the 17. chapter of John, our Lord and
Savior Christ seems to speak this way ( at the 20, and 21. verses) Neither
pray I for these alone, (says he) but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word: That they all may be one; as thou Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. Here Christ prays, That Believers
may be one with him, as he and the Father were one: but if Christ be really
united to each Believer by his Spirit; What difference is there between this
Union, and the Hypostatical Union: the second Person was united unto our
Nature, to our Flesh; and if now Christ be united unto a Believer by his
Spirit, which is the Third Person; What is the difference between the
Hypostatical Union, and the Union of a Believer with Christ by the Spirit?







his Spirit; yet he is so far united unto a believer, as to make him a member
of the Body only: But the second Person was United unto our Nature, and unto
our flesh to make Christ the Mediator. Indeed, if God were United to man for
far as to make him Mediator between God and Man, then he might say, I am God,
and I am Christ: but (I say,) this Union being Voluntary, he does so far Unite
himself unto the soul of a Believer, as to make him a Member of the Body only,
and not a Mediator. But when the Second Person was United to our Nature, the
Union was to make the Person a Mediator. And thus ye see, there is a great deal
of Difference between that Hypostatical Union, and this Mystical Union of a
Believer.

And whereas it is said, in that 17. of John, That Christ prays that we may be
one with him, as he is with the Father: That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one. I answer: This is
an As of Similitude, and not of Equallity: Christ prays unto the Father, that
Believers may be one with him; not by way of Equallitie; that a Believer should
be Equally one with Christ, as Christ is with the Father: for then Christ
should pray, that a Believer might be worshipped too, which he never did: and
if that Christ here should pray, that a Believer might be one with Christ, as
Christ with the Father, in regard of Equallitie; then Christ should pray, that
a Believer should be one with him from Eternity: for says he unto his Father
in the beginning of the chapter, Glorify me with thy self, with the same glory
which I had with thee before the world was. Christ was one with the Father
before the world was. Therefore, if he should pray, that a Believer might be
one with him, in regard of Equallity, he should pray that a Believer might be
one with him, in that respect: which were impossible. But he does not pray,
that a Believer might be one with him, by way of Equallitie, as he is one with
the Father by way of Equallitie, but Similitude. And yet diverse Learned and
Reverend men, think the meaning of that place rather to be this, That they may
be one among themselves: Christ prays, that they may be all one; that is,
Lord, I pray, that they may love, and agree together; he prays for Union among
themselves But suppose it be taken the other way, That the Lord Jesus Christ
here does pray, that Believers may be one with him, as he is with the Father:
That is, not in regard of Equallitie, but in regard of Similitude; that as
Christ is one with the Father in a way suitable to him, so Believers may be one
with Christ in a way suitable unto them.

But suppose then, (you will say) that a Believer is not one with Christ in
this height of One-ness; how may it appear, by way of Scripture reason, that
Christ is really united unto each Believer, and that he is really in the soul
of a Believer by the Spirit; not only in regard of infused Habits; habits of
grace, grace inherent; but that Christ Himself is really in a Believer by his
Spirit?





1 John, 5.8.
There are Three that bear witness in Heaven, and in our Hearts, The Spirit,
Water, and Blood. Water; what is that? That is Sanctification; a man's
Sanctification does bear witness to him that he is the Child of God, that is,
Water. But now, Sanctification consists, either in the Habit of grace, or in
the Acting of grace; if therefore the Spirit of Christ in a Believer, were
nothing else but Grace, inherent Grace, then it were all one with the testimony
of Water: but there are Three that bear witness, There Is the testimony of the
Spirit, there is the testimony of Blood, and there is the testimony of Water:
If by the Spirit we are to understand only, the Grace of Christ, the Habit of
grace in the soul, then there would be but Two that bear witness, namely,
Water, and Blood; because the other would be al one with Water; Water being
meant only Sanctification: But now there are Three that do bear witness unto a
soul that is in Christ, The Spirit, and Blood, and Water; and therefore Christ
is really in a Believer, Christ really united unto all Believers by his Spirit.

What is the Benefit of all this? For suppose that we grant this, That Christ
in a Believer, is not only Grace, and the Habits of grace in the soul, but
Christ Himself is really in the soul of a Believer by his Spirit: What Profit,
Benefit, or Comfort will come unto a Believer more this way than the other way?



Graces only were in them, he would love them; because thereby they should be
made like unto him: but now, if his own Spirit be in a believer, then his love
must needs be infinite unto a believer, and a believers love infinite to him
again in his way. This is a great and glorious Privilege.

Simon Magus, Act. 8.13 Mat. 27.3. Heb. 12.17. Mat. 13.20. Heb. 6.5, 6.
That he believed. Will ye instance in Repentance? It Is said of Judas, That he
also Repented; and Esau that sought the birthright with Tears. Will ye
instance in Hearing of the Word with Joy? It Is said, So did the False ground.
Will ye instance in the partakings of the Heavenly Gift, and Powers of the world
to come? Men have a taste of these, and yet fall away. Will ye instance in
Sanctification it self? It Is said, of certain Wicked men, in the 10. of the
Hebrews, That they trample upon the blood of Christ wherewithal they are
Sanctified. So that even a wicked man, in Scripture phrase, is said, to be
Sanctified, one that falls away, and comes to naught. But where do ye find in
all the Scripture, that the Lord Christ is said to be in an Hypocrite? An
Hypocrite is said to Repent, to Believe, to receive the Word with joy, and to
be Sanctified, in a large sense: but where do ye find in all the Bible, of any
Hypocrite, that Christ is said to be in him, really united unto an Hypocrite?
No, this is the great Privilege of a believer only, Col. 1.27
Christ in you the hope of Glory.

by his Spirit; Then a believer shall never die again, spiritually die again. I
have read of a Woman, that when her Husband was dead, she would eat and drink
the ashes of her Husband; have his body burnt to ashes, and so eat and drink
the ashes of her husband: and being asked the reason; because (says she) I
mean to part with him no more: I have parted with him once already, when we
were one; but now I will be made one with him in another way, and I will part
no more with him. So, if Christ be in a Believer, really in a Believer, Christ
really united unto each Believer by his Spirit; Then Christ and that Believer
shall never part again, that Believer shall die no more: for the same Spirit that
raised up Christ from the dead, dwelling in a Believer, shall also raise up a
poor believer, yea though he fall into the grave of sin; he shall never die
spiritually again upon this account.

Christ: but now, if Jesus Christ be really United unto each Believer by his
Spirit, here is a close Union indeed. And therefore, upon this account, every
believer may come with boldness now, and with Unlimitted expectations of mercy
from God the Father, being brought thus near, that Christ Himself is really in
the believers soul. And what a Glorious, and Blessed Condition is every
believer in now upon this account!

Psalm. 8.1. and 4.
O LOrd (says the Psalmist) how excellent is thy Name! Lord, what is man! Why?
Lord, what is man that thou visitest him! He wondered at the love of God that
would visit man. But behold a greater love than so, to visit poor man, for
Christ is come down into the soul of a believer, he is come into him by his
Spirit: not only come to visit him, but Christ really United unto each believer
by his Spirit. What Glorious and Condescending love is here!

1 Cor. 3.17.
He that defiles the Temple of the Lord, him will God destroy. Take heed what
you do, if there be any opposers here.





Zacheus, so with the Jailor, so with Paul, and so with diverse others. But then
ye must know, That a work is great or small, according to the opposition that
it does meet withal. Though a Work or Duty, be small in it self, yet if it meet
with great opposition, and break through it, it is a great work. It was no
great matter, for the poor Woman to give one or two mites into the Treasury:
but she having no more, and it being all her livelihood, it was a great matter.
It is no great matter, for a man to pray, and to pray constantly, and to
frequent the Ordinances: but when a poor creature shall meet with all
opposition from his Relations, then it may be a great matter to do this. It is
no great matter (comparatively) for to stay ones soul upon Jesus Christ. But in
the time of temptation, when ones soul is full of Fears, and a man does look
upon Christ as his enemy, then to cast himself into the arms of Christ, and to
stay the soul upon Christ then, this is a greater work. So that the work is
great, though small in it self, it is meet with great opposition, and break
through all.

But whosoever you are that make this Objection, fearing that you are not in
Christ, and so have not the comfort of this Doctrine: Give me leave to propound
Three or Four Questions to you.



Adam (ye know) was the first man, the father of us all; we were in Him as your
Root, and he in Us as his Seed: and his Works, they are Naturallized to us. We
being in him as in the Root, and he being in us as in his Seed, his Works are
Naturallized to us. It Is Natural to See, and to Hear, and to Speak; it is
natural for a man to Sin. Sometimes ye have a Wicked man hating of a Godly,
Gracious man, and he can give you no reason for it; I cannot tell why (says
he) but my heart is against him. But I Will tell ye why, and what the reason is:
The Old Man is in him, the Old Adam is in him, and the work of Adam is
Naturallized to a Wicked man, and he can give you no reason, (many times) why
he does so, because the Work is Naturallized to him. So on the contrary, The
Lord Jesus Christ is our second Adam, and believers being in him as in their
Root, and he in them as in his Seed; his Works also, are Naturallized unto a
believer in a great measure; that a believer (sometimes) his heart does stand
unto the good Work of God, and he can give you no reason for it: why I should
love this or that Godly man, I can give you no reason; but so it is, my heart
stands toward him. The reason is this, because that Christ the Second Adam is
within, and so his Work, and Things are naturallized unto the soul; and in some
measure, is it not so with you?

John, ye shall see what our Savior promises. I will pray the Father (at the
16. verse) and he shall give you another Comforter. And what then? He describes
him, in he 17. verse. And at the 20. says he, At that day ye shall know, that
I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. At that day. It may be for the
present you cannot say, that Christ is in you, you in him, and he in you: but
did ye never think yet in all your life that Christ was in you? Yes, once or
twice, or sometimes, I confess I did think that Christ was in me, and I was
strongly persuaded too, that Christ was in me; but now I have lost those
persuasions. But how came ye to be so persuaded at that time that Christ was in
you? Thus it was with me, My heart was Dead, Hard, and I could not pray; I
thought that God and Mercy was gone, that I should never see the face of God
again; and all on a sudden, when my soul was in this sad condition, I know not
how, but all on a sudden, a strange and unspeakable comfort came upon my soul,
and my soul stood up, as it were, from the dead, and then I had that
persuasion, that Christ was in me. Well, soul! be of good comfort, this was
Christ's time, that was Christ's time; and though now for the present, thou can
not say, that Christ is in thee; I tell thee from the Lord, that time shall
come again, and Christ will send the Comforter again, and then shall thou know,
that thou art in the Father, and Christ is in thee, and thou art in Jesus
Christ: for what he said unto those Disciples, he said unto other of the
Disciples, Wait but a little, and thoug I be absent for a little time, I will
send the Comforter, and then shall you know: although you do not know now, yet
there is a time, when the Comforter shall come, and then shall thou know, that
Christ is in thee, and thou art in Jesus Christ.

it puts forth in the Arm: The soul does not act in the Eye, as it acts in the
Mouth; neither does it act in the Tongue, as it acts in the Ear: Should the Eye
say, I have no soul in me, because I cannot speak like the Tongue? Should the
Tongue say, I have no soul in me, because I cannot see like the Eye? Should the
Ear say, I have no soul in me, because I cannot speak like the Tongue? No; but
the soul that is in the body, it gives according to the Station, and Place of
every member that is in the body. So now, the Lord Christ he gives out unto all
his Body: he is by his Spirit in the hearts of Believers; but he does not give
unto every Believer alike: One Believer has one place in the Body of Christ,
and another believer has another place in the Body of Christ. But now I say to
thee, Observe what Place, Room, and Station thou have in the Body of Christ,
and then tell me whether I, or no, do not ye find some workings of grace, in
some measure, suitable unto the Place, Room, and Station that ye have in the
Body of Christ? Yes, surely, I cannot deny this, but there are some workings in
my soul, according to the Room, and Station that I have in the Body of Christ:
And this I can say, That when the Comforter came, then I did know, that Christ
was in me: And I can say this also (through grace) in some measure, The Work,
and Things of Christ are Naturalized to me: They are the Servants, and Retinue
of Christ, that do come in, and go out unto my soul: The Lord knows, I am never
better than when I am speaking of Jesus Christ, and hearing from Jesus Christ.
If so, soul! be of good comfort, though thou have feared that Christ is not in
thee, Go in peace, thy faith has made thee whole;and the Lord Jesus Christ is
in thy soul, the Lord Christ that is thus really united unto each Believer by
his Spirit, is really in thy soul, and in thy heart.

Suppose it be so, That the Lord Christ be in my soul indeed: What is my Duty
now that does flow from hence?





Christ in your souls? And yet, how many are there, that are sometimes blessing
God, and showing some kind of thankfulness for outward things; but as for this
In-being of Christ in the soul, that they are strangers to, and the Lord knows,
they were never thankful for that, so much as for outward things. But if Christ
be in you of a truth; why should you not be contented with your condition what
ever it be, yea, Thankful for it, yea, thankful in Proportion?



To end all be exhorted, to get a share in this great mercy that I have been
speaking of, this In-being of Christ in the soul. It may be there are some,
that can say, I have none of Christ in my soul, and may speak truly; some that
can say, I have an unclean heart within me, but I have no Christ within me; I
have a wanton heart within me, but I have no Christ within me yet; I have a
proud heart within me, but I have no Christ within me yet; I have a Worldly
heart within me, but I have no Christ within me yet; I have a Blaspheming heart
within me, but I have no Christ within me; I have a Lying and Deceitful heart
within me, but I have no Christ within me to this day; Lord, I have no Christ
within me, what shall I do? Others, it may be, that have indeed Christ within
them, and they can say, Lord, I hope that I have Christ within me; but I do not
find that I have room enough in my heart for such aguest: Lord, my soul is not
enlarged enough for such aguest as Christ is: Lord, my soul is a poor narrow
room Oh! that my soul were more enlarged: what shall I do to get my soul
enlarged to give entertainment to such a guest as Christ is?

I shall speak to ye both from one Scripture, turn ye both to the 17. of John,
and the last verse. Says our Lord and Savior Christ, praying unto his father,
And I have declared unto them thy Name, and will declare it: that the love
wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Mind the words.
Here are these Three things observable in them. First of all Here ye have this
Doctrine that I have been speaking of all this while, Christ in each believer:
I in them. Secondly; That God the Father does love a Believer, though not so
much as Christ, yet with the same love that he loves Christ: That the love
wherewith thou have loved me, way be in them, and I in them. Thirdly. That the
way to procure this love, and this In-being is, To have the Name of God
declared. And I have declared unto them thy Name, and I will declare it: Why?
that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. So
then, the way for to get this In-being is, to have the Name of God declared
unto poor souls. What is this Name, the Name of God the Father that Christ
declares? It was the Love of God; his Free Grace and Love. Says Christ, Joh.
3.16
God so loved the world etc. and still Christ preached the love of God to poor
lost man. This was the Name of God that is declared. Now then, do any of your
souls complain, That you want this In-being of Christ in you? or that you have
not room in your souls to entertain such a guest? Observe where this Name of
God is declared, and manifested, this Free love of God is manifested and
declared; and there set thy soul under the spout, under the declaration, under
the manifestation of the Name of God; and look upon it, as if Christ were there
preaching and declaring the Name of God to thy soul, and there Christ shall
come in unto thee, and there thy poor narrowed, and straightened soul shall be
enlarged, and made more capacious for Jesus Christ.

Wherefore I beseech you then, receive this Word of Exhortation; and let every
soul go unto Jesus Christ, and say to this purpose, Lord Jesus, Thy work is to
declare the Name of the Father to poor sinners, that so thou may be in them:
now O Lord, I am a poor sinner, Lord, declare the Name of the Father to me;
Lord, declare the Name of the Father to me. I have a straightened heart, I have
not room enough for thee in my soul; Oh! that it were enlarged for thee: now
therefore declare this Name of thy Father to me; that so the love wherewith thy
Father has loved thee, may be in me, and I in thee also. Thus I say, go unto
Jesus Christ. And study, study much this In-being of Christ in your souls: you
that have it not, labor to get it; and you that have this In-being, labor to be
thankful for it, improve it, and get your souls more and more enlarged under it.

SERMON V. Preached at Christs-Church Aug. 25. 1648.

GALATIANS, 2. part of the 20. verse. -- Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.


I Intend at this time to speak on these words, But Christ lives in me.
Wherein ye have these Three things. First. The In-being of Christ in a
Believer: Christ in me. Secondly. The Efficacy of this In-being: Christ Lives
in me. Thirdly. The Constancy thereof; he does not stay for a night or two; but
he Lives, or Abides in me.


Accordingly there are Three Notes, or Observations. First. Christ is in each
Believer; Christ is in every Christian. For when he says, I live, yet not I;
he personates a Believer all along, speaks not in his own person, but in the
person of a Believer, one Justified by Faith alone. Secondly. That Christ
lives in all Believers. Christ lives in me. Thirdly. That Christ lives more
in Believers than themselves do. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Christ has a greater hand, and stroke in the Spiritual actions of believers,
than themselves have.


I have spoken of the former of these in another place and now I will speak
unto the other: and therefore I shall put them both together, in one Doctrine,
or Observation, thus.

Christ does so live in a Believer, that he has a greater hand, and stroke, in
the Spiritual actions of a Believer, than a Believer himself has: Christ lives
in a Believer more than himself, as to his Spiritual actions.

For the opening, and clearing of this Truth. First, I shall labor to show you
that Christ lives in each Believer. Secondly, That he has a greater hand, and
stroke, in the actions of his Spiritual life, then a Believer has himself.

John, 38. verse. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water. This spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him, should receive. Where the Spirit of Christ is, there
is Christ. And this is a promise made to all Believers, more or less, to be
fulfilled unto them; Out of their bellies shall flow rivers of living water:
Which is to be understood of the Spirit. So that the Spirit of Christ shall be
in them, and be working in them. And as for the other, you know what is said in
that, 14. of John, and the 23. verse. Says our Savior there, If any man love
me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him. It Is the same word that is used before for
Mansions, In my fathers house are many Mansions, verse 2. We will come and take
up our Mansions with him. And this was so received a Principle in the Apostles
time, that he says to the Corinthians, in the 1 Epistle, 3. chapter, 16.
verse, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God; and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you? But if you look into the, 8. chapter of the Romans, you shall
see all proved together, verse the 10, 11. And if Christ be in you, the body is
dead because of sin: but the spirit is life, because of righteousness. But if
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. Here are Three or Four things observable. First,
That Christ in you, and the Spirit in you, is all one. And therefore, having
said in the 10. ver. If Christ be in you: at the 11. verse, he says, If the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you. Again you may
observe here, That Christ in a Believer, is not Habitual grace only, for, says
he, If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you. It
was not Faith, or Habitual grace, that raised up Christ from the dead; but the
Spirit of God himself. And, says he, this Spirit dwells in you. So that,
Christ in a Believer, is not only the Habit of grace, but the Spirit of Christ.
And then Thirdly, ye may observe this too; That this Spirit, is a living
Spirit; and dwells, or abides in a Believer. For it is said twice here, That
the Spirit dwells in you. So that plainly then, you see from the words,
Christ dwells in every Believer, Christ dwells in every Christian, he lives in
him.

And if it were not so, How should the absence of Jesus Christ be recompensed
by the coming of the Spirit, or of the Comforter? When our Lord and Savior
Christ left the World and his Disciples, he gave them a gracious Promise of
sending his Spirit; Ioh. 16.7
And if I go not (says he) the Spirit or the Comforter, will not come: but if
I go, I will send the Comforter, and he shall make up your loss of me. Now if
that the Spirit of Christ should not be in a Believer, and live in him; how
would the coming of the Holy Ghost, and of the Spirit, make up the loss of the
personal presence of Jesus Christ?

Besides, You know that friends love to be near unto one another; and the
nearer they are, the happier they count themselves; they love not to be
asunder: the soul of the lover, lives where it loves, rather than where it
lives. Now there is the greatest friendship between Christ and a Believer; and
the Lord Jesus Christ, has a happiness above all friends; that he can make
himself nearer, and be more One with his friends, than any friend in the world
can. And therefore, upon those terms of Love and Friendship, Christ by his
Spirit lives in all Believers.

If Christ lives in all Believers, really lives in them by his Spirit, then
what need of Ordinances? for Christ and the Spirit of Christ in me, can live
without Ordinances: and if a man have attained once unto the Spirit, Christ in
him, and Christ living in him; and have attained unto the Spirit, the Spirit of
Christ really living in him; what need of any Commandments without? or Rules
without? for the Spirit will be a sufficient-Rule to lead him into all that is
right: what need therefore of any Commandments, Rules, or Ordinances without?

Numbers, you shall find, that Joshua had the Spirit, and not in an ordinary
way, but in a more than ordinary way the Lord gave Joshua his Spirit: and yet
notwithstanding, Joshua was to be under Commandments, and under Ordinances: at
the 18. verse. The Lord said unto Moses, take thee Joshua the sun of Nun, a man
in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hand on him, and set him before Eleazer
the Priest, and before all the Congregation: and give him a charge in their
sight. Mark, he was to come under a Command, and under a charge although he had
the Spirit. And he shall stand before, Eleazer the Priest, who shall ask counsel
for him after the judgment of Urim before the Lord. And so it was. And Moses
did as the Lord commanded him. Now Moses does not say, What need I go to
Eleazar, or to the Priest? what need I go and consult by Urim and Thummim? for
I have the Spirit, that is able to lead me into all Truth. No, but he submits
unto his Charge, and he waits upon the Lord in this way of the Ordinances,
although it is said here, that he had the Spirit. So, had not David the Spirit
in a great measure? and yet, did he not use the Ordinances? But look into the
new Testament, and there you find, that the Apostles had the Spirit also: Our
Lord and Savior Christ, he breathed upon them; they waited for the coming of
the Spirit; and the holy Ghost fell upon them: and yet notwithstanding, they
were under Commands; for says our Savior Christ to them, Go, Mat. 28.19
teach all Nations, Baptizing, and teaching them to do what ever I command you.
So that although they had the Spirit, and the holy Ghost, in a greater measure
than any man (for ought I know) ever had since; yet notwithstanding, they were
under Commandments: Teaching them (says he) to do whatsoever I command you.
And ye know what our Savior says, in that place I mentioned even now, Joh.
7.38, 39.
He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water,
(which he spoke concerning the Spirit, and the holy Ghost, that should be
given, for he was not yet glorified.) A Promise made to Believers, and the
Churches, in the times of the Apostles; they had the Spirit by virtue of that
Promise: and yet notwithstanding, they were under Ordinances, and did use the
Ordinances. But that you may see how this Objection runs cross, both to the
old, and to the new Testament; look upon one place more; it is in the 30. chap.
of Isaiah, the 20. and 21. verses, a Promise made concerning the times of the
Gospel. And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water of
affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but
thine eyes shall see thy teachers. Here are Ordinances, here are Teachers. Well
now, but where is the Spirit? Verse the 21. And thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it. Thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee; Who speaks that word? Look into the 1. chapter of the Revelation,
and there you shall find, it is the Spirit that speaks the word behind one, at
the 10. verse. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a
great voice. So that this voice behind, is that of the Spirit: When we do not
expect the Spirit, the Spirit comes and speaks to us. So that, thus now ye
see, Teaching, and Ordinances, and the Spirit of Christ in us, and living in
us, may and do stand together.

What need of these things? If Christ lives in each Believer really by his
Spirit, what need of Commandments, or Teachings without? for is it not said,
Ye shall be all taught of God? and ye shall no longer teach your neighbor? is
it not so said in Scripture?

Jeremy, from whence the place is fetched: and the 8. chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews; ye shall find, that the words run thus: This is the Covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel, (verse the 10.) after those days, says
the Lord: I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts,
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. And they shall
not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, Saying, Know the
Lord: For all shall know me from the least to the greatest. Mark how the words
run: It is not barely said thus; They shall not teach every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother; but that clause is added to it, Saying, Know the
Lord: They shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
Saying, Know the Lord. As if he had said, I will now make a Covenant of grace,
and mercy with you; I will write my Laws in your hearts, and ye shall all know
me, and though you have been taught heretofore, as ignorant people, that have
not known the Lord, yet now, because I will write my Laws in your hearts, and
my Law shall be there; ye shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, Saying, Know the Lord, as if ye were ignorant, but my Law
shall be within your hearts, and you shall be taught as a knowing people.

Chrysostom does well observe, It is with Christ in us, (says he) as with
Christ without us. In the times of the old Testament, the great Promise was of
giving Christ: in the times of the New Testament, the great Promise is, the
giving of the Spirit. Now therefore, look as it was with Christ when he came
into the world, so with the Spirit when he comes into the heart, Christ in us.
Now when Christ came into the World, he came not to destroy the Law, but he
came to fulfill the Law: So when the Spirit comes into the heart, the Spirit
comes not to destroy the Gospel, or the Ordinances of the Gospel; but he comes
to fulfill the Gospel. Christus impletio legis, Spiritus impletio Evangelii.
Christ the fulfilling of the Law, the Spirit the fulfilling of the Gospel.
Quaecunque sunt in Legi etc. Whatsoever things are in the Law, Christ
fulfilleth: whatsoever things are in the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Spirit
fulfilleth. And as when Christ came, he came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it; Mat. 5.17.
(for he says himself, I came to fulfill the Law) so when the Spirit comes into
any soul, says the Spirit also, I come not to destroy the Gospel, or the
Commandments of the Gospel; but I come into this poor soul, to help it to
fulfill the Commandments of the Gospel. Now when I do take away the
Commandments, and make the Commandments no Commandments to me, (I mean, the
Commandments without) then I destroy the Commandments as to me: When I do
make the Ordinances of Christ, as no Ordinances to me; then I do destroy them,
as to me: And when I make the Rule without, to be no Rule, as to me, then I
destroy it, as to me: and when I that am a Believer say thus, I have the
Spirit, and therefore I have no need of any Commandment from without, for the
Spirit is Rule enough; here I take away the Commandment, as to me; I take away
the Ordinances, as to me; I take away the Rule, as to me, and therefore I
destroy them. Certainly, Christ within us, is not contrary to Christ without
us: Christ without us, did not destroy the Law; Christ within us, does not
destroy the Gospel. Therefore, for any now to throw up Ordinances upon this
account, because they have the Spirit to lead, and guide them; this is to walk
contrary to all the Scriptures, both of the Old, and New Testament. Oh! that
people would think of this one thing, The Spirit was never given to be the only
Rule of a man's life; but it was given to help us to understand, and to enable
us to keep the Rule. Thus you see, Ordinances, and Christ living in a
Christian, can stand together. And so you have the First thing cleared, and
proved, Christ lives in all Believers.

Whereby may it appear, That the Lord Jesus Christ does so live in a Believer,
as that he has a greater hand, and stroke in all the actions of his Spiritual
life, than a Believer has himself? that Jesus Christ does live more in a
Believer than himself does?

Paul to the Ephesians, and the last verse, there you find these words,
(speaking of Christ and his Church) Which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. Our Understandings, our Wills, our Affections, our Duties,
they are but empty vessels til Christ does fill them, he fills all, he
fills all in all. If ye have any Sails spread in any Duty, it is Christ that
fills them. Look into the 3. chap. of that Epistle to the Colossians, ye shall
find at the 11. ver. it is said of Christ, He is all in all. The words are, But
Christ is all, and in all. He is all in all men; so it may be read: Or, he is
all in all things. Either way it may be read, and it signifies both, He is al
in all men, and he is all in all things. Take the first All, for all men; and so
he is all in all them. Take the last All, for all things; and so he is all in all them, in all things. Now if the Lord Jesus Christ be al in all things, and in all men; then certainly, he has a greater hand and stroke in the actions, the
spiritual actions of Believers, than themselves have.



None comes unto the Son, but whom the Father draws: Mat. 10.22.
and none knows the Father, but he unto whom the Son reveals him. Convert me
(says the turning soul) and I shall be converted.

Romans, and the 26. verse. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities.
But how does this prove, that the Spirit has a greater hand and stroke in our
Prayers than our selves have? Mark what follows, For, we know not what we
should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us,
with groanings which cannot be uttered.

the Apostle says, both unto the Romans, and unto the Galatians, That we are
led by the Spirit: Believers are led by the Spirit. Plus est agi, quam regi. He
does not say, We are ruled by the Spirit, but he says, a Believer is led by
the Spirit; not ruled, but led. It is more to be led, than to be ruled: for
when a man is ruled by another, he acts himself, and his own actions are seen:
but when a man is led, and carried away by another, though he may act himself,
the others action is more seen than his. We (says he) are led by the Spirit.

Matthew the 19. and 20. verses. But when they deliver you up, take no thought,
how or what you shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what
ye shall speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father
which speaks in you. So that he has a greater stroke in the grace, and
carriage of a soul under his sufferings, than himself has.

Paul says, in that same 8. of the Romans, Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again unto fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby
we cry, Abba, Father: the Spirit it self bearing witness with our spirits, that
we are the children of God. So that now all these Five things are clear. And if
the Spirit and Christ in a Believer, the Spirit of Christ, have a greater
stroke in a man's Conversion, in his Performance, in his Obedience, in the grace
of his Suffering, and in his Assurance, than himself has; then surely, the
Lord Jesus Christ, has a greater hand and stroke in the spiritual actions of
Believers, than themselves have; now that is proved.

hand and stroke therein my self, and therefore why should I not boast? I have
been now at Prayer, and though I have had some help from the Spirit in Prayer,
yet I had the greatest hand and stroke therein my self, therefore why should I
not boast? But (says the Apostle) boasting is excluded: Surely therefore, the
Lord Jesus Christ does so live in a Christian, as that he has a greater hand
and stroke, in all the actions of his spiritual life, than a Christian, or a
Believer has himself; so that he may say truly, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me.

If this be true; surely there are few Believers in the world; how few are
there in whom Christ lives thus? I fear upon this account (will some poor soul
say) that I have no faith in jesus Christ: I thought once that I had faith in
Christ, and that I was a Believer, but I do not find Christ living in me thus,
that the Lord Jesus has a greater hand and stroke, in all my Duties than my
self, and therefore I fear that I never yet had faith: are there not few
Believers in the world upon this account?



He came unto his own, and his own received him not; Joh. 1.11
and knew him not: his own would not say, Now our Lord Christ is among us. So
when Christ comes into the soul by his Spirit, when he lives there, he lives a
conflicting life: he has his Temptations there, and his freedom from those
Temptations; he has his Desertions there, and his freedom from those
Desertions; he lives a hidden life there, a veiled life there, he comes to his
own, and many times the soul that is his own does not receive him in a way of
comfort, is not able to say, Christ lives in me. But who ever you are that
make this Objection, or lie under this Fear; give me leave to propound Four or
Five Questions to you.

Finis action is domin us et reginae est. The end swaies the action. And look
what that is that does sway your End, that is it which lives in you: if Self
swaieth your End, Self lives in you; if Christ sway your End, Christ lives in
you. Now soul! take all the actions of thy life, since thou have set thy face
toward heaven, and as for the great turnings of your life, and the great
actions, Has not Christ been at the end of them?

sometimes you are tempted to what is evil, do not ye say thus, I cannot do it;
Oh! Lord, thou know I cannot live as I have done, and I cannot want the
presence of God and Christ. What means this Cannot? but a Law within, that God
has written in the heart, there is the Spirit, and there is Christ.

Irajan the Emperor, that He was an exceeding, meek, loving, quiet, good
natured man; and yet He was one of the greatest Persecutors in the Primitive
times, He had his hand in two as bloody actions against the Saints, as any
Persecutor in those times: yet a man of a quiet, loving, sweet nature and
disposition. How came this to pass? He was acted by Satan, and being thus
acted beyond his own disposition, and inclination, it argued that Satan had a
greater hand and stroke in his action than himself had. So, when a man shall be
carried on to what is good, even contrary to his own nature and disposition:
what does this argue, but that the Lord Christ has a greater hand and stroke
in that action than himself has.

Zacheus went up into the Sycamore-tree, he only went up to see the outside of
Christ; but he comes down, receives Christ into his house, there he bids him
welcome, and says, Lord, Behold, Luke, 19.8.
the half of my goods I give to the poor. Zacheus never intended this when he
went up to see Christ; What Is the reason? The Lord Christ was upon his soul,
the Lord Christ was at work upon him; and because he was carried out farther in
this good work than ever he intended, it thereby does appear, that the Lord
Jesus Christ had a greater stroke in this spiritual action of his than himself
had. As on the other side, A wicked man, sometimes, he begins to sin; and says
he within himself, I will do it but a little, I will not go very far, I will
never do it again, I will now take my leave of this sin, it shall never be
acted by me any more. But he goes farther in it than ever he intended; Why?
because the Devil has a greater stroke upon him than himself has. So here,
when as a man's soul shall be carried out unto what is good, beyond what he
intended, this argues that the Lord Jesus Christ is at work upon his soul, and
has a greater hand and stroke upon his actions; his spiritual actions than
himself has. Now is it not thus with thee?



Upon all this I do now appeal unto you, who ever you are that lie under any of
these Fears, Has it not been thus with you? That all on a sudden, you have
been raised to these persuasions? Do not you find, That sometimes your soul
has been carried out to God, even contrary to your own inclination and
disposition? Do not you find, That sometimes your soul has been carried out to
what is good, beyond all that you intended? you thought to begin Prayer a
little while; and has not the Lord sometimes come in, and carried out your
soul farther than ever you intended? Do you not find, a secret disposition, or
inclination to all the Commandments of the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Do you not
find, That in the greatest actions, and turnings of your lives, Christ has
been at the end thereof? Oh! yes, If I should speak true, I must needs say
this; Although I have not seen Christ at the end of every action, yet as for
the great actions, and turnings of my life, I must needs say, Christ has been
there. And the Lord knows, I have a secret disposition to the Commandments of
the Gospel. And, O Lord, thou know, that I have been carried out, many
times, to what is good, contrary to mine own disposition. O Lord, thou know,
I have been carried further in a way of good, than ever I intended. O Lord,
thou know, When my soul has been dead, hardened, and I have said, Now mercy
is gone, and I am driven from mercy; then, then has there been persuasions
raised in me, that Jesus Christ is in me. Well, be of good comfort (soul) be of
good comfort from the Lord: if thou have these persuasions, do not check them;
and if for the present you have not these persuasions, yet wait on the Lord;
for our Savior Christ has said, Joh. 14.20.
I will send the Comforter; and in that day ye shall know, that I am in you,
and you in me: and therefore wait upon Christ for that day.

Suppose this Doctrine be true, That Christ lives in all Believers, that he
has a greater hand and stroke in the actions, the Spiritual actions of
Believers than themselves have; What Conclusions, or practical Meditations
shall we draw from hence?







has. Then for a man to stand and scorn, scoff, and jeer at the Prayers,
Duties, and gracious actions of a Believer; what is it, but to make opposition,
to Christ Himself? If there be ever an Opposer, a Scorner in this Congregation;
Poor soul! where will thou appear in the great day?



David, that when he and his people had offered a great Offering, he praises
the Lord for his own willingness to offer unto the Lord. So a Believer is not
only to be thankful for what he receives from God, but also for what he
himself does do to God, and for God: Why? because it is not be that does it,
but Christ living in him; and the Lord Christ has a greater stroke in that
action which he does to God, or for God than himself has. Therefore infinite
reason, why we should not only be thankful for what we receive from God, but
for what we do to, and for God.

to Prayer, or any Duty; yet will I go and offer my self unto God in Prayer.
Either Jesus Christ will come down upon my Prayer, God will come down in my
Duty; or else he will not. If the Lord do, what a mercy shall it be unto me! If
the Lord do not come down while I am at Duty, and work all my work for me; it
shall be my affliction, and I will mourn after God. But whether the Lord does
come down in my Duty, or whether he does not; it is as it pleases Him, I will
wait upon the Lord, for it is He that works in us mightily. Oh! my soul
therefore, for ever wait upon God in Duty; yea, although my heart be hard,
dead, dull, and indisposed thereunto.

Believer. Some there are, that do pretend to the word Believer; I am a
Believer; and they say they have Faith. But if I have Faith indeed, then Christ
lives in me; Not the World lives in me, but Christ lives in me; Not Malice
lives in me, but Christ lives in me; Not Pride lives in me, but Christ
lives in me. But how many are there (poor souls) that may say in truth, Pride
lives in me; and Malice lives in me; and the World lives in me; but Christ
lives not in me. And will ye say then, that ye have Faith? Let us not be
deceived. But if this be true, That Christ lives in all Believers, what
gracious, and holy conversations should the conversations of Believers be? And
whenever you fail in any thing, you should even say, Yea, but would Christ do
so? My soul, thus and thus have thou spoken, but would Christ have spoken thus
and thus?

Lord Christ has an eye upon all our actions; the Lord Christ has a greater
stroke in all our Spiritual actions than our selves have: he is at the
Beginning, and he is at the Middle, and he is at the Latter end of every
action. Had the Lord Christ only given himself for us, what a great mercy had
it been! but he has given himself To us; not only for as, but to us; he comes
and lives in a Believer: he lives more in a Believer, than a Believer does
himself. What Love, Mercy, and Grace is here! You that are Believers, do you
know your own Privilege? what it is to have Christ living in you? Only bear
the word of Exhortation: you that are made partakers of this great privilege,
Christ living in you; Christ in you the hope of glory; Col. 1.27
labor now to hold forth the virtues of Jesus Christ in your lives. And when ye
have done all, then walk Humbly, walk Humbly with your God, and say as Paul
here of the true Believer, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I have
been now at Prayer; yet not I, but Christ Prayed in me: I have been now at
Conference, and spoke such and such good words; yet not I, but Christ works
in me, speaks in me. Upon this account, let us all labor to walk Humbly with
our God, for it is Christ more than you, Christ has a greater stroke in all
your actions, than your selves have; therefore now, let every man say, I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

THE Woman of Canaan. A Sermonpreached at Christs-Church October. 26 1647.

MATTHEW, 15. beginning at the 21. verse. Then Jesus went thence, and departed
into the coasts of Tire and Sidon.

22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto
him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil. 23. But he answered her not a word. And his
Disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away, for she cries after
us. 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. 25. Then came she, and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.
26. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs. 27. And she said, Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall from their masters table. 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her,
O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her
daughter was made whole from that very hour.
YE have in this Story, a great Storehouse of Heavenly Comfort, and
Instruction. I shall labor (briefly) to open it at this time unto ye.

The words tell us, of a great Miracle, wrought by our Savior Christ, Casting
out the Devil in one that was possessed. Concerning which cure, Two things
considerable: Where this cure was wrought: And by what means it was wrought.
Wrought in the coasts of Tire and Sidon: And by means of a woman's faith. For
our Savior said, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole. The greatness of this woman's faith, is
set out by Three great Temptations that she did meet withal, when she came and
besought our Savior for the cure of her child.

First, He answered her not a word; but was silent to all her misery, and
Prayer. This was a great Temptation, a great trial.

Secondly. He was not only silent; but when the Disciples spoke for her, he
seems to give her a flat denial: I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. And this was a further, and greater Temptation.

Thirdly. When yet she pressed in upon him; he seems to give her the repulse, and
to call her Dog: It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to
Dogs. Here was a great Temptation indeed. But her faith wrought through all
these Temptations. And because (as ye shall see and hear in the opening of the
words) that there is none of all these Temptations, but one time or other, may
befall the best of Gods children: it will be good for us to observe, How this
woman's faith wrought through every Temptation, that we may do the like in our
Temptations.

But before we come unto that. The holy Ghost here, would have us take notice,
First, From whence Christ came, and upon what occasion. Secondly, Whither he
came, and how he was received.

First of all, it is said here, [Then Jesus went thence.] He went from the
Jews. He had been (as ye read in the former part of the chapter) disputing
with them against their Traditions, Ye have made the Commandment of God void,
through your Traditions, verse 6. Whereupon they were much offended, verse 12.
Our Savior now then goes from them; they were offended, and rejected his words,
and he goes from them. These were the Jews that dwelt at Jerusalem, not the
meanest neither, The Scribes and Pharisees, the Learned men of that time, and
those that were most in account for Holiness; See what entertainment the Gospel
finds in Christ's own time among the Learned, and those that were accounted the
most Holy: Scribes, Learned men, and the Pharisees, the most precise, and
strict men of those times, and yet here the Gospel is rejected by them. Christ
goes away, Christ goes from thence, upon this account.



Jesus went from thence: But whither went he? The text says, [He departed into
the coasts of Tire and Sidon.] How so? Our Lord and Savior Christ, commanded
his Disciples, that they should not go into the way of the Gentiles; but (says
he) Go and preach to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 10.5, 6.
but go not into the way of the Gentiles. Will Christ forbid his Disciples and
Apostles to go into the way of the Gentiles, and will he himself go into the
way of the Gentiles, go into Tire and Sidon, how can this be? Some answer it
thus: That the Lawgiver was not bound unto the Law that he made himself.
Others answer it thus: That our Lord and Savior did not go unto Tire and Sidon
for to preach, but he went thither to be hid. As in the 7. of Mark, (where ye
have the same story) From thence he arose and went to Tire and Sidon, and
entered into an house, and would have no man know it. In this respect now, he
did not forbid his Disciples to go into the way of the Gentiles.

But the answer is clear, both in the 15. of Matthew, and that same of Mark, He
departed (...) unto the coasts of Tire and Sidon. And in the 7. Mark 24. He
arose and went into the borders of Tire and Sidon. He went unto some place of
Judea; he did not go into the way of the Gentiles, but he went unto some Town
and place in Judea, which was upon the coasts of Tire and Sidon.

And here now he being, A woman comes unto him. Who is described at the 22.
verse, From her Country; and from the Action which she did. Behold, a woman of
Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, etc.

A Woman, a woman of Canaan, and Behold, a woman of Canaan.] As if that the
holy Ghost would have us take special notice of it, Behold, a woman of Canaan
came unto him. The Canaanites were of all others the most Wicked: the Jews were
for to cast them out of their Nation, and not to converse with them: in the
Jews account they were Dogs. And therefore our Savior says afterward, It is
not lawful to cast childrens bread unto Dogs. She was a Canaanite. But now this
Woman, this Canaanite, she Believes; comes unto Christ, and Believes greatly: O
woman, great is thy faith.

Beware of the Concision, Phil. 3.2
beware of Dogs. Children turn Dogs, and Dogs turn Children: the Canaanite, a
Dog, becomes a Child and believes; and the Jews that were the Children of the
Kingdom, they turn Dogs and rend Christ; Oh! what Free Grace and Love is here!
Who would rest upon any outward Privilege though it be never so great? Who
would be discouraged in regard of any unworthiness though it be never so much?

But what says this woman? Says she, [Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of
David, my daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.] Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, thou son of David. Why does she call him the son of David? and not rather
the son of Abraham? and not rather the son of Adam? and not rather the son of
Man? (as Christ was often called) why does she here call him the son of David?

We find in Scripture, that Christ and David did often exchange Names. And
David your King shall reign over you. Jer. 30.9
(A Promise made to the Jews yet to be converted) that is, Christ: David your
King (and not Abraham) shall reign over you; but David your King. David was the
King of the people of God, and was to feed them: and so Jesus Christ is King of
the Church, and feeds the people of God. Abraham was not a King, David a King;
and therefore, thou son of David, and not, thou son of Abraham. And then, the
Messiah ordinarily among the Jews was called David. And therefore this woman
here says, O Lord, thou son of David.

She does first of all acknowledge his Deity; and therefore she calls him Lord,
O Lord: She does acknowledge his Humanity, and Incarnation; and therefore she
says, Thou son of David. Her Faith was rightly planted: here now ye have her
Faith in the Musterd-seed; look but down a few verses, and you find it grown up
into a great tree, that the birds of the air, and the Saints, may come and
build their nests in the branches of her Faith. But here it is planted. She had
in her own country, some that by Exorsisme did undertake for to cast out
Devils: she does not go to them: she had her own gods in her own country, she
leaves them, and she singles out Christ, and she singles out that Name, Title,
and Attribute of Christ, wherein was most of the Covenant, and most of the
Promise: and her faith now, being thus rightly planted, it rises up unto great
perfection, she comes on with boldness.

But stay, O woman, a little, Thou art a great sinner, thou art a Canaanite,
and so a Dog, and what do thou coming unto Jesus Christ? I know what I do
(might she say) I do not come to Peter, I do not come to James, I do not come
to John,; but I come to Christ, and I come to Mercy, to Mercy it self. I do not
plead mine own Righteousness, or mine own Patience, or my Humility, or Prayer,
or Perseverance in prayer; but I plead Mercy, Have mercy on me, O Lord. Behold
a Miracle in the midst of a Miracle, (says Chrysostom) The Angels in heaven
cover their faces, in beholding the glory of Jesus Christ; and a poor Woman
here on earth comes with boldness: the Cherubims, and Seraphims in heaven
(says he) fear before Christ; fear above, and faith below; fear in Angels,
faith and boldness in a poor woman, she comes with boldness.



She does not only come with Boldness, but she comes with Prayer, Have mercy
upon me etc. She comes Praying, for she came Believing. Faith and Prayer well
go together. Prayer is the issue of Faith. Faith is Prayer in the Coal, and
Prayer is Faith in the Flame; she comes Praying. And mark also, She comes with
Love; and such Love, as makes another bodies infirmity and weakness ones own:
For she does not say thus, My Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil, have
mercy on my Daughter; but have mercy on Me: her daughters vexation is her own,
her infirmity is her own. Faith wrought the Love here. Oh! that Parents would
imitate this woman, and go unto Jesus Christ for their Children that are vexed
with Devils. If a child be sick in body, a parent will run to God and cry for
help; but childrens souls may be vexed with Devils (every Lust and Sin is a
Devil) and they do not run to Christ and say, Oh! Lord, have mercy on me; for
my Daughter, or my Son, or my Child, is vexed with an unclean Devil, or a
profane Devil: But this woman, having planted her faith rightly, her faith
here it does work by Prayer, and it works by Love, and she says thus, Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is grievously vexed with
a Devil.

But what now is Christ's answer to her? [He answered her not a word.] Now comes
the Temptations, the Three great Temptations; Do not wonder that I call these
Temptations. It is true, God tempts no man, and Christ tempts no man: but
take Temptation for Trial, so Christ tempts, so God tempts. Satan, he tempts
a man for to draw out his Sin; but Christ tempts for to draw out our Faith.
Satan's temptations are black within, white and sweet without: but Christ's
temptations are black without, white and sweet within.

The first Temptation therefore, you have here, He answered her not a word. Not
a word! Christ is called the Word: The Word answers not a Word. The Fountain of
mercy seems to be enclosed; as if he rejected Her, and her Condition; as if he
cared not for It, nor for Her; He answered her not a Word. Here was a great
temptation upon the woman, a great trial; for she might say thus: I have heard,
That the LORD heaheth Prayer; and now I come and pray unto him, he answers me
not a Word; How is the Scripture true? I have heard that this man says, Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: and now I
do come unto him, he answers me not a Word. The Centurion came unto him, and he
helped him. A poor Leper came unto him, and he helped him; my condition is
worse than any bodies. Here was a great Temptation, Christ answered her not a
word.

Though Christ answered her not a word, he heard every word: in not answering
of her, he answered her. In not speaking, Christ speaks much, (many times)
for when he speaks no answer to your prayers, the language of his actions speak
thus, Pray on, Cry on, and lift up your voice on High. Christ holds the door
close, not that he may keep you out, but that he may make you knock the more.
Christ lets you continue praying, not because he does not regard your prayer,
but because he loves your prayer so well, that he would hear your prayer again
and again, Christ knows, that strength comes in wrestling.



If this Temptation do befall any of you as it befell this woman, to have no
visible answer unto your prayer; pray do as this women did: What did she?

First. He answered her not a word; but still she does acknowledge that he was
able to help her, does acknowledge his Deity, and says, Lord. So do you.

Secondly. She does acknowledge; that it is his Office for to help: and
therefore she says, Thou son of David. So do you also say in your heart,
Though I have not help for the present, it is the Office of Christ to help me;
He is the son of David.

Thirdly. She does not rest upon her own Duty, or her own Righteousness; but
she comes unto mere mercy, and she waits on that. So do you also.

Fourthly. She does propound her misery, leave her misery at the feet of
Christ, and does not stint or limit him to this or that means. Lord (says she)
my daughter is grievously vexed; but she does not say, how she would have her
daughter cured, she leaves that to Christ, only propounds her misery, and
leaves that at the feet of Christ, to take his own way, and use his own means.
So do you also.

Fifthly. She continues yet praying, yea, when the Disciples had done. The
Disciples they said, Send her away (at the 23. verse) for she cries after us.
Christ made an answer to them, and ye hear no more of the Disciples, they had
done. Thus do you also, as this woman did, Though your Friends, and the
Disciples of Christ that have been praying for you, be weary, have done, and
have no more to speak for you; yet hold you out, and continue praying. Thus did
this woman, she would not leave Christ, but she comes on afresh, she comes unto
him again.

What is Christ's answer? [He answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the
lost sheep of the house of Israel.] Here now is the Second Temptation. And this
indeed seems to be greater than the former. Before he answered her not a word;
and now here is denial, seeming denial, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. This Temptation is greater: for now in this his
dealing, his way seems to run cross unto promises. The Promise was made unto
the Gentiles; the old Testament is full of it: 42. of Esaias, and the 1. verse.
He shall bring forth judgment unto the Gentiles. verse 6. I have given thee for
a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. And so in many places,
Mercy is promised unto the Gentiles. Here now our Savior says, I am not sent,
but to the last sheep of the house of Israel: His dealing with this woman,
seems to run cross to the Promises. Yea, now he comes to the great
unanswerable Objection; as if he should say thus: There are a company of poor
lost ones, that are my sheep, elected, predestined to Salvation from all
Eternity; and I am sent unto them, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel. Whereupon this woman might say, Nay then, what do I
waiting any longer? for is I be not one of the Elect, if I be not one of
Christ's Sheep, then there is no hope for me. This was a great, and a very great
Temptation, to lay these words before her, a great Trial, I am not sent, but
uno the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But mark her carriage: she does not
fall to dispute the matter of Election, or Predestination; she came and
worshipped him, saying, Lord help me, at the 25. verse. As if she should say,
Lord, whether I be Elected or no, I do not know; whether I be one of those lost
sheep or no, I cannot tell; but I am sure I am lost, and therefore, O Lord help
me. Observe,







Lord help me: and for the present, not to dispute whether he be a Sheep or no,
Elected or no, Predestined or no, but run to Christ, and go to Prayer, and
say, Lord help me, and lay the dispute by.

She came and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me: still she held on, and hung
upon Jesus Christ. According to the increases of our Temptations, so shall the
increases of our Faith be.

If all this will not do, behold now a Third, and a greater Temptation. He
answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread and to cast it to
dogs.

It is not meet to cast childrens bread to DOGS.] The word in the original is,
a Whelp. A Dog grown, or a Mastiff, may be, and is good for something, of great
use; but what is a Whelp good for, (for the present) of what use? It is not
meet to cast childrens bread unto Whelps.

To CAST Childrens bread] It intimates thus much, That God does cast some
Outward blessings upon Wicked men, that are even Dogs: but the bread of
Children is so dispensed, Gospel-bread is so dispensed, as nothing shall be
lost.

Here was a very great Temptation, and greater than the other. Dog is most
unworthy. When the Scripture would set out the unworthiness of a man, and the
abject condition of any, he is called a Dog. Goliath could understand this, Am I
a Dog? that thou come out thus against me. 1 Samuel 17.43.
Am I so base, vile, and unworthy? am I a Dog? And so Mephibosheth, when he
would acknowledge his own Unworthyness to David, he calls himself, a Dog, and a
dead Dog. So Hasael, Am I a Dog? Yet says our Savior here, It is not meet to
cast childrens bread unto Dogs. This woman now, her heart might have risen, and
she might have said thus, (one would think) I am no Dog; I am a Woman, though a
sinful Woman, but I am no Dog: I have now come and spread my condition, and
misery before ye; if ye will not relieve me, do not miscall me; if ye will not
help me, yet do not abuse me; if ye will not help me, yet pity me, do not call
me Dog, I am no Dog. The Jews, that you call the children of the Kingdom, they
indeed are Dogs, they turn again and rend you, but I do not turn again and rend
you, I am no Dog. Her heart might have rise at this phrase: Here was a great
Temptation now, a mighty Trial here in this Third thing.

am most unworthy, it is no new thing for true Believers to have their own
unworthiness objected to them.

But mark, how this woman's faith works through this Temptation. Says she,
True, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters table.

True] The word is the same that in the Corinthians ye translate, 1 Cor. 15.33.
Protest. I protest by our rejoicing, that I die daily. And it should rather be
translated so; Yea, by our rejoicing, we die daily: rather than in the form of
an Oath, (as it is there) it is the same word that is here for, True.



Lord] Observe here, she calls Christ Lord, when Christ calls her Dog. Lord,
(says she) though thou speak dishonourably of me, yet I will speak
honorably of thee: though I am a Dog in thy mouth, thou art a Lord in my
mouth. A gracious heart, and a true Believer, will speak and think honorably of
Jesus Christ, even then, at that time, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall suffer
the greatest dirt and reproach to be thrown upon him: True, Lord.

But the dogs eat the crumbs.] Thirdly. True faith finds out a promise in the
very refusal, in Christ's refusal: finds out Encouragment in the bowels of
Discouragment. True Lord, Bread is for Children; that is, the loaf, the piece
that is cut off the loaf; but the Crumbs does as well belong to the Dog, as the
Loaf belongs to the Child. And Lord, thou faiest I am a Dog, therefore a Crumb
does belong to me. True faith, it gathers in upon Jesus Christ, and gathers in
upon him by that very hand that seems to put the soul away from him: it makes
advantage of a discouragment, and gathers in upon Jesus Christ, even by that
hand that does thrust it away. The dogs eat the crumbs.





From all this, you may observe here. If you be tempted with consideration of
your own unworthiness, how you should give an answer unto those temptations. Do
as this woman did; if I be a Dog, Lord, yet I am thy Dog; and if I be a Dog,
Lord, yet crumbs belong to me; and if I be never so great a sinner, mercy and
grace is for sinners, and I come to mercy. Oh! still, still hang upon Jesus
Christ, still hang upon Jesus Christ, and never let him go. Ab negando
promittit, he does promise in denying. There was honey-combs found in the body
of the Lion. Do but hang upon Jesus Christ, hang upon him by faith, and you
will find hony-combs in the midst of all those temptations, and discouragements
that you do meet withal. And though for the present he does seem to give a
denial unto all your prayers, yet at the last he will own your prayers, he will
own your faith, and he will say unto to thee, Man or Woman, Great is thy faith:
be it unto thee even is thou will.

I come to the Victory after this Combat. Then Jesus answered, and said unto
her, [O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou will.] Here now
the Lord does give a Testimony of her faith, and he does give her the mercy
desired. First, he commends her faith: and secondly, he commends the greatness
of her faith, O woman great is thy faith.

Why does he rather commend her Faith, than other graces? she had other graces:
Here is Humility in this woman to be seen; here is a great deal of Wisdom in
this woman to be seen; here is Prayer; here is Perseverance in prayer; Christ
commends none of these, but commends her Faith: why does he rather commend her
Faith, than any other grace?



If the Lord Jesus Christ does commend faith so, why should we not all labor
especially to strengthen our faith. Get faith, you that have it not, and
strengthen it, you that have it. Get Humility, Patience, Wisdom; be much in
Prayer, and continue in Prayer; but above all things get Faith: Faith is the
grace commended by Jesus Christ above all other graces; therefore we should
labor above all for to get faith, and to strengthen faith. It is observed from
this place, that Christ commends none but the Gentiles, the faith of the
Gentiles: He says concerning the Centurion, I have not found so great faith,
no not in Israel: he was a Gentile. And here he says concerning this women, O
woman, great is thy faith: and she was a Gentile. What ever therefore thou have
been; though a Canaanite, though a Sinner, though a great Sinner; get faith,
labor to strengthen then thy faith, and the Lord Jesus Christ will own thy
faith at the last: though for the present he seems to hide himself from thee,
yet he will own it at the last, and he will commend it at the last.

Secondly. He commends here the Greatness of her faith. Wherein was the
Greatness of her faith? Faith consists in the knowledge of Christ, assent unto
the truth, a relying upon God in Christ in time of temptation, it is a Coming to
Jesus Christ; an Adherence to him. But the greatness of her faith lay in this,
That in the midst of all these temptations, yet she did hang on Christ, and
would not be beaten off by any of these discouragements, or temptations. Here
was the greatness of her faith.



And upon this account, How many are there that have strong faith, that think
they have no faith at all. Some think they have no faith, because they cannot
say, Christ is mine, Mercy is mine, Heaven is mine: but yet, if in the time of
your temptation ye can hand upon Christ, and will not away from Christ, but
will still hang upon him, still wait upon him; you have not only faith, but you
may have strong faith, a great faith as this woman had. And let me tell you
this for your comfort: at the last the Lord will make a report of your faith
unto your own heart: Yea, he will make a report answerable to your temptation:
for you may observe here, That as the wound was made, so the plaster was laid.
You have Three great temptations: Answerably now, the Lord Jesus Christ does
testify of this womon. First of all, He answered her not a word, would not own
her, would not speak to her: Now (says he) O woman. Then he said, That he was
not sent, but unto the lost sheep. Now he does own her for a Sheep, and he
says she has Faith. Before he says, It is not meet to cast childrens bread
to dogs. This did argue that she was a Dog, one most Unworthy. Now he says,
that she is most Worthy; O woman, thou have not only faith, but thou have a
great faith, O woman, great is thy faith. So that I say, still hang upon
Christ; in all your Temptations, in the midst of all your Discouragments, still
hang upon Christ; and the Lord Jesus, he will not only make a report of your
faith unto ye, but according as your temptations rise, so shall the report of
your grace be from the Lord Christ unto your poor soul: therefore hang upon
Christ.

He does not only here, give a testimony of her faith, and the greatness of her
faith; but now he does give the Thing: Be it unto thee as thou will. Christ can
deny nothing to a true Believer: a Believer may have what he will of Christ at
last. Christ cannot hold: though he do hide himself from his brethren (as
Joseph did) for a time, he cannot hold it out always, he cannot hold out the
siege always, but he will give up himself to a poor Believer, O poor Believer,
Be it according as thou will: thou would have Grace, thou would have this
or that Mercy; Be it unto thee even as thou will.

I Will only take one Lesson from all, and so conclude.

And the great Lesson that we should all Learn from this whole Story is, To
believe in the face of all Discouragement, of all Opposition, all Temptation;
still to hang upon Jesus Christ. The very reading of this story provokes us
hereunto. Whatsoever your Temptations be, whatever your Discouragements be, yet
hang on Christ, never away, still wait upon him.



I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep; and thou art none? He said so to this
woman, and yet she did hang upon him, and he commended her for her faith.















But Jesus Christ yet will come to you. This woman did not come to Jerusalem,
Christ went down unto the coasts of Tire and Sidon; Christ came to her, and yet
she believed, this stood with faith, and Christ commended her faith.



O woman, great is thy faith. So that, do but now hang on Christ, though thou
have not assurance of thy Salvation, or of the love of God, yet in the face of
all Temptation, and all Discouragment, hang on Christ, never away, never be
beaten off by any Discouragment, hang on Christ, wait on Christ, and the Lord
Christ will at last commend thee for thy faith, and he will say unto thee, Be
it unto thee as thou will. How shall people, that go on in a continued way of
Doubting and Unbelief, ever look this poor woman in the face at the great day
of Judgment? this poor Canaanitish woman? How will you be able, you that go on
in a continual way of Doubting and Unbelief, to look the Lord Jesus Christ in
the face? Stir up your selves, stir up your selves I beseech you, to this great
work of Believing. I confess it is a hard thing to Believe, and harder to
Believe than to keep all the Ten Commandments; there is something in Nature to
contribute toward the keeping of the Ten Commandments; but there is nothing
in Nature to contribute to thy Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is a very
hard thing to Believe truly; and those that make it an easy matter, they do
not know what it is to Believe. But read over this story, and your hearts will
be provoked to Believe, to hang upon Jesus Christ; do it, and the Lord will
commend your faith, and own you and your faith.

FINIS.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICAL TABLE Of THE CHIEF MATTERS HANDLED In the Third VOLVMNE
A Premonition to the READER.
COurteous Reader, Be pleased to understand that the Two latter of these
SERMONS, being Preached the one before the House of Commons, the other before
the House of Lords, we thought good to give thee notice, that in this
Alphabetical Table, when thou see the letter C. before the Page, it directs
thee to that Page in that Sermon preached before the House of Commons; but when
the letter L. then it directs thee to that Page in the Sermon preached before
the House of Lords: this if you be but heedful of, you will not er.

A
ACTIONS,
see Godly
Adam
A parallel between the first Adam and the second Adam Page 31
Angels
The preservation of the Saints is in the hands of Angels. Page L. 13
Anger
There is anger in God Page L. 4 How the word Anger is taken. Page L. 5 How
Anger is said to be in God Page L. 6 The extent of Gods Anger Page L 6 Gods
Anger gives being to our Anger Page L 6

Anger,
see mercy
Angry
It is lawful for man to be angry, and why? Page L 8

B
Believe
How hard a thing it is to believe Page 62
Believer
Every true Believer is an humble man Page 43 Believers need commandments and
why Page 102 Christ lives more in a Beeleever than a Believer himself does
proved Page 104 There are but few Believers in the world Page 107 Believers are
in continual conflicts Page 107 Believers ought to be thankeful and why Page
113 Believers think meanly of themselves Page 208
Believers,
see Self-denying, Christ, Hypocrites, Ordinances, Meditations.
Benefit
What benefit comes to the soul by the In-being of Christ. Page 84

C
Characters,
see Justification.
Carnal,
see Professors.
Children
Children sometimes turn dogs Page 200 See Dogs
Christ
Christ is in all Believers Page 73 How many ways Christ may be said to be in
all believers. Page 74 Christ is personally united to a believer Page 75 How to
know whether Christ be in a man or not Page 89 Duties flowing from the Inbeing
of Christ in a soul Page 96 Christ lives in a believer more than himself Page
98 That Christ lives in every believer, proved Page 98 The reason why Christ
lives more in a believer than himself Page 106 How to know whether Christ live
more in a believer than himself Page 108 The least of Christ is highly prized
of believers Page 209 Christ's coming is sudden Page C. 5 Christ coming, how
many ways taken Page C. 6 How it may appear that Christ's coming is sudden Page
C. 7 Reasons why Christ's coming is sudden Page C. 9 Christ's coming is not far
off, and reasons why Page C. 19 How infinitely we are beholden to Jesus Christ,
and why Page L. 8 See Humility, In-being, Benefit, Love, Believer.
Christians,
see Moral
Civility
What morral Civility is good for Page 11
Coldness
Difference between the coldness of a believer, and the coldness of a wicked
man Page 15
Conversion
The Conversion of the Saints is sudden Page C. 8
Comfort
The Comfort of the Saints is sudden Page C. 8 Comfort for the Saints Page 11
Comfort for Believers Page 88

D
Dealing
see Promise
Death
Death is the greatest evil Page 4
Deliverances
Outward deliverances come to the Saints at unawares Page C. 9
Despair
A caution against despair Page C. 13
Desperate
A desperate sleep is now upon professors Page C. 20
Dispensation
The wonderful dispensation of God showed Page 200
Dog
Dog, how the word is taken in Scripture Page 207 Dogs often times turn
children Page 200
See Children Duty, see Spiritual, Self-denial, Christ.
E
Election,
see Temptation Engagements
Egagements
for believers to come to duties Page 113
Example
see Humility

F
Faith
Man is Justified by faith and not by the works of the Law Page 1 Faith unites
a man to God Page 4 Faith is an emptying grace Page 61 Faith lays aside all
its own Righteousness Page 202 As temptations increase, so also shall faith
increase Page 206 Faith rises above nature Page 209 Faith commends Christ
above all other graces Page 210 The strength of faith does not lie in the
assurance of our salvation Page 212 See Justification
Fall
see Perfection
Froward
Froward spirits do little good in a common wealth Page L. 30

G
Grace
Growth in grace how it is known Page 17
Gracious
The reason why men are no more gracious Page 39 The Saints should live
gracious lives Page 114 See Quality
God
Gods willingness to hide his people in time of his anger. Page L. 11 See
Faith, promise, anger
Godly
Every godly man is a living man Page 3 Godly men reflect upon their own
actions Page 8 Difference between wicked and godly men Page 112
Godly,
see Preachers
Gospel
How the Gospel causes Self-denial Page 58
Gospel,
see Learned
Growth,
see Grace

H
Heaven,
see Kingdom
Hide
Whom the Lord will hide in times of danger Page L. 14
Holy
The reason why men are no more holy Page 39
Holiness,
see Original, Justification
House
God has 3. houses, 1. A house of instruction Page L. 7 2. A house of
Correction Page L. 7 3. A house of destruction Page L. 7

Humble,
see Believer
Humility
Christ is an example of humility Page 60
Hypocrite
What a Believer has more than an Hypocrite Page 85
Hypocrisy
It is an evil thing to call Duties by the name of Hypocrisy. Page 113

I
In-Being
What the In-being of Christ in a believer is Page 76 The In-being of Christ in
a believer is hard to be understood Page 77 Limitations concerning the In-being
of Christ in a believer Page 78
In-being,
see Benefit, Christ
Incertainty
Gods people must trust in him in incertainties Page L. 18
Injustice,
see Oppression
Infinite
The infinite love of Christ manifested Page 114
Justification
The cause of our Justification Page 26 Justification by faith is a friend to
Holiness Page 28 Justification by the works of the Law is an enemy to Holiness
Page 29 How Justification by faith advances our holiness Page 36 Our
Justification may be hidden from our sense Page 43 Visible Characters of
Justification laid down Page 44 How a man may stand clear to himself in
Justification by faith alone Page 46

K
Kingdom
How the Kingdom of Heaven is taken in Scripture Page C. 1

L
Law,
see Faith, Justification. Law how taken in Scripture Page 34 The preaching of
the Law cannot make a man deny himself Page 52
Learned
Learned men are most opposite to the Gospel Page 199
Living,
see Duty
Life
Life is the greatest good Page 4 How vegetative life is in Sants Page 5 How
sensitive life is in Saints Page 6 How rational life is in Saints Page 7
Life,
see Spiritual Wicked, Motion
Little
There is nothing little between God and man Page 41
Love
The infinite love of Christ to man Page 87
Love,
see Infinite

M
Man,
see Godly
Meditations
Practical Meditations for believers Page 112
Meek
Meek men do much good in the earth and why Page L. 30
Mercy
Difference between Gods Mercy and his anger Page L. 5
Mercy
see Temptation
Mystery
Mysteries that are in self-denial Page 57
Monument
Monuments of praise erected and why Page C. 13
Morral
Difference in self-denial between morral men and Christians Page 55
Mortification
Whence mortification comes Page 33
Motion
All motion comes from life Page 9

N
Nation,
see Wrath
Nature,
see Faith
Natural,
see Perfection
Notion
Under what Notion the Lord looks upon the sins of the Saints Page 13

O
Obedience
Obedience whence it comes Page 24 Objections against the smalness of obedience
answered Page 42
Observations
Waking observations for sleeping people Page C. 20
Oppression
Oppression and injustice reign still in this kingdom Page L. 22
Ordinances
How Ordinances are needful Page 100
Original
What the Original of all our holiness is Page 28

P
Papists
How Papists deny themselves Page 55
People
Why godly people are exposed to danger Page L. 12 Gods people are often left
at great incertainties Page L. 16 Why Gods people are so often left at
incertainties Page L. 18
Perfection
There is some natural perfection still left in man from the fall Page 9
Pleasant
The pleasant lives of the Saints Page 12
Prayers
The Saints may have no present answer of their prayrs Page 204 The Saints
duties when they have no present answer to their prayers Page 205
Prayer,
see Temptation.
Preachers
Godly Preachers ought to be sent out, and why Page L. 9
Preservation,
see Angel
Present,
see Prayer.
Profession,
see Saints.
Promise
Gods dealing sometimes seems to run cross to his promise Page 206 True faith
finds out a promise in the refusal Page 208

Q
Quallity
The quallity of a gracious man Page 54

R
Rational,
see Life
Religion
Men lose Religion by seeking after Religion Page L. 29
Repentance
Repentance whenee it comes. Page 33
Righteousness
How Righteousness must be sought Page L. 24
Righteousness,
see Faith.

S
Saints
It is a desperate thing to oppose the Saints, and why Page 112 Wherein Saints
and carnal professors agree Page C. 2 Wherein Saints and carnal professors
disagree Page C. 3 A shelter for Saints in the midst of a storm Page L. 13
Saints,
see Conversion, Comfort, Life, Pleasure.
Self
How self creeps into all actions Page 63 How self acts in man Page 10
Self-denial
Self-denial what it is Page 50 Every believer is a self-denying person Page 49
Trial of self-denial Page 64 Self-denial is a hard duty Page 70 How self-denial
may be attained Page 71
Self-denial,
see Believer, Law, Moral, Mystery, Gospel.
Security
A caution against Security. Page C. 11
Sense
see Justification.
Sensitive,
see Life.
Sleep,
see Desperate.
Sleepers
Two sorts of sleepers, their difference and events Page C. 21
Spirit
The Spirit of Christ is in every believer Page 98 The Spirit is the free gift
of God Page 104
Spiritual
What spiritual life is Page 3 Duties flowing from spiritual life Page 20 How
to get spiritual life Page 23
Strength,
see faith,
Sudden,
see Christ.

T
Temptations
Temptations may rise higher after prayer Page 206 Temptations sometime come
about Election Page 206 When Temptations come about Election, the best way is,
to lay aside dispute and fly to prayer Page 206
Temptation,
see Faith.
Thankfulness.
An exhortation to thankfulness Page C. 16
Truth
No truth to be despised Page L. 27

U
Vegitative
see life.
Union
Union of Christ with believers Page 75
Uncertainties
What to do in uncertainties. Page L. 24

W
Wicked
Wicked men are not in the state of life, proved Page 8
Wicked
see Godly
Witness
Three that bear witness in Heaven opened Page 85
Wonderful,
see Dispensation.
World
The danger of the world Page 19
Wrath
Gods wrath is not yet pacified toward this Nation Page L. 20

FINIS.

