A BREVIATE OF THE WEAVERS BVSINESS Before the Honorable Committee of the
House of Commons in the Star Chamber.
July 28 1648
THat their Opponents in their Petitions referred to this honorable Committee.
charge the said Governors to have committed many things contrary to the
Statute-lawes and Ordinances of the said Company.

And the said Governors have put in their Answer to each particular charge, in
some things justifying their practices, either by prescription, by their
Charter confirmed in Parliament, by the Statute-Laws, or by the allowed
Ordinances of the said Company; And in other things by denial of the charge,
referr the same to the proof on both sides.

Now forasmuch as there is no other rule of safety for the said Governors to
act and regulate by, or their members to submit unto, then the Ordinances of
their Company procured by common consent, and confirmed by the Judges,
according to 19. H. 7. Cap. 7. (which they are respectively engaged by Oath to
observe) until the said Ordinances be by the same, or a higher Power repealed.
And forasmuch as the said Opponents charge the said Governors with breach of
the said Ordinances:

The said Governors do therefore humbly pray this honorable Committee, That
in the drawing up of the Report to the honorable House of Commons touching the
Premises; you will be pleased to permit the Clerk of the said Company to attend
your Honors with their Books of Ordinances under Seal, together with the
Statute-Book, and other matters of Record by them quoted; to the end their
practices may be examined by them, and this honorable Committee may receive
full satisfaction.



London, but in Norwich, Yarmouth, Colchester, Canterbury, and other Cities and
Maritine towns in this Kingdom where Strangers do still live, and exercise
Weaving without molestation.

2. These Statutes still in force, viz. 14. H. 8. Cap. 2.21. H. 8. Ca. 16. and
32. H. 8. Ca. 16. give liberty to Strangers born, Denizens, or not Denizens to
take Apprentices and Journey-men, (provided they be born under the Kings
obeisance) and appoint the Master and Wardens of Companies in London, to
regulate all such Strangers or Denizens, and their Manufactures, as do use
their respective Arts within two miles of London; and to administer the Oath
mentioned in the Star Chamber Decree, made 20. H. 8. as by the same Statutes
may appear.

3. These Ordinances confirmed by the Judges, viz. 31, 45, and 53. appoints the
ordering and regulating of Strangers, Denizens, and Forainers.

4 By prescription by their Charter, confirmed in Parliament, And by the 15 and
17 Ordinances of this Company the said Governors have liberty to admit whom
they conceive fit into their Corporation.

5. Whereas their Opponents in their Petitions, and before this honorable
Committee have from time to time in a most lamentable manner alleged and
affirmed, that they and their families (being many thousands) do want
emploiment, and are undone in their Trade by reason of the multitude of
Strangers that are continually admitted into their Company.

The said Governors do upon their reputation affirm unto your Honors, That by
the diligentest search and course they can possibly take, they cannot discover
that there is twenty Master-strangers admitted that weave any of those kinds
of ware which these Opponents were bred up unto, or deal in, the Strangers
being generally Weavers of broad Silks and Stuffs; and the said Opponents are
Weavers of Ribbonds and Laces.

Lastly, the said Governors do manifest that they have really endeavored to
procure a restriction of the coming over of strangers Weavers in the future;
as by their Bill twice read in the house of Commons at the beginning of this
Parliament, which is now before this honorable Committee, may clearly appear.
Which Bill, together with a new draught of a Bill since delivered to this
honorable Committee, the Governors humbly desire may be taken into
consideration.



London.

Moreover, if it be found that any persons have given false testimony or
counterfeited any Certificate, they are liable to punishment; but the Governors
are not therefore to be blamed.

viz. a Silver spoon and ij. s. iiij d.



2. The spoones so received are not diverted to particular or private uses (as
by some has been suggested) but are duly accounted for every year; therefore
if they should be inhibited to be taken in the future, the prejudice will be
to the stock not to the Governors.

3. As touching the ij s. iiij d. above mentioned it is not paid to the
Governors, but to three Officers of their Company, it being the usual
constant fee which has been paid and continued time out of mind, unto the said
Officers and their predecessors for giving the oath, recording the testimony of
each man's due service to the trade, and his admittance thereupon, and for
posting them into several other books, and for other services and attendances
in and touching the premises; The said Officers having but 4 l. a piece per
annum for their service, besides such accidents as making free, binding
Apprentices, etc.



Note, That in most Companies the Master and Wardens are chosen by the
Assistants only, without the Livery.
1. The Bailiffs of this Company,ever since they were a Corporation (which is
about 500. years) have constantly been nominated and elected, by the old
Bailiffs, Wardens, Assistants, and Livery of the said Company only, and that by
scrutinie, without any interruption or intermixture of any other persons, under
the degree of the Livery whatsoever.

2. This manner of electing the Officers of Corporations by a certain select
number of rank and degree (as is practiced in London and other popular Cities)
has long since been resolved in a case of Law by all the Judges, to be good
and agreeable with the Law, for the avoiding of popular disorder and confusion,
(notwithstanding the word Commonalty specified in their Charter,) as may
clearly appear in the Lord Cooks fourth Report, fol. 77. and 78. touching
Corporations.

3. When any Common-halls are called in London for the public service of the
State or City, as for the choosing of Magistrates, granting of Loan moneys,
etc. none but the Liveries of the several Companies are summoned or permitted
to be there, and whatsoever they conclude upon, is binding to the several
members of each respective Company in London; otherwise instead of regular
resolutions, nothing could be produced but terror and confusion.

Lastly, the said Governors conceive, that their custom being of that
antiquity, is amongst the rest of the customs of London confirmed by Magna
Charta.



them to put in several exceptions against the said accounts, which exceptions
were received by this Honorable Committee 7. Julii instant, at which time it
was thought fit and ordered, That the Governors should not put in any answer
unto the said exceptions.

Therefore the said Governors are enforced to remind your Honors of some heads
of what they have formerly presented to this Honorable Committee touching their
accounts, viz.

1. That the accounts of this Company have been yearly examined, audited, and
allowed by Auditors chosen and qualified according to the fifth and fortieth
Ordinances of the said company, confirmed by the Judges according to the
Statute of 19. H. 7. Cap. 7.

2. That all moneys expended out of the common stock for the necessary and
public affairs of the Company are allowed by the said fortieth Ordinance, and
therefore they ought not to be excepted against by their Opponents (who being
members of the said Company are sworn to the due observance of the said
Ordinances as well as their Governors) but to be concluded by the said
Ordinances.

3. If the generality of this or any other Corporation, have a right to except
against any part of the disbursments of their Masters and Wardens, then their
power will hold equal to except against all their accounts, which if granted,
it will unavoydably follow, that Governors cannot purchase, let or set, or
take up moneys at interest upon the Common-Seale of that Corporation, for the
defraying of any public service, without the consent of every individual
member of the same Company, the dangerous consequence whereof, the Governors
humbly leave to your Honors most serious consideration, humbly praying that no
such exceptions may ly against their accounts, nor any such thing brought in
president in the future against them, or any other in like case.



Ireland, which if they did enjoy would amount unto a thousand pound, besides
they have lent and paid for the use of the State, since 12. October 1640. above
One thousand pounds more.

2. They affirm that they have 46. settled Pensioners of their Company, besides
above 60. other poor, that they relieve quarterly; and could they be freed
from these expensive troubles, they might soon by the blessing of God raise a
good stock for their Company.

3. The said Governors humbly entreat your Honors to take special notice,
that these Opponents who question and except against the accounts of the said
Governors, which have been duly audited and allowed according to the allowed
Ordinances of the said Company, have themselves for many years together
received the Journeymens quarteridge, (which if duly collected, is equivalent
to the Masters Quarteridge) and have shared it amongst themselves, refusing to
give any account thereof unto their Governors, contrary to their several
Oaths; which said Quarteridge belongs to the stock of the said Company, as
by the 43. Ordinance of the said Company may clearly appear, and not to their
private uses.









2. The Orders of the Court of Lord Major and Aldermen, produced by the
Opponents for suing one Richard Fletcher, and others in those Orders specified,
bears date in Anno 1627. and 1630. which was long before these Governors were
in place; and therefore ought not to be charged therewith.



July, 1640. And as touching that which their Opponents term, a Patent or
Monopoly, the said Governors do affirm, that the Commonwealth has been,
and at present is very much prejudiced by adulterated, insufficient, and
cheating Wares and Commodities, which are thereby inhibited, and which had long
since been prevented, (had not the said Charter been under restraint by means
of their Opponents) All which is more fully set forth in the Governors answer
to this particular charge received by this Honorable Committee and read, 22.
June last, unto which together with their former Answer they refer.





France, and other forain parts, which are inhibited by the Statute of 19 H. 7.
Cap. 21.



This is the summary account of the Governors answers delivered at several
times unto this honorable Committee.

And now the Governors humbly desire your Honors patience to peruse these
ensuing particulars.

1. That in the progress of this business their Opponents, from time to time,
have enlarged their accusations far beyond the bounds of their petitions
referred to your Honors, or their proofs touching the premises.

2. The said Governors have used their utmost endeavors by way of Treaty with
their Opponents, to have composed their differences according to the advice of
this Honorable Committee. But because the said Governors could not condescend
to some of their Opponents demands, (which tend to the total subversion of the
ancient established Government of the said Company) the said opponents brake
off, and declared they would treat no further, with them; an account whereof
the said Governors and Livery presented to this Honorable Committee,
subscribed by them 12. April last, which they humbly desire may be by your
Honors taken into consideration. Since which time the said Opponents, to raise
up the difference between the members of the said Company and the said
Governors, have printed and published a most notorious libell, wherein they
cast many scandalls and reproaches upon the said Governors, and wherein they
term the said Governors cheaters, affirming that within this few years they
have received 1200 l. in bribes, and shared it amongst themselves; which libell
being full of other notorious scandals and calumnies (to the end it should be
taken for truth) they entitled it, [The humble representation of the
Commonalty of the Company of Weavers to the high Court of Parliament] but never
durst deliver it to the Parliament to this day: Which Libell, together with
several other Libels by them printed and published; together with their other
practices in going from house to house to incense the people against the said
Governors; has made them so odious, that now many of their Members in stead of
paying their duties, and conforming to government, refuse to pay any more, and
reproach and threaten the said Governors when they are in execution of their
service for the Company, to their great discouragement and danger.

And the Governors hope this Committee will call to mind the said Opponents
uncivil and tumultuous carriage before this honorable Committee, both against
them, the Governors, and their Council; to which the Governors might add their
many other strange and feditious practices to enforce their clamorous and false
aspersions cast upon the Governors; and that during the dependency of the Cause
upon their own complaint before the Parliament, and by way of reference before
this honorable Committee; of which insolences and bold miscarriages, as the
Governors hope to find a time to be heard upon their further Information, so
they humbly expect and desire, That this honorable Committee, for so much as
thereof has already appeared before them (the matter, as the Governors
conceive, concerning the Honor and Justice of Parliament) will he pleased to
take the same into their due and serious consideration.

FINIS.

