A FULL DISCOVERY OF A FOUL CONCEALMENT: OR A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE Proceedings
and Transactions of the Committee for the accounts for the Commonwealth of
England, WITH William Bagwell and John Brockedon Accomptants, Discoverers and
Plaintiffes against the Committee of Hartford, the Treasurer and Paymaster
there in the year 1643.

LUKE 8. 17. Nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest; Neither any
thing hid that shall not be known and come abroad.

Licenced by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1652.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COUNCIL of STATE For the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of Will: Bagwell, and John Brokedon Accomptants,
discoverers and Plaintiffes in the behalf of the said Commonwealth,
SHOWS
THAT your Petitioners the third of July last 1651, (at the request of some of
the Soldiery) did peruse and examine some of Hartford accounts, and by an
account by them drawn out, have discovered (5097 l. 2s. besides the value of
Arms and Furniture for 28 Harquebushiers men and horse that served less then
the number raised) as discoverers for the Commonwealth, whereof they have
proved, 2500 l. or thereabouts by several credible witnesses upon oath, the
same being a branch of 4103 l. 2 s. detained (from the Soldiery that were
under the Command of Sir John Norwich for 13 weeks and 3 days pay) by the
Committee of Hartford, their Treasurer, Paymaster, etc. of the said County, of
which they have hitherto given no just account: The same being collected and
received of the Inhabitants of the said County for the satisfaction of the pay
of 300 horse Harquebushiers, that they maintained at their charge, under the
Command of the said Sir John Norwich from the 17 of August 1643, to the 25 of
March 1644. which detention etc. caused your Petitioners to exhibit the said
branch of discovery, of 2500 l. or thereabouts, with their complaint against
the said Committee etc. of Hartford, before the Honorable Committee for the
taking and receiving of accounts for the said Commonwealth.

That notwithstanding the many addresses to the said Committee for relief, your
Petitioners were still frustrated of their expectations by their continual
delays and obstructions of their prosecution of the charge laid against the
aforesaid Committee etc.

Whereupon your Petitioners upon the 27 of January last continued their said
prosecution of the said branch of discovery of 2500 l. or thereabouts, and
notwithstanding their great charge and loss of time in their several
addresses to the said Committee (in the behalf of the said Commonwealth) can
hitherto have no relief, which tends to the great wrong of the Commonwealth
and Soldiery, as by a true Narrative of their proceedings and transactions,
and the account ready (when called for) to be humbly presented to your Honors,
does at large appear, And this discovery issuing from the military affairs,

Your Petitioners humble suit is, That your Honors will be pleased to take the
premises into your pious and serious consideration, and thereupon if your
Honors find it meet to nominate some worthy persons (Commissioners) that are
experienced in Military affairs, to hear, examine, and determine the business,
or otherwise to do therein as to your grave wisdoms shall seem most agreeable
to equity and justice, for the procuring an effectual trial and speedy end of
the said discovery etc. for the present and future good and benefit of the
Commonwealth and Soldiery etc.

Delivered April 17 1652 to the Lord General Cromwell. And they (as in duty
bound) shall ever pray etc. Will. Bagwell, John Brockedon.

A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings and Transactions of the Committee for the
Accounts of the Commonwealth of England, with William Bagwell and John
Brockedon, Accomptants, Discoverers, and Plaintiffes against the Committee of
Hartford, the Treasurer and Paymaster there, in the year 1643.
Humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Council of States serious
Consideration, by the said Bagwell and Brockedon.
THat the proceedings of the said Bagwell and Brockedon in their address to
the said Committee of the Accounts of the Commonwealth, against the said
Committee of Hartford, etc. which was in being in Anno 1643. may be rightly
understood, It is in the first place to be noted, That in the said year 1643 by
Authority of Parliament, a Regiment of 300 Horse acknowledged to be raised in
an abstract of an account examined and subscribed by Henry Gardner, Thomas
Knightley; John Slany.
300 Horse Harquebushiers were to be raised by the said Committee of Hartford
under the Command of S John Norwich Knight and Baronet, Colonel and Captain of
horse for the defense and preservation of the said County, which said Regiment
was continued under the said S John Norwich his Command, and in the said
service from the 17 of August 1643, to the 25 of March 1644. At which time they
were taken into the Lord of Manchesters marching Army, during which time of
their service under the said Sr John Norwich being 31 weeks and 3 days, the
before mentioned Committee of Hartford, for payment and discharge of the said
Regiment, assessed and received of the Inhabitants of the said County moneys
sufficient to pay the aforesaid Regiment of 300 horse Harquebushiers, for the
time aforesaid, and yet nevertheless have left the Soldiery of the said
Regiment in arrear and unsatisfied for Note that 13 weeks and 3 days pay
remains yet unsatisfied as it appears by several affidavits, etc.
13 weeks and 3 days pay, they having paid the Soldiery no more but for 18
weeks only.

Whereupon the said Soldiery finding themselves aggrieved for the withholding
of their due for the said 13 weeks and 3 days, did the 3 of July last 1651
apply themselves to the said Bagwell and Brockedon, with some accounts of the
said Hartford Committee, who upon view and examination whereof, they the said
Bagwell and Brockeden, by accounts have discovered, As appears by account at
the end of this Narrative.
5097 pound 2 shillings, for the Commonwealth: a branch whereof, of 2500 l. or
thereabouts they have discovered, by Edward Coxe, John Gates, Gabriel
Baskervill, William Allen, John Hatton, Charles Booth, and other witnesses,
that Sr Thomas Dakers, Mr Barber, Captain Dauges, M. Puller, and other
Commissioners in the year 1643. and Humphry Packer senior, and Humphry Packer
junior, then Treasurer, and Paymaster, or some or one of them, or some other by
the direction of them the said Committee of the County of Hartford, or some
other or others by their appointment, did assesse, collect and receive of the
Inhabitants of the said County of Hartford, money sufficient to discharge the
whole pay of the said Soldiery; and that the said Committee, Treasurer, and
Paymaster, or some or one of them, or others to their use, have detained, and
do still detain, to the great wrong and prejudice of the Commonwealth and
Soldiery, the said sum of By several affidavits.
2500 l. or thereabouts as a branch or part of As it appears by the said
account.
4103 l. 2s. the said Bagwell and Brockedon find to be owing to the said
Soldiery, for 13 weeks and 3 days pay due to them from the 17 of August 1643
to the 25 of March 1644, as by account particularly it does appear. Whereupon
(according to the Act and several Ordinances of Parliament) for redress of
the premises, in the behalf of the said Commonwealth, the said Bagwell and
Brockedon by several Petitions have addressed themselves to the Honorable
Committee for the taking and receiving of accounts for the Commonwealth, which
Committee are required by the said Act etc. to use all fitting means for the
discovery of the truth, in and concerning the premises, as occasion shall
require, and to certify their proceedings to the Honorable house of
Parliament, which they the said Committee to this present refuse to do, as by
these ensuing passages more particularly appears.

Upon Tuesday 1651. January 27.
The first Petition.
the first Petition was presented to the said Committee at the Duchy house,
who having read the same, sent for the Petitioners before them, and told them
that they should have an answer thereof the Thursday following in the afternoon.

Upon Thursday about one of the clock in the afternoon the Petitioners repaired
to the said Committee for their answer to the said Petition, January 29.
and there attended; but the said Committee came not that afternoon, The first
delay.
but had left word with the doorkeeper to tell the Petitioners that they the
said Committee were to Whereas there was no need of any writings or search at
all.
search out some writings before they could give an answer, and therefore
desired the said Petitioners to come the next day, either in the morning, or
the afternoon, 1651 January 31.
and they should have their Petition answered.

Upon Saturday the Petitioners sent two of their witnesses to the Duchy house,
who spoke with M. Ieoffries the accomptant to the said Committee; who answered
that if they would send in the The names of the Committee were sent in, and the
charge laid against them, which was accepted of from the Petitioners as a
charge the 3 of Febr. following.
names of the Committee of Hartford, and others that detain their money from
them, that then the said Committee would send for them up, provided they could
make it appear The 2d delay.
: And the said Ieoffries further said, that the Committee at the Duchy house
The Petitioners prove the County has paid the money.
made a question whether the County had paid the Committee at Hartford the
money they were so charged with.

Upon Tuesday the Petitioners with 6 of their witnesses were sent for in before
the Committee at the Duchy house, Note their slighting of business of so
great consequence for the public good.
who told them that they had sent a letter to the Committee at Hartford by the
Carrier, February 3.
but knew not whether the said Carrier had delivered their said letter, or no,
for they had not then received their answer from the said Committee. And after
some debate within themselves the said Committee sent out the aforesaid
Petitioners to have They did at that instant all subscribe thereto.
the witnesses hands subscribed thereto; which was accordingly done. Then they
desired the names of the Committee and others against whom the charge lay; The
charge sent in.
which was likewise sent in subscribed. Then they told the Petitioners The 3d
delay.
that the charge that was laid against the Committee at Hartford, must be
answered by way of account, and examined by them, whereby it might the better
appear whether the said Committee were justly charged, which (said they) should
be done before they would send for them up, to avoid future trouble and charge:
To which the Petitioners answered, saying, that the charge laid against the
Committee of Hartford etc. was a discovery in the behalf of the Commonwealth,
which they would prove by their What need accounts where the proof is personal?
witnesses, and that it concerned not the accounts, and therefore if they
pleased to send for the said Committee etc. their witnesses were ready to
testify their charge upon oath: And herein the said Petitioners desired to
know their minds; Whose answer was, that they should within few days have
their answer, in the mean time wished that some of them would give their
attendance to know their pleasure when they would send for them.

Upon Tuesday the Petitioners sent one John Gates to the Duchy house to the
Committee that was there, February 10.
who appeared not willing to speak with him, they sending their Accomptant M.
Jeoffries to him, who told the said Gates, that the Committee had The fourth
delay.
sent a man for the accounts, but received as yet no answer: and the said Gates
replied, saying, the Petitioners desired an answer to their Petition, and to
prove their said charge, which could be done without such accounts. Then the
said M. Jeoffries said, that if the Petitioners have nothing to do with the
accounts, the Committee would have nothing to do with them; that he knew their
mind, and bid the said Gates to take that for their answer.

Upon Thursday the Petitioners sent the said Committee another February 12.
The 2d Petition.
Petition,in which they humbly desired their Honors to appoint a day that they
might present their witnesses, which they had in a readiness to make proof of
their charge (as aforesaid,) who having read the same sent for them, to come
before them with two of their witnesses being then present: the said Committee
then seemed to be very affable, The fifth delay
and desired that one or two of them would attend them on Tuesday next, and
said that they had written to the Committee of Hartford, and that if in case
they did not hear from them by that time, they would grant their warrant to be
sent to them by a Messenger that might make affidavit thereof, and that the
Petitioners demands in the said Petition was but The Committee made the
Petitioners believe that money should be brought in to satisfy the Soldiery.
2500 l. and that money being brought in, it would satisfy the business
without further trouble. Whereupon John Brockedon replied, saying, that he and
William Bagwell (the said Petitioners) would attend them upon Tuesday next,
which was agreed upon.

Upon Tuesday the said Petitioners attended the said Committee, 1651 February
17.
and being sent for in before them, the said Brockedon intimated that according
to their Honors direction, they came for an answer to their Petition delivered
the 12 of this month: whereupon M. Henry Robinson the Chairman said, there
was a warrant drawn up by their direction, which the said Petitioners should
have to send by one that could make affidavit of the delivery thereof, and that
it should be sealed up and directed to the Committee at Hartford. Whereupon the
said Brockedon replied, saying, Under correction it is proper we should know
what is written in the warrant: The Committee agreed the Petitioners should see
the warrant before it was sealed up.
and they or one of them said it was but reason. Then the Clark of the said
Committee said, the Petitioners and the rest might withdraw themselves, and he
would register the said warrant, and thereupon by order of the said Committee
they did withdraw themselves out of the room and attended. Then M. Robinson
came forth Now they must not see the said warrant.
and told the Petitioners that the effect of the warrant was for the Committee
of Hartford to bring in their accounts, and the money they are charged with,
forthwith. And the said Brockedon replied and said, viz. We have nothing to do
with the accounts concerning this business, we are for the Commonwealth, and
desire our witnesses may be examined, which we have in readiness to make good
our charge. To which the said M. Robinson replied again saying, Pray give leave
that the money may first be demanded, and if you can have it without further
trouble, Here the Committee refuse to take the oaths of the witnesses then
presented to them.
what need your witnesses be examined? send away the warrant (says he:) and so
departed, and all the rest of the Committee went also out of the room where
they sat. And a little after the Clark brought forth a Packet directed to M.
Barber, Captain Davis, M. Puller, and the rest of the standing Committee for
the County of Hartford, and delivered the same to the Petitioners (which was
sealed up and directed as aforesaid) who desired of the said Clark a copy of
the said warrant, and of what is contained touching their business in the said
packet: whereupon the said Clark answered and said, that he had no order from
the Committee to give any copies: and so departed.

The same Tuesday in the afternoon the said Petitioners Plaintiffes
Notwithstanding all their delays the Petitioners were fain to send one at their
own charge.
delivered the said Packet to one John Hatton their messenger, who went the
Thursday following to Hartford, and delivered the same to Captain Dauges (one
of the Committee there) who brake the said Packet open, and when he had read
the contents thereof, he said he understood it not, and wished the said
messenger to carry the same to the standing Committee, promising him by the
Faith of a Gentleman he would meet him there: whereupon the said messenger took
the said Packet, and by the direction of the said Captain Dauges did deliver
the same the Saturday following to the said Committee, Note how the Committee
at Hartford slighted their warrant, and the infidelity of Captain Dauges.
who very much slighted the business, and told him they would send their
answer by their own messenger and not by him. At which meeting the said Captain
Dauges (contrary to his engagement) appeared not.

Upon Tuesday the Plaintiffes and two of their witnesses repaired to the said
Committee at the Duchy house, February 24.
and being called before them, the Chairman M. Robinson, demanded what they
desired; and the said Brockedon replied saying: We have brought our messenger
to make affidavit of the delivery of your Honors warrant to the Committee at
Hartford according to your direction, which was done upon Saturday the 21 of
this month. The said Chairman answered, that he should not need to make
affidavit, for they had received an answer from the said Committee of Hartford,
and did read part thereof, expressing that they had no notice of what How could
they assesse and receive moneys without an Ordinance of Parliament?
Ordinance gave them power to receive the money they are charged with. And
after some discourse, they wished the said plaintiffes to attend their
accomptant the The sixth delay.
next morning, and he should show them the book of Ordinances, and Acts of
Parliament, and the accounts they had, to compare them: the which was effected
the day following. And the Plaintiffes having seen, and not only taken notice
of what was most conducible to their proceedings, but also what may conduce to
the future benefit of the Commonwealth, they departed. February 26.


Upon Thursday the Plaintiffes The 3d Petition
presented another Petition to the said Committee desiring (in the behalf of
the Commonwealth) that their Honors would give order, that the copy of the
accounts and every particular thereof, according to the original given to
their Honors by the said Packer Treasurer, may be in a short time delivered
unto them, And that their witnesses may be forthwith examined, and their said
charge prosecuted etc. And likewise a copy of their Honors warrant sent to the
Committee of Hartford and their answer thereupon, ( They would neither let them
see the warrant sent, nor the answer thereupon.
which they refused to let them see) or that their Honors would be pleased to
return their transactions, that they may with the copies aforesaid otherwise
seek the right and benefit of the Commonwealth. Out at the back door.
Which Petition when they had read, they went all away one by one, and not one
of them would vouchsafe to speak a word with the said Plaintiffes, yet left
their answer with M. Ieoffries, which was to this effect, viz* The seventh
delay.
The Committee (said he) wished me to tell you, that they the said Committee,
know not whether they have power to proceed The Committee expecting to have had
some relief by the Act of Oblivion; would give the Petitioners no answer before
they saw the said Act.
before they see the Act of Oblivion that is expected to come forth: And that
the said Act did so far free those from being called to accounts that are
past, that therefore they could not proceed before the said Act came forth: And
wished the said Plaintiffes to attend the Committee again the Tuesday
following, when they should have their answer.

Upon Tuesday the said Petitioners Plaintiffes Bagwell and Brockedon, 1651.
March 2.
after notice given to the Committee of their attending for an answer according
to the aforesaid directions of the 26 of the last month, and after about two
hours attendance The Committee finding no relief by the said Act of Oblivion,
would not speak with the Petitioners.
the Committee came forth (who appeared not willing to speak with them) but
went away all of them, only the Chairman M. Robinson, whom by accident the
Plaintiffes found in another room apart, And then the said Plaintiffes took an
occasion to put him in mind of their business: who after some discourse told
the said Plaintiffes that order was given that their the said Plaintiffes
desires should be granted; and the said Brockedon thereupon pressed and said,
That he and the said Bagwell had been there a long time with their witnesses to
be examined, and that their affidavits were ready drawn that they might take
their oaths. When the said Chairman heard that, he went his way after the
rest, and then came forth M. Ieoffries their accomptant, and said, The eight
delay.
That the Plaintiffes should have the copies of the accounts paying for them:
and he being demanded what he would have, he answered saying, that he could not
tell, but as he might draw them, they would come to Note their accomptants
exactions upon the public service.
above five pounds: And further said, that he would have twenty shillings in
hand before he would begin to draw out the said accounts.

Upon Thursday the said Plaintiffes so soon as they got their witnesses
together, March 4.
went with The 4 Petition.
another Petition at the usual time before the Committee rise at the Duchy
house: The 9 delay.
But they were all gone, and so the said Plaintiffes kept the said Petition to
be delivered the next sitting day.

Upon Tuesday the said Petitioners Plaintiffes presented unto the said
Committee at the Duchy house the said Petition, March 9.
intending it to be their last unto them in this business, wherein they gave
the said Committee a hint of the Act of the 15 of October 1649, which gives
power to the said Committee to take the oaths of two credible witnesses, that
can testify any discovery (as aforesaid) and that they the said Plaintiffes
had often attended their Honors with several witnesses to prove upon oath
their aforesaid charge exhibited before them against the Committee of Hartford
etc. that was in being in the year 1643. And having their witnesses in a
readiness with their affidavits drawn up, humbly desired their Honors to take
their oaths, and that they would likewise please to give order, that
(according to their desires in their former Petition) they might have the
copies of the accounts for the future benefit of the Commonwealth, that
thereby they might without any further delay proceed for the right and benefit
thereof. The Plaintiffes (after an hour and halfes attendance) were by the
said Committee sent for into the room where they sat, and there being a full
Committee, the then Chairman stood up and said to the Plaintiffes, viz. We
have read your Petition, The 10 delay.
and notwithstanding we have much business, yet in short, the copies of the
accounts you desired They say they deny them not, and yet the Petitioners
cannot have them.
we have not denied them, and you may have them, as we have already ordered:
And we do not deny to take the oaths of your witnesses, They say again they
deny not to take their oaths, and yet refuse to give them their oaths, though
they were there presented for that purpose.
if you will assign out any particular sum, and the particular party, or
parties, that has received more then he has paid. To which the said Brockedon
(one of the said Plaintiffes) replied saying, We can prove by our witnesses
that there is detained 13 weeks and 3 days pay (as has been often repeated)
due to the Soldiery, that was collected and received of the Inhabitants of the
County of Hartford by that Committee, The particulars whereof was already
delivered to the said Committee the third of Febr. last.
or others under them, against whom the charge is. And before the Plaintiffes
could press further to have the oath administered to the witnesses, then and
there present, the said Chairman with the Hammer in his hand said that they
were in haste, and desired that the Plaintiffes would take what they had
expressed for an answer; and withal (to prevent the said Plaintiffes further
reply) took the Bell in his hand and rung it. Whereupon the said Brockedon
said, We must then take this for an answer. And so the Committee rose, being as
weary of the Plaintiffes importunity on the Commonwealths behalf, as they the
said Plaintiffes were of their delays.

Whereupon the said Petitioners Plaintiffes and Discoverers for the
Commonwealth, finding by woeful experience nothing but delayings and
continual discouragements to themselves and their witnesses, and that all
proceedings tended to perplex and tire them out with fruitless answers and
attendances, and that they were at last dismissed without any appointment for
further hearing, and thereby deprived of all further hope of satisfaction from
the said Committee, They the said Bagwell, and Brockedon to make it appear to
your Honors, and to whomsoever shall be concerned in the knowledge thereof,
That they have not undertaken a discovery of the premises upon slight, but
sound and solid grounds, deemed themselves bound in conscience as well for
vindication of their integrity, as in service to the Commonwealth, To cause
some few of their witnesses being but seven in number, upon their oaths In
regard the Committee would not administer the oath unto them.
before a Master of the Chancery to testify what they knew concerning the said
discovery, all concurring in effect and real substance with these two which
hereafter follows.

Edward Coxe of Martin in the fields in the County of Middlesex Yeoman, of the
age of fifty and four years or thereabouts, makes oath, That the Committee of
Hartford, or their Treasurer Humphrey Packer senior, or Humphrey Packer junior
Paymaster, or some or one of them, or others to their use, do to this day
detain two thousand five hundred pounds, or thereabouts, for thirteen weeks and
three days pay due to the Soldiery under the Command of Sir John Norwich, from
the 17 of August 1643, to the 25 of March 1644, of the moneys raised and
collected of the Inhabitants of the said County of Hartford for the
satisfaction of the said Soldiers pay for the full time aforesaid of their
service of the said County, under the Command of the said Sir John Norwich as
aforesaid.

Edw. Coxe.
Sworn the 15 of March 1651. John Page.

Gabriell Baskervill Citizen and Stationer of London, of the age of fifty and
two years or thereabouts, makes oath that the Committee of Hartford, or their
Treasurer Humphrey Packer senior, or Humphrey Packer junior Paymaster, or some
or one of them, or others to their use, do to to this day detain two thousand
five hundred pounds or thereabouts for thirteen weeks and three days pay due to
the Soldiery under the Command of Sir John Norwich, from the 17 of August
1643, to the 25 of March 1644, of the moneys raised and collected of the
Inhabitants of the said County of Hartford for the satisfaction of the said
Soldiers pay for the full time aforesaid of their service of the said County,
under the Command of the said Sir John Norwich as aforesaid.

Gabriell Baskervill.
Sworn the 15 of March 1651. John Page.

By these two affidavits (the real effect and substance whereof has been
attested upon the oaths of Edward Coxe, Gabriel Baskervil, Lancelot Whiteing,
John Gates, Charles Boothe, Richard Gwyn, John Wanl^y.
seven credible persons, and will, if need be, be made good by a cloud of
witnesses) it is clearly manifest, that the said Bagwell and Brockedon,
discoverers for the Commonwealth, are more then sufficiently provided to make
good their said charge and discovery, and may justly minister occasion of
enquiry, what might be the cause that the Committee for the accounts for the
Commonwealth of England, sitting at the Duchy house (unto whose care, affairs
of this nature are entrusted by the Parliament) have so delayed, deferred, and
wearied out, these discoverers, affording them neither pertinent proceeding,
proper hearing, Trial, or Determination, answerable to what, according to an
Act, and Ordinances of Parliament was justly expected, by occasion whereof (if
this kind of dealing should be smothered) will necessarily ensue as is justly
to be feared, viz.

A great encouragement to the Committee and others that are accomptable

A grief to the people who pay their moneys they were assessed

A discouragement to those that bring in discoveries at their great

A disheartning to the Soldiery who have hazarded their lives The Petitioners
can prove (that the Committee of Hartford, or one of them did say, that if they
must pay the Soldiery, they could but pay them at last) by these witnesses
viz. Edw. Coxe, John Scot, William Steward, Richard Gwyn, John Hatton, and
diverse others.
to be thus defeated of their Salary.

Upon all which they these discoverers for the Commonwealth, William Bagwell,
and John Brockedon, with the soldiers and others concerned herein, do all
humbly entreat your Honors most serious observation, whether the Parliaments
care and trust in things of so great concernment to the Commonwealth, the dues
of Soldiers, and rights of Discoverers have (in these proceedings) found that
faithfulness and just respect, as was agreeable with Christianity and a good
conscience, or the contrary; and where it shall appear to your Honors that the
Commonwealth has been, or is like to be prejudiced through the neglect, or
partiality of any, that you will be pleased to employ your most effectual
endeavors, as to your grave wisdoms shall seem meet, for a through and speedy
remedy; and that the discovery before mentioned may be brought without such
delays and chargeable (yet fruitless) attendance, to a speedy issue etc.

AN ACCOUNT Of the Charge of 300 Horse raised for the service of the County of
Hartford, under the Command of Sir John Norwich Knight and Baronet Colonel and
Captain of Horse, from the 17 of August 1643, to the 25 of March 1644. For
which there was Money Collected of the Inhabitants of the said County, and paid
to the Committee etc. of the same County, to satisfy the pay of the said Sir
John, and his officers, and Troopers etc.
The weekly Pay.
l. s. d. l. s. d. 4 Sr John Norwich as Colonel and Captain of Horse 24 3 0 40
8 6 Cap. Lieutenant Deane 8 8 0 John Edwin Cornet 4 14 6 John Mehewe
Quartermaster 3 3 0 10 John Scot Corporal 1 1 0 16 16 0 William Joyce
Corporal 1 1 0 Thomas Muncaster Corporal 1 1 0 John Gardner Scout-master 3 10
0 Humphry Packer junior Clark 3 10 0 Thomas Hunt Master of the Arms 1 15 0
John Eels Trumpeter 1 1 0 John Hawkings Trumpeter 1 1 0 Thomas West Sadler 1 1
0 Samuel Ventris Marshall 1 15 0 99 Troopers Harquebushiers 99 at 17 s. 6 d.
each of them per week is 86 12 6 113 This Troop of 113 Horse is per week 143 17
0 4 Captain Thomas Brudnall 13 13 0 27 16 6 Lieutenant John Holmes 6 6 0 Joseph
Barber Cornet 4 14 6 John Penefather Quartermaster 3 3 0 4 John Benson
Corporal 1 1 0 4 4 0 William Graves Corporal 1 1 0 Giles Sydrake Corporal 1
1 0 John Levistone Trumpeter 1 1 0 80 Troopers Harquebushiers 80 at 17 s. 6 d.
per week each of them is 70 0 0 88, This Troop of 88 Horse is per week 102 0 6
4 Captain Thomas Moulson 13 13 0 17 16 6 Lieutenant Simon Altoffe 6 6 0 Robert
Fitz Williams Cornet 4 14 6 Stephen Tailor Quarter 3 3 0 5 Edward Faircloth
Corporal 1 1 0 5 5 0 Richard Gwynn alias Gynn Corporal 1 1 0 Christopher
Morecraft Corporal 1 1 0 John Sawell Trumpeter 1 1 0 Edward Davis Trumpeter 1
1 0 62 Troopers Harquebushiers 62 at 17 s. 6 d. each of them per week is 54 5 0
71, This Troop of 71 Horse is per week 87 6 6 The Troop of 88 Horse is per week
102 0 6 The Troop of 113 Horse is per week 143 17 0 Horse in service 272 which
in toto is per week 333 4 0

The 28 Horse (of the number raised) wanting proved by the muster roll that is
examined and subscribed by Thomas Keightly, and Henry Gardner.
Wanting 28 Troopers and 28 Horse to make up the number of 300 Horse, there
being moneys raised and paid to the said Committee etc. for so many for the
defense and preservation of that County etc.

The weekly Pay
l. s. d. 2 Of Sir John Norwich and his Clark is 305 11 0 270 Of 270 Officers
and Troopers is 305 11 0 333 4 0 28 Of 28 Troopers wanting that served not 24
10 0 300 The weekly pay of the 300 Horse amounts to 357 14 0

From the 17 of August 1643 to March 25. 1644: The said Regiment served in this
service.
The time The days Weeks and days. In the Month of August 14 is 2 0 September
30 4 2 October 31 4 3 November 30 4 2 December 31 4 3 January 31 4 3 February
28 4 0 March 25 3 4

In toto days -- 220-Weeks -- 31 -- and days-3 Whereof deduct 18 weeks paid the
Soldiery -- 18 Remains unsatisfied to 270 for weeks -- -13 and days -- 3


Which 13 weeks and 3 days pay due to the said 270 officers and troopers
(besides the pay of Sir John Norwich and his Clark) at 305 l. 11 s. per week
amounts l. s. d. to the sum of -- 4103 -- 2 -- 0 More due to the
Commonwealth for the pay of 28 Troopers Harquebushiers that wanted of the
number of 300 which should have served under the Command of the said Sir John
Norwich at 17 s. 6 d. per week each of them for 31 weeks and 3 days is -- 770
-- 0 -- 0 More due to the Commonwealth for 28 Horse wanting of the number of
300 Horse raised for this service, which at the Commonwealths rate of 8 l. per
Horse amounts to -- 224 -- 0 -- 0 The Total sum discovered by the
Accomptants Discoverers is -- 5097 -- 2 -- 0 Whereof the witnesses prove upon
oath -- 2500 -- 0 -- 0 And by account appears to be discovered more -- 2597 --
2 -- 0 In all discovered as above -- 5097 -- 2 -- 0


The Commonwealth of England.
Debtor.
2 Per so much the said Committee etc. per contra paid to Sir John Norwich as
Colonel and Captain of Horse at 24 l. 3 s. per week, And to his Clark or
Paymaster at 3 l 10 s. per week, is for both 27 l. 13 s. per week l. s. d. for
31 weeks and 3 days amounts to -- 869 -- 0 -- 0 270 Per so much the said
Committee etc. paid to 270 Officers and Troopers that served under the Command
of the said Sir John Norwich for 1 weeks service only, which as in folio 13.
at 305 l. 11 s. per week amounts to -- 5499 -- 18-0 The balance due from the
said Committee etc. to the Commonwealth by this Account the 25 of March 1644
carried to the credit side of the said Commonwealth in fol. 15. is-4873 -- 2-0
11242 -- 0-0
The Commonwealth of England.
Creditor,
Per Moneys Collected and paid by the Inhabitants of the County of Hartford by
Ordinance of Parliament, to the Committee etc. of the same County for the pay
of 300 Horse Harque-bushiers raised under the Command of Sir John Norwich,
Colonel for the defense and preservation of the said County from the 17 of
August 1643 to the 25 of March 1644, being 31 weeks and 3 days, due to the said
Sir John as Colonel and Captain of Horse, and to his Officers and Troopers as
by this account in fol. 13 at 357 l. l. s. d. 14 s. per week amounts to --
11242 -- 0 -- 0
Creditor,
Per the balance per contra fol. 14 of the abovesaid accounts owing by the
Committee etc. of Hartford the 25 of March 1644 -- 4873 -- 2 -- 0 Per 28 Horse
wanting of the 300 Horse raised as abovesaid, and served not, under the Command
of the said Sir John Norwich, which at the Commonwealths rate of 8 l. per
Horse amounts to -- 224 -- 0 -- 0 5097 -- 2-0 Per the value of Arms and
Furniture for the 28 men and so many Horse that wanted of the number of 300
raised, which served not the sum of- Per Interest of the whole from the 25 of
March 1644 to this present the sum of --
Will. Bagwell, John Brockdon.

THe Lord General Cromwell being moved concerning the Printing and Publishing
of this Narrative, approved that it should be Printed, because it was for the
public good.

LICENCED BY AUTHORITY.

FINIS.

