Christ's coming Opened in a SERMON Before the HONORABLE HOUSE OF Commons IN
MARGARETS WESTMINSTER: MAY 17. 1648.

Being the day appointed for Thanksgiving for the great Victory in WALES.

By WILLIAM BRIDGE, Preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth.

London, Printed for Peter Cole at the Sign of the Printing-Presse in Cornhill
at the Royal Exchange. 1648.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS In PARLIAMENT Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
ACcording to your command I have presented these notes to your view, somewhat
concerning the Kingdom and coming of Christ: an Argument as unwelcome to some,
as welcome to others: Kings, Princes, and Rulers sometimes startle at it, but
they need not; for Christ means them no hurt: Quicquid Christo datur,
abundantius redditur.
if they will throw down their Crowns at his feet, he will set their Crowns on
their heads and his own too. Timuisti perdere terram, and
The Jews feared and refused to receive Christ and his Kingdom, Perdidisti
Deum; timuisti ne tollerent gentem, and sustuleru^t Deum; quia tenere voluisti,
tenendo male amisisti; and sine terra remansisti, and sine Deo. Augustine in
Joan. 11.48. Tract.
least they should lose their own Kingdom; and thereby they lost both their
God and their Kingdom, as Austin observes. But who ever lost his Scepter by
submitting unto Christ's Scepter? I may say truly, Potestas Christi is rather
Cumulativa then Privativa. In helping Christ to his Throne, you shall help
your selves to your honors and greatness. A liquis dicitur alio adjuvari
dupliciter, vel propter additionem novae virtutis; sic infirmi est; sic Deo non
competir; vel per executionem prioris, in quantum aliquis per alium exequitur
^uam ordinatione^: sic Deus per nos ^djuva^r. Thom. ^^in.
I will not say that Christ has need of you, he has no need of us: But if
that of the Schools be true, viz. that one is helped by another, either by
addition of new strength and virtue, or by the exercise of what was formerly
given, then Jesus Christ may in some sense (and that according to Scripture
Phrase, Judges. 5.23.) be said to be helped by you. Great confedracies will be
raised against him when he comes to his Kingdom. Ps. 2.1, 2. But God who sits
in Heaven, laughs at those combinations. v. 4. and in spite of them will set
his King upon his holy hill of Zion. v. 6. And to him that overcomes will I
give to fit down with me in my Throne says our Savior, even as I have
overcome and sit with my Father in his Throne. Rev. 3.21. Wherefore most
Honorable, be not overcome with evil, be not overcome with difficulties, with
oppositions or combinations of men; but overcome evil with good, and do what
in you lies to bring this blessed King Jesus unto his Thron and Inheritance,
that as all the earth in due time shall so England in special manner may become
the Kingdom of our Lord Christ, and we may all say, the Lord God omnipotent
reigns amongst us.

I could not long deliberate in so short a time what part of Gods Word I should
preach to you, but knowing the trouble of these times, and that the more you
spend your thoughts on Christ's coming and Kingdom, the more your hearts will
be upheld in the times of your troubles; I chose rather to preach on this
Argument, which I here now present, and beseech the Lord to bless it to you,
and you to this Kingdom; only be strong, and be of good courage; fear not,
neither be dismayed; and the Lord your God will be with you as he has been
formerly, which shall be the prayer of

Your humble Servant in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, WILL. BRIDGE.

CHRIST'S COMING Is At OUR MIDNIGHT
Mat. 25. verse. 6. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the
Bridegroom comes.
IN this parable, ye have the state and posture of the Church a little before,
and at the coming of Jesus Christ. Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened
unto ten Virgins. verse 1. Sometimes the Doctrine and grace of the Gospel, is
called the Kingdom of heaven: The Kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of
mustard seed, etc. This cannot be meant here; because in the Gospel there are
not ten Virgins. Sometimes the state of glory above is called the Kingdom of
heaven: That is not meant here, because there are no foolish Virgins. Sometimes
the Church of Christ under the New Testament, is called the Kingdom of heaven;
for there God appears, manifests himself, and it is heaven on earth: and this
is that which is here called the Kingdom of heaven. Which Kingdom is
described by the Governor, King and Head thereof: And by the subjects of that
Kingdom. The Subjects are described by their Agreement and Disagreement.
First, they agree in this, that they are all Virgins; though some foolish, yet
Virgins, not defiled with men, or the pollutions of the world: it is possible a
foolish, and unsound heart may go thus far in Religion, to be free from the
pollutions of the world, yea, through the knowledge of Christ, says the
Apostle Peter. Secondly, they agree in this, that they have all their Lamps,
good and bad, wise and foolish under Ordinances, which are the Lamps, whereby
the golden oil of the sanctuary is emptied into our hearts. Thirdly, they
agree in this, that they are all expectants, wise and foolish wait the
bridegroomes coming: they all think to receive good, and have a good day by
the coming of Jesus Christ: this is far, yet thus far may a foolish Virgin
go. Fourthly, they all agree in this that they had oil in their lamps:
indeed, verse the 3. it is said, Ad nihilu^ valet quod non valet ad finem suum.
that the foolish Virgins took no oil with them; but verse the 8 they say, Our
lamps are gone out: So that o^^e they had once, but they had not enough, and
so none; parts and gifts, and common graces a man may have, not only his lamp
but some oil in it for a time, yet be a foolish Virgin. Fifthly, they agree in
this, that they keep Company, have Communion and fellowship together in the
Church; yea, so far that the foolish are not known till Christ's coming: so
smoothly may a foolish Virgin carry it, yet remain foolish. Sixthly, They all
agree in this also; that they hold out their profession, with lamps, and
waiting till the bridegroom comes. So that possibly, a man may be a Professor
of the Gospel, and bear up his Profession among the best, even to the last,
yet be unfound at heart, and a foolish Virgin. Thus far they agree.

But Secondly, though these Virgins agree in many things, yet they disagree in
the point of wisdom: for the wise got so much oil as did serve till the
last; the foolish not so: there was defectus olei, verse 8.

Secondly you have here the description of the King, Governor and Head of this
Kingdom, who is described from and by the manner of his coming. First, he
comes as a Bridegroom. Secondly, he comes apparently. Not as in the days of
his flesh when he came more hiddenly; behold a great cry, etc.

Thirdly, he comes suddenly, unexpectedly, in the most dark time, he comes at
midnight.

Now Christ's coming is either spiritual and invisible, John 14.18. I will not
leave you comfortless, I will come to you, Or visible: and that either at the
day of judgment: or else at the calling and conversion of the Jews, when he
will appear in the clouds, and come to set up his Kingdom in this world, in a
more glorious manner then ever. So Rev. 1.7. Behold, he comes with clouds,
and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him, that is the
Jews, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him, even so, Amen.
Which relates unto the 12. Chapter of Zachariah, verse the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
Spirit of grace and supplication; and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, etc. In
that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, and the land shall
mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their
wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;
the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart, etc. Which cannot
be understood of the day of judgment, because then the families of David,
Nathan, Shimei, Levi, shall not mourn apart, and their wives apart. Of this
coming of Christ to set up his Kingdom, I rather take this parable to be
understood, and not of his coming at the day of judgment; for in the 24. of
Matthew, the Disciples did propound three questions to our Savior Christ,
verse the 3. Tell us, when shall these things be? that is the destruction of
the Temple; and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the
world? To the last he does answer first (as is usual in Scripture,)
negatively, verse the 6. Ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, but
the end is not yet. Affirmatively verse the 14. And this Gospel of the
Kingdom, shall be preached in all the world for a witness to all Nations, and
then shall the end come. To the first question he does answer in the second
place, verse the 15, and 16. And to the second he does answer in the third and
last place, because he intended to speak most to that, and so proceeds to
speak of his coming and the signs thereof, in the after part of the 24.
Chapter, and verse the 37, 39, 40, 44, 46, 50. and so he goes on in this
beginning of the 25. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be like unto ten
virgins. In which parable still he speaks of his coming as before, for verse
13. he concludes this parable thus, Watch ye therefore, for ye know not the
hour wherein the Son of man comes.

Besides, Christ comes not as a Bridegroom, but as a Judge at the day of
judgment. And if ye look into the 19, 21, 22 chapters of the Revelation, where
mention is made of the glory of Christ's kingdom in the latter times, ye find,
that the converting Jew, who there sings the Hebrew song Halleluja, i^ ^alled,
the Bride, the Lambs wife, saying, Come Lord Jesus. And at the eighteen and
nineteen verses of the nineteenth Chapter, mention is made of a great battle:
But there is no fighting, nor battelling at the day of judgment; That is no
time for feasting, nor suppers neither; but at weddings and marriages there
were, and are great suppers, which we read shall be at this time, verse 17.
And as the wise enter, so the foolish, and those that tell, and make lies are
shut out. Finding therefore all these things at that coming of Christ, thus to
suit with this parable, I rather incline to think, that it cannot be
understood of the day of judgment, but of that time when Christ will appear
at the Jews conversion, to set up his kingdom on earth, in that glorious, and
blessed manner which all the Prophets bear witness unto.

And because all the Victories, and deliverances that Christ works for the
churches in the mean time, are so many steps unto this kingdom, and coming of
his: therefore in Scripture phrase, sometimes, they are called his coming.
Matthew 17. His transfiguration was called his coming in his Kingdom; for
Chapter 16.28. Christ says, There be some standing here, which shall not taste
of death till they see the son of man coming in his Kingdom. And then verse 1.
Chapter 17. it is said, And after six days, Jesus takes Peter, James and John
his brother, and brings them up into an high mountain apart, and was
transfigured before them. In three Gospels, this history of the transfiguration
is linked unto that speech, There are some standing here, which shall not taste
of death till they see the son of man coming in his Kingdom, with those words,
And after six days Jesus took Peter, etc. Our Lord and Savior Christ was
then come when he spoke those words; but he was to come in a more glorious way
and manner to set up his Kingdom, and his transfiguration being a taste of
that glory and coming, it is here called his coming in his Kingdom. So all
these great deliverances and victories which Christ works for his Church,
being so many tastes, and forerunners of his coming in his Kingdom, they may be
called his coming too; surely, they are as so many steps that he takes in the
way of his coming to his Kingdom.

But says the text, He comes at midnight; That is, in a time when he is least
expected, suddenly, and when we are most in the dark. And so the Observation is
this.

Christ comes at midnight:

Behold (says Christ) I come as a thief; thieves come in the darkest time, a
time when they are least expected; so will Christ's coming be.

For the opening and clearing of which truth, I shall labor to show,

First, That our Lord and Savior Christ will come again. Secondly, That he
will come at midnight. Thirdly, Give you some account why he chooses rather
thus to come at midnight, then otherwise. And then draw down this by way of
Application to our present occasion.

First, Our Lord and Savior Christ will come again.

1. Take his coming for, his Spiritual coming; and though now absent from your
soul, yet he will come again. John 14.23. If any man love me, my father will
love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him.

Secondly, Personal, visible coming at the day of judgment, so he will come
again. 2 Thessalonians. 1. Chap. 7, 8, 9, 10. verses.

Thirdly, appearing in the clouds, when he will come to set up his Kingdom,
so he will come again before that great day; for if ye look into the Scripture,
ye shall find that his coming and his Kingdom are knit together, do
synchronize Dan. 7.13, 14.

So in many Scriptures ye shall find his coming, and his Kingdom do go
together. Now if ye look into the 11. of the Revelations, we shall find it
spoken of times yet to come; The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever:
verse. the 15. And we give thee thanks, O Lord, God Almighty, because thou have
taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned, verse 17. which cannot be
understood of the day of judgment; for then the Nations are not angry, then
the Temple-doore is not opened, as is here said verse 18, and 19.

I would not be mistaken here; for I do not think that Christ shall come and
reign, continue reigning upon earth a thousand years, I do not see how the
Saints can spare him out of heaven so long. Neither do I think that this his
coming is only to be understood of a spiritual coming into the souls of his,
so filling their souls with his spirit, that they shall have need of
Ordinances no more; for in those glorious times, though there shall be no
Temple, that is, a Jewish Temple, yet the Temple door, that is, the Gospel
Temple, shall be opened. And in Zachariah the last, which is plainly spoken of
the glory of the latter times yet to come, it is said expressly three times in
that Chapter, that men shall go up to keep the feast of Tabernacles, an
allusion to the Jewish Ordinance. But why not the feast of Passcover and
Pentecost, only the feast of Tabernacles? many reasons may be given, but I
think one is; Because the feast of Tabernables had been more neglected then
other feasts; for upon the coming out of Babylon, in the 8. of Nehemiah it is
said, they had not kept that feast from the time of Joshua, the son of Nun to
that day, which was almost a thousand years. Now the Holy Ghost seeing what
degenerations there would be in our latter times, and losings, and neglectings
of Ordinances, he says here, that then they shall keep the feast of
Tabernacles: that is, in the expression of the Jews, observe those Ordinances
especially, which had been most defaced and forgotten: But I keep to the words
of Scripture.

Christ shall come in the clouds again, when the poor Jews shall see him, and
those which are called Forsaken, Read chapter 13 of the 2. of Esdras, which though
it be Apocrypha and the lowest of Apocrypha, being written in Latin, yet of
great antiquity, cited by Cyprian, Jerome, Austin, Cle men's Alexandrinus, and
diverse others.
shall be called Beloved the Kings bride, when the fullness of the Gentiles
shall be come in, when Christ himself shall set up his Kingdom in the world,
his Regnum potentiae, not patientiae: when he shall rule from sea to sea, when
he shall come not riding upon an asses colt, but in the clouds, with thousands
of Angels ministering unto him. When foolish virgins shall be shut out from his
glory, and the wise professor taken in. And in the mean while, though our Lord
and Savior Christ seem to forsake the Churches for the present, yet he will
come again unto them with delivering and conquering mercy: Behold, I come
quickly, hold fast that which thou have. Revel. 3.

Obj. But how may it appear that Christ will come at midnight?

Answ I shall give you a taste of it in all his comings, because there is the
same Spirit in one as in another.

1. For his spiritual coming, when Christ comes first with his Converting
grace, and causes his Converting mercy to pass upon any soul, then he does
come at midnight, Job. 33. God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it
not; in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men,
in slumbrings upon the bed, Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction, verse 14, 15, 16. When a man is fast asleep in his sins, little
thinks of any good, unless it be to oppose it, then Christ comes and seals
on some instruction upon his soul. Thus he does come at midnight.

Secondly, Comforting mercy, and causes his comforting grace to pass upon a
man's heart; then he does come at midnight, in an hour and time when he does
least expect him. I sought him (says the Spouse,) but I found him not. I
sought him on my bed, in private, and found him not. I sought him in the
streets, in the public Ordinances, but I found him not. It was but a little
that I passed from the watchmen, but I found him whom my Soul loves. Then,
and there she finds him, where she looked not for him, and did not expect him.
Psalm 42. verse 6, 7, 8. O my God (says David). My Soul is cast down within
me. Here Is trouble, sorrow, and heaviness; all thy waves are gone over me,
verse the 17. Here Is more. Yet (says he) verse 8. The Lord will command his
loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his songs shall be with me.
It is Gods ordinary title, The Lord our maker, who gives songs in the night,
Job. 35. We read of Master Robert Glover, mentioned by Master Fox, in the
book of Martyrs, That though he were a man very gracious and holy, faithfully
bearing witness to the truth; yet it pleased God to withdraw himself and
presence from him, in so much that he was greatly distressed while he was in
prison; and opening himself to his friend, told him, how God had left and
deserted him; his friend exhorted him still for to wait on God, which he
labored to do, and the night before his execution, spent much of that time in
prayer, yet no comfort came, no manifestations of the presence of Christ; the
next day he was drawn out to the stake for to die for the truth, and as he
went, he mourned much for the presence of Christ; but when he came in the sight
of the stake, it pleased God so to fill his heart and soul with comfort, and
the incomes of his love, that he cried out unto his friend, O Austin, heis
come, he is come, he is come. This good man was in the dark a great while; but
when in the darkest time, then Christ came. Christ comes at midnight, when he
does come with comfort.

And thirdly, Israel, that they went out of Egypt at midnight. God had promised
deliverance a long time before, and they did all expect it; but who would have
expected it at such a time as that was? And if we look into that last Chapter
of Zachary, we shall find, that the great deliverance of the Churches promised,
is to be in one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day nor night, but
it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light, verse 7. Who
would expect light at evening? we all expect darkness at evening time; but at
evening, when we look most for darkness, God has promised this great light.

And for Christ's coming at the last, ye know what he says, I will come in an
hour when ye look not for me. And for this great deliverance and victory
which the Lord has now given unto you, was it not at midnight? consider with
your selves a little, remember the days of your former troubles, and were you
ever in a more dark condition? were ye not all benighted? when were your
enemies more high, and lofty? when were your friends more down and dejected? A
night, a night, the Lord knows, a dark night was come upon us. Well, but now
Christ comes with a seasonable, almost miraculous victory and deliverance. And
this is Christ's way and manner; He never comes to his people as a Bridegroom,
but still he does come at midnight, in all his comings still he does come at
midnight.

Christ loves that his people should sit up for him, up for him; yea, though he
don't come till midnight.

And does it argue love, for one man to sit up and wait for another? and not
love in our souls to sit up and watch, and wait for Christ? Christ loves to
see our love exercised; and therefore says he, though I intend to save, and
help such a person, yet I Will stay, and stay long; I will not help him
presently, I Will suffer a night, a dark night to come upon him, so shall I see
his love in waiting for me.

Secondly, Job. He seals on instruction in the night, that he may hide pride
from man. When a man is awake, he tryes things by reason, and if reason like
them, then they do pass for current; if reason don't approve them, then they
will be rejected: but in a dream, in a deep sleep, the mind receives things,
not examining them by reason. Now in the great things of God, the less hand
reason has, and the more Faith, Rations p^aecedentes minuunt Fidem,
subsequentes augent.
the better. Reasons going before Faith, do diminish it; but Reasons following
Faith, strengthen it, say the Schools. Faith ennobles a work. The more a man
ushers in a business with his own reason, the more apt to be proud thereon:
but in a dream, in a deep sleep, there is little of reason to be used, and
therefore in a deep sleep he comes upon us, that he may hide pride from us.

Thirdly, Christ: Oh! what a gracious Savior have I, that could find in his
heart to find me out with his mercy in this dark condition, in this unexpected
time! His time is not as our time, as his thoughts are not as ours. Christ is
the good Samaritan, he will pour wine and oil into the bleeding wounds of his
servants, but he will first let the Priest pass by, and the Levite pass by,
and such means and helps pass by, which we ordinarily expect comfort from;
and when we have none from them, then says he, now is a time for me; but by
that time all other helps are passed by, it will be midnight; but though it be
midnight (says Christ) it is all one to me, for I create light, and my
thoughts, and my times, are not as man's are. And though man come with help and
succor in the day time, yet I will come at midnight. Oh!

What is the issue of this doctrine?

This Doctrine looks wishly upon two sorts of people,

Some foolish virgins there are whom Christ comes against, and these he will
come upon at midnight, take them in their beds, when they are fast asleep in
their sin, and are most secure. Ye have heard of the lamentation of Norwich;
there was a generation of men that rose up and threatened to destroy the godly
Party there; but the Lord so ordered things in his providence, that those whom
they threatened to destroy, were preserved, and the destroyers perished; nigh
two or three hundred (if relations be right) blown up with powder, or spoiled,
and three godly families, consisting of about twenty persons, in several
rooms of the house that was blown up, were all preserved, and not a bone of
them broken, whilst the other flew up into the air, as spectacles of divine
anger, as if God should speak from Heaven, these are the people whom I would
have preserved, and those are the people, that I would have punished. But ah!
poor destroyed souls who perished in the thunder of Gods anger, did they ever
think that Christ would have come upon them at such a midnight? Here is a
great deliverance and victory that is now before ye: If relations speak true,
two thousand and five hundred, putting to flight eight thousand of the enemy,
fifteen hundred slain, three thousand taken prisoners, and the rest
scattered: But ah! poor deceived people who made this insurrection? did they
ever think that Christ would have come so suddenly, in such a time, at
midnight upon them? Consider all your wars, and has not Christ come at
midnight all along? Christ is in the way to his Kingdom, and every step he
takes shall be midnight; both unto those he comes for, and those that he comes
against; but woe to them whom he does come against, it is adreadfull thing to
be cut off suddenly, and surprised in our sins. This is a judgment threatened
on the latter day, Christ will come quickly, be quick with men in a way of
judgment: as a thief in the night will he come, when poor foolish virgins shall
be fast asleep.

I would h^^e therefore exhort and beseech ye in the Lord, to consider the
grounds ye stand upon, the principles ye work by, the cause ye manage; and I
appeal to you, whether do ye not think that God is in all these wars, that
the event of battles is only in the hand of God? Some of you, no friends to
Parliament, nor the cause of God in their hands, have tried many ways (as once
Balaam,) to curse Israel; sometimes ye have got upon one hill, and there ye
have built an altar, thinking from thence to curse Gods people; when that would
not do, then ye got upon a second; when ye could not do it from thence, then ye
got to a third mountain: one while ye thought to have done it by the strength
of your old skillful soldiery; when that would not do, then ye came home, and
sought to make divisions among us, and to raise jealousies between brethren;
seeing that would not do it sufficiently, you have now gotten to a third
mountain, laboring to stir up the Countries to make insurrection, and yet you
cannot curse them from thence. Wherefore now after all, do ye not think that
God is against you? can ye believe that God is with you, after all these
successive victories that have fallen against you? Have ye not read that
Scripture, The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, the wicked
are snared in the works of their own hands? and have ye not been snared in
the works of your own hands? have ye not risen to fall? have not your own
doings, been your undoing? and will ye yet go on to plot, consult, design?
what? will ye never have done? well then, go on, consult, plot, devise,
associate, confederate together, try the conclusion, work to the utmost; yet
know, that when ye have done all, and as you think have the better, and all is
your own, then will Christ come upon you at midnight, in an hour and time,
when ye do least expect him, and it will be a darker night then ever yet you
saw; for our Lord and Savior Christ, he does come as at the last, so now in
these his precedaneous comings, still at midnight, he does come at midnight. Be
wise now therefore, O ye Princes, Nobles, Rulers, Judges, Gentlemen, and
others: Kiss the Son, lest ye perish in the way, for Christ is upon his way
unto his Kingdom.

Secondly, course with all his people, see what is said in the 6. of Hosea,
verse 3. Then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord, his going forth
is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain unto the earth. Oh! but I am a poor ignorant creature,
don't know or understand the mind, and will of God in these actions, and
transactions of things abroad. Be it so, yet (says the Lord) you shall know
him, if you follow on to know him. Oh! but I am in a sad and a dark condition,
benighted with some affliction. Be it so, Christ will come, and he will come as
the morning; as sure and certain as the morning comes, so will Christ come; and
though it be a dark night, yet you say, certainly morning will come again; so
confident may you be of Christ's coming; for (says the text) he will come as
the morning: that is, certainly. Oh! but I shall faint in the mean while, he
will stay long ere he comes. Nay, but he will come in season, as the former,
and as the latter rain; the former and the latter rain come in their seasons;
so will Christ do, and therewithal your comforts shall be all revived and
refreshed; why should then any of Gods people be discouraged?

But suppose that the Lord Jesus do comfortably appear to us in a dark
condition,

First, Nec super biendum rebus florentibus, nec desperandum adversis.
But does Christ come at midnight? why then should we not trust in God at
midnight, in the darkest time? At what time I am afraid (says the Psalmist) I
will trust in the Lord Faith moves Christ for to come the sooner: And therefore
(says the Apostle) Looking for, and hastening the coming of the Lord. You
read it in the English, (...)
hastening unto; but according to the Greek, the words may better be read thus,
looking for, and hastening the coming of the Lord. Our very looking for his
coming, (...) 2 Pet. 3.12.
does hasten his coming. Faith mitigates our calamities, and holds the hands of
our enemies. I have read in the life of Tindall, that he being in the
Low-countreyes, heard of a certain Juggling Conjurer, that could by his
conjuring command a dish of meat from any Princes table in the world, which he
did use to do, and would ordinarily invite his friends unto dinner: Whereupon
Master Tindall resolved, that he would go see this act, but would set himself
to believe the contrary; which he did; and the company being come together, and
the Conjurer endeavoring the same, was so hindered by the faith of Master
Tindall, that he cried out, and said, Fidearmatus, dissicilia quaeq, potest.
I cannot do it, there sits the man that hinders me, and holds my hands. I say,
faith will hold the hands of wicked and devilish men; such too many we have to
deal with in these times: Oh! that you would use your faith more and more. And
have ye not ground enough for it? Christ comes at midnight; why should you not
believe what ever your condition be, although it be never so dark?

Secondly, If Christ come at midnight,

We many times leave Gods work, and are not constant in it because of
opposition, which does make us fear: But will Christ come and own us, and come
in a time when we look not for him, in the darkest time? then why should not
men go on with all constancy, even in their darkest fears? Luther relates a
story of Austins mother, (which also Austin does mention) who was much troubled
for her son Austin, because that for the space of seven or nine years, he had
been a Manichee; she prayed and continued praying for him; at the last in the
night, she had as a word from God in answer to her prayer, these words, Qualis
tu, talis ille; As thou, so he. Whereupon she was much refreshed, and told him,
she had received a promise from the Lord that he should be converted from his
error; but he told her the meaning of the words was contrary, that she should
be as he was, that is, converted to his opinion; But she did so constantly
abide in her sense, Ad-o constant^r manebat in suo sen su, ut Angustinus facile
transivit in sententiam ma^ris. Luth. in Genesis
that, Facile transivit in sententiam matris, he easily turned to his mothers
opinion. And indeed, what more convincing to an adversary then to see one
constantly abiding by what is good? A Christian, especially a Christian
Magistrate, should be like to Christ, who when he is in a way of mercy, will
not be put out of his way by men. Isaiah. 27. verse 4. Who would set the briars
and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together. At the 2. and 3. verse, he speaks of his great love, and care to and
of his Church: A vineyard of red wine, I the Lord do keep it, I will water it
every moment, least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. I but in this
vineyard, there may be many briars and thorns, that may arise up to afflict
Gods people. True, But (says the Lord) who would set the briars and thorns
against me in battle? I would go through them. As if he should say, Indeed
these wicked men are as briars and thorns, rending and tearing my poor
people, and as briars and thorns they do conjoyne and twist together; but
though they do rise up against me in the way of my mercy toward my people, yet
they shall not put me out of my way, I will even pass through them: yea, and
though they do rise, it shall be to their own ruin, they shall burn
together, I would burn them together, I the Lord would pass through them. Now
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I hope, is in the way of mercy to this poor
Kingdom; but certainly, he is upon the way to his own Kingdom; and though
wicked men may obstruct, and hinder us, they shall never hinder him, but he
will pass through them. Oh! therefore, labor more and more to be like to
Christ, keep on your way; for though it be late ere he come, yet he will
certainly come, he comes at midnight.

Thirdly, your battles for these many years; and I must needs say, that of late
our divisions and sins have been so great, that I feared they would even drive
Christ out of the field: but now I see still he does own your cause, and own
your forces, still he does keep the field; yea, and goes on marching, as if he
were resolved not to leave the field, till he has conquered all this Kingdom
with his love; and he has now given you a taste of his intentions and love in
this victory, a seasonable victory, a wonderful victory, an unexpected
victory, a midnight victory; Oh! thou Wonder-working God! shall we not now
praise thy name? We read of a great straight and dark condition that
Jehosaphat was in by reason of his enemies; but he crying unto the Lord, the
Lord heard and delivered him and his people: in so much as they kept a day of
thanksgiving in the open fields, and they called the name of the place
Berachah, the valley of blessing. 2 Chronicles. 20.26.

In Joshua's time the people of Israel were in a great straight, by reason of
the Amalekites, who came upon them when they were weak; but the Lord fought
for his people, smote their enemies, and they were quite destroyed; whereupon
Israel made an Altar, and called it Jehovah-nissi, The Lord my shield. In
Samucls time again, they were in a great distress by reason of their enemies;
but they cried to the Lord, and he delivered them, and destroyed all their
enemies: then they set up a stone, and called it, Eben-ezer, The stone of help,
saying, Hitherunto the Lord has helped us. Afterward again, they were
brought very low into a very dark estate, sold into the hands of their
enemies, but the Lord raised them up Saviors, Deborah and Barak, and delivered
them from all their enemies; and then they penned a Psalm of praise, the 5. of
Judges, wherein they do ascribe and give the glory of all unto God himself;
wherein they make an honorable mention of the instruments which God used; they
did not revile the instruments, but honored them; wherein they condemned and
cursed those that would not go forth to help the Lord; curse ye Meroz: Wherein
they commended the Tribes and Countries who came forth and willingly offered
themselves unto the service of the Lord; wherein they prayed against the
enemies of the Church: And then mark the issue (at the last verse) And the
Land had rest forty years. And such an issue, not only forty years, but many
times forty years rest, may you have as an issue of the praises of this day.

But yet observe, still some monument of praise was erected; sometimes a stone,
sometimes an Altar, always one monument or other of praise. And have we no
Altar? no stone now? no name of God to celebrate now? no present of
thankfulness to bring to our God this day? is there no act of mercy to be
shown? none of Christ's friends to be relieved? shall we make no progress?
shall we stand still? do nothing? as men in a maze? shall we make no
improvement of this deliverance and victory? why should we not all sit down
under our relations, and say, How shall I make improvement of this mercy? what
shall I do now for God and Christ that I did not before? Is there nothing in
your hand? what? No present to be given to Christ? have we nothing at all? then
let us bring the sense of our own Nothing; for the more humble ye are after
victories, the more thankful for victories. And if ye have no present in your
hand this day to bring unto God for this victory, Imago Caesar is reddatur
Caesari, imago Dei reddatur Deo. August.
yet bring the victory it self, and give it to God. Ye give to Caesar the
things that are Cesars: why? because his image is upon them; and has not this
victory much of the image of God upon it? When David was delivered from his
enemies, we read in the 116. Psalm, that he checks himself for his former
unbelief, I said in my haste, etc. and gathers up himself into God again;
(...) In ingenu is. Ar. Motan. sic Tarnov. in Psalm. passion.
Return unto thy rest O my soul. When delivered from his enemies, as we read
in the 118. Psalm, he sounds a retrate from man, O my soul, trust not in
Princes, not in man, nor in the sons of men, trust not in Princes. The word in
the Hebrew is, Ingenuous men, for Princes should be ingenuous; and if any men
are to be trusted to, they are ingenuous men; but being delivered from men, he
retreates from men, and says, O my soul, trust not in men, nor in the sons of
men, not in Princes, not in ingenuous men.

Yea, and in that Psalm, he calls upon others also for to praise the Lord; and
so let us do in his words: O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever: He stilleth the rage of the sea, and the tumults of the
people, for his mercy endures for ever. Who has owned your cause again, and
your forces again, for his mercy endures for ever; who has remembered you in
your low condition, for his mercy endures for ever; and has visited us with
his love at midnight, for his mercy endures for ever: O give thanks unto the
God of Gods, for his mercy endures for ever. Praise the Lord.

If Christ come at midnight, Applic. 2.
then me thinks his personal coming is not far off. I cannot say it is
midnight in that respect, but surely it is very late, it is very dark, and it
has been dark a great while.

We read of two sorts of signs, which go before the coming of Jesus Christ:
Some that are more remote and transient, some that are more immediate and just
at his coming. Those that are more immediate and just at his coming, ye read
of in the 24. of Matthew. verse. 29, 30. Immediately after the tribulation of
those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of the Heavens
shall be shaken, and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven;
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son
of man coming in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory. These are yet
to come. But those that are more remote, all seem to be past already. Before
the coming of Christ (says the Apostle) the man of sin shall be revealed; that
is past. Before the coming of Christ, there shall false Prophets arise, and
say, I am Christ, and another I am Christ; that is past. Before the personal
coming of Christ, there shall be wars and rumors of wars; this is past And
before that day, there shall be great divisions, even in the matter of
Religion; one saying, Lo here is Christ, and another, Lo there is Christ;
this is already. And immediately before, and at his coming, men shall be
smiting their fellow servants, eating and drinking with the drunken; this is
already. The wise and the foolish Virgins, shall be all asleep; and was there
ever a time, when both wise and foolish were more asleep then now? when men
set themselves to sleep, they draw their curtains, put out their lights, and
will have no more light come in; so now. When men are asleep, their senses are
bound up that were open before, they see not, hear not, taste not, smell not;
their senses are locked up. Sleep is, Ligatio sensuum. And was there ever time
when men's senses were more bound up, that were formerly exercised, then now?
are there not some that would pray, and hear, and read, that will not now?
who have now thrown off all duties, ordinances, and means? Oh! what sleeping
is here? was there ever such sleeping among professors as now there is? if ever
wise and foolish virgins were afleepe, they seem to be in our days; and shall
we sleep also? will ye not rather watch and pray? watch and pray, pray and
watch; and what I say to one, I say to all, watch and pray, least ye enter into
temptation.

Take but two or three wakening observations from this Parable.

First, If ye look into this parable, ye may observe a most desperate sleep
is to come upon all prosessors, immediately before the coming, the great coming
of Christ. I call that desperate sleep, which is universal; this Parable falls
upon the Churches; Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven, (not the Kingdom of the
world) be like to ten Virgins; and those ten shall be all asleep, good and
bad. And says our Savior in another place, Nevertheless, when the son of man
comes, shall he find Faith on earth? Again, I call that a desperate sleep,
which shall be in the face of light. Its an hard thing to sleep, whilst a
candle is held unto ones eyes; and in the time before Christ comes, much light
and truth shall break out, as Antichristian error goes off; and yet, even
then, good and bad shall fall asleep.

I call that desperate, (again) which shall be in the midst of trouble. Its an
hard thing for a man to sleep when he is pincht and stricken; in the times
before Christ and when he comes, men shall be smiting their fellow servants;
and yet, even the smitten shall be asleep. Oh! what desperate sleeping times
shall the latter times be! have we not all cause then for to watch and pray?

Again secondly,

Now if a man be very sleepy, and you come to him, and say, Sir, take heed of
sleeping, for if you do fall asleep, you will never wake again, will he not
take heed of sleeping? thus it shall be with the sleepers of this latter time;
at other times men shall sleep and wake, and wake and sleep; but if men fall
asseepe, into a spiritual sleep immediately before the coming of Jesus
Christ, they shall sleep till he comes, and shall be wake't no more but by his
coming: Oh! Lord, who would not watch and pray, least he enter into temptation!

Thirdly, If ye observe this Parable, ye shall find,

Some slept (as the wise Virgins) but did keep their oil, their oil not
spent; these when the Bridegroom came, entered with him into his joy.

Others there are that sleep, and have spent their oil; had oil, but spent
it: and these when the Bridegroom comes, are shut out; and though they call,
Lord open; He answers, I know ye not. So now in the latter days, there shall
be two sorts of professors, one that shall sleep and slumber, but they shall
keep their graces, their oil, their principles; and these, though they be
found asleep when Christ comes, Christ will pardon, and their sleeping,
becausethey have still their oil.

Others there shall be, who shall not only fall asleep, but they shall lose
their principles: True, I thought indeed, that a man was bound for to keep the
sabbath, to live strictly, and to make a conscience of every word and thought;
but now I see there is more liberty; thus they shall lose their principles,
their oil, their judgments: these poor souls shall never wake again; and
when Christ comes, though they cry to him for mercy, they will not obtain it:
No, ye have lost your principles, your oil, your judgments; ye are foolish
Virgins, ye shall never enter into my joy, he will then say. Who would not then
watch and pray? what I say to you, I speak unto my own soul, and to every
person here present, Oh! let us all watch; for the Son of man comes, and he
comes at midnight; and if it be not midnight now, yet it is late already.

And seeing all these things are so, give me leave Honorable and Beloved, to
leave an exhortation with you, which is no other, then that which the Psalmist
presents unto ye in the 24. Psalm. Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be lift
up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Gates (ye know)
are the place where the Magistrate fate: The Temple door was called the
Everlasting door; in opposition to the door of the Tabernacle which was to
continue but a little time: The Psalmist speaks here of Christ's Kingdom and
Lordship on earth, verse 1. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
the world and they that dwell therein. Then he will have a Church and a
precious people: Who shall ascend unto the hill of the Lord? who shall stand on
his holy place? verse the 3. Which he answers in the general: He that has
clean hands and a pure heart. And more particularly at the 6. verse, This is
the Generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, even Jacob.

The Children of Israel had two names; sometimes they were called Israel, when
they were in a more flourishing and strong condition: sometimes they were in a
low and weak condition, and then they were called Jacob; Fear not O worm
Jacob. Now says the Psalmist here, The earth is the Lords, and Christ shall
reign, and the poor despised Israel, who now are in low condition, and
therefore called Jacob, shall be converted, and ascend unto the hill of God.
Now therefore my advice and counsel unto you, is, That as the Lord Jesus shall
make any approach unto your Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Churches, you would
receive him, and not shut your gates and doors against him: but O all ye
Cities, Towns and Magistrates, lift up your heads, lift up your heads O ye
gates, and all you Temple-men, and Churches, lift up your everlasting doors,
that this King of glory may come in. And if ye ask who it is? It is the Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle; wherefore lift up your heads. And
because this exhortation is of great consequence, and men are slow to receive
it, I exhort you to it again, at the 9. verse. Lift up your heads O ye gates,
even lift them up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.
Now the Lord grant, that we may all so lift up our heads and gates, that this
King of glory may come in among us, not as a judge to condemn us, but as our
Bridegroom to love us.

FINIS.

