THE BREVVERS PLEA.

Or, a VINDICATION of Strong-Beere and Ale.

Wherein is declared, The wonderful bounty and patience of God. The wicked and
monstrous unthankfulness of man. The unregarded injuries done to those
creatures, groaning, as it were, to be delivered from the abuses proceeding,
From disdainful aspertions of ignorant Man. From the intemperance of sinful
Man.


1 COR. 12. 19. Jf they were all one member where would the body be.

20. But now are they many Members, yet but one Body.

21, The eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you.

Iuven. Sat. Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas.

LONDON, Printed for I. C. 1647.

Lectori candido et benevolo. S. P. D.
COurteous and Judicious reader, to thy view chiefly to Jexpose these my
ensuing lines, being urged thereunto by the loud cry of two horrible wrath
provoking sins, now reigning amongst us. viz. Vnthankefullnes toward God, and
uncharitablenes toward man, these two like unseperable companions always go
together, both dishonouring the Creator; some unthankfully vilifying, and
others intemperatly abusing the creature, to reform which lies only in the
Magistrate, yet blame and aspersions are cast upon those, who suffer most (by
such lewd and prodigal offenders) J mean the distressed company of Brewers,
whose sad condition groans for speedy releif, a Company very needful and also
profitable to this City and Suburbs, yet looked upon with an unkind aspect, but
occasioned by those who may be well affected, but being mistaken in their
judgment can give no true and sollid reason for it. But according to that of
the Poet,

Non amo te Volusi, nec possum dicere, quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
The Brewers Plea, or a Vindication of strong-beere and Ale.
What a vineyard in England? has God been pleased to warm this western
clymate with a Temporal Blessing of so excellent a nature for the Sustaining,
yea for the reviving of the poor wearyed Laboring men, and not only foe, but
also for the cheering up of the drooping Spirits and the glading of the hearts,
of the Sorrowful and afflicted? This is no small favor which has so long
been bestowed upon us in this occidentall part of the world; but it is a
wonder, that for so great a blessing, we should return so little thanks unto
the Almighty? yea, many amongst us take not so much notice of it as to account
it for a blessing, and othersome more ungrateful (little knowing what the want
thereof would produce) seem to loath it in their thoughts, by their
disdainful expressions, and aspersions cast upon those creatures, without
which this Kingdom especially near London were in a sad condition, as I shall
show more plainly hereafter. And here is manifestly seen not only the great
bounty of God, but also his exceeding wonderful patience, that notwithstanding
such murmurings he has yet continued this blessing amongst us, though
sometimes threatened a dearth thereof. Thus God dealt with his Israel in the
wilderness, although some murmured at Manna, yet he withdrew not that favor
from them. But our disdainers will say, it is their zeal against drunkenness,
I may as well say, O sinful zeal! staggering and wavering no less through
ignorance, then the drunkard through his intemperance. Because some do abuse
the good creature of God by that detestable sin of drunkenness, shall others
therefore (such as would be thought to be religious) expose it to disdain? Nay
cry it down as a thing to be extinguished? Let such ingeniously confess which
they hold to be the greater sin, to abuse or to extinguish, any of Gods
creatures, the abuse (by punishment duly inflicted) may be reformed; but to
extinguish or diminish the vir^ue of any of the crea^ures, is to deprive not
only the offenders, but also the innocent of the full fruition of those
creatures which God has appointed for the comfort of mankind.

After Noah had offended, and suffered reproach by his cursed son, did he to
manifest his detestation against that sin, give order to destroy that
vineyard which he had so painfully planted, had not this error been greater
then the former? For he that will serve God aright, must neither turn to the
right hand nor to the left; but must walk before him in a straight path with
an upright heart, to diminish or detract from the excellency of the creature,
is to dishonor the Creature. And it is a punishment from God upon a people
when a people degenerateth from its natural virtue, or is deprived of its
proper excellency, as appears by the expression of the Prophet, bewailing the
sad condition of Israel, (says he) Your silver is become dross, your wine is
mixed with water. Isa. 1.22. And our Savior who came to repair our ruins and
to purchase for us a better Paradise then that which Adam lost, made it his
first miracle to make water wine, and that of the best, ( John 29.) whilst some
of us would turn our native wine into water, I mean our Strong-beere into
Beer of the least nourishment and meanest condition. For brevities sake let
these two witnesses suffice, although the holy Scriptures are full of
expressions tending to the commendations of those creatures most (I speak
concerning temporal blessings) which are most cherishing to the vital
spirits, and most preservative to the health and well being of weak mankind.
The same holy spirit that pronounces woes against gluttons and drunkards
commends Canaan, because it flowed with milk and honey, and corn and wine
and oil, Deuteronomy. 11.9 14. ver. And although England has not naturally the wine
of the vine yet it injoyeth the plentiful fruition thereof; yea in such an
abundant manner that many English prodigals, though vast estates have been left
to diverse of them, yet have complained more of the want of money, then of the
want of wine. But grant that these foreign plantations should fail us, or that
we should be disappointed, yea almost destitute of wine by some unexpected
means proceeding from providence, either divine or humane, or that those ships
that ventured, (...) those commodities transported for wine, should be
otherwise employed, or improved to the enriching of the Kingdom, that wine
ther^by should be scarce amongst us, yet has England whereat to rejoice within
it self. For of hopps and Malt our native commodites (and therefore the more
agreeable to the constitutions of our native inhabitants) may be made such
Strong-beere being well boiled and hopped, and kept its full time, as that it
may serve instead of sack if authority shall think fit, whereby they also may
know experimentally the virtue of those creatures at their full height, which
Beer being well brewed of a low pure amber color clear and sparkling, Noble
men and the Gentry may be pleased to have [ English Sack] in their
wine-sellers, and Tavernes also to sell to those who are not willing, or cannot
conveniently lay it into their own houses, which may be a means greatly to
increase and improve the tillage of England, and also the profitable
plantations of hop-grounds, thereby inabling the industrious Farmers to pay
their rents, and also to improve the revenews of the Nobility and Gentry, and
so much the more, may they be pleased to add some of those places (w^ch as yet
are receptacles for wild beasts [ Parks and Forrests] ^n which may be erected
fair and profitable farms, and so become comfortable habitations, for
laborious and painful husban^dmen with no small profit to the owners thereof,
and also to the general good of the whole nation, should part of those
commodities transported for wine be more advantagiously disposed of, and our
own vineyard at home be better husbanded and manured. And at lesser rates such
good strong beer as shall be most cherishing to poor laboring people without
which they cannot well subsist, their food being for the most part of such
things as afford little or bad nourishment nay sometimes dangerous, and would
infect them with many sicknesses and diseases were they not preserved (as with
an Antidote) with good beer, whose virtues and effectual operations by help
of the hop well boiled in it, are more powerful to expel poisonous infections
then is yet publicly known, or taken notice of.

And should the Almighty, (being provoked by our sins) afflict these parts with
the infection of the plague, in what a deplorable condition, would the poor of
this City and Suburbs be, if they should be deprived of comfortable fruition of
good strong beer and ale, for the providing whereof the licensed well governed
victualler is to be encouraged by suppressing of unlicensed Ale houses, which
are the only receptacles of drunkards, and by severe punishing those lewd
livers who frequent those disordered houses, which only dare harbor them
because having no licenses they are in no danger of the loss thereof, and
being accustomed to their evil courses both they that keep such houses and
they that frequent them, regardlesse of their reputation by reason of
continual impunitie, grown impudent and fearlesse either of God or the
Magistrate, which causes scandalous aspersions to be cast on those which offend
not: But the licensed victuallers keeping good houses and good orders, paying
taxes according to their degrees are no less necessary for the poor,
neighboring inhabitants (and also for strangers as accasion may require) then
any other retailing trade, for as the Brewer is the poor man's treasurer, so
the victualler is the yeoman of the poor man's wine-seller, providing and
preparing for present use, such sound well ripened beer, as the poor cannot
provide for themselves, neither without it can they go on in their labor,
unless beef, porke, and bacon, and such hearty meat could be afforded them
at a cheaper rate, but although such meats should prove more scarce and dear,
yet may it please God in mercy to send plenty of Corn for bread and beer, we
shall not hear the cry of the poor complaining of want, so long as for a sma^l
matter they can send for so much good bread and beer as will suffice their
whole families, which is not only a sustenance against hunger but a
preservative against sickness. But grains if they be taken hot; and put into a
vessel fit for that purpose they are an excellent bathe for itching limbs,
also they are good food for the cattle of this City and suburbs, without
which hey and other provision would be at a far dearer rate then usually it
is. Thus we see that among the many temporal blessings which the Lord has
bestowed upon us this is none of the meanest, The Lord in mercy grant us
thankful hearts. But, Nescio quis teneros oculis mihi fascinat agnos, Beholds
a foul monster called ingratitude, with two prodigious heads and scorching
eyes have cast such looks upon this our vineyard, as if like Balak and Balaam
they were conspiring together to bring a curse thereon though of differing
dispositions, yet both dangerously provoking the Almighty to displeasure. The
one of these heads is of that sort of people, who out of a fervent zeal to the
glory of God the Creator forget to honor him in a right taking notice of him
in his mercy and bounty toward us in his creatures but with an austere
countenance and supercilious eye, and speeches agreeable thereunto, slight and
despise the creature and those that deal therein, because abused by
untemperate persons: thus the creature is made the patient of evil, groaning as
it were to be delivered therefrom, and yet is burdened with hard censure, a
double injury; zeal without discretion is like heat without moisture every way
destructive, let such consider, if at any time afflictions befall them, would
they be contented therefore to be evil thought of because they fare so ill, nay
would not the calamity be the more heavy unto them, when they shall see that
it lays them open to uncharitable censure, this is all one as if we should
afflict the innocent because they are abused, and let the guilty escape and
prosper according to that saying, Faelix ac prosperum scelus virtus vocatur,
Optimi corruption p^ssimo, is a destiny equally fatal to every good creature,
and the better the creature is it being corrupted or abused is so much the more
dangerous und hurtful, the sweetest ointment being putrified becomes most
noisome, And man himself (by creation the most honored of all the creatures)
being degenerated into a condition tending to cruelty and violence, is more
unsatiable and unavoyd^bly dangerous then any beast. Nay religion it self,
which is illa aurea catina that golden chain, whereby God and man (with
reverence be it spoken) are so nearly linked together John 17.11, 21. verses, I
say religion which is that scala miliarium by which we are directed the right
way to ascend the heavenly throne of glory is not free (quis talia fando
temperet a lachrymis.) From the foul abuses of audaciously wicked mankind, the
Profane Person makes a mock of it, the hypocrite makes it his cloak for
every occasion but it will prove a mourning one at the last full of
lamentations and woes, but this is not a subject now to treat of; wherefore I
cease, but I shall not cease to mourn although in silence cura leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent; Igne quid vtilius? what more needful then fire?
ye-many fair buildings have been destroyed thereby, shall it therefore be
forbidden? Then let not those whose better fare makes them so insensible of
poor men's wants, deny them that good beer, which is so needful to their meaner
food because that some abuse it. But alas who complains of that foul sin of
gluttony? which as a Grave unsatiable has swallowed up many of those good
creatures which are appointed for our nourishment and comfort, but by the
excessive abuse thereof, many of exce^^^ parts, have been much disabled both in
body and mind from the free and happy use of those good gifts, which God
bestowed upon them to be improved and also employed to his glory and that in
their latter days most, which is that age of man which should be most adorned
with wisdom by reason of long experience; yet let not any cry out against or
lay any blame upon East cheap, plentiful Cheapside or Leaden Hall, or either
Fish-street, or any other of those fair and plentious markets in and about
this City, wherein Gods bounty is manifested and ex^ended toward us in so
large a manner; but rather in a detestation of our own unworthiness and
unthankfullnesse, let us all cry out and say, Nos, ^o^ inquam desumus Iapeti
genus qui praesumus; Primetheus the son of Iaph^t (for the Heathen look no
higher but somewhat darkly concerning Noah, who was their two faced Ianus) [who
saw the end of the old world and the beginning of the new.] having (as Poets
fained) stolen fire from Heaven, and brought it amongst the sons of men, it
occasioned many new and dangerous deseases, even such is that zeal which is
not guided by true knowledge, and limited within the bounds of charity, it
fills the mind with many strange and dangerous errors, corrupting the
judgment, which are the deseases of the soul, but doubtless those that are
truly religious will qualify and cool (I do not mean extinguish) the hot
fervencie of their zeal, with the sweet dew of discreet and pious charity,
knowing that God is a severe Judge against those who passing by themselves,
presume to censure others, which is one of those crying sins which the land now
mournes. The other head of that wrath provoking monster, (Ingratitude) [Si
ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris] is that wretched sort of people, who falling
(an infirmity proper to the Drunkard) into the Error of the left hand, are so
besotted with the love of the creature, as altogether neglecting their du^y
toward the Creator, who is blessed for ever Amen. This brutish sin,
drunkenness may be called a sin of sins, the fruitful mother of a numerous
brood, hateful even among the Heathen, the Turks amongst whom our English
Beer is of more esteem then any other sort of drink, are severe punishers of
drunkenness, in Cairo a fair City in Turkey, it is punished with death, among
the Iudians in some part it is so severely punished with death, that they
spared not the Magistrate; but gave rewards to them that slew him in the time
of his being drunk, such was their cruel zeal, or heathenish severitie,
permitting no time for repentance as being ignorant what belonged thereunto,
nor to set their houses in ord^^ for the good of their posterity, but the
indulgent leuitie of our Magistracy to the e^dangering of many ^oules, has so
provoked the Almighty to take the matter into (...) own hands, that sometimes
he has also for a warning to others punished this sin (...) death, witness
mose untimely ends, some having dyed immediately in the sin, yea (...) the
very house where they have so offended, others have broke their necks off their
horses, and others going a Shipboard have fallen between the Ship and the
Boat, and so have been drowned, a manifest token of Gods displeasure against
that sin, neither has he spared the Glutton, though a sin less scandalous,
because not so easily discerned, yet no less detestable in the sight of the
al-seeing Almighty, witness that rodd of many twigs, I mean the many
diseases, and diverse weaknesses, pains, and infirmities inflicted upon their
bodies, and also the unfitness of their intellectual parts to any thing than is
good. But now in this time of reformation better things are not only h^ped
for, but also expected that the Magistrate may be pleased, for the Glory of
God, whose substitute he is, and for the good of the Comm^^ Wealth whose
welfare is committed to his care, to do his endeavor according to the power
and trust committed unto him, to punish according to laws of this Kingdom:
those that wilfully offend and continue in those gross (...), the foulness
whereof are expressed. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. verses Prove, 23.21. Romans 1^.^^. Ephesians.
5.18. Those which are drunken are drunken in the night sait^ the Apostle. 1
These 5, 7. if such modesty were amongst those, who as yet were not converted to
the faith, or perhaps as yet had no knowledge of the truth; how great^ shame is
it (...) as this where the sound of the Gospel has been so long heard, to
harbor such offenders, yea to let them pass unpunished. The Consideration of
which doubtless will m^ve the hearts of the pi^us Magistracy of these times to
have a more vigilant eye over those irrigular unlicenced private houses (which
hitherto have been the more secure, because so little suspected) that not only
the drunkards; but also the places of drun^enness may be punished, whereby the
good creatures may be delivered (...) servile ^ses, or rather freed from those
base abuses which they are exposed (...) by unworthy intemperate persons. And
also whereby those who deal in Those creatures may the more cheerfully go on
in their lawful callin^s, and the more assuredly expect a blessing from the
Almi^hty upon their careful endeavors, that so the company of ^r^wers may be
loo^ed upon as supporters, and releevers of a great p^^^ of the poor of this
C^ti^ and Subburbs, and be had in such respect, and enjoy such privileges as a
(...) Company and Members of this Cit^e of London, according to that admonition
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. ^2 verse 14. The ^ody is not one member but many, etc,
and verse 18. God has set the Members every one of them in the b^dy as it has
ple^sed him, etc. which holy advice, let ever^ one of them in the body as it
has pleased him, etc. which holy advice, let every one so observe and follow,
that evil speaking may be put away, that envyings and emulations may cease,
that we may all according to ^ur-degree, like States in their order fight
against Satan (that common enemy to all mankind) who would deprive u^ of our
spiri^ual Canaan, as the Stars in their ^rd^r fought against Sise^a who would
have depr^ved Israel of their temporal Canaan, that the Lord may be p^eased t^
shine upon these 3. Kingdoms with the blessings of truth and (...), that ^^e
affrighting voice of the oppressor may cease; and the cry of the oppres^ed
may be no more heard, that all men may receive their due re^pect not according
to the greatness of their estates, but acco^ding ^o manner of their getting
those estates, that the ensuing year may be as it were a Iubily; wherein every
true Isralite may (...) to his own proper ^nheritance, that the winter storms
of wars and rumors (...) may spr^ng forth like a vine with her clusters of
plenty, and the peaceable voice of the Turtle may be heard in our land; in the
mean while let every true hearted ^^^istian send forth such sighs and prayers
to the A^mighty that he may be p^eased to frame such hearts in all the 3.
Nations; that with speed he may bring people from ^^^tivity, that Iac^b may
rejoice and Israel may be glad: which the Lord grant for his mercies sa^e who
is that individual ^rinity and that incomprehensible Unity; to whom (...) for
ever Amen.

FINIS.

