A brief and compendious NARRATIVE Of the renowned Robert, Earl of Essex; His
Pedigree, and his valiant acts, performed when he was General of the
Parliaments Army.

WITH A Summary Chronicle of his life:

AND In what manner his Burial is appointed to be solemnized.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by JANE COE. 1646.

portrait of Robert Devoreux His Excellence, ROBERT DEVOREUX, Earl of Essex
and Ewe, Viscount Hereford: Lo: Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine: Lo:
General of all the Parliaments Forces, dyed on the 15. of December. 1646. Aged
56. years.


A brief and compendious Narrative of the renowned, ROBERT, Earl of Essex,
his pedigree, His valiant acts performed when he was General of the
Parliaments Army, etc.
I Shall not trouble you with the Narrative of the many pious actions of this
noble Lord in his minority: he was much beloved of the Commons, he had a
public spirit, his experience was great: he traveled beyond the seas, and
acted well at home. When times began to be reformed, he was made a Privy
Counselor; and the King raising Fore^s against the Parliament, this good Earl
was looked on with great affection, and England had great hopes to be eased by
him, for none was more in the affections of the people.

July 12. 1642. The Parliament being acqu^inted that the King had besieged
Hull, with many Horse and Foot, that his Forces were trenching themselves, and
had 24 pieces of Canon to plant against the Town, both Houses voted the 22. of
July 1642. His Excellency the Earl of Essex to be their Captain General, and
to live and dye with him: And the Earl of Bedford was voted Lieutenant
General of the Horse. Before which time, the Earl of Warwick was made
Admiral of the Seas, and then of the Navy: His Excellency having received his
Commission from the Parliament, the City of London assisted him in the raising
of nigh 10000. men, for his own Army, they were drawn into Regiments, and
daily exercised in the discipline of Wars by Orders from his Excellency, but
in the mean time, those that adhered to the King, labored to set up the
Commission of Array in all parts of the Kingdom; but those that adhered to the
Parliament, joined with his Excellency, and labored to set up the Militia.

The Parliament having placed Deputy Lieutenants for the several Counties of
the Kingdom, gave Commissions to the Earl of Pembrooke, E. of Stamford, the
Lord Say, Lord Brooks, Lord Roberts, Lord Willoughby of Parham, and others.
The King proclaimed both his Excellency and them Traitors, but the Parliamene
published their faithfulness. And the 15. of August his Excellencies Army was
drawn out of the City of London,

August the 20. His Majesty came against Warwick, and played against the City
with Batteries, and Prince Rupert landed at Newcastle with Arms from beyond
Sea, and the Commission of Array was labored for in Kent, but prevented: a
party of Horse and Foot being sent by his Excellency, took Cobham house, the
Block-houses at Gravesend, the Bridge at Rochester, and Dover Castle, and
secured other parts of the County.

August the 22. His Majesty set up his Standerd at Nothingham, Sir John Lucas
and diverse others were taken prisoners. But the Kings Foot plundered diverse
Wagons at Litchfield that were laden with clothes for the relief of the
Protestants in Ireland.

Aug. 23. The Lord Brooks and Col. Hampden fell on the Kings Forces raised from
Coventry, routed 7. Troops of Horse, and 300. Foot, killed 40. and took 60.
prisoners near Southwell, amongst the rest Cap. Leg and Cap. Clarke
prisoners, the Earl of Carlisle taken prisoner, and committed to the Black-rod.

The Earl of Bedford with a party from his Excellency forced the Marquess of
Hartford, the Lord Paulet, Sir Ralph-Hopton, Sir John Stowell, and others, 500.
in number, to retire into Sherburne Castle.

The E. of Stamford reli^ved Leicestershire, and rescued much goods that Col.
Hastings had plundered, P. Rupert came to join with Hastings.

The Lord Admiral came with a Squadron before Plymouth Roads, and took a
Merchants Ship and a man of War from Spain, both coming to the King.

September. 1. Diverse prisoners were taken in Lincolneshire by Col. Sir Anthony
Irby (viz.) Sir William Ballardine, Major Lilb^way, Major D^llman, Killiguay,
and diverse others. Col. Lunsfords Sumpter Horse was taken in Oxfordshire,
himself hardly escaping.

Sir W. Waller and Col. Norton forced Goring into Portsmouth, and Southsay
Castle was surrendered to them: also in like manner Portsey and Portsmouth were
surr^ndred.

September. 9. his Exc^llency took his leave of the Parliament, and passed
through the City guarded in triumph, and many vollyes shot at parting and
prayers for him and his Forces. 46. Cavaliers were taken in Oxfordshire, and
sent to London.

Sep. 13. the Lord Montague was taken Prisoner and committed to the Tower;
prince Rupert being joined with the King, and marched toward Chester to join
with Sir John Byron.

Sep. 22. the parliament sent a petition to be sent to the King, by his
Excellency, from them, with instructions for the ordering of th^^^ Army, under
his Excellency, which was sent by Sir Phil^p Stapleton. And his Excellency
marched with his Army to Shrew^bury, with 300. Horse, and seize on the
Magazine. After which the King joined his whole Army with the Lord Strange, and
possessed himself of Chester, his number 10000 Foot and 3000. Horse. But the
mean while the E. of Bedford took Sherborne Castle.

Col. Fines, with Col. Sands, Col. Brown, with others, consisting of 10.
Troops of Horse, and 1000. Foot, engaged with prince Rupert, P. Maurice, and
Sir John Byron, killed 30. and lost 28. amongst the rest Major Douglas. But the
mean while 200. Cavalliers were beaten off at Northampton. And the Lord
Fairfax, General of the North, did many good services, and took many prisoners
in Yorkshire, many Horse and Foot out of several Counties came in to join
with the E. of Essex.

His Excellency marched on to Worcester, and took the City. Malignants had
plotted to blow up his Quarters with 11. barrels of Gunpowder, but the plot was
discovered and prevented. He sent the Parliaments Petition to the King, and was
called Traitor for his labor, yet went on with gallant courage and resolution.

Worcester also, and Hereford mere taken by him. And the King retreated to
Shrewsbury, and the E. of Derby besieged Manchester. The Lo: Fairfax took
Kewood Castle, and Pontfract Castle.

Afterward the King went against Hereford, but was kept out till his
Excellency came to relieve them: and followed the King to Worcester, where he
received Propositions from the King, which his Excellency sent to the
Parliament, and fortifyed Worcester, and secured Bridgenorth: and hearing that
the King had appointed P. sb Rupert, the E. of Derby, E. of Cumberland, E. of
Worcester, Marquess of Hertford, E. of Cardigan, Lo: Herbert, and the Lo:
Coventry with their forces to join with him, his Excellency prepared to give
them Battle: And in the mean time a party from his Excellency defeated the
Lord Grandison, near Gloucester, killed 50. took 30. prisoners, and took the
town, and the Lord Willoughby, fell on P. Ruperts Quarters, and killed 30. on
the place, but with some loss.

The Kings Forces joining, marohed toward Coventry; his Excellency followed
him so close, that they stayed not there. The Parl. secured Windsor Castle, and
the Tower of London.

October. 3. a great battle was fought between Keinton and Edgehill, between
both Armies; the King in person being in the head of the one, with P. Charles,
the Duke of York, with diverse Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, and
Knights, and the Earl of Essex in the head of the other, with diverse Lords and
Commons, Members of both Houses of Parl. where his Excellency after a bloody
fight, obtained a gallant victory, and took 16. Colors from the King, killed
Robert Earl of Lindsey, Lord high Chanceller of England, George Lord D'
Aubeny, brother to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Sir Edm. Varney Knight
Marshall to the King, and diverse other eminent men, and took many prisoners.

Afterward the King having taken Banbury, marched to Reading, his Forces were
kept out of Windsor. The Parliament sent a Petition to the King by
Commissioners, but the Kings Forces in a misty night, November. 12. marched to
Brainford, and killed many of Col. Hollis his men in their Quarters, yet his
Excellency relieved them by the Lo: Brooks, and Col. Hampdens Regiments: many
were slain on both sides. And his Excellency came up so close to them, that
they fled to Henly, and brake down the bridge to hinder the pursuit: and the
City of London showed so much willingness to assist his Excellency in what
they might, as could be expected, as his gallantry had well deserved. 13.
pecces of Ordnance were brought down by water, and discharged against them at
Sion house, which did execution, so that the enemy to be revenged plundered the
passage boats which they found on the water side.

Thursday the 17. in the night the City of London took a great Alarm, to
Oxford, 3. City Regiments with 12 pecces of Ordnance were drawn out, to
releeve His Excellency. A great party of His Majesty's Forces were about
Charsey, Brainford, Hou^s^^, Hamersmith, and parts adj^cent, some Capitulations
there was between the King and Parliament, but it came to no effect; And
therefore His Excellency forced them from their quarters, and drove them from
Brainford, Kingston, Hunslow, etc. The King retreating to Oxford, his forces
about Abbington, Wallingford, and Redding. And the 25. of November, His
Excellency returned to the Parliament, to acquaint them with the state of the
Army, and to provide subsistence for his Forces, for winter quarters.

In December Sir William Waller took Winebester, the Lord Grandison, and 60.
great Officers, 1000. Horse and Foot, and 600. Arms. The Lord Fairfax Routed
the Earl of Newcastle near Tadcaster. Sir William Waller took Arundel Castle.
And the city of Chichester.

In January the Lord Fairfax Routed the Earl of Newcastle again near Bradford.
Again, the Lord Fairfax Routed the Earl of Newcastle near Leeds. Leeds taken
by the Lord Fairfax. His Excellency Routed the Kings Forces near Henly, and
took 200. Prisoners. Sir William Brereton Routed Sir T. Aston by Namptwich,
took 100. Prisoners Horse and Foot.

In February Sir John Seaton in Lancashire took Preston, Lancaster Town, and
Castle. The Western Forces Routed the Cornish near Madbury, took five piece of
Ordnance, 10 Officers, 100. Prisoners, and 200. Arms. Sir Th. Aston again
routed by Sir W. Brereton at Middlewich.

March Sir W. Brereton took Lichfield close. Sir W. Brereton Routed the Kings
Army near Stafford, the Earl of Nerthamton and many more slain. Lastol also
taken. Sir W. Waller took Mal^^sbury by storm.

In April, 1643. Col: Massey Routed the Welsh in the Forest of Dean. Col:
Massey took Tewksbury. Wigg^n taken by Sir John Seaton. Sir W. Waller took
three Troops of Prince Maurice's Horse. Sir W. Waller took Manmouth in Wales.
Sir W. Waller took Higman, and in it 150 Officers and Gentlemen, 1000.
Prisoners. Sir W. Waller took Rosbridge and Chepstow. And Hereford taken by
storm by Sir W. Waller, and in it 40. Knights and Officers in Commission, and
600. Prisoners. Sherburus Castle and Hemster taken by Sir W. Waller. The
Lancashire man took Whaley. The Lincolneshire men took Crowland.

His Excellency having received recruits, mustered 3 complete Regiments in the
Artillery Ground at London: And His Excellency marched to his Forces to Henly,
making preparations against the enemy. And marched with his Army against
Redding, in number 12000. Foot and 2000. Horse, where he had some parley with
Colonel Aston the Governor; and had relief sent him from London. A party
came to releeve Redding, but were beaten back, and 16. of their men were
slain, and another party gathering near Dorchester, where diverse were slain,
and 100. taken Prisoners, and a third time, Prince Charles and Prince Rupert,
with 45. Troops of Horse and 9. Regiments of Foot, were beaten back by the L.
Roberts, 80. killed on the place, 4. taken in the pursuit, many prisoners
taken, and 200 Arms. And April 20. the Enemy being 3500. marched out and
delivered Redding, to His Excellency. And the works about the City of London,
were made by the assistance of the Inhabitants, men, women and children. The
City sent provisions to his Excellency, which was distributed thus.

Victuals distributed to his Excellencies Army.
His Excellenties Army 2. load. The Lord Greys Foot 6. load. Major Genesis
Skippons 1. load. Colonel Hampdens 1. load. The Lord Roberts 1. load. Sir
William Constable 1. load. Sir John Meldrum 1. load. Colonel Bartlet 1. load.
Colonel Holborne 1. load. Colonel Holmsted 1. load. Colonel Cholmley 1. load.
Rochford, Peterboroug, and Vallard, 2 load. To the Train 1 load. To the
Pioners 1. load.
And his Excellency being resolved to march toward the King, came to London,
May 11. to acquaint the Parliament there with. And the Queen was going toward
Oxford with 52. wagons of Ammunition, and 44. barrels of Gunpowder. A treaty
was between the King and the Parliament, but took no effect. So his Excellency
returned to his Army to Reading, June 8. preparing to march toward Oxford, and
accordingly his Excellency marched through Stoken Church, and so on toward
Whateley: and the E. of Denbigh was made General of the Counties of Stafford,
Worcester, Salop, and Warwick.

In July his Excellency forced the Kings party from Wheatly bridge, where he
took 80. Horse. His Majesty put out a Proclamation excepting his Excellency,
and diverse members out of pardon: Which caused the Parliament to put out a
declaration to vindicate them. At which time the sickness was very hot about
Oxford. And the 9. of July his Excellency sent Sir Philip, and Colonel Goodwin
toward Buckingham; who raised the Kings men from their quarters, and killed
and took diverse.

But Thursday, July 16. Sir William Waller being over-powred, receiving loss
at the Devizes, the Queen joined her Forces with the King, near Edgehill. All
this while his Excellency giving a check to the Kings Army.

The Kings Army besieged Gloucester; gallantly defended by Colonel Massy: His
Excellency marched from Ailsbury Aug. 23. to relieve him. On which day,
Colonel Massy (besides diverse other repulses) made a sally upon them, and
took 3. pieces of Ordnance, and killed many. In September there joined with the
Lord General, 2. Regiments of London Train-bands, and 3. Regiments of
Auxiliaries; who raised the siege, and brought in Ammunition and provisions.
And three days after his Excellency marched to Cerencester, where he beat two
Regiments of the Kings, took the Kings Magazine of bread, and nigh 400.
prisoners.

After which his Majesty with his whole Army, being again drawn into the field,
his Excellency marched up to them: the Queen came up to the Kings Army and a
great Party with her, to strengthen his Majesty's Army against the Earl of
Essex: But his Excellency fought with them near Newbery, where he killed five
Lords, with diverse others of quality. The King with the loss of 500. men
retreated to Edgehill, whither the Queen came to him from the North, and
joined her Forces.

In September th Earl of Manchester took Horn Castle, and the City of
Linco^n. Eccleshall taken by Sir William Brereton, who caused Lord Capels
forces at Lappinton to retreat.

In October Lord Capels Forces beaten at Leigh-bridge, and forced into
Shewsbury. Holt-baidge taken. And in November Colonel Birch routed the enemies
forces. Wrexam in Wales taken taken by Sir William Brereton. The enemy beaten.
The Dorsetsbire men took Wareham.

In December Sir Tho. Middleton took Flint. Moston taken. Colonel Massy took
Woorton. The Plymouth forces routed by the Lord Digby. Sir William Waller
routed the L. Craford near Aulton. Aulton taken by Sir William Waller. Col.
Skippon took Grafton-house. Holt-House, Bewly-House, and Hawardin castle taken
by Sir W. Brereton.

In Januaay Sir W. Waller took Arundel Castle, and 200. prisosoners. Colonel
Mitton routed Sir I. Biron near Elsmore. Sir John Gell took Burton upon Trent.
Hilson taken, and Laicock House. The Earl of Manchester took Croyland.
Burleigh House, Cocket Island taken by the Scots: Gussanna taken by Sir W.
Brereton.

In February Sir W. Brereton took a fortified house in Wales by storm. Sir W.
Brereton routed L. Capels forces, and brought 3000. of the enemy to nothing.
The Isle of Axolm taken by Sir John Meldrum. Burlington also and Whitby taken,
and Milus house by the L. Fairfax. Alnwick and Morpith by the Scots, Milford
haven by Captain Swanley, Biddle-house by Sir Tho. Fairfax, where was taken the
L. Brereton, 20. Officers of note and 300. prisoners. Hilsley House and Newbery
taken by Sir W. Balfore.

In March was taken, Bredport. The Pembrokeshire men with Cap. Swanleys Seamen
took Haverford West. Timby Castle taken, with 7. pieces of Ordnances, and 400.
prisoners and Arms. Carew castle taken, the Earl of Carbery routed, Sonderland
taken by the Scots. Sir W. Waller routed Hopton at Cheriton, near Alsford; one
Lord, and 100. more slain, 100. Officers, and 500. Soldiers taken prisoners.
Whitchurch taken by Dorsetshire men.

In April 1644. the L. Fairfax took Cawood Castle. Axolm and Crowland taken
Whitchurch in Dorsetshire, and Waltham taken by Col. Brown. Adlington taken in
Cheshire by Col. Duckinfield and Major Morgans men. Also Dedington house and
Crow. The Earl of Newcastle routed at Selby. Duresme and Lumley taken by the
Scots.

In May the Earl of Manchester took Lincoln and the Castle, 7. pieces of
Ordnances. 200. Kinights, Colonels, and other Officers of note, 300. Arms, and
800. prisoners.

In May, 1644. his Excellency desired the Parliament to have a Committee to
reside with him in the Army, and his Excellency made preparations to the field,
and presently besieged Oxford, where the King then was: and at the beginning of
June got away toward the West, the King and the Prince being gone to Exeter
with the Lord Paulet, and others: his Excellency having taken diverse prisoners,
drew his Army after them. The Queen fled over into France; his Excellency took
in the Well diverse persons in several places amongst which many of quality,
and diverse Garrisons. In June his Excel. secured Weymouth, Taunton Deane,
Wartham, Bavonestable, Mount Stanford near Plymouth, Plimpton, Saltash and
Lanceston. And in July his Excellency gave a defeat to Greenvill near
Lestithiel in Cornwall, and took 100. prisoners, and killed 300. upon the
place, and then took Tadcaster and Foy, and did beat them from Newbridge, still
taking more prisoners daily.

The Pembroke men took Carnarvan and the Castle. Col. Massy routed Sir John
Winter at Newnham, took 9. pieces of Ordnance, 200. Officers, and 500.
prisoners. Brereton Castle taken, and Malmsbury taken, with 7. pieces of
Ordnance, and 300. prisoners. The Scots took Lumly Castle. Bewdly in
Worcestershire taken. And Yarmouth, by Sir John Meldrum. Abingdon by the L.
Robers. Russell Hall by the Stafford Forces.

In June Col. Massy took Chippingham, and Tewksbury: Sir W. Waller took
Shudly, took two pieces of Ordnances, 70. Officers and Gentlemen, 40. Horse,
250. prisoners. Compton house taken by the Warwickshire men, 30. Officers and
Gentlemen, 60. Horse, and 140 prisoners. Weymouth by Sir W. Balfore, 27. pieces
of Ordnance, and 400. Arms. Taunton Dean by him likewise. Oswestree by the
Earl of Denbigh Cholmley house by him likewise. His Excellency took Barnstable
and Taunton. The great Battle at Marstone Moore was fought, where all the 3.
Generals Armies were engaged on both side: we killed 4000. and took 1500.
prisoners, and the Earl of Newcastle, and Pr. Rupert both utterly defeated.
Greenland house taken by Col. Brown. Wilny Ferry by Sir John Gell. York
surrendered to the 3. Generals, Tickell to the Earl of Manchester. Mount
Stamford near Plymouth, taken by his Excellency, and Plimpton with 8. pieces
of Ordnance, and Saltash also, and Lanceston, Greenhil house taken, and Morpith
Castle.

In July the Lord Roberts routed Greenvill near Listithiell in Cornwall, took
100 Officers and Gentlemen, and killed and took 300. more. Newbridge taken by
his Excellency. Sir W. Brereton defeated Newcastles Army, going to join with
the Lord Capels and Biron, about Chester and Wales. Sir Thomas Middleton
surprised the enemy at Welsh-poole, and took 100. horse and prisoners. Sir M.
Langdale defeated at Melpesse by S. W. Breretons Forces, and diverse prisoners
of note taken. Sir W. Breretons Forces beat the enemy at Tarvin, and after beat
Col. Marrows Forces in Cheshire: and a third time beat the enemy out of Worrall
Island.

In Aug. his Excellency fell upon the Cornish Brigade near Saltash, and brake
through their Army, slew many of them upon the place, took 300. prisoners and
four Drakes. Shelford taken by the Earl of Manchester, and likewise Welbeck
House, VVareham by his Excellency, Gatesh ad at Newcastle by the Scots,
VVinkfield Manor by Sir John Gell, and Redcastle by Sir T. Middleton.

The Kings, whole Army, Maurices and Greenvils, were erawn into th field in
Battalia, in number almost 2^000. men near Lestithiell, where his Excellency
daily skirmished with them, killed many, took prisoner Col. Champernoon, who
was sore wounded, and diverse more: many lying 6. and 8. in a heap; and upon
desire his Excellency granted them leave (at a parley) to bury their dead.

On Saturday the 24. of Aug. 1644. his Excellency appointed Major General
Whitc^t, and Col. Ware to guard the Rear of Lestithiel, and make a dam tostop
provisions from the Kings Army that way; and his Excellency with a small party
of Col. Gowres Regiment, beat off 3000. Hhrse and foot from Blazy bridge,
appointed by the enemy to stop provisions from Millibilly Bay, where his
Excellency killed many, and took prisoners a Colonel, 2. Captains, and diverse
others.

In the beginning of September his Excellency notwithstanding he was so
over-powred by the enemy, yet preserved both himself and hls men, forced the
enemy from the Seacoasts, and got safe to the Lord Admiralls his Horse not
above 3000. brake through the whole body of the Kings Army; and his Foot not
above 6000. though encompassed with 20000 of the Kings, from Gromporond,
Enedor, and Foy, even to Blazy bridge, who were resolved to give no quarter to
our men; yet they fought it out so gallantly, killing two of theirs for every
man that we lost, until at last they got Articles from the Kings party to have
a safe convoy to Lestithiel, Pool, and Wareh^m, their sick to remain at Foy;
and none of them be pressed to desert their service to his Excellency.

And his Excellency being recruited in September from the Parliament and in
December had his randezvous at Titchfield, and falling on the Kings Rear, took
almost an hundred prisoners near Kingscleare; and with the assistance of the
Earl of Manchester, and Sir W. Waller, routed the Kings Army near Newbery,
and took 9. pieces of Ordnance, 300. prisoners, and 500. Arms.

In September Col. M^sley ^ron^ed Prince Rupert, took 12. Pieces of Ordinance,
100. Horse, and 200. Foot.

In October the Scots took Newcastle by storm, and in it 20. Lords and
Knights, 50. Officers of note, 2000, Prisoners 48. pieces of Ordinance, and
3000. Arms.

The Earl of Manthester and Sir William Waller routed the Kings Army near
Newbery. and took 9. pieces of Ordinance, 300. Prisoners, and 500. Arms.
Tinmouth Castle surrendered to the Scots. Liverpoole taken, and Col. Egerton
defeated at Farm in Cheshire by Sir William Brereton, Holt Castle taken by
Col. Crook.

In November, Helmsley taken by the Lord Fairfax, the enemy driven from
Newbery, Farringdon and Malborough by the Earl of Manchester, and Sir William
Waller, the enemy beaten by Captain Stone near Ecleshall.

December. the Pembroke men took Laughorne, the Scots Carlisle, the Lincolnshire
men Croyland, Col. Massey Monmouth, and the Lord Fairfax took Knais brough.

In Ian. Russel house taken by E. Denby, Bellasith Garrison, near Abingdon by
Col. Brown, the enemy beaten at Christleton near Chester by fir William
Breretons forces, the enemy routed at Eaton in Cheshire, fir william Breretons
forces beat Prince Ruperts and Maurices, forces going into the North to join
with the Northern forces.

In Feb. Col. Laughorne routed the enemy in Pembrokeshire; took 4. pieces of
Ordinance, 400. Arms, and 300. Prisoners, Sir John Meldrum took Scarborough
Town, 30. pieces of Ordinance, and 100. Ships, Col. Mytton took Shrewsbury,
and in it 100. Knights and Esquires, and Officers in Commission, 36. pieces of
Ordinance, 3000. Arms, and 2000. Prisoners.

In the latter end of March, 1645. the Lord Fairfax and the Scots took. the
Castle of Scarborough, Weymouth retaken by Col. Sydnham, Blechindon house
taken, and Col. Massey took Evisham, 30. Officers and Gentlemen, 150. Horse,
and 400 Prisoners and Arms.

His Excellencies Funeral.
His Excellency the Earl of Essex his Hearse having been publicly seen at
Essex House in the Strand, (where he has layne in his Scarlet Britches, and
Buff-Coate, in his Parliament Robes, Commanders Staff in his hand, and Coronet
on his head; in a Hearse covered with black Velvet, and his Cullers, and diverse
Scutcheons of Arms about him, being attended by the Members of both Houses,
Essex house being hanged about with mourning) he passes from thence, with
diverse Regiments of the Train Bond of the City of London marching with him;
and others standing on each side of the street, to Westminster; and in the
Chancel of the Abbyes another hearse prepared for him; where he is to lie during
the pleasure of the House, and then to be removed into King Henry the sevenths
Chapel.

The Earl of Essex his Pedigree.
SIR Walter Devoreux Knight, had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight, who married
Agnes Daughter and Heir of Thomas de Chophall, and had Issue, Sir Walter
Devoreux Knight, who married Elizabeth Daughter of Thomas Brannock alias
Bromwich Knight, by whom he had Issue, Sir Walter Devoreux Knight, which
married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of John Marbury, and by her had Issue,
Sir Walter Devoreux Knight of the Garter, and Lord Ferrers of Chartley in right
of his wife, Anne, Daughter and Heir of William Lord Ferrers of Chartley. This
Sir Walter was slain at Bosworth field with King Richard he 3. he had Issue,
John Devereux Knight of the Garter, and Lord Ferrers of Chartley, who married
Cicely, sister and Heir of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and had Issue,
Walter Devoreux, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Viscount Hereford, and Knight of the
Garter, married first Mary Daughter of Thomas Gray, Marquess of Dorcet, he
married secondly Margaret Daughter of Robert Garnish of Kendon in the County of
Suffolk; by whom he had issue, Edward Devoreux of Castle-Bromewich in
Warwickshire etc. he had Issue by Mary Gray his first wife, Sir William
Devoreux Knight, 2. Son (who married Ione, Daughter of John Sendamore, and had
Issue by he two Daughters, Barbara, and Margaret,) and Katherine wife to Sir
James Baskervill, and Sir Richard Devoreux Knight, eldest Son (of Walter and
Mary Gray,) who married Dorothy Daughter of George Hastings Earl of
Huntington, (he dyed before his Father,) and had Issue, Mary who dyed a Virgin,
Anno. 1558. being then 20. year old, Anne wife to Henry Clifford, Elizabeth
wife to John Vernon, of Hodnet, Sir George Devoreux Knight, second Son
married -- Daughter of -- Meverell: And Walter Devoreux the first Earl of
Essex of that name, Created by Queen Elizabeth Anno. Dom. 1572. dyed in
Ireland 1576. he married Lettice Daughter of Sir Francis Knowles, Knight of the
Garter, he had Issue by her, Dorothy I. married to Thomas Parrot and after to
Henry Percy Earl of Northamberland, she dyed Anno. Dom. 1619. Penelope wife to
Robert Lord Rich, she dyed 1607. Walter Devoreux, second Son, slain at Room
in Normondy the 10. of December Anno. Dom. 1591. And Robert Earl of Essex, and
Ewe, etc. Eldest Son, he married Francis Daughter and Heir of Sir Francis
Walsingham: by whom he had Issue, Dorothy wife to Henry Shirley, Son and Heir
of Sir George Shirley of Stanton in Leicestershire, Knight and Baronet: Francis
wile of William Lord Beauchamp Son of Edward Lord Beauchamp Son of Edward.
Lord of Hartford: And Robert Devoreux, Earl of Essex, and Ewe, Vicount
Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier, and Lovaine, Lord General of
the forces raised by, and employed in the service of the Parliament, who dyed
at his house in the Strand on Monday September the 16. Anno. Dom. 1646. He
married to his first wife Francis Daughter of Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk,
and by her had no Issue, he after married the Daughter of Sir John Paulet and
had no Issue.

The Funeral Elegy, of the Obiets of his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex.
What dismal accident is fallen of late.
That fills with grief our Kingdom and the State?
Sure it must be some universal blow,
That makes a Sea of tears the land ore-slow.
Or as and Earthquake had great Britain shook.
Men are amazed, or else seem Plannet struck.
This weeping deluge, this eyes inundation,
Bewrayes some mighty blow is given our Nation.
It Is so, and such a stroke cannot befall
On one the like whom we a Subject call.
And therefore reader, if thou know not why
Sad sorrow has possessed each man's eye
Then know that grief this Land has overspread,
Upon distracted thoughts of Essex dead.
Oh! it is too true: have we not reason then,
To mourn until we have his like again?
Two Kingdoms (next unto the King) it is known,
On this good Peer had their affections thrown.
But what avails high Eminence and Place.
The Kingdoms favor, and the peoples grace?
These are supports, but no pre-eminence
Against Death, to be a Buckler or Defense.
For why? If any, or if all of these
Could have put by this blow, or given some ease
To this loved Lord, there is few within this Land,
But would have lent him both a heart and hand.
But he has made a happy change in this,
An earthly Earldome for a Crown of Bliss.
He lived well, purposely to dye well too.
And as his purpose was he so did do.
Death brings good men where good men should abide,
If wicked men were good, they should have died.
We take our turns, it skills not where or when,
Provided that we dye to live again.
Scotland a friend, London an Interest.
In this maine loss is too too manifest.
You Soldiers that good Essex did attend,
Let these lines to your sorrows solace send.
That though you have a curelesse cause of care.
Yet in your griefs three Kingdom's bear a share.
And in sweet peace let rest his noble Dust.
until the Resurrection of the just.
When Soul aad Body both conjoined again.
In never ending glory shall remain.
FINIS.

