Sir William Breretons LETTER Concerning The Surrender of the City OF CHESTER
For the Parliament: Together with the ARTICLES agreed on betwixt both parties,
and the Commissioners Names. SEnt in a Letter to the Honorable William Lenthal
Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, and appointed to be forthwith
printed and published:

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
February 6. 1645.

For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
Honorable Sir,
THe care of preserving this City from ruin (being the most considerable in
this part of the Kingdom) invited to entertain a Treaty, wherein at the least
ten days were spent in several Transactions, the Enemy still using
protractions and delays in hope of their expected Relief: For which end,
strong preparations were made, whereof we received frequent Advertisements from
several persons, That Ashley and Vaughan had united their Forces, and lay
hovering about Bridge-North. Their intention was to have joined with the Welsh
Forces under the Lord St. Paul, with those Irish that came over in December
last, and those other now lately Landed at Blew-Morris, who were part of the
Lord Digbies Regiment, some whereof are English, and some Lorrainers, as these
Intercepted Letters enclosed mention. To prevent the Conjunction of which
Forces, I sent three Regiments of Horse, the Warwickshire, the Reformadoes
Regiment, and part of the Staffordshire Horse, and some of the Cheshire
Dragoons, together with some of Colonel Mittons Horse and Foot, which party was
Commanded by Colonel Mitton, who marched to Ruthin upon Saturday night, Ian.
24. intending to fall upon the Enemy in their Quarters, but the Enemy escaped
and marched to Denbigh, and so toward Conway: Nevertheless our Forces came
most seasonably; for Ruthin Castle was so unprovided, as that we have now great
hopes of Reducing that strong Castle, however the Conjunction of the Enemies
Forces is hereby prevented, which might probably occasion the Enemies Retreat,
after they had Quartered three or four days about Bridge-North and Shiffnall,
and had drawn out some small pieces, and two Cases of Jack. So as the Besieged
being now hopeless of Relief, sent out their Commissioners Ian. 30. to Treat
with ours, whose Names are herein enclosed.

The number was proposed by them, and was the rather assented to by us, to the
end better satisfaction might be given to the common Soldiers, when some of
their own Officers were entrusted and employed in Treating and making
Compositions for them, that they might thereby be also obliged to restrain
their Soldiers from Plunder and violation of what is concluded and agreed upon.

The first day nothing was concluded upon.

This day Ian. 31. they were mighty importunate that the Treaty might be
continued, and respited until Monday morning at nine of the clock; which being
refused, as by my last Letter appears, they delayed not to enter into a Treaty;
whereupon it was concluded to be delivered upon these enclosed Conditions,
whereunto it was the rather assented, to prevent the Plunder of the City, which
could not have been preserved, if it had not been taken by Composition. That
which further remains, is satisfying the Soldiers and settling of the City,
which will prove a work of great difficulty, wherein my Endeavors shall not be
wanting to the uttermost of my Abilities, or to serve the Public in any other
employment Commanded, and shall ever profess my self to be, Sir

Your most faithful Friend and humble Servant, WILLIAM BRERETON.
Chester Suburbs, Febr. 2. 1645. THough this Letter was Dated Febr. 2. yet I
thought it fit to stay the Messenger until we were able to send you the
certainty that we were possessed of the City. What Ordnance, Arms, or
Ammunition, or what Irish are found therein, you may expect to receive an
Account in my next. I do not hear any further Reports of the Irish, neither do
I believe, they will be now less forward to adventure into these parts.

WILLIAM BRERETON.
Chester, Febr. 3. 11 of the Clock.


ARTICLES Concluded and Agreed upon February 1. 1645. Between the Commissioners
appointed on the behalf of John Lord Byron, Field-Martial General of North
Wales, and Governor of Chester on the one part; and the Commissioners on the
behalf of Sir William Brereton Baronet, Commander in chief of all the Forces of
Cheshire, and at the Leagure before Chester, on the other part, for the
Surrender of the City of Chester, with the Castle and Fort thereof.
1. THat the Lord Byron, and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen and
Soldiers, and all other Persons whatsoever now residing in the City of
Chester, and the Castle and Fort thereof, shall have liberty to march out of
the said City, Castle and Fort, in all their Apparel whatsoever, and no other,
or more Goods, Horse, or Arms, then are hereafter mentioned, viz. The Lord
Byron with his Horse and Arms, and ten men with their Horses and arms to attend
him: Also his Lady and Servants, two Coaches, and four Horses in either of them
for the accommodating of them; and of such other Ladies and Gentlewomen, as the
said Lord Byron shall think meet, and with eighty of the said Lords Books, and
all his Deeds, Evidences, Manuscripts, and Writings, in his possession; The
said Lord, his Lady, nor any their Attendants, carrying amongst them all above
forty pounds in Money, and twenty pounds in Plate; The rest of the Noblemen,
with their Ladies and Servants, to march with their Horses, each of the said
Lords attended with four men, their Horses and Arms, every such Nobleman
carrying with him not above thirty pounds in Money: Every Knight and Colonel to
march with two men, their Horses and Arms; no such Knight or Colonel to carry
with him above ten pound in Money: Every Lieut. Colonel, Major, and Captain of
Horse, with one man, their Horses and Arms; no such Lieutenant Colonel, Major,
or Captain, carrying with them above five pounds in Money: Every Captain of
Foot, Esquire, Graduate, Preaching Minister, Gentleman of quality, the Advocate
and Secretary to the Army, every of them with his own Horse and Swords, the
Ministers without Swords, none of them carrying with them above fifty
shillings, and the Ministers to have all their own Manuscripts of Notes, and
Evidences. Lieutenants, Cornets, Ensigns, and other inferior Officers in
Commission on Foot, with every man his Sword, and not above twenty shillings in
Money: All Troopers, Foot-Souldiers, Gunpowder-makers, Canoneers, and all
others, not before mentioned, to march without Horse and Arms; and that none of
the Persons before mentioned, shall in their march, after they are out of the
City and liberty thereof, be plundered, searched, or molested.

2. That all Women of what degree soever, that please to march out of the City,
shall have all their Apparel with them; And such Officers Wives (whose Husbands
are Prisoners, or absent) may carry away such sums of Money with them, as are
allowed by these Articles, to Commanders, Officers, and Gentlemen of their
Husbands qualities, and no more.

3. That none of the Commanders, Officers, or Soldiers, or any other, at, or
before their marching out of the City, Castle, or Fort, d^ injure, or plunder
the person or goods of any, nor carry any thing away out of the City, Castle,
or Fort, but what is their own, and hereby allowed.

4. That all Citizens, and others, now residing within the City, shall be saved
and secured, in their persons, and their goods and estates within the City and
Liberties thereof, preserved and kept from the plunder and violence of the
Soldiers, and have the like freedom of Trade, as other Cities and Towns under
the Parliaments protection have, and such Immunities as they of right ought to
have: And that every such Merchant, and Tradesman of Chester, as shall desire
to go into North Wales, to look after his Goods, shall have a Pass to go
thither, and ret^^n back again, he first giving security, that during his
absence he will do no Act to the prejudice of the Parliament; and that no such
person shall at any time, without License, carry more moneys with him then
sufficiently to defray the charge of his journey; and that all Citizens, and
other Inhabitants, who shall now, or hereafter desire to march out of the City
of Chester, and not act any thing against the Parliament: His or their Wives or
Families, to have the benefit of, and privilege of Inhabitants.

5. That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick or wounded, within
the City of Chester, or the Castle, or Fort thereof, shall have liberty to stay
until their recovery, and then have Passes to Conway; or any of the Kings
Garrisons not blocked up in the mean time, to be provided for.

6. That the said Lord Byron, Noblemen, Commanders, Gentlemen, Officers and
Soldiers, and all others that shall march out of Town, shall have liberty to
march to Conway, and five days are allowed them to march thither, with a
Convoy of 200 Horse. The Welsh Officers and Soldiers to have liberty to go to
their own homes; and all of them to have free Quarter in their march, and
twelve carriages if they shall have occasion to use so many; which carriages
are to be returned in the sixth day; and Passes be given them for their safe
return to Chester; and that they be secured until they return thither.

7. That no Soldier in his march shall be inveigled or enticed from his
Colors or Command, with any promise or inducement whatsoever.

8. That all such persons, Citizens or others, who have Families in Chester,
and are now in places remote thence, shall have the like benefit of these
Articles, as those who are now resident in the City.

9. That the Friends of the Earl of Derby and Liechfield, or any of those whose
dead Bodies are not yet interred in Chester, shall have two Months time to
fetch them thence, whither they please, provided that none of them come
attended with above twenty Horse.

10* That no Church within the City, Evidences or Writings belonging to the
same shall be defaced.

11. That such Irish that were born of Irish parents, and have taken part with
the Rebels in Ireland, and now in the City, shall be prisoners.

12. That all those Horses and Arms, belonging to those that march out, and not
by those Articles allowed to be taken and carried out of the City; Except such
Horses as are the proper goods of the Citizens, and the Inhabitants that shall
remain in the City before the delivery of the same, be brought, the Horses into
the Castle Court, the Arms into the Shirehall, where Officers shall be
appointed to receive them.

13. That in consideration hereof, the same City and Castle, without any
slighting or defacing thereof, with all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and all
other furniture, and provisions of War therein whatsoever, except what is
allowed to be carried away, and formerly herein mentioned, with the County
Palatine Seal, Sword, and all the Records in the Castle, without Diminution,
Imbezeling or Defacing, be delivered unto the said Sir William Brereton, or
such as he shall appoint, for the use of King and Parliament, upon Tuesday
next, being the third of this instant February, 1645. by ten of the Clock in
the Afternoon.

14. That the Fort, with all the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition, and provision
therein, of what sort soever, not formerly granted or allowed of, upon the
signing of these Articles, be delivered to Sir William Brereton, or to such as
he shall appoint.

15. That upon signing of these Articles, all Prisoners in the City, Castle,
and Fort, that have been in Arms for the Parliament, or imprisoned for adhering
thereunto, shall immediately be set at liberty.

16. That the Convoy shall not receive any injury, in their going or coming
back, and shall have three days allowed for their return.

17. That if any person concerned in any of these Articles, shall violate any
part of them, such persons shall loose the benefit of all the said Articles.

18. That upon the signing of these Articles, sufficient hostages, such as
shall be approved off, be given for the performance of all the said Articles.

Signed by us, the Commissioners appointed, on the behalf of the Right
Honorable the Lord Byron. Edmund Varney. John Robinson. Thomas Cholmundley.
Peter Griffith. Henry Leigh. Thomas Thropp. John Johnson. Christo. Bleafe.
William Ince. John Werden. Edward Moreton. Thomas Bridge.

What is done by the Commissioners, is confirmed by John Byron.

Commissioners for Sir William Brereton.
Colonel John Booth. Colonel Io. Bower. Col. Robert Duckenfield. Col. Mich.
Jones. Col. Chidley Coot. Col. Io. Carter. Roger Wilbraham, Esquire. Adjutant
General Louthian. Iona. Bruen, Esquire. Lieut. Col. Hunt. Lieut. Col. Venables.
Master Bradshaw.
FINIS.

