THE LOYAL CONVERT, ( According to the Oxford Copy.)

A Convert will be loyal: OR, Some short Annotations on this Book; By W.
BRIDGES.

VIRG. Improbus haec tam culta novalia miles habebit? Barbarus has segetes?

HOM. (...).

Quaeris uter melius, Rex ne imperet, anne Senatus
Neuter (quod saepe est) si sit uterque malus.
Sin sit uterque bonus, Numero praestare senatum;
Inque bonis multis plus reor esse boni.
Difficile est numerum, forsan reperire bonorum,
Sic facile est unum saepius esse malum.
Et fuerit medius saepe inter utrumque Senatus,
Sed tibi vix unquam rex mediocris erit.
Consilioque malus regitur meliore senator,
Rex consultores sed regit ipse suos:
Alter ut eligitur populo; sic nascitur alter
Sors hic caeca regit, certum ibi consilium.
Reader, if thou would read any more such Poetry as this, See Thom. Morus
Anglus, where there is much to this purpose.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands. 1644.

To the Honest-hearted READER.
READER,
I Here When you have taken the Protestation to show your self any thing for
the searcher of hearts, then I shall be persuaded to give you some credit, and
shall desire the honest hearted reader to think he has to do with such a
writer; but such gentlemen as you seem to me to be, can take a solemn
national Covenant and spit it up again, and without conscience fall into that
desperate Iesuited maxim, That no promise is to be held with such, whom you
can soon call heretics or schismatiques, or any thing. The Searcher of hearts
has a controversy with Covenant breakers. I would you did read such places as
Ier. 34.18.20. and would learn to apply them better then you have done any
scripture that I can see in this treatise, and yet I desire to see without
prejudice.
protest before the Searcher of all hearts, that I have no End, either of
Faction, or Relation in this ensuing Treatise. I am no You do not know what you
are, nor indeed does any carnal man; He that does not stand only for the one
thing, Luke 10.42. may and indeed (at some time or other) will fall into an any
thing: Better men than you have confessed, that they did never think a man had
need to be converted, till they themselves were converted. But you are even the
same that thousands of your stamp are, that is to say, Sure service book men,
and (the worst of men) moderate men falsely so called, Lukewarmnes, neutrality,
and ignorant pride with obstinacy, see the wisdom of God concluding them
inseparable, Rev. 3.15.16.17.
Papist, no Your sectary we know what it is, viz. any one that is truly
religious, a reformation and a religion at large is the thing such as you love,
that is to say, Sundays no Sabbath; and the book of liberty put into practice
again, Wakes, Church-ales, Rushbearings etc. oh it was a merry world in those
days: upon which terms I must say of your Peace, as once the Father said, Vbi
non hoc bellum ibi pax diabolica, Where there is not this strife (namely
between the better and worse part) there is a devilish Peace. With this
introduction, commonly, these men begin such pamphlets, and they think they
prevail much upon the readers affe^tion, I say to the honest hearted reader,
look about thee In nomine Domini incipit omne malum: Satan can transform
himself into an Angel of light, and so do his Ministers also, If thou espiest
this Protestation before, the sound of his masters heels are behind him; And he
is a stone-cold formalist, some Chrismas -- zelot, as full of obstinacy, as an
egg is of meat, one that will tell you he would be resolved, but he is
resolved aforehand; of such a one let Solomon give the true character, Prove.
26.16. The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can render
a reason.
Sectarie, but a true Lover of Reformation and Peace: My Pen declines all That
we shall leave to the judicious reader, if there be not exceeding much of both
bitterness and deceit too judicent impartiales, good reader have thine eyes
about thee, and see without prejudice.
bitterness of Spirit; all deceitfulness of heart; and I may safely, in this
particular, with Saint Paul, say, I speak the truth in Christ and lie not, my
Conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I neither walk nor write
in craftiness, nor handle the holy Scriptures deceitfully: Therefore if thy
Cause be Our cause is the cause of Jesus Christ, as has been clearly and
plentifully proved, nor ever yet gainsaid, but by sophismes, lies and
quarrellings. And that defensive war the Parliament has now a foot, has
been sufficiently vindicated, as is to see in the several treatises to that
purpose, if we had to do with reasonable men; Wherein (good reader) thou have
the question rightly stated without any Andabatisme, which this Gentleman has
not either so much wit or so much honesty to do: We desire him therefore to
take the good counsel that he gives, And in the name of Jesus Christ, laying
aside all wilful ignorance, pride, prejudice, private interests, and
uncharitable censures, to deal seriously, and not so deceitfully with a truth
of God. Reader, he knows our question is not what he here says it to be, for
all his specious pretense. We will therefore in these Annotations (Christ
willing) search his several scriptures, and where they open, (God and thou be
judge, Reader) we will not seek to shut: We desire to consult not only with
reason, but with religion too, Which (in the power of it) such men are sadly
ignorant of; And then to his last clause, Let truth prosper though we perish,
and God be glorified though in our confusion; We say, Amen, and So be it.
Jesus Christ, in the name of Jesus Christ, I adjure thee to lay aside all
wilful ignorance, all prejudice, all private respests and Interests, and all
uncharitable censures: Deal faithfully with thy Soul, and suffer wholesome
admonitions: Search the several Scriptures herein contained, and where they
open a Gate, climb not thou over a Style, Consult with Reason herein
exerciz'd, and where it finds a mouth, find thou an ear: And let Truth
prosper, though thou perish; and let God be glorified, although in thy
Confusion.

THE LOYAL CONVERT.
THe Kingdom of England, that has for many Ages continued the happiest Nation
on the habitable earth, enjoying the highest blessings that heaven can give, or
earth receive; the fruition of the Gospel, which settled a firm Peace; which
Peace occasioned a full Plenty, under the gracious Government of wise and
famous Princes, over a thriving and well-contented People, insomuch that she
became the Earths Paradise, and the Worlds Wonder, is now the Nurcery of all
Sects; her Peace is violated, her Plenty wasting, her Government distempered,
her People discontented, and unnaturally embroiled in her own Blood, not
knowing the way, If you speak for your self, Sir, you are no good subject; if
for us, you are no good Christian, all our practices of mercy have showed, and
all our prayers for mercy to God and man too, do show this to be most false, we
do affect the means, all the lawful means of peace, but our misery is that
when we speak to men thereof, they make them ready to battle; The language of
this Proemo is neat, but very Jesuitical and dangerous; Take heed (good
Reader) we live in the times now, that even the Jesuits begin to plead for the
taking of the Oaths of Supremacy and Alleagiance. See the safeguard from
shipwreck for a prudent Catholic, with Doctor Featlies Annotations thereupon
published by order. Sure our Church is either altered, or the Popes stomach
that he can now digest us; But here it is (Reader give it thine observation)
when there is hope that Kings will preserve Popery, then Popery it self will
swear to preserve them.
nor affecting the means of Peace; insomuch, that she is now become the Byword
of the Earth, and the scorn of Nations.

The Cause and ground of these our National Combustions, are these, our
national Transgressions, which unnaturally sprung from the neglect of that
Truth we once had, and from the abuse of that Peace we now want: Which, taking
occasion of some differences betwixt His Majesty and his two Houses of
Parliament, has divided our Kingdom within it self, which had so divided it
self from that God, who blessed it with so firm a Truth, so settled a Peace, and
so sweet an Unity.

As that sin brought this division, so this division (sharpened with mutual
Iealousies) brought in the Sword.

When the Lion roars who trembles not? And when Judgments thunder, who is not
troubled?

Among the rest, I (who brought some Faggots to this Combustion) stood
astonished, and amazed; to whom the mischief was far more manifest then the
Remedy: At last, I laid my hand upon my heart, and concluded, It was the hand
of God: Where being plundered in my understanding, I began to make a scrutiny,
where the first Breach was made, that let in all these Miseries.

I found the whole Kingdom now contracted into a Parliament, which consisted of
three Estates; A King, a House of Peers, and a House of Commons; by the Wisdom
and Unity whereof, all things conducible to the Weale-publique were to be
advised upon, presented, and established.

I found this Unity dis-joynted, and grown to variance even to Blood. The
King and his Adherents on the one party; and his two Houses and their Adherents
on the other.

The pretense of this division, was the true Protestant Religion, which both
protested to maintain; The Liberty of the Subject, which both protested to
preserve; the privileges of Parliament, which both promise to protect: Yet
neverthesse, Sure this Gentleman thinks that any thing will be granted him: I
am confident, and in this I dare appeal to God and all good men, that England
never saw her Religion and Ordinances in that glory of luster, as they have
been since this Parliament began; Such a spirit of prayer and preaching is
gone out amongst us, as is indeed wonderful. But that which you call
Religion's profanation, is in deed and truth Religion's purging and
reformation, viz. to pluck down idolatrous crosses, to silence Organs, to
abolish relickes of Popery, to scum off the filth of our Liturgies and
Church Service, and to put away out of our Cathedrals, those bawling Boys, and
drunken singing men; This is the profanation of Religion we are guilty of in
such men's opinions as this is. True it is, in these sad times of ours, and
exceeding full of distraction, Sectaries creep in and increase abundantly whose
suppressing (in their and the Lords due time) we do not doubt but the great
Reformer will bless us with. This you can remember, and object against our
side; But your open Masses on your side I hear no complaint of, not a word of
your Irish Rebels now, Cum privilegio, in the land here; Accidental
prophanations, (in such a time as this) will happen, it cannot otherwise be,
but voluntary and desperate ones; volent and violent prophanations your side is
guilty of; you authorize, defend, sight for (or at least with) professed
prophaners; yea, professed enemies of Religion; yea, all Religion which has
any power or piety joined thereunto. This writer, which, (in this strain of
wit) desires to strike through the sides of our Parliament and profession too
at one blow, dares not here undertake to instance any one piece of the
profanation of our Religion (justifiedly) published, preached or practiced in
this distracted strait of time by the Authority of Parliament, Religion,
Liberty, Privilege, and all is trodden under foot by that side, to which this
Gentleman is now a loyal Convert, as is seen daily, but what impudence dare
aver that we do any such thing? Good Reader do not be beguiled, but hear
what this man says, Religion, Liberty, Privilege, never more profaned,
interrupted, violated, but by whom? let him speak out and tell thee, or do
thou open thine eyes, and tell thy self, rather, and then thou will tell me,
that the Gentleman has in this, but thrown dirt in his own sides face.
the first never more profaned; the second never more interrupted; the third
never more violated.

Standing amazed at this Riddle, I turned mine eyes upon his Majesty; and there
I viewed the Lords Anointed, sworn to maintain the established Laws of this
Kingdom: I turned mine eyes upon the two Houses; and in them I beheld the
Interest of my Country, sworn to obey his Majesty as their supreme Governor.

I heard a Remonstrance cried from the two Houses: I read it; I approved it; I
inclined unto it: A Declaration from his Majesty; I read it; I applauded it; I
adhered to the justness of it: The Parliaments Answer; I turned to the
Parliament: His Majesty's Reply; I returned to his Majesty.

Thus tossed and turned as a Weathercock to my own wea^nesse, I resolved it
impossible to serve two Masters.

I fled to Reason; Reason could not satisfy me: I fled to Policy, Policy
could not resolve me: at length, finding no Counselor, but that which first I
should have sought; I hyed me to the Book of God as the Great Oracle, and
ushering my Inquest with Prayer and Humiliation, I opened the sacred leaves,
which (not by chance) presented to my first eye the 20 of the Proverbs, ver. 2.
The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, and who so provokes him to
Anger, sins against his own soul.

Now I began to search, and found as many And was there ever any pestilent
heresy in Gods Church tha^ had not numerous quotations of holy Scripture?
Augustine observes it sweetly, that Heresies and perverse opinions, insnaring
the souls, they are not vented, but when the good Scriptures are not well
understood, and then that which men understand wrongly, they assert to others
as rashly; See Aug. tract. in Jo. 10. It may be this Gentleman would be ready
to do to me as he did to Jeremiah, or as that other Zidkijah did to Micaiah,
for he smote him on the cheek and said, When went the spirit of the Lord from
me to speak to thee? 1 King. 22.24. For indeed some men think that none are
in the favor of God so as they, and that God has given to none his graces in
that measure that they, though Christ knows they never knew what belonged to
any saving grace or knowledge; but Sir, I must needs tell you, you have made
Augustines words true. And such as you verify that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.7.
they would be Doctors of the Law, and yet understand not what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm.
places to that purpose as would swell this Sheet into a Volume; so that in a
very short space, I was so furnished with such strict Precepts, backed with such
strong Examples, that my Judgment was enlightened, and my wavering Conscience so
thoroughly convinced, that by the Grace of that Power which directed me, neither
fear, nor any By-respects shall ever hereafter remove me, unless some clearer
light direct me.

But, above all the Rest, a Precept and an Example out of the Old Testament
(strongly confirmed by a Precept and an Example out of the New) settled my
opinion and established my Resolution.

Pre. 1. I could not have th^ught that a Royalist, and one of so tender a
conscience, as this Gentleman would seem to be, would have quoted a text of
the holy Scripture.

1 with such perverting.

2 And so strangly derogatory to that which he seems to be so earnest for.
For good Reader do but mark well: It pleases God to own (says he)
Nebuchadnezzar for his servant, we grant it, but to do what? amongst other
things, 1 To conquer that which is none of his. 2 To be a scourge to the people
of God. 3 To destroy others a while, till at length others destroy him; Thus
God may, and does own the Devil for his servant for such services as these.
Sir, you will have small thanks at Court for such parallels and comparisons as
these, we hope and pray yet, that God has appointed our gracious Sovereign. 1
To preserve our right and yours. 2 To be a nursing father to Gods people. 3 To
help to save them, which I Will assure you, Sir, will venture their dearest
bloods to save him: you do exceeding ill, sir, and I must tell you, it is an
unreverent and unbeseeming comparison. But let us see what this Scripture
contains. 1 That to God belongs the Kingdom, Rule and Government of the
whole world. 2 He does give the rule thereof even to the Beast of the field, to
whomsoever pleases him. 3 That he has less reason then a beast, which does
not submit. 1 To accept the punishment of his iniquity, Levit. 26.41. 2 And to
seek a place of hiding there, where God will secure him. For 2 great reasons
are given hereof, 1 Secret from the purpose of God and his decree, I have
given, etc. v. 6. 2 From the sin of man which God does intend hereby to
scourge for a time, for ^o the Lord tells them plainly, verse 7. And therefore
whosoever shall dare to strive or resist, must now know it is no less then a
disobedience and God-resistance. The sum. Your Land (O ye Jews) heretofore
yours (while ye were mine) and governed by your own King, I have now given
away unto a strange King, even the King of Babylon, and the government shall be
his over you all, ye^, and what yours is, to the beast of the field. Now your
wisdom will be to submit to me and him; yea, to me in him that you may show
your passive obedience, if otherwise two mischiefs will ensue against you,
viz. 1 Severe punishments, sword, famine, etc. 2 And that until they be wholly
given into his hands, hereupon a double exhortation is given. 1 Do not hear
(expressed). 2 Much less believe (employed) those that say, Ye^ shall not serve
the King of Babel, and a binding reason, ver. 10. For they prophecy a lie,
etc. Lastly, the direction and promise, ver. 11. But now what does this Text
conclude. 1 Has God given away our Land and King to a forrainer? Who sent you
to preach this doctrine? 2 They are commanded by God to this which is not our
case. 3 Thus you argue, The people of Israel must not refuse the means of
their safety, how unlikely soever. Therefore the people of England must not
refuse the means of their slavery how unlawful soever. Its very well argued,
sir, indeed. But honest Reader mark a little and see what the Gentleman would
conclude hence. 1 Our King is as that King of Babel, whom God has appointed to
do what he will. 2 Our Parliament the people that will not obey, therefore
designed to fire, sword, etc. 3 All the holy learned of the Land are dreamers,
enchanters, sorcerers, and men that prophecy a lie unto you. 4 Therefore
Countrymen put your necks under the yoke of the King, and you shall remain
still in your land, occupy and dwell therein; yes marry shall you and wear
wooden shoes, as the Pesants do in France: Reader I appeal to thy soul, is
not here pestilent perverting Gods truth? Do not such men torment and set on
the rack ((...)) Gods truth, 1 Pet. 3.16. This is the first Precept with which
this good man was so satisfied.


The first Precept out of the Old, Ier. 27.6. where it pleased God to own
Nebuchadnezzar his servant, (although a known Pagan, a professed Idolater, and a
fierce Persecuter of all Gods Children) concerning whom he says, v. 8. They
that serve not the King of Babylon, and that will not put their necks under his
Yoke, I will punish them with the sword, Famine, and the Pestilence, till I
have consumed them. v. 9. Therefore hearken not to your Diviners and Prophets,
that say unto you, You shall not serve the King of Babylon, for they prophecy
a lie unto you, v. 10. But the nations that shall serve the King of Babylon,
and bring their necks under his Yoke, those will I let remain in their own
land, (says the Lord) and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

Can there be a stricter Precept? or could there be a more impious Prince? And
yet this Precept, and yet this Prince must be obeyed: nay, sub poena too; Upon
the pain of Gods high wrath, fully expressed in Famine, Sword and Pestilence, not
only upon the People, but upon the Priests also, that shall persuade them unto
disobedience.

The 2 Precept is the old place Romans 13.1, 2, 3. etc. To this I answer that
this Gentleman sure does suppose that that he can say more then Doctor Fern, or
else he would never press it so far; But I will not dare to suppose that I
can say more than they, which have given him answer. Let the reader apply
himself unto Master Burroughes in the end of the treatise, entitled. The Lord
of hosts: and others abouring excellently upon that subject. Only thus much
give me leave to advertise: The Gentleman does first hoodwinck you and then
abuse you. 1. Gods command his reason, and that under, thereat, they are
altogether, yea and every one by himself, that which we desire to tremble to
think of disobedienc^ to; For they are such a three fold coard as cannot be
broken, but we break with them. 2 Equality with our sovereign, superiority, or
supremacy over him, let this book object against them that are guilty of
desiring such a thing, We utterly disclaim and renounce the thought thereof, And
therefore herein the author fights with his shadow, and not with us. 3 His
distinction of active and passive obedience, power, praise, pliance, prayers,
etc. Suppose all this should be admitted, yet the author hits not the question,
alas he comes not near the mark. Indeed no more they do any of them by their
good will. 4 The paral^ll too between the two Scriptures that is to say,
between the 13. Romans 1, 2, 3, and 1 Cor 11.29. with that flash of wit
discerning the Lords body, and discerning the Lords anointed, that he say^s of
ordinance, and the punishment of disobedience etc, allow him all this, And all
this is beside the business in hand and has nothing in it but froth: How
easily and with no noise falls all this Babel to pieces thus. 1 He that rebels
against Gods commandment, shall receive to himself judgment, True, but we do
not so, therefore, etc. 2 He that desires to be equal with, or above his King,
he etc. But we abhor it with our hearts: therefore etc. and so of all the
rest, This spiders web is soon swept down you see, Much reading, I know by my
self, is a wearisomnesse to the flesh; And though there be many books yet every
one has not time to read them, observe therefore, good Reader, without
prejudice these following things in answer to this precept. 1 Obe^ience to the
King may be denied, not only in things unlawful by the Law of God, but man
also; This is granted by the Kings side, this position, That Gods Law and man's
Law do limit Kings power. 2 Resistance is lawful with these three cautions: 1
If there be the consent of the two houses of Parliament. 2 If that resistance
be defensive. 3 If the King be bent to overthrow all religion, Laws,
Libertyes, etc. and show nothing but will: For you know, sir, and for sh^me do
not dissemble it, that Aristotle's old rule is, He that Governs by Law is a
King, by lust is a tyrant. The next book therefore that this Gentleman writes,
we shall entreat him to satisfy the reader in those particulars above and such
as th^se below, viz. 1 What is the difference between (...) power and (...)
strength for surely this must be regarded. 2 There is difference between these
two He has, and He is, the greatest power, let it be spoken of whom it will. 3
The resistance of the Power, and the resistance of the will are things
different. 4 These concurrences in a Governor, which all have granted. 1 The
power, which is from God. 2 Person, which is from men. 3 Qualification, which
is from himself. 4 Limitation, which is from the Law divine and humane. 5 Let
him also satisfy us in these two things more, that is to say. 1 Though duty,
breach of oath and covenant does not make forfeyture of power, yet whether any
breach does so. 2 Wheth^r power given to King, Parliament, etc. may be
reassumed? when, how, in what cases, and by whom? The light of reason we have,
has taught us this, and we cannot forget it, That spiritual good things have
such means to preserve them, Which is a truth warranted by Gods word. That
natural and civil good things must surely have means to preserve them also,
Such therefore would I entreat the next discourse of this Gentleman's to be, as
may give satisfaction in these things, or else he does nothing to the purpose.
2 Pre. The second Precept is enjoined us out of the New Testament, To. 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no power but of
God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. This Power, (this King) to whom S. Paul commands this
subjection, was Nero, the bloody persecutor of all that honored the blessed
Name of Jesus Christ.

Gods Command should be a sufficient Argument, (...) is enough: But when he
adds a Reason too, he answers all Objections: But when he threatens a
punishment (no less then damnation) upon the resistance thereof, he has used
all means to persuade a necessity of obedience.

Let every soul be subject.

Not equal, much less superior. And what is taking up of Arms, but an
employed supposition of at least equality? What are the hopes of conquest but an
Ambition of Superiority? What is condemning, judging, or deposing, but
Supremacy? For it is against the nature of an Inferior to condemn, judge, or
depose a Superior.

And, lest the Rebellious should confine his obedience to a good Prince, the
next words reply,

For there is no power but of God.

Power in it self is neither good nor evil, but as it is in subjecto, the
person; If an evil King, an evil Power, If a good King, a good Power: God
sends the one in Mercy; and we must be subject; the other in Judgment, and we
must be subject: in things lawful, actively; in things unlawful, passively:
If a good King, he must have our praise and our plyance; If an evil King, he
must have our Prayers, and our Patience.

He that resists the Power (whether good or evil, for all power is of God)
resists an Ordinance of God (Ordinances of men are not resisted without ruin)
and whosoever resists, shall receive, but what? (...), damnation to
themselves.

Now, compare this place with that 1 Cor. 11.29. He that shall eat this Bread,
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, eats and drinks, What? (...)
damnation to himself. If then there be proportion betwixt the Sin and the
Punishment, you may hereby gather the heinousness of disobedience, the
punishment whereof is the very same with his, that is guilty of the Body and
blood of our Lord; to the one, for not discerning the Lords Body, to the other,
for not discerning the Lords Anointed.

Ob. The Lords Anointed? And who is he? None but the regenerate: Christ is not
Christ to any, to whom Jesus is not Jesus.

Ans. Gods Word answers your silly Objection, not I: was not Saul Gods
Anointed 1 Samuel 26.9. Was not Cyrus Gods Anointed, and many more whom God
acknowledges so, and yet wicked Kings?

Cyrus is mine Anointed yet he has not known me.

Example. 1. For the first Example; Truly I do but desire to appeal to
judgment which is sound and without prejudice, not Idolizing the name of King,
Court, etc. as not long since we were commanded to do something else. And by
those which now desire to preach us as deep into the blind obedience, as ever
they did. I have (I thank God) three rules fitted to that threefold obedience,
which have not yet failed me in the trust I have committed to them; I am
informed that, 1 Blind obedience wants discretion. 2 Implicit ob^dience
wants truth. 3 Seditious and servile obedience want's justice.
Reader, do but observe with what obedience they would have thee obey, and also
take the good memorandum, given thee by an Ancient, And be not blindly
obstinate, and I Will desire no more, Tertullian's censure of the people of his
time is thus Majore formidine Cesarem observatis; quam ipsumde Olympo Iovem;
which is in English thus in effect, I would to God some of you would learn to
fear God a little, which pretend you fear (and love the King so much) and I
could like it well; Michior Canus takes occasion to say of the Italians these
words, Vos Itali vultis deum habere in pane, quem non creditis esse in caelis,
in English, You Italians will needs have God to be in the bread in the
Sacrament, which I Am afraid you hardly believe to be in heaven. sic ilic in
vita. Melanct. But to the point, this first Example Reader, I judge it (to this
business) very incongruent and absurd: Absurd I say, For do but observe, and
the force of the reasonning lies thus. 1 Three children captives do yield
passive obedience to the lawful commands of a free Monarch in a strange land.
Therefore all freemen ought to yield passive obedience without resistance to
the mere will of a mixed Monarch, (the Parliament then sitting and dissenting
thereto) in their own land I shall pray the Reader to observe well the
agreement between this case and ours. 2 It is not lawful in any case to resist
(no though the commands be altogether unlawful) a King that is to Govern by
will. Therefore unlawful also to resist him (or his bad Council which is to
Govern by Law; Thus the Gentleman argues from the first of those Examples which
did so confirm him.
The first Example for our Obedience the Old Testament proposes to our
imitation, Dan. 3.16. Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon sets up a golden
Image, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were commanded to fall down and worship
it.

The King a known Pagan commands gross Idolatry, did these men conspire? Or
(being Rulers of the Province of Babel) did they invite the Jews into a
Rebellion? did these, to strengthen their own Faction, blast their Sovereigns
Name with Tyranny and Paganism? Did they endeavor by scandals and impious
Aspersions to render him odious to his people? Did they encourage their
Provinces to take up Arms for the defense of their Liberties or Religion? Did
they seize upon or stop his Revenues? or annihilate his Power? did they
estrange themselves from his Presence? Murder his Messengers, or would they
have slighted his gracious Offers? No, being called by their Prince, they came;
and being commanded to give actual obedience to his unlawful commands,
observe the modesty of their first answer, Dan. 3.19. We are not careful to
answer thee in this matter; and being urged, mark their pious Resolution in
the second: Dan. 3.18. Be it known, O King, we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the golden Image which thou have set up.

The King threatens the Furnace, they yield their bodies to the Furnace, and
say, Dan. 3.17. God whom we serve will deliver us out of thy hands, and is not,
he will deliver Thee into our hands. They expect deliverance rather in their
passive obedience, then in their actual resistance.

Ob. But they were few in number, and their forces not considerable.

Ans. Admit that which all Histories deny, Was not God as able to subdue Him
with so few, as to deliver them from so many? Had their weakness less reason
(for the cause of Gods apparent dishonor) to expect a miraculous assistance in
those days of frequent Miracles, then we after so long a cessation of
Miracles? Gods glory will not be vindicated by unlawful means, or
unwarrantable proceedings.

Obj. I, but we take up Arms, not against the King, but against his evil
Counselors.

Ans. Adherents ye mean, A rare distinction! And, tell me; whose power have
his Adherents? The Kings; By which appears, ye take up Arms against the Kings
power; Eccl. 8. He that resists the power (it is not said the Prince) shall
receive damnation. Again, Where the word of a King is, there is power. God
joined the King and his power, and who dare separate them? They that take up
Arms against the Parliaments power (you say) take up Arms against the
Parliament; do not they then that take up Arms against the Kings power, by the
same reason, take up Arms against the King? Now look back upon your intricate
distinction, and blush.

Obj. But, if the King betray the Trust reposed in him by his Subjects they may
suspend their obedience, and resist him.

Ans. You and such as you the Kings flatterers; and it is pity to see what
daubing here is with untempered mortar.
Kings are Gods Vicegerents and cannot be compelled to give an account to any,
but to God. Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned: That is
to thee, to thee only must I give an account. Though I have sinned against
Uriah, by my Act; and against my people by my Example, yet against Thee have I
only sinned. You cannot deprive, or limit them in what you never gave them.
God gave them their Power, and who art thou that dare resist it? Prove. 8.15.
By me Kings reign.

Obj. But, his Crown was set upon his Head by his Subjects, upon such and such
conditions.

Ans. Why was the penalty upon the sail not expressed then? Coronation is but
a humane Ceremony, And was he not Proclaimed before he was Crowned? Proclaimed?
But what? A King? And did not you at the same instant by relative consequence,
proclaim your selves Subjects? And shall Subjects condition with their King,
He is bound by the law to the law, which is the common Sponsor between him and
the subject, viz. that the subject shall pay tribute give obedience, etc and
then, that he shall enjoy his protection too, or else he is in an ill case.
or will Kings bind themselves to their Subjects, upon the forfeiture of their
power, after they have received their Regal Authority?

Ob. But the King has, by Writ, given his power to his Parliament, and
therefore what they do, they do by virtue of his Power.

Ans. The King, by his writ, gives not away his power, but communicates it. By
the virtue of which Writ, they are called ad tractandum and consulendum de
arduis Regni, to treat and advise concerning the difficulties of the Kingdom:
Here is all the power Yes to enact something too surely, Sir, you have forgot
your self: but if Delinquents be found out, and rescued from the hand of
justice, what then? Nay if they be armed against them which should do justice
on them, what then?
the Writ gives them, and where they exceed, they usurp the Kings power, being
both against the Law of God, and the constitutions of the Kingdom.

Ob. Well, but in case of necessity, when Religion and Liberty lie at the
stake, the Constitutions of the Kingdom (for the preservation of the Kingdom)
may suffer a Dispensation. Here Is no law of God broken yet, unless you show us
more.


Ans. Admit that: But what necessity may dispense with the violation of the Law
of God? the deviation where from is evil, and, Thou shall do no evil that
good may come thereon.

Ob. But, we take not Arms against the King, but only to bring Delinquents to
condign punishment.

Ans. And, who are they? even those that take up Arms for the King; which an
unrepealed Statute, 11. Hen. 7. acquits. But, admit Statutes may be broken, and
you seek to punish them; Who gave you the power so to do? The Law: And what Law
denies the King power to pardon Delinquents? God that has put power into the
hand of Majesty, has likewise planted mercy in the heart of Sovereignty: And,
will ye take away both his birthright and his Blessing also? Take heed, you do
not slight that, which one day may prove your Our rejoicing is the testimony of
our conscience, that we shall have mercy with the King of Kings, which is our
soul's sole sanctuary. In the mean time you reason well, The King may pardon
some Delinquents, therefore ought to pardon any; yea all. A King has mercy for
D^linquents therefore, let him spare them, nay arm them against those that
endeavor to do their duties in ridding the common wealth or Church of them.
Sanctuary.

Ob. But, the King, being a Mixed Monarch, is bound to his own Laws.

Ans. There be two sorts of Laws, directive and coercive: As to the first, he
is only bound to make his account to God; so to the second, he is only liable
to the hand of God: who shall say unto him, what do thou?

Ob. But Kings now adays have not so absolute a power, as the Kings mentioned
in the Scripture.

Ans. Who limited it? God or man? Man See before confessed that, the Kings
power is limited by Gods law and man's law too, where is the limitation, if he
may do what he will, and must account to none but God? For in vain is he
petitioned, or subsidy, or aid denied him, For he may take all when he
pleases, and is to account to none but God.
could not limit the Power he never gave: if God, show me where; till then,
this objection is frivolous.

Ob. But, when Kings and their assistance make an offensive, and a destructive
war against their Parliament, may they not then take up defensive Arms?

Ans. It is no offensive War for a King to endeavor the Recovery of his
surrepted right; Prove a surrepted right, and you say something.
however, are not the Members of a Parliament Subjects to their Sovereign? If
not, who are they? If Subjects, ought they not to be subject? Gods people, the
Jews, Hester 8. that were to be destroyed by the Kings Command, neither did,
not durst make a defensive War against his abused power, until they first
obtained the Kings Consent.

But admit it lawful, (though neither granted nor warranted) that subjects may
upon such terms make a defensive War; does it not quite cross the nature of
a defensive War, to Assail, pursue, and dispossess?

When you shot five pieces of Ordnance, before one was returned at Edgehill,
was that defensive? When you besieged Redding, which you after slighted, was
that defensive? When you affronted Basing-house, was that defensive?

The warrantable weapons against an angry King, are Exhortation, Diswasion,
wise reproof (by such as are nearest to him) Petition, Prayer, and Flight. All
other weapons will at last wound them that use them.

For the two Examples of our blessed Savior, to it I answer that, This example
also I judge to be like the former and very impertinent. My reason is, Our
blessed Lord had an aim only at the business which he came to do, viz. 1 To
do the work of his ministry Esa. 61.1, 2. And 2 in due time to suffer the
death on the cross, upon which 2 of the parts of his office were dependant,
viz. the prophetical and priestly office, for the 3 part, that is his Kingly.
Ex. 2 The 2 Example was left us out of the New Testament, by Him that is the
true president of all holy obedience, our blessed Savior; whose humility and
sufferance was set before us as a Copy for all generations to practice by. 1
Pet. 2.

The temporal Kingdom of the Jews, successively usurpt by these two heathen
Princes, Augustus, and Tiberius, two Contemporaries, was his natural
Birthright, descended from his Type and Auncestor King David. Had not he as
great an Interest in that Crown, as we have in this Commonwealth? Was not He
as tender-eyed toward his own natural people, as we to one another?

Was not the Truth as dear to Him, (who was the very Truth) and the way to it;
as direct to Him (that was the only way) as to us?

Was not He the great Reformer?

Had the Sword been a necessary stickler in Reformation, how happened it that
he mistook his Weapon so? In stead of a trumpet, he lifted up his Voice.

Were Plots, Policies, Propositions, Prophanations, Plunderings, Military
Preparations, his way to Reformation? were they not his own words, Mat. 26.52.
He that takes up the Sword shall perish by the Sword. Nor was it want of
strength, that he reformed not in a Martial way: Could not he command more
then twelve legions of Angels?

Or had he pleased to use the Arm of flesh, could not he that raised the dead,
raise a considerable Army? Sure, St. John the Baptist would have ventured his
head upon a fairer Quarrel, and St. Peter drawn his sword to a bloodier end; No
question, but St. Paul, the twelve Apostles and Disciples would have proved as
tough Colonells as your associated Essex Priests did Captains; and doubtless
St. Peter, who converted 3000 in one day, would have raised a strong Army in
six.

Our blessed Savior well knew, that Caesar came not thither without divine
permission; In respect whereof, He became obedient to the very shadow of a
King; and whom the actively resisted not, he passively obeyed.

Ob. I, but there was a necessity of his obedience, and subjection, to make him
capable of a shameful death.

Ans. No, his obedience, as well as death, was voluntary; which makes you
guilty of a shameful argument. Bona verba quaeso. you are peremptorily
ignorant, Sir, and forfeit your discretion very often. The death of our Lord
was voluntary quoad depositionem, it is true, himself says so Ioh. 10.18. I
lay down my life, no man takes it away. But yet necessary too, quoad decretum:
as I shall show you out of your own scriptures Mat. 26.54. how then should the
Scriptures be fulfilled which say that it must be so.


Ob. But, He was a single person; We, a representative body: what is
unexpedient in the one, is lawful in the other

Ans. Worse and worse! If our blessed Savior be not Representative, Tell me
whereof art thou a Member? woe be to that Body politic, which endeavors not
to be conformed according to the Head Mystical.

He preached peace; If always you say something, but if ever otherwise, either
by himself or his, your parallel is not worth a point See Mat. 10.34. and be
not rash.
Your Martial Ministers (by what authority they best know) proclaim war. He
preached obedience with limitation Mat. 22.21. Cesar's due no more, you (like a
company of flatterers as you are) preach it without limitation.
He, Obedience; They, Sedition: Do not impudently tax us of preaching lies,
show any one so doing, and name him, otherwise you must needs father the lie.
The Gentleman you glance at, in the word (Martial) is quite beyond your
aspersion, and till the Court admire such Micaiah's, I am afraid the Kings
undertakings will be but like Ahabs journey to Ramoth Gilead, though 400 such as
you say all, Go up and Prosper.
He, Truth; They, Lies: He, Order is a word of great latitude, Sir, and I
believe you mean, Order of Bishops, Order of Cathedralls, Order of
Church Service, etc. Look about you, and you have been answered. No, know God
is the God of order, and not of confusion.
Order; They, Confusion: He, Blessedness to the peacemakers; They, courage to
the In your two last particulars you beg shamefully. 1 You would have us think
such as you mean to be Peacemakers, Who are indeed our only Peacebreakers. You
are such, and we have found you such on every treaty that we have had with you,
like him that shed the blood of war in Peace. We have found you as the men of
Meseck and Kedar (degenerating indeed) which whiles we (and you too) talk of
Peace, make you ready to battle. Psa. 120.7: 2 You would have us think that
imprisonment for malignity, and as incendiaries in a state, is persecution for
righteousness. No we know you suffer as evil doers, are buffetted for your
faults, and desire you to remember the old rule; Non poena sed causa martyrem
facit, It is not the punishment, but the cause which makes the Martyr. Sir, it
becomes them that bring such a railing accusation as this, so full of
bitterness, and gross falsehood, to draw it to particulars, and to say, This
and this was done by such and such a person, and persons. We who desire
information, believe me, do think, the blasphemies, lies, and brasse-brow'd
impudencies to be on your side.
Persecutors: He, Blessedness to the persecuted; They brand them with
Malignitie that call them blessed.

God was not heard in the whirlewind, but in the still voice.

But, his thoughts are not as our thoughts, neither are our ways like his
ways.

But, whence proceeds all this? even from a viperous Generation (which has
long nested in this unhappy Island) and those increased multitudes of simple
souls, sedued by their seeming sanctity, who taking advantage of our late too
great abuse of Ceremonies, are turned desperate enemies to all Order and
Discipline, being out of charity with the very Lords prayer, because it comes
within the Popish Liturgy.

How many of these have lately challenged the name of sanctified Vessels, for
containing the poison of unnatural Sedition? How many of these have usurpt the
style of well-affected, for dis-affecting peace? How many of these have
counterfeited the honor of good Patriots, for largely contributing toward the
Ruins of their Country? How many does this Army consist of? How for their
sakes is Blasphemy connived at! Sacrilege permitted! How for their
encouragement, are Lies and brasse-brow'd Impudencies invented, nay published
(nay published in their very pulpits) and tolerated (if not commanded) even by
them, who (perchance, where this quarrel ended) would throw the first stone at
them! How many of our Learned, Religious, and Orthodox Divines (who by their
able Tongues and Pens, have defended and maintained the true ancient and
Catholic Faith, and vindicated the Reformed Religion from the aspersions of
her potent Adversaries) are now plundered in their Goods, sequestered in their
Livings, imprisoned in their persons, (if not forced in their Consciences)
whilst their Wives and poor There shall be judgment merciless to him that
shows no mercy. Iam. 2.13. I pray you open your eyes, and see the justice of
the Lord of hosts in this thing. Adonibezek shall rise up in judgment against
you, his confession is Iud. 1.7. As I have done, so God has rewarded me. So
must you say too. Remember your earecutting, undoing, depriving, suspending,
merciless high Commission Court, and then say, God is just.

When a ships lading of those that your party drove to New England were sailing
thither, O (says a creature of one of your Courts) that a storm would come
now, and sink all these into the bottom of the sea! this is a piece of your
charity.

Believe it, Sir, you have been bloodily merciless, and the just God is now in
making inquisition.


Children begging their bread, are left to the mercy of these unmercifull
times; even for the encouragement of them, whose Surgunt indocti, et rapiunt
caelum, et nos cum omnibus doctrinis nostris detrudimur in gehennam. Aug.
pedantick learning durst never show her ridiculous face before an easy
School-man, whose livelyhoods they unworthily usurp, not dispensing the bread
of life, but the darnell of giddy-headed fancy and sedition, abhorring the way
to peace, and maligning those that ensue it.

Ob. I, but we desire Peace, so we may have Truth too.

Ans. What mean ye by having Truth? The preservation of the Old Truth, or the
institution of a New?

If ye fear the alteration of the Old, (having your Sovereigns Oath, which you
dare not believe) what other assurance can you have?

The Blood you shed, is certain; the change you fear, is It is an easy matter
for you to write so, but it is not so easy for you, (...) make wise men think
so. Solomon's prudent man, and his fool, with their previsions, and provisions,
are to be seen, Prove. 22.3. You are very confident of your abiliti^s, that dare
oppose your judgment, to that of a whole State.
uncertain: it is no wisdom to apply a desperate Remedy to a suspected disease.

If the enjoyment of peace depends upon a full assurance of Truth, our discords
may bear an everlasting Date: God has threatened to remove his Candlestick, and
our wickedness justly fears it; And so long as we fear it, shall we abjure
peace, the blessed means to prevent it? He that seeks to settle Truth by the
sword, distracts it.

Or is it a Truth ye want? If so, Is it of Doctrine, or of Discipline? If of
Doctrine, Actum est de nostra Religione, Farewell our Religion. Or, is it of
Discipline? Discipline is but a Ceremony. And did the Lord of the Sabbath
dispense with a moral Law, for the preservation of an Oxes life, or an Asses?
and shall we, to alter some few indifferent Ceremonies (allowed by the
Parliaments of three pious and wise Princes, and the practice of many holy
Martyrs, who sealed the true protestant Religion with their blood) cry down
Peace, and shed the Blood of many thousand Christians?

Our seduced Protestants will have no set Forms of prayer, but what proceed
immediately from their own Fancies. This is their Truth.

Our Semi-separatists will hear our Sermons (if they like the Teacher) but no
Divine Service. This is their Truth.

Our Separatists will not communicate in our Churches, nor join in our
Congregations. That is their Truth is one, as is the God of truth; And as for
the Separatists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc. What the State thinks of them,
and how it proceeds against some of them, you should seek to know before you
seem to censure. We contend not, Sir, for such a truth as must have a touch of
an Irish toleration. The Independants, those Gentlemen do differ in judgment
in that point, it is true, yet modestly, and without morosity: Reckon them with
reverence, Sir, I pray you, they shall for learning go check by jowl, with your
side of the first form, And if you take them in their Pulpit employment,
believe me none of yours are to be compared with them; Alas, Sir, preaching,
that is to say, opening the whole counsel of God, has been out of fashion at
Court, ever since I was born; More the sin, and shame of some body, And the
judgment which is denounced Amos 7.12.16.17. Reader, observe if it be not
accomplishing: Neither is the quarrel for a few ceremonies, we contend for
substance. For all our liberties, as we are men, and Christian men, do lie now
at stake, and we hope the Lord will discover himself to be for ^is therein.
Truth.

Our Anabaptists will not baptize till years of discretion, and Re-baptize.
That is their Truth.

Our Antinomians will have no Repentance. This is their Truth.

Our Independants will have an universal Parity; This is their Truth.

Good God, when shall we have peace, if not till all their Truths meet!

Obj. But, Christ says, Mark. 10.34. I come not to bring Peace, but the sword:
therefore for the Propagation of Peace, it is lawful to use the Sword.

Ans. So he is termed, 1 Cor. 1.23. a stumbling block, and does that warrant
to stumble? So, He says, Mat. 26.31. All you shall be offended because of me;
and does this Patronize our Offenses? The Law is good and just: Because Romans
7.7. then we had not known sin but by the Law. Is it therefore lawful for us
to sin? God forbid.

Our Savior brings the Sword among us, as wholesome meat brings sickness to a
weakly sick stomach, or Physic to a body abounding with Humors; not
intentionally, but occasionally.

Thus, by your erroneous and weak mistakes, you make the Prince of Peace the
Patron of your unnatural War: and the God of Truth, the president of your This
has been answered before, and if an accusation against us were enough who
should be guiltless? If you think, Sir, you can yet bring any thing against
our proceedings, which has not been said, and deserves the name of any more
then such a cavil as this, you have your liberty.
unexamined errors.

But, Almighty God, the Champion of his own Truth; and maintainer of his own
Cause, has (to more then common admiration) appeared in this great Enterprise.

He that delivered Isreal's handful from the hand of Pharaohs Host, has showed
himself in the (almost incredible) proceedings of this heaven displeasing
War; the brief Relation whereof may move those hearts, that are not seared,
or stone, to melt into a thankful acknowledgement of his Power, and remain as
Monuments of his Mercy, that children (yet unborn) may say hereafter, God was
here, viz.

The two Houses of Parliament made first That is to say, before the Papists
could get them, for indeed they were designed to have had them, that we might
have had what they have in Germany, that is to say, neither house, home, nor
habitation; The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelty, for this Parliament
therefore, and that seizure, We humbly bless the name of our good God. But good
Sir, not first before the plot for bringing of an Army against the Parliament.
Nor first before many other things which conscience has not silenced among
some of you, and in due time the Kingdom will take notice of, Sir, with all
your tricks and ambiguities, you dance in a Net, and your dissimulation and
prevari^ation cannot be hid.
a general seizure of all the Arms, Ammunition, Castles, Forts, Magazines,
and Ships, (being the whole visible strength of this unhappy Kingdom) to whom
(having now settled the Militia, both by Sea and Land, in their own hands)
tides of Proposition gold came in upon the Truly our gold came not in as it
ought to have done; We had then, and yet have too many amongst us whose
earrings were laid by for an Idol of their own making. But now you speak of
our Incomes for the War; Remember I pray you Sir, that we do not forget some
of your Receipts also. First, The Lands and Money of almost all the Nobility
and Gentry of the Land. Secondly, Malignant Merchants and Citizens, not a few.
Thirdly, All the Civilians in the Kingdom, and (Reader) into their hands, all
the treasure of the Kingdom was running, out of all their Cossers you expend.
And indeed it must be so, for it was ill got, and must not be better spent.
Fourthly, You received one sum from beyond Sea upon a good Pawn. Fifthly,
And 100000 l. came in (they say) elsewhere that was helped to be gotten by us,
and now is spent to fight against us. Sixthly, All the wicked ones which are
scummed off the three Kingdoms are on your side, these usually love not any
thing better than that which God hates, and will give their first borne to a
Moloch; The Gentleman observes it well, we are fain to strain hard for moneys,
every thing expended in the things of God came too too hard But to Idolatry,
every thing comes easy, the health, 1 King. 18.28. they cut themselves with
knives, etc. the wealth, Exodus 32.6. they plucked off a heir earrings the ease,
Exodus 32.6: rose early; their very children too. Psalm. 106.37. They offered
their sons and daughters to devils. Seventhly, All the Papists in
Christendom yield you their prayers and purses, then I shall desire thee (good
Reader) to mark with me these two things. First, who they are that fight
against us, that is to say, a gracious Prince, and some others missed into the
deep mire(alas) where now they stick so fast that God only can help them out.
Secondly, what it is to be feared these men will do if they should prevail,
viz. Pull down any thing to set themselves up again, and to repair the
ruins of their (thus) spent states and fortunes.
Public Faith; Money (like blood from the Liver, conveyed through all the
veins) issued to make a large supply, and where it stopped a while, mountains of
massy Plate, from the vast Goblet to the slender Thimble, this faith removed
into their safe possession: And when the great Milch-cow began to slake, they
pressed her nipples, and by hard streyning renewed the stream. As Physicians
evacuate the Body, sometimes by Vomit, sometimes by Purge, sometimes by
Phlebotomy, sometimes by Sweating, sometimes Fluxing, sometimes Diuretically,
yet Purge but the same Peccant humor; So did they, first by Proposition, then
by way of Contribution, now by way of Loan, then by way of Subsidy, (no less
then 50 at one time) here by way of Assesment, there by way of Twentieth part,
then by way of Excise, one while by way of Sequestration, then by way of
Plunder, but still the issue, Money: And to work the better upon the
affections of the Multitude, all this for the behoof of King and Parliament,
for the pretended defense of (God knows what) Religion; insomuch that men came
in like Swarms to the next Tree, or rather like treacherous Decoyes, with
their innocent multitude into the Net, and Horses without number.

Thus were they supplied with all necessaries which the Arm of flesh could
provide, for the waging of an unconquerable war, whereon the money already
expended, makes no less figures then 17 Millions Sterling, besides the
Revenues of the King, Queen, Prince, Duke of York, and the whole estates of
all such as take up Arms against them, besides free Quarter, and Soldiers yet
unpaid. His Majesty on the other side, driven away with a few Attendants, not
having among them so many Swords and Pistols as these had Canons, wanting both
Money, Horses, and Ammunition, only what he received from the piety of some
believing Subjects, (whose ears were Pamphlet-proofe against all defamations,
and scandals cast upon sacred Majesty) finding slender Provision in his own
Dominions; and that stopped or seized which came from foreign parts: No
Shipping, but what he purchased with the precious and extreme hazard of his few
(but Valiant) Subjects: No Arms, but what he gained by the courageous venture
of his own neglected Life, the Subject of our continual Prayers: Yet has God
covered his head in the day of battle, and blessed him with such success, that
he is (by the Divine Providence) become a great It is the desire of our souls,
that his Majesty were master of his own passions, and then of all the three
kingdoms. And we do not doubt of both these, if God would once please to
rescue his sacred Person out of your hands, in the mean time, we will not cease
to pray, that God would give him the great evidences of his external love to
great ones, that is to say, a wealthy family, solid honor, and a sure
posterity, yea, and that his soul may be bound in the bundle of life, with the
Lord his God, while the soul of his, and our adversaries be by God cast out, as
out of the middle of a sling: Surely God is just, and the misleaders houses
have been as the moth, or as the lodge, that the watchman makes. Job 27.18.
Master of the Field, and almost able to maintain fight with his own Ships at
Sea.

The God of Heaven bless him, and prosper him, and make his days as the days
of Heaven, that being here the Faiths Defender, he may still be defended by the
object of that Faith.

Nor is the To your providentiall observations, I say thus, Sir, Surely were
not profaneness, and blasphemies as toys, and trifles among you, you durst
not speak, much less print such blasphemies as these, such language, as indeed
befits heathens, rather then Christians. Solomon says Eccle. 9.2.3. That all
things come alike to all, and the same condition (in regard of outward things)
is to the just, as to the wicked: as is the good, so is the sinner, he that
swears, as he that fears an oath. On all this, this Gentleman concludes
presently that, which Solomon gave his heart to know, and could not comprehend,
verse. 1. This Gentleman concludes, 1 That Master Hampden was punished. 2 Thus,
and in this manner. 3 For this, and this: Though you dare deal thus boldly,
with the secrets of humane majesty, yet if you presume so with the divine, Look
for your reward, and be sure the damnation does not sleep of those, which like
bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of things, and men
they know not. But to the particulars (reader) the reproach which he would cast
upon that honorable man Master Hampden, hear the truth of: Master Hampden (as
many other godly, and gallant patriots) stood against shipmoney, and such
things, as being (for so indeed they were) against law and liberty of the
subject, denying to pay those things which indeed ought not to have been
demanded: here-hence, a suite is commenced against the said Master Hampden, a
suite in his Majesty's name for the things aforesaid, wherein he endeavored
legally to defend himself, and with himself, us, ours, and the kingdom:
choosing rather to suffer imprisonment, etc, then to do act, either against
conscience, within which is and will be, index, judex, carnifex, or law, without
which ought to be to every good subject sicut murus aheneus as a sure defense.
Sir, had his Majesty had about him such as Master Hampden was, and would have
pleased to have given ear unto them, (which we do not desire to doubt his
gracious disposition in) he would have spoken to our Sovereign words of truth,
and soberness, which would have been as so many precious preservatives against
precipices; but the Court was then, as it is now, full of pestilent
sycophantisme (more the pity) wherein I believe your reader will allow you
none of the least shar^; Sir, I must tell you many bless God for those few,
such as this Gentleman was, and what aspersion you cast on him, you will never
keep from recoyling in your own face.
providentiall hand of God more visible in prospering him then in punishing his
Enemies, whose ruins may remain as Sea-marks to us, and Pyramids of Gods
Power, whereof a touch:

Sir John Hotham, then Governor of Hull, who first defied and dared his
Sovereign to his face, what is become of him? How stands he a Mark betwixt
two dangers, having nothing left him but guilt enough to make him capable of a
desperate Fortune?

Master Hampden, that first waged Law, and then War against his own natural
Prince, has not he (since these unhappy troubles began) bin first punished
with the loss of children; nay, visited to the third Generation, to the
weakening (if not ruining) of his Family, and then with the loss of his own
life, in the same place where he first took up Arms against his gracious
Sovereign? was it not remarkable, that the Lord The Lord Brook is the next
man you bark at, and he is dead, (more the pity had it otherwise pleased our
good God) had he lived he would have made an excellent instrument of
reformation indeed. But he took exception against that clause in the Litergy,
From sudden death, good Lord deliver us; if he did so, it is answerable in the
fathers language, Nulla subita mors piis, so Saint Augustine, there is no
sudden death to the godly. I believe that noble Lord was better prepared for
that which God was pleased to call him to, even that day he died, I mean death
it self, how sudainly soever it might seem to you to come, then you ever were
while you studied the writing of this book; He that is a mortified, and yet
mortifying Christian seeks to dye daily, and desires to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, which is best. Those that make their covenant with death, and
their agreement with hell, whose only preparation for death is by endeavoring
to forget it, to these men death is the terrible of terribles, but the
righteous is bold as a lion, and is persuaded that neither life nor death, etc.
shall be able to separate him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord. But he was slain out of a Cathedral: Sir, I do not wonder that any
friend of reformation should be killed thence, they would kill reformation it
self, were it in their power: and this that you allege, Sir, is one of the
least of their sins: Alas the Bishops, and the Cathedralls have killed
thousands of souls, here they killed the body indeed, but they could go no
further, you set a Character upon that honored Lord, (though against your will)
which will not be forgotten, and indeed the memory of the just must be blessed.
You give him (as Caiaphas) an excellent Epitaph. Deo et Ecclesiae cecidit hic,
My Lord Brook fell for God, and the Church. And Bishops are down already, what
then should the Cathedralls do up? Truly I do not know, unless to be a nest,
and cage of all unclean birds, a harbor for dumb dogs, proud prebends, non
residentiaries, and a crew of ale-swilling singing men, who with their boatus
strenuus, loud lowing, (as that learned man calls it) sing loud Abominations,
morning, evening, and midday, where the counsels of God should be opened to
his people, and converts gathered in to our Lord Jesus Christ. I have known
that city, and Cathedral, Sir, this many a year, and I believe there is not
less belonging to Michaels Church, Stow Church, the Chapel, and the Minster,
then 5000 l. per annum. And for the space of these 40 years there has hardly
been a preaching Minister in three of those four Churches, nor (...) ^mons
twice on the Lords day in any one. Michaels, and Stow were for the most part
not used at all, saving for their burial places, There were one Maxfield, and
one Maddox (blind readers both) stipendiaries successively to three of these
Churches, at I believe, not above twenty pound a year, and in Maxfields time
the Clark (John Bird by name) read the first lesson, and gave the responsalls.
Brook who so often excepted against that clause in the Lyturgie, (From sudden
death good Lord deliver us) was slain so suddenly? who was so severe an enemy
against Peace, should perish in the same War, he so encouraged? Who, so
bitterly inveighed against Episcopal Government, should be so shot dead out of
a Cathedral Church? who laboring to put out the left eye of established
Government, his left eye and life were both put out together?

How is Duke Hamilton (scarce warm in his new honor) taken in his own snare,
having entangled his Lord and Master in so many inconveniences?

How is Holland, whose livelihood was created by his Sovereigns favors,
branded with a double treachery, and like a Shittlecocke fallen at the first
return, and scarce able to raise himself by a sorry Declaration?

Is not Bristoll Fines (who at his Council of War condemned and executed
innocent blood) himself condemned (pleading innocence) at a Council of War,
from the mouth of his own General, though finding (perchance) more Mercy then
he either deserved, or showed? But that blood that cried to him for Mercy, will
cry to Heaven for vengeance.

And are not many more ripe for the same Judgment, whose notorious Crimes have
branded them for their respective Punishments?

How many of those If you would name us some of these men, and Ministers, it
would give much satisfaction, and make us to believe that you had not
undertaken the impudent lying, which is gone out through the land: I pray you
do not forget, Sir, what you are to make appear to us.

1 That ours are blood preaching Ministers.

2 That some are dead, and many sick of that bloody disease.

3 And that if any one chanced to be sick or dye of a Plurifie, therefore (for
this Gentleman can tell) God smote him, because he at any time seemed to
dislike a peace even as bad (yet blindly sought and sued for) as the Irish
cessation.


blood-preaching Ministers have died expectorating Blood, whilst others at this
time, laboring under the same Disease, can find no Art to promise a Recovery?
All whom I leave to possible Repentance, and pass over.

Cromwell, that professed Defacer of Churches (witness Peterborough and
Lincoln, etc.) Sure this Gentlemen was a Prebend, had some College lease, or
some such thing he is so zealous of Cathedralls. But let us see for answer, 1
It is but if fame speaks true, and Fama mendax, Aulicus will lie. 2 If the
thing were so, as he says, viz. watering the horses at the font, etc. I do not
know but that it may be easily answered, Necessity makes that lawful some
times which at other times is prohibited, Read, Sir, and be not rash, Mat.
12.3.4. 3. Reader, thou see the method these Malignants have in making
Parliament proceedings odious, viz. O, they pull down old Monuments, etc. I
believe wise men think that in Peterborough, Lincoln, and Canterbury too,
there were many things were not fit to stand, or else they were in a better
condition then many of their sister Churches. Gentlemen of your strain would
rail at Henry the eight, if he were now living, for pulling down the good old
Abbyes: But if you could see there are two most especial pieces of providence
herein, 1 Blind zeal set them up, I am sure, and you said such pulls them down
again: See God in this, here is a clear (...), a very retail between the sin,
and the punishment, Such zeal set 'em up, and such zeal pulled 'em down again. 2
Shall not these soldiers rise up in judgment against many of our great
Rabbis and Doctors, these droanes, and no conscienc'd Seniors daily saw, s^^
by, and cried up this Diana, and will you hear the reason? By this craft we
have our gain, Act. 19.25. These that would be thought to be some great ones,
came daily themselves (and caused others so to do) to offer near the holy table
(at my author reverently calls it) the blind whelps of an ignorant devotion in
sacrifice* of which sacrifice I may say as the Apostle, The things which the
heathen offer in sacrifice to their Idols, they offer them to Devils not to
God, 1 Cor. 10 19.20. or as God himself of the them sacrifices, Esa. 66.3. At
length come the soldiers in the spirit, (though not the wisdom and authority)
of Hezekiah, and they seeing this brazen serpent abused, break it all to
pieces, and call it Nehushtan, you are angry, Sir, they care not for it: and
for my part I must needs say Digitus Dei hic est, the finger of God is here.
Some other things there are here, which I cannot pass over silently. 1 Your
naming these Gentlemen so odly, Fines, that Cromwell, and plain Sands, etc. if
you be a Clergy man I must tell you, In vain seems he to be religious which
refrains not his tongue, Ian. 1.26. I pray you let us leave to be proud, the
Lord has pretty well begun to humble us, Ego et Rex meus, are strains too high
to hold long: This exalting of our selves above what is called God, and good,
is a footstep of Antichr^st, Brother amend this, I Will show you your portion
else, 1 Samuel 2.36. to cry out for a place in the Priesthood, that you may eat a
morsel of bread. 2 For the rising of Monuments, was it matter of coin he
rifled for? You speak language as if there had been something of gain there to
be found: No surely there was nothing of that nature there. Upon the sepulcher
of Semiramys, there was written, Si quis regum, etc. If any King want money, in
this tomb he shall find enough, that very tomb did Cyrus open, and there
found an inscription, Avare, tu, etc. thou covetous fool, see here an Emblem of
misery, and Mortality too, which should make thee, if thou were wise, to
regard no such trash. Then sure it was for conscience he did it: and if so,
Sir, I will tell you, The Monuments of the dead had as much need to be rifled,
and look into almost, as the monstrosityes of the living. A Church in London
(and that no mean one) had within these 12 months as many brasses (yet to be
seen) taken off the stones as came to a great number, whereon is written such
inscriptions as this; Of your charity pray for the souls of A. B. and C. D. his
Wife, etc. upon whose souls, and all Christian souls the Lord have mercy, etc.
Are these dead Poperyes sit to stand before the eyes of living Protestants: and
in a time of reformations? Saint Paul spies an altar, when time was, and at
Athens too (I pray you mark that Vniversityes, and Cathedralls too are not
without their gross Superstitions) directed: To the unknown God, Act. 17. he
cries it down then, and if the Church had been constituted, I doubt not but he
would have pulled it down too, and yet is blameless; but if we do any thing
the Kingdom must ring on it. The wolf on a time looks over the hedge, and sees
the shepherd killing a lamb out of the flock for his food? Yea (says he) he
may do this, but if I should do so, etc: you can apply it. 3 We desire you
should tell us where, when, and by whom any tortures were used on the tender
breasts of women; this takes I suppose like a ballot that's new among boys, and
ignorant people, 2 Samuel 16.2.3. Ziba's lie, and the purpose thereof, I am sure
you know, viz. to ingratiate himself, by disgracing a far honester man;
Remember (Reader) and take heed. It was David's sin, his rash credence, yea such
a sin, as upon which followed a worse then that, the bestowing of that upon a
knave, which was the inheritance of an honest man, yea, and mark how fast a lie
sticks, upon better information David mended it not. 2 Samuel 19.29. 4 That all
our reformers need reforming, we agree with you, and it is our daily suit at
Graces throne, that it may be so with them: For if any cannot rule his own
house, how shall he guide the Church of God. 1 Timothy 3.5. If then the reformers
need reforming, what do the deformers do? if the cleanest places in England
need washing, what do the foul holes, and filthy sinks do. This hogsty
Prelaticall has been swept but twice since the Conquest, and the Temple at
Jerusalem had three sweepings, in the three years of our Lords Ministry.
and Rifler of the Monuments of the dead, whose profane Troopers (if Fame has
not forgot to speak a Truth) watered their Horses at the Font, and fed them at
the Holy Table, that Cromwell.

Sands, whose sacrilegious Troopers committed such Barbarous insolences, with
his (at least connivence) in the Church of Canterbury, and used such inhumane
tortures on the tender breasts of women, to force confession of their hidden
goods, the golden subjects of their Robbery.

What can the first expect, and what reward the other has found, I neither
Prophecy nor judge. If these, and such as they, do fight for the Reformed
Religion, God deliver every good man both from them, and it: Cursed be their
wrath, for it is fierce, and their anger, for it is cruel.

These (and of such many) are they, that whilst they pretend a Reformation,
need first to be reformed.

Nor do I, in tasking this Army of such impious Barbarismes, excuse, or rather
not condemn the other, whereof no question, too great a number are as equally
profane; whilst altogether make up one body of wickedness, to bring a ruin
on this miserable Kingdom; for whose impieties His Majesty has so often
suffered.

I but His Majesty's Army (besides those looser sorts of people) consists of
numerous Papists, the utter enemies of true Religion.

To whom the King has sworn his Protection, from those he may require
assistance.

But, unto all his people, as well Your Logic is just like your Divinity, Sir,
I must be plain with you, an both stark naught, you say, To whom the King has
sworn his protection, from those he may require assistance. But unto the
Papists he has sworn Protection, therefore of the em he may requir assistance.
To your Minor. If you say, The King has sworn Protection to the Papists, so as
to the Protestants you speak ignorantly; not so as to the Protestants, not so
as to the Parliament. For the best subjects are to have the best Protection
Josh. 9.9.27. Gibeonites they may be, if you will, but no more; and if the King
of Israel should have craved the help of the Gibeonites against the Israelites,
sure it had been preposterous. 2 If you say, The King has sworn to protect
them, every way, you speak sadly: And it is as much as to say, The King has
sworn to protect them, which if they grow strong, and have not content, will
powder, and poison him; You remember, and we too, the King of France, And I
believe some of the assistants of his Majesty that now is the son, their near
friends, should have been the assassinates in the time of his Majesty that then
was King James his Royal Father. 3. If you say the King protects them other
way, then by the Law, its no Protection but a toleration, like that of Usury,
etc. in our Land; But the Papists themselves renounce our Laws: The last Jesuit
that dyed, did (in my hearing) at the Gallows rail upon them all, he said, They
were bloody, ill made, and worse kept, etc. Then it must be Toleration, but
that word will sound ill. Nay fourthly, If you say the King protecteth, or that
he ought to protect Papists any way, you speak Illegally; for, Whom the Law
protects not, the King either cannot, or ought not to protect, but the Law
protects not Papists, therefore the King ought not to protect them. Whom the
Law disarms, of them the King ought not to require an armed assistance, and
that against Parliament and Protestant party; but the Law disarms Papists,
therefore the King ought not to require an armed assistance of them. Again, I
consider his Majesty's Subjects, 1. As Men and Subjects, and so while they live
amongst us, doubtless they have, and ought to have a kind of protection, viz.
1. Quoad sanguinem, as to blood, no man may kill them. 2. Quoad jus and
possessionem, no man may rob them. But, 2. If you look on them as enemies to
Religion, and Papists, their portion is no more then, To be tributaries; To pay
so much an hour sleeping and waking; To hold themselves in their Ubi, their
place; To be incapable of some offices, and many other things, which other men
of the Protestants have, etc.
Papists as Protestants, he has sworn his Protection; therefore from all His
Subjects as well Papists as Protestants, he may require assistance.

Neither does he call in Papists, as Papists, to maintain Religion (as
himself has often manifested) but as Subjects to subdue, or at least qualify
Sedition.

The aid of the Subject, is either in his person, or in his purse, both are
requirable to the service of a Sovereign.

As to your case, Sir, I give you this answer, It cannot be but that offenses
will come, but woe unto them by whom they come; what necessity is there to use
defense, where there is no opposition? Your devilish counsel tells His Majesty,
That they are against him, which are indeed most of all for him: And hereby he
thinks himself straightened, to call about him those to help him, which indeed
will neither help him nor you, longer then they think you help to help on their
Design, which is to set Antichrist in his throne in England once again. The
case then is this, Let His Majesty please once to return to His great Counsel
again, Let Delinquents stand upon their own legs, Let Papists betake themselves
to their Tribute, Restraint, etc. And then see, Sir (if you be not wilfully
blind) what necessity will be of this sin, of calling in Papists, Rebels,
Forreiners, etc. As to your distinction, that they are called in, not to
maintain Religion, etc. Why? Your Religion, Sir, and that of Rome, will be
enough consistent. See Vertum: Roman: and you have the Jesuits judgment in it,
which I believe is of great authority with some of you. I tell you once again,
That the Protestant Religion at large (and that is it which you would have)
there went but a pair of Sheets between it and Popery, and such a Religion I
believe the Rebels and Recusants too will be easily persuaded to maintain. As
to that, that they are called in to subdue, or at least to qualify Sedition:
Truly, you remember me of the trouble in Israel, in Absaloms time, which when
it was composed, and the people of the Land begin to differ among themselves
again, 2 Samuel 20.1, etc. There was come thither one Sheba the son of Bichri, a
man of Jemini, a wicked man, and he blew the Trumpet, etc. and made a worse
sedition then there was before: Believe it, Sir, these Sheba's that you have
called in, when our division is at the height, and their time is come, will be
the first that will blow the Trumpet, and say, We have no part in David, etc.
we fought for the King, because we thought he would fight for the Pope,
otherwise we cannot be for him, unless he be against the power of Protestant
Religion. As to our using of evil instruments, I give two things in answer, 1.
Woe to that wicked Counsel which brings the good men of a Land into such bad
straits. 2. I am persuaded there are some, which put themselves into the
service of the Parliament, and are wicked, that they may rob and steal, and do
wickedly, and thereby (in the eyes of them which cannot see) asperse the Cause
and Parliament-side. One Captain was hanged not long since, who at his death
confessed and professed himself a Roman Catholic (I was a By-stander) and dyed
for plunder.
Put case His Majesty should use the assistance of none but Protestants; Tell
me, would you not be apt to cavil that he is favorable to the Papists;
neither willing to endanger their persons, nor endamage their purses; or, at
least, that they are reserved for a last blow?

Or, in case Papists should largely under-write to your Propositions, send in
Horses, Arms, or other provisions, would you not accept it, and for its sake
their persons too?

Are you so strict in your Preparations, as to Catechize every soldier? Or, to
examine, first, every Officers Religion? Or, having the proffer of a good
Popish, or debaucht Commander, tell me, should he be denied his Commission?

Remember Sir Arthur Ashton, whom his Majesty entertains by your Example.

These things indifferently considered, it will manifestly appear, that the
honest-minded vulgar are merely seduced, under the color of piety, to be so
impious, as by poisoning every action of their lawful Prince, to foster their
implicit Rebellion.

But in case, your side should prosper and prevail, what then? would then our
Miseries be at an end? Reason tells us; No, God keeps us from the experience:
Think you, that Government, (whether new, or reformed) which is set up by the
Sword, must not be maintained by the As to the maintaining of the government by
the sword, etc. And if so set up, it must be so preserved, etc I am sorry to
see That a Gentleman, a wise man (as you would make the world believe you are)
should wrap, and involve together so many, so gross, and so absurd ignorances;
I will but ask you, and the men of your side these questions: 1 Is the
Government of Christ's Church now to set down? Or the judgment to be executed
upon his adversaries, is it now to be written? See Psa. 149.9. to execute on
them the judgment written, etc. see the places whereto all our expositours
send us, as Deu. 7. And then I must tell you, you have told the world what a
Divine, and Text-man you are. 2 Do we dream of our Power, or of an arm of
flesh, to maintain the Government of the Church of our Lord, once recovered out
of the Devils hands? alas for you. 3 Dare we distrust the Lords blessing,
think you (we doing our utmost duty herein) both upon our King and us? You
render your self to me a mere carnal man: He who has promised to be with us
to the end of the world, To set his Kingdom in the midst among his enemies, To
tread down Satan shortly under our feet, To give a spirit of life to the two
dead witnesses, that great fear may come on them which see them, Rev. 11. Into
his hands, and protection we commend our poor endeavors, and let him do what
seems him good.
sword? And how can Peace and Plenty be consistent with perpetual Garrisons,
which must be maintained with a perpetual charge; besides the continual
excursions, and conniv'd-at injuries committed by Soldiers, judge you?

Or, put the case, this necessary Consequence could be avoided, think you the
ambition of some new Statesmen accustomed to such Arbitrary, and necessitated
power, on the one side, and the remaining loyalty of his Majesty's
dis-inherited Subjects, watching all opportunities to right their injured
Sovereign, and themselves, on the other side, would not raise perpetual
tempests in this Kingdom?

Or, if such an (almost) unpreventible evil should not ensue, think you such
swarms of Sectaries sweat for nothing? Are their You speak; ignorantly and
poorly, so you think, and write; Sectaries purses? Alas Sir, God help our
Treasuries, if we spent out of their Coffers: These are the men hinder us, you
are deceived. There is about London one (and I believe he is not alone)
Jesuit, in the Sect of the Anabaptists, He labors, sweats, confers, preaches,
defends that point with all his might, And why? because he knows that all the
Disciples he gets into that way, are all clearly withdrawn from the Parliament:
Their Tenent is, you know (if you know any thing) that Christ can defend his
Kingdom without war, and their usual quotation that of our Savior to Peter,
He that takes the sword shall perish thereby.
purses so apt to bleed to no end? Will not their costs, and pains expect, at
least a congratulatory connivence in the freedom of their consciences? Or,
will their swords, now in the strong possession of so great a multitude, know
the way into their quiet Scabbards, without the expected Liberty of their
Religions? And, can that Liberty produce any thing but an established Disorder?
And is not disorder the mother of Anarchie? and that of Ruin?

Open then your eyes, closed with crasse, and wilful blindness, and consider,
and prevent that, which your continued Disobedience will unavoydably repent too
late.

But, the truth is, They are all Papists, by your Brand; that comply not in
this action with you: Admit it were so; Are not Papists as tolerable for his
Majesty, as Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatists, Atheists, Antinomians,
Turks, and indeed all Religions and Factions, nay, Papists too, for his
Subjects? These of his Majesty's side come freely, out of their Allegiance, as
Subjects: Yours are preached in, coming out of obstinacy, as Rebels: They at
their own charges proportionable to their Abilities; These like Judas, selling
their Sovereigns Blood for ill-paid wages: Yet, both sides pretend a Quarrel
for the true Protestant Religion.

Good God! What a monstrous Religion is this, that seeks protection from the
Implacable opposition of her two Champions!

His Majesty protests to maintain it: The two Houses Protest to maintain it:
O, for an Oedipus to read this Riddle!

His Majesty adds one Clause more: wherein if the other Party would agree, the
work will be at an end, which is:

According to the established Constitutions, by Oath You may blush to mention
such a word, was it not enough for your selves to forswear, lie, etc. But you
must seek to be guilty of other men's sins also? your oath Et cetera, was it not
a fine one? And that I may say no more, borresco referens, God is (to the
everlasting shame of that party) now showing what the head of that faction
durst do, and did do, in the great Oath you mention, of which the world will
ere long receive enough of satisfaction in his condemnation, and the truths
vindication.
taken by him at his Coronation; And there the two Houses leave him contending
for a yet undetermined Alteration.

And, for my part, I dare not conceive such evil of the Lords Anointed, and
my gracious Sovereign, as to fear him perjured.

Has not his Majesty, in the presence of that God, by whom he reigns,
imprecated the Curse of Heaven on him and his Royal Posterity, ( Sub Sigillo
sacrament. too) if He, to his utmost, maintain not the true Protestant
Religion exercised in that blessed Queens days, and propagated by the blood
of so many glorious Martyrs (at which time God blessed this Island in so high a
measure) if he preserve not the just Privileges of Parliament, and the Liberty
of the Subject?

Nay, more, did not His Majesty so promise the severe execution of the Statute
against all Recusants, that if he failed, he desired not the aid of his good
Subjects?

What inferior person would not think his Reputation wronged, not to take up
confidence upon such terrible terms? What notorious evil has his Majesty
perpetrated to quench the sparkles of a Common Charity?

Consider, O, Consider; He acts his part before the King of Kings, whose eye is
more especially upon Him; He acts his part before his fellow Princes, to whom
he has declared this his Imprecation; He acts his part before his Subjects,
whose stricter hand weighs his pious words with too unequal Balances.

Were he the acknowledger of no God, yet the Princes of the earth, (if guilty
of such a Perjury) would abhor him. Or, were all the Princes of the earth,
blind, deaf, or partial, would not he think his Crown a burden to be worn
upon his Perjured brow before his own abused people? Or, (having renounced his
Subjects aid, upon his fail) could he expect that loyalty, which now he wants
upon a mere suspicion?

But: He is a Prince, H^ is our dread Soveragin, never the better (I must tell
you, Sir) for such as your commendation, if the old rule be true which is A
pe^versis vituperari decorum est. It is ill to be commended of wicked men: We
desire that our King may be inferior to none of the Kings of Israel in
heavenly graces, no not Josiah, Hezekiah, To none of the Kings of England in
earthly glory, no not Henry the 7. in riches, nor Henry the 8. in works of
reformation, the evil counsels that are about him being taken from his
throne, we doubt nor the prosperity thereof. The pulling of feathers from our
garments to make pillows, and put under the elbows, is both the work, and
emblem of a parasite, There were certain familyes in Africa (says my author)
which if they did but only commend trees, beasts, or children for the most part
they never did thrive after it, Gell. lib. 9. cap. 4. God bless his Majesty,
and his from amongst ill tongues.
whom God has crowned with graces above his fellows, A Prince, whom, for his
Piety, few Ages could parallel.

What Vices of the times have branded his Repute? His Youth, high diet,
strength of body, and Sovereign Power might have inclined, and warpt him to
luxurious vanity, as well as other Monarchs, whose effeminacies have enerved the
strength of their declining Kingdoms; How many would have held it a
Preferment, to be Attorney to his Royal Lust, or Secretary to his Bosom
Sin? Yet, he remains a president of unblemisht Chastity.

He might have pleased and pampered up his wanton Palate with the choice of
Curious wives, to lighten Cares which wait upon the Regal Diadem; Yet, he
continues the pattern of a chaste Sobriety: He might have magnified his Mercy,
and sold his Justice, to reward a Service, in pardoning offenses (committed by
those of near relation) yet He abides the example of inexorable Justice.

These and many other eminent Graces, and illustrious Virtues can claim no
Birth from Flesh and blood; especially, in those, whose pupillages are
strangers to Correction; Nor, is it safe Divinity, to acknowledge such high
Gifts, from any hand, but Heaven.

Which, being so, my Conscience, and Religion tells me, that Almighty God, (who
is all perfection) will not leave a work so forward so imperfect; but, will,
from day to day, still add and add to his transcendent Virtues, till he
appear the Glory of the World; and after many years be crowned in the World
of Glory.

Martial. lib. 8. Ep. 66. Rerum prima salus, and una Caesar.


Phil. 3.8. Rerum prima salus, and una Christus.


Postscript to the Reader.
NOw thou have heard the Reader, thou have read these notes upon this
unanswerable piece, as they are pleased to style it, I appeal to thee, whether
this be not Scripture full of corruption and language, which is nothing but
Sophistry: do not forget that the Devil quotes Scripture, but our Savior
cites it right, Mat. 4.3, 4. etc. He is the Jew that is one inwardly, Romans
2.29. And, not he that praises himself is allowed, but he whom the Lord
praises, 2 Cor. 10.18.
Harmony of Scriptures, without Corruption; and the Language of Reason, without
Sophistry.

Thou have not only heard Divine The Precepts and Examples too, how impertinent
thou have seen Reader, before, be not cozened with a blind confidence;
Remember Solomon's rule, Prove. 14.15. The fool believes every thing, but the
prudent will consider his steps.
Precepts, but those Precepts backed with holy Examples: Neither those out of
the Old Testament alone, but likewise out of the New. Being now no Matter left
for thy Exceptions, prevaricate no longer with thy own soul: And, in the fear
of God, I now adjure thee once again, as thou will answer before the Tribunal
at the dreadful and terrible day; that thou faithfully examine, and ponder the
plain Texts which thou have read, and yielding due obedience to them, stop
thine ears against all sinister expositions; and remember, that historical
Your rule for the exposition of Scripture is a fine one, are you not ashamed of
it?
Scripture will admit no allegorical interpretations. If any thing in this
Treatise, shall deserve thy Your answer you have had plainly, Sir, by direct
Scripture, and those your own too, delivered from the pestilent perverting, as
is to see to all men, not wilfully blinded. Now therefore I retort your
admiration, and what you say to the Reader, I say to you, As you will answer
before Gods Tribunal, be not ashamed to vomit up your poison you have given
and taken, and receive this Antidote, Exodus 21.33. If a man shall open a well,
or dig a pit, and not cover it again, the owner of the pit, etc. Read and
apply with trembling; There was a Bird in those Countries, named Iustus,
because she always hid her Excrements, which she knew to be exceeding
hurtful to men, Phot. in Biblio. I would you would get a Paddle and cover your
dung.
Answer, do it punctually, briefly, plainly, and with meekness; If, by direct
Scripture, thou can (without wrestling) refute my Error, thou shall reform,
and save thy Brother; If not, recant thine, and hold it no dishonor to take
that shame to thy self, which brings Glory to thy God.

1 PET. 3.13. Be always ready to give an answer to every one that asks you a
reason, with meekness and fear.


If the sons of Sion get advantage hereby to establish them in the present
truth, I have enough; And let Christ the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords have
honor in this; That great is truth and will prevail.
Deo Trin-uni gloria.
There arose certain of the Synagogue, which are called Libertines, but they
were not able to resist the wisdom of the Spirit by the which he spoke, Act.
6.9, 10.
FINIS.

