A brief and plain DISCVSSION Of that Question which of late has troubled many
tender CONSCIENCES;

NAMELY, Whether it be lawful to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in
those Congregations where there is a mixture of some Ignorant or Profane
Persons.

Tit. 1.15. To the pure all things are pure.

1 Cor, 11.28. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1652.

Whether it be lawful to receive the Sacrament in those Congregations where
there is a mixture of some that are Ignorant or Scandalous.
THat the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a most sacred Ordinance, and ought
to be used in a sacred manner; that it ought not to be polluted by profane
persons, and such as come altogether unworthily and unpreparedly, all will
easily grant; That such as these, ought to be kept back and not to be admitted,
yea that every one in his place and order, according to that power which God
has given him, ought to use his best endeavor to keep such back, will not be
denied by any that desire this holy ordinance may be preserved in its purity:
But if for want of right Discipline (which is yet wanting in most Congregations
of the Kingdom) or want of right Exercise of this Discipline, some Unvvorthy
ones do thrust in and mix themselves with others in the use of this Ordinance,
whether it be lawful for a worthy receiver to join himself with them is the
question. And this is such a thing as has much troubled the minds of many
piously affected, who though they excedingly desire to partake of this
Ordinance, yet dare not do it, where there is such a mixture.

That it is not unlawful to receive the sacrament in such Congregations, where
there is a mixture of some that are Ignorant or Scandalous may appear by these
reasons following.

Argu. 1. Whatsoever Duty we are called unto by a Clear command from the word,
we ought not to forbear the performance of it, unless we have as clear a
command to the contrary: But we have a clear command to do this (that is to
receive the Lords Supper in remembrance of Christ's death) and hereby to show
forth the Lords death till he come, etc. No such clear command to call us from
it when there is a mixture of Unworthy ones: therefore we are bound not to
forbear it. If there be any such clear command to the contrary, let it be
showed. The Apostle, when he delivers the doctrine of the Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11
23. when he shows the danger of coming Unworthily, and calls upon men to
Examine themselves before they come, v. 27.28. had fair occasion likewise to
have showed the danger of joining with others that came unworthily; yea it had
been necessary for him to have done so, when there were some of the Corinthians
that had divisions and contentions among themselves, v. 18. others that came
drunken, to the sacrament v. 21. others that despised the Church of God, v. 22.
yet he does no where charge them not to join with these, in the use of this
Ordinance, but only enjoynes every man to examine himself, and so to eat of
the Bread, and drink of the Cup.

As for those places that are alleged by some to show the unlawfulness of
joining in mixed congregations, in answer to them afterward, it shall be
plainly demonstrated, that all of them fall far short of holding forth any
such clear command for the Forbearance, as those beforementioned do for the
Performance of the duty.

Argu. 2. If it be unlawful for a worthy receiver to join with those that come
unworthily, it is because he does some way com^unicate with them in their sin.

But he that comes rightly prepared does no way communicate with the sin of the
unprepared, so he may lawfully come.

If the worthy receiver does communicate with the sin of the unworthy, it is
either because he communicates with such in the outward action, or in the
inward affection.

For the inward affection he has no communion with them that way at all; the
affections of the unworthy and worthy being altogether of a differing nature.
The one comes with a heart humbled for sin; the other with a heart hardened in
sin: the one comes with a heart hungring after Christ and his righteousness;
the other without any sense of the need of him, or any true desire after him.

The one comes with a serious purpose to forsake all sin: the other with a
purpose to continue in sin, or at least without any serious or settled
resolution to forsake all sin.

For the outward action wherein both do communicate, that it is in it self
good, being the very thing which Christ himself requires, namely to receive
sacramental Bread and Wine in remembrance of his death and passion: and would
be good in him that comes unworthily, if his inward affections were right. As
the outward action of hearing the word, and joining in prayer, and calling upon
God, is good when done by a wicked man; so is the outward action of receiving
the Sacrament: The evil that accompanies these actions is want of doing them
in a right manner.

2. In all actual sins man's will is principium actionis, the principal cause
of the act, how then can a man be guilty of that sin which another man commits,
wherein his will has no concurrence?

3. If the worthy receiver should be accessory to the sin of the unworthy, then
the unworthy should pollute the Ordinance of God, not only to himself, but to
others: but this he does not, for To the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1 15.

Object. But is there nothing else required to free us from being accessory to
the scandalous evils of such as come unworthily to the sacrament, but only
self-preparation?

Answ. Yet: It is our duty to admonish such, if their scandals be known to us,
and we have opportunity to do it, Mat. 18.15.

2. If they regard not our private admonition, it is our duty to do it before
one or two witnesses, v. 16.

3. If they, will not yet hear, it is our duty to acquaint the churchofficers
with it, if they be such as are fit and willing to yield any help, v. 17.

4. If by none of these means unworthy ones can be kept back, it is our duty
to mourn and be humbled before God, earnestly seeking for redress of this evil,
1 Cor. 5.2. If we have used our best endeavor for performance of these things,
we shall not be involved in the guilt of such as come unworthily to the
sacrament.

Arg. 3. If be it unlawful to receive the Sacrament with those who come
unworthily; then it is unlawful to do this with any such, or with those whom
we know to be such: if with any such, then we must not join in receiving with
those Hypocrites, from whom scarce any congregation is free.

If it be unlawful only to receive with those whom we know to be such, then
our Savior would not have joined with Judas (whom he knew to be a thief and a
traitor) in eating the Passover (for that was a sacrament of the same nature,
and serving to the same end, with this of the Lords Supper.)

Ob Christ knew Judas to be such an one, by his divine knowledge; as he was God
only, and not as he was Man.

Ans. By what knowledge soever he knew him to be such, yet if by his presence
he had polluted the Ordinance, not only to himself, but to others, he would not
have permitted him to join in it: for there was no care wanting in him to
preserve the purity of Gods ordinances.

2. Though the other Disciples knew not that Judas was a Traitor before they
came to eat the Passover, yet in the time of eating it they knew it: for John
having asked Christ who it was that should betray him, he answered, he it is to
whom I shall give a sopp when I have dipped it, and having dipped the sopp, he
gave it unto Judas. John 11.25, 26.

3. If my knowledge of another man's Unworthiness should hinder me from joining
with him, then when I know and am convinced of the unworthiness of any that
comes, though his sin be such as will not call for a Church-censure, yet I must
forbear: or if it be of a scandalous nature (though I have neither time nor
opportunity of acquainting the Church with it, so as he may be kept back) yet I
am debarred from coming.

Suppose a Christian intending to receive the sacrament, should have certain
knowledge of his neighbors drunkenness or uncleaness the night or morning
before he were to come (so as he had no opportunity either of admonishing him
or acquainting the Church with it) is he therefore bound to deprive himself of
the benefit of partaking of the sacrament, because another comes whom he
knows to be unworthy: does his bare knowledge of another man's sin involve him
in the guilt of it?

It is not in the power of any private person to keep away such as are
unworthy, if therefore he shall do that which belongs to him (namely admonish
them, or acquaint the Church Officers with it having opportunity, or be
humbled and mourn for it if no good can be done) he acquits himself of the
guilt of such as come unworthily. His Sin is not, the joining with such in
receiving the sacrament, but the not performing of those other duties which God
requires of him.

Arg. 4. If the presence of wicked men does pollute the sacrament to those that
join with them in receiving it, then it does pollute other Ordinances also to
those that join with them in partaking of them, and so it should be unlawful
to hear the word, and call upon the name of God in those Congregations where
wicked men are present.

The reason is, because we have external communion with them in these actions
of worship, as well as receiving the sacrament: and in none of these we have
any internal communion at all with them, but the outward actions being good,
it cannot be evil to have communion with them in these (as has been showed.)

Oh. But in the use of the sacraments there is a nearer and higher degree of
communion than in other ordinances, these being the nearest and strongest bonds
of union and communion.

Ans: Gradus non variat speciem. This is still but a communion of the same kind
and nature, namely external: and so we have but a greater degree of outward
communion, no inward at all, and if it be sinful to have communion with them
in the outward action in this Ordinance, it is likewise sinful (though not so
great a sin) to communicate with them in the outward act in other ordinances.

Can we think that Hezekiah and Josiah should have been so much commended for
celebrating those famous Passovers in their time, wherein there was such a
mixture of many who were not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.19. when Judah was universally corrupted with false
priesthood, idolatry, images, groves, etc. if this mixture had polluted the
worship to the people of God who came rightly prepared to the exercise of it?
yea, can we think that when some amongst the Corinthians caused schisms and
contentions, some that went to law with their brethren before heathen judges,
some that did eat and drink with infidels at the tables of idols, some that
denied the doctrine of the Resurrection, some that came distempered to the
Lords Supper, that the Apostle would not have given direct charge to the
Corinthians to have separated from these in receiving the Sacrament, if their
presence had polluted the Ordinance to all the rest?

Can we think that the Lord would have suffered idolaters, fornicators,
tempters of Christ, murmurers to have eaten the same spiritual meat, and drink
the same spiritual drink with his people in the wilderness, if they bad
defiled these things not only to themselves but to others?

Arg. 5. If the presence of wicked men does pollute the Sacrament to those who
come rightly prepared, then the efficacy, benefit, fruit and comfort of Gods
ordinances should depend not only upon his institution, blessing, the influence
of his Spirit, and right qualification of those who partake of them, but also
upon the qualification and disposition of all those who join with them in the
use of them: which would make the people of God be upon great uncertainties,
when they should receive benefit by his Ordinances, and bereave them of a great
part of that comfort which they should reap by them, because they should always
be in suspense whether some unworthy ones did not join with them in the use of
them: yea it would as it were confine the comfort and virtue of them to the
qualities and tempers of men.

We have a sure word that tells us, that every one who does examine himself a
right, may come and eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup: and in doing so
he shall eat the body, and drink the blood of Christ, that is, be made partaker
of the benefit or Christ's death and suffering; and this is that which must be
the ground of our comfort in coming to the Sacrament, and of our assurance
that we shall receive good by it, and not the consideration of the quality and
condition of those that ioyn with us in receiving; lest hereby we do in part
suspend the power of Gods ordinance upon the worthiness of men.

Ob. But we ought to partake of pure Ordinances.

Ans. So we may, though some impure ones join with us in the use of them. We
ought to account the ordinances pure, if for the substance of them they be
administered according to the pure and holy rule of the word. As in the hearing
of the word we may be said to partak of a pure ordinance, if pure and sound
doctrine be taught, if there be such an explication and application of the
Scripture, as is agreeable to the mind of the Spirit speaking in Scripture,
though some ioin with us in hearing whose hearts are like to the highway side,
or the stony ground, or thorny ground: so in receiving the Sacrament we may be
said to partake of a pure ordinance, if coming rightly prepared it be
administered unto us for matter and manner according to Christ's institution, if
there be the same outward elements, if these be blessed and consecrated by such
words of Scripture, such holy prayers and supplications, as Christ has
appointed, if it be administered to such as have received the seal of Baptism,
make outward profession of Christianity, though there be some amongst them
whose lives and conversations be not answerable to this profession.

Ob. But if scandalous persons coming to the Sacrament do not pollute the
Ordinance, then they need not be kept away: then what use of Church Discipline?

Ans. Though they do not pollute it to others, they pollute it to themselves,
and their presence is offensive to others (especially to weak ones) who are
grieved and troubled at it; therefore they ought to be kept away. But though
this ought to be done, yet it must be done in an orderly way, and by those to
whom God has committed the power of exercising Church censures: which not
being committed into the hands of every private Christian (at least any single
person) such may lawfully come to the Sacraments, though unworthie ones be not
kept a way: and if he comes rightly prepared, may come with assurance of
receiving benefit by it, when for matter and manner it is administered according
to Christ's institution.

Now it follows that answer be given to such Scriptures and Reasons as are
brought by some to prove the unlawfulness of receiving the Sacrament in mixed
Congregrtions.

Ob. 1.1. Cor. 10.17. We that are many are one bread and one body, becaues we
are all partakers of one bread. Hence this argument is gathered.

It is unlawful for us to make ourselves one Body with wicked men: But by
partaking of the same bread with them we make our selves one Body with them,
for the Apostle says, that we are all one Body, because we partake of one
Bread.

Ans. This place does not prove that all who partake of one bread, are thereby
made one body, but only the faithful true believers, such as receive in the
right manner, for the Apost. does not say all that partake of one bread, but we
that are many are one body, because we all partake of one bread, meaning
himself, and others that were like himself, namely true believers. And that
this must needs be the meaning, appears by these reasons.

1. The same (We) must be here meant which was spoken of in the former verse
where he says, The bread which we eat, is the communion of the body of Christ:
now wicked men have no spiritual communion with the body of Christ, but only
the faithful: Neither have they any further communion with the faithful, than
they have with Christ, namely a communion only external, therefore they are
not made one body with them.

2. The one body which the Apost. speaks of in this verse is the mystical
body, that body whereof Christ is the head, of which body wicked men are no
parts.

3. All those who are united together as parts of this body, partake of one and
the same Spirit, which is the bond of this Union. There is one body and one
Spirit. Ephesians. 4.4. But wicked men do not partake of the same Spirit with the
faitfull (this being the Spirit of adoption and sanctification, appropriated
only to the sons of God, Gal. 4.6.) therefore they can have no spiritual or
internal communion with them; An external they may have, and such have all
hypocrites, with Christ himself, when they receive the sacrament, for they
partake of that bread and wine which are signs of the body and blood of
Christ, and therefore have sacramental relation to him.

Ob. 2. A principal place is that of the Apost. 1. Cor. 5.11. If any that is
called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such an one eat not; this is
brought to prove that we must not join with scandalous persons in receiving the
sacrament, because then we must eat with them.

Ans. 1. This cannot be understood of all kind of eating, for then we must
never eat with them at ordinaries, at great men's tables, or any places of
public meetings, which cannot possibly beavoided.

2 This eating in scripture phrase usually signifies freindly socice and
familiarity. Thus the Psalmist says, My familiar friend in whom I trusted
which did eat of my bread, etc. Psalm. 41.6.

And this our Savior applies to Judas, whom he had chosen to be one of his
disciples, and with whom he had daily familarity, Job. 13.18. thus David
advises Solomon, that the sons of Barzillai should be amongst them that did
eat bread at his table, that is, among the number of his familiar friends,
because they came to meet him when he fled from Absolon. 1. King. 2.7. thus it
is said, that many shall come from the East and West, and sit at table with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, that is, shall have nearest
familiarity with them. Luke 13.28, 29.

3. That in this place, eating must be so, understood, appears, because eating
mentioned in this place is the same with (...) v. 9, keeping company, or being
mingled with them, which must needs be understood of familiar society, because
he ads in the next verse, that if we will not keep company at all with such, we
must go out of the world.

Ob. But the argument is further carried on and thus urged; if we must have no
civil society and familiarity with wicked, much less must we have religious
society with them, which is the nearest and most intimate of all.

Ans. This argument follows not; for the case is altogether unlike, as
appears in these two particulars.

1. Religious society is indeed the nearest and most intimate of all, betwixt
those who are truly religious, but not so betwixt them and wicked men in
religious duties, though they join in the same outward action yet they have no
inward society or communion with them, there is no mingling of affections with
them, as it is with those who join in civil society and familiarity; yea their
affections are altogether disagreeing one from another (as has been showed)
and their society merely external; they have no other kind of communion with
them, than wicked have with Christ, when they partake of the outward signs of
his body and blood.

2. Civil society is elective and voluntary, in a man's own free choice; but
this in receiving the sacrament is not such, for it is a necessary duty to
receive the sacrament, this is enjoined as a necessary means to keep a
thankful memorial of Christ's death. As it is necessary to hear the word and
to pray, so it is necessary to receive the sacrament; we have a command to do
this, and must not neglect it; And when wicked men do thrust themselves in, and
join with us in the action, it is altogether contrary to our minds and wills. A
man has liberty to choose those companions whom he will familiarly converse
withal, but many times he has not liberty to choose his own company in
receiving the sacrament: so that this differs from civil society both in
regard of intimacy and liberty, which that is accompanied withal, but this not
so.

Ob. 1. Cor. 5.6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Hence it is
gathered, that we shall be infected with the guilt of wicked men, if we join
with them in receiving of the sacrament, because in that action we make our
selves one lump with them.

Ans. The Apostle directs this speech, not to any particular Christian, but to
the whole Church of Corinth, and his scope is not to call off any Christian
from receiving the Sacrament, though some unworthy ones did join in the action,
but to stir up the Church of Corinth to exercise the Church censure against
the incestuous Corinthain by showing the danger which his example and company
might bring to others if he went unpunished, ^amely, embolden them to the
committing of the same or other like sins: or if this sin went uncensured, it
might involve the whole congregation in the guilt of it, because they did not
what they might and what they ought to do against it.

2. The argument which the Apostle here uses is a similitude, now similitudes
do not hold in all things, and therefore must not be stretched beyond their due
bounds. Leaven is a natural cause of souring the lump, and therefore works
certainly and constantly if no hindrance comes in ^he way. Scandalous sins are
not natural but moral causes of infection, and therefore work not necessarily
but contingently, namely where there is a fit disposition to receive their
impression. There is a disposition in some or other in a congregation fit to
receive infection from the example of a scandalous sinner that goes uncensured,
and a readiness to be emboldned by it: but there is no such danger in a worthy
receiver to receive infection, because he is of another quality and
disposition: and this example does not encourage such an one to ill, but rather
afflict and grieve him.

The Gospel is compared to leaven Mat. 13. and it is a moral cause of
conveying its sweetness, namely of working saving grace in the hearts of the
hearers, but it does not this in all, or the greatest part, but only in those,
whose hearts God is pleased to fit and dispose for the right receiving of it.

3. As scandalous sins are leaven, so is hypocrisy. Our Savior bids his
Disciples take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy. Luke
12.1. if therefore the whole lump (the whole congregation) must needs be
leavened by the presence of some wicked men, it must be leavend by the
hypocrisy of others, and so we shall be free in no Congregation. All therefore
that this place proves, is, that it is the duty of every Church and
Congregation, to use the best means they are able that scandalous sinners may
be censured, lest their example and presence prove hurtful to others, but it
proves not that it is unlawful to join with others in the use of Gods
ordinances, in such actions as are in themselves good, and which God requires.

Ob. 4.2. Cor. 6.14, 15. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, has light with darkness? etc. so we must not communicate with
wicked men.

Ans. The thing which the Apostle here condemns in the Corinthians, is the
having fellowship with idolaters at feasts in their Idol Temples, eating those
things which had been sanctified to Idols; or joining with heathens and
infidels in marriage society. Now what a wide, and far-fetcht consequence is
this? Christians must not have fellowship with Idolaters and heathens at their
idol tables, they must have no marriage society with them (which is the nearest
society of all) therefore they must not have society with such as profess
Christianity in the use of the Sacraments; we must have no fellowship with
wicked men in the wicked works of darkness, will it follow therefore that we
must have no fellowship with good men in good actions, because some wicked ones
are mixed amongst them? may we not join with wicked men in the use of Gods
ordinances, as hearing the word, prayer? etc. (for if this argument has any
force, it reaches to other ordinances as well as the Sacrament, to exclude us
from having felllowship with them in my of them) for what fellowship has
righteousness?

Ob. 5. Come out from among them, and touch no unclean things, 2. Cor. 6.17. Go
out of her my people that you be not partakers of her sins, Rev. 18 4. Hence
some collect, that we must come out from those congregations where wicked men
are admitted.

Ans. These collections are as wide and weak as the former, we must touch no
unclean thing, we must join with no wicked men in wicked actions, does it
therefore follow that we must not join with them in good actions? we must come
out from Babell which is the mother of fornications, which teaches the
doctrine of Devils, which practices all manner of idolatrous worship, which
makes herself drunk with the blood of the Saints, does it therefore follow that
we must come out from Christian congregations, where the word is purely and
soundly taught, and the sacraments (for the substance of them) administered
according to Christ's institution.

4. He that bade his people come out of Babel, bade them not come out of
Pergamy and Thyatira, where there were as great corruption tolerated (if not
greater) than are to be found in many of our Congregations. We may wonder that
such as seem not to own separatists and their way, should yet plow, with their
heyfer, bringing the very same Scripture, and applying them the very same way,
and to the very same ends that they have done, when as satisfying answers have
been given to these long since by many worthy men: and that mist of darkness
which some sought to raise from them, has been so fully dispelled and
scattered, and that again and again.

To conclude, let every sober-minded Chiristian seriously consider whether this
separating from the Sacraments in all our congregations, do not open a direct
way to the infringing and violating those great Gospell-rules whereby we are
tied to the preserving of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and
maintaining Christian love and fellowship one with another, (which the
scripture holds forth ten times more clearly, than it does any point of purity
aimed at by this separation) We are called upon again and again to the
preserving of love, Above all things put o^ love, which is the bond of
perfection, Col. 3.14. Above all things have fervent love among you, 1. Pet.
4.8. this is made the character whereby Christ's true disciples are
distinguished from others, John. 13.35. and the note whereby we know that we
are translated from death to life, namely if we love the brethren, 1. Ioh.
3.14. But where are we bidden above all things to take heed that we receive not
the Sacrament in mixed congregations? we are charged in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ that there should be no divisions or schisms (as the original
is) amongst us, 1. Cor. 1.10. But where are we charged in the name of the Lord
Jesus not to join with any unworthy ones in receiving the Sacrament? why should
we let go a certainty for an uncertainty? a certain unity, for some doubtful
degrees of purity? for such things as (if they be required of us at all, yet)
are not urged upon us with half that clearness and strength of scripture as the
other are. Though Christ come to set a difference betwixt his own and the world
(even such as were tied together by nearest outward relations, as father and
son, etc.) yet he came not to set a difference betwixt his own and his own,
betwixt the living members of his body: for these he prays that they may be
one as be and the father are one, Joh. 17.21. these he gives in charge that
they love one another, John 15.17. And these commands are joined together, as
things of like necessity and validity, namely that we believe on the son, and
love one another. 1. Ioh. 3.23. Love is the bond of union and communion betwixt
all the members of the body. How great a breach has been made in this bond, by
this branch of separation (namely separating from the sacrament) daily
experience too sadly shows. How can this bond continue firm, when there is a
continued withdrawing from those actions wherein Christian union and communion
does principally consist, and whereby Christian love is principally preserved?

What is that division or schism which the Apostle does so earnestly dehort
from, 1. Cor. 1.10. but a groundless separation from a true Church? And is not
this a great degree of such a separation when we separate our selves from them
in those actions which are the greatest bonds of union, and strongest means of
spiritual communion? Heathens are allowed to join with Christians in other
ordinances (as hearing the word, and prayer) but not so in the use of the
sacraments, because they are not looked at as members of the same body: if
therefore we will join with the members of Jesus Christ only in the use of the
other ordinances, but uot in the use of the sacraments, what privilege do we
allow them this way, or part of spiritual communion with us, more than
heathens are allowed? The Apostle charge the Corinthians with schism,
because they were partially addicted to their teachers, one holding of Paul,
another of Apollo, another of Cephes, 1. Cor. 1.12. compared with 10. yet they
did not separate themselves one from another in hearing the word, or receiving
the sacraments: if therefore we practice separation these vvayes, how can we
acquit our selves from a great degree of that schism which he there condemns?

Many of our Congregations are not denied to be true churches even by such as
withdraw from our sacraments: if any should be doubtful this way, they may
receive satisfaction from scripture-grouuds, which therefore may be briefly
mentioned.

1. That is a true church which is built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles (namely the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles) Jesus Christ
being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.19, 20. that diverse of our congregations
are so, it cannot be denied.

2. That is a true church which is the pillar and seat of truth, 1: Tim. 3.15.
that it, to which the truth is as it were fastened, and by which it is held
forth in a constant continued manner, (As the laws of a kingdom were wont
to be fastened to pillars, and by them to be held forth to the veivv of all) and
so it is in many of our congregations.

3. That is a true church where salvation is to be had: namely by the use of
those ordinances which are there settled, and in a constant course administered.
Thus our Savior proves the Church of the Jews to be a true Church, namely
salvation was of the Jews, Io. 4.22. It was to be had in an ordinary course by
those means that were planted among them: though all things were then
extremely corrupted.

4. Those are true Mothers which bring forth true legitimate children to their
husbands: such do some of our Congregations daily bring forth unto Christ.
Diverse of those who do now withdraw from us will not deny themselves to be
truly begotten and brought forth unto Christ in our Congregations.

Suppose those Logical notions about the matter and form of a Church (which
some much insist upon) will not exactly agree to many of our Congregations (if
taken in a strict sense) yet if there may be found in them all the essentialls
of a true Church, namely those great ordinances of sound and saving preaching
of the Word, and Sacraments administered according to Christ's institution (for
their substance) in a settled way, and a considerable number of persons
submitting themselves really to those ordinances, and others also in outward
profession; they cannot be denied to be the true Churches of Christ though
defective in some things that make much for the well-being though not necessary
for the essence or being of a Church.

Now if diverse of our Congregations be the true churches of Christ, every true
Christian should think how dangerous a thing it is to make a schism in the
body by separating from them, and therefore not dare to do this without strong
and evident grounds of Scripture leading thereto, since there are so strong
grounds to the contrary, the light of which shine forth as Clearly as the light
of the sun at noon tide in a bright Sunshine day.

If nothing be allowed in our Congregations destructive to the being of a true
Church; If nothing be vvanting in them essential to the nature of a true
Church (the oracles and ordinances of God being fixed and settled in them, and
there being a fixed fellowship in partaking of them (for the substance)
according to Christ's institution) let every conscientious Christian seriously
consider whether he does not more violate Ghospel-rules by separating to make
schisms and breaches in the church of God, than by a loving and peaceable
joining with his brethren in partaking of these ordinances to preserve unity
and peace, without which the Church of God cannot long subsist, or have any
being at all.

FINIS.

