A Copy of the SUMMONS FROM Sir William Brereton, Col. Morgan, and Col. Birch,
sent in for the surrender of the City of Worcester To the Parliament: With
their Answer and our Reply.

Also the taking of High-Arkall, the Lord Newports house, by the Shropshire
Forces on Friday last, and therein 250 Arms, Diverse long Gunnes, 20 Halberts
and other short Weapons, all their horse except 40. with the Garrison and
Forts* Powder, Match, and all their Ammunition and provisions, and all their
bag and baggage.

Printed by the Original Papers, and published according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 31 March, 1646.

The Copy of a Letter of the taking of High-Archall.
Worthy Sir,
WHat I told you in my last we hoped to effect, God has made us able (by his
blessing on our endeavors) to accomplish; we have played on High-Arkall with
our Gunnes, and made some batteries, which we followed so close that we brake
one of our pieces, and cracked two more; we shot in diverse Grenades, and so
g^uled the enemy that they were easily persuaded to capitulate: The Governor
himself, as I forme^ly told you, was out, but the rest of the Officers and
Gentlemen in the Castle treated with us, and have agreed to surrender the
Garrison, with all the Works, Arms, and Ammunition therein to us for the use of
the Parliament, only the Gentlemen and Officers (not exceeding the number of
forty) are to march away with horse and arms; so that all the foot Arms are
to be delivered to us, and they to have a convoy with them to Worcester, but I
believe they were ignorant that that City is besieged; it will (I doubt not)
further Sir William Brereton, Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Birch their design
against that place, if they continue before it. There were in High-Arkall above
200. all which are drawing out to march according to the Articles; the
Committee have deported themselves very bravely in this business, and so have
all our Officers and Soldiers, and it is of exceeding great consequence to
these long suffering parts of this County. There are about 250 Arms in the
Garrison, diverse long fowling pieces that will kill a great way, which have
done them great service: Some horse they have also left for us in the Garrison,
and all their Bag and Baggage; Powder they had not much, but provisions no
lack, only they had no fresh meat, but powdered Beef, Bacon, and Corn a
reasonable quantity. The Committee are now considering of an other Design
which is of very great concernment, and I believe they will go on in it; but
of that I shall certify you further hereafter.

Archall 27 March 1646. Yesterday they agreed for the surrender of
High-Archall, and this day they march away to Worcester.



A List of what was taken in High-Arkall, the Lord Newports House, in
Shropshire by the Shropshire Committee, and the Forces of Shropshire, 27 March
1646.
225 Arms. Diverse long Gunnes. 20 Halberts and other short weapons. All their
Horses, except 40. Powder and Match but little. Much Bacon, powdered Beef and
Corn. All their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage.
40 Marched away with Horse and Arms.

200 Marched away without Arms.

The Garrison and Forts, and all therein was delivered to the Committee, 27
March 1646.

The Copy of a Letter from Sir Will. Brereton to certain Members of the House
of Commons, read before the Committee of both Kingdoms.
Gentlemen:
WE find here every day more of Gods goodness unto us in the issue of the
last Victory, which was as complete and clear a Victory as was yet in this
Kingdom; I do believe not above 200. of their whole Army escaping, and there
being (as it is thought) near 500. Horse taken, besides what was slain and
wounded, and many more Officers taken then are in any of your Lists; Sir Jacob
Ashley being taken by one of my Brigade, and Col. Egerton, who are now both in
Warwick Castle; so also Captain Sidney, and several others taken. Upon the
encouragement we received from the Committee at Evesham, and many others, it
was thought fit to send in a friendly Summons to Worcester, the Copy whereof is
enclosed, as also their Answer, and our reply. And hereof I can assure you,
that if I had some addition to this Army, I had not doubted but to have given a
very good account of Worcester in a short time; but we have now received
Commands from the Committee of both Kingdoms which we must observe. But if
these Forces might have continued here, and that there might have been some
further assistance applied, I believe very good service might have been
performed. The Lord prosper and direct you in all your Counsels, and send an
happy and speedy end of these unnatural wars, which is by no man desired
more, then by him who will always profess himself to be

your most thankful and faithful friend to serve you. William Brereton.
March the 27. 1646.
This Summons (following) was sent into Worcester, upon the blocking up of that
City by Sir William Brereton, Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Birch, March 25.
1646.
Gentlemen:
OUr tender and neighbourly affection to your welfare, and care to prevent that
ruin which has fallen upon other places which have obstinately refused good
Conditions, and have had far greater hopes of relief then your selves, there
being now not any appearance of an army in the West, or elsewhere within this
Kingdom, but what have submitted to the Parllament or are already their
prisoners, has moved us to send you this Summons, to let you know, that you
may prevent your houses from ^poile your Estates from ruin, your persons from
restraint, and effusion of blood, and such other miseries as will inevitably
fall upon your selves, your wives and children, (if the Lord have so great a
mercy for you and your City) by timely submitting to the two Houses of
Parliament, in whose name we now require this from you, and that you deliver
the City and Forts into our hands, for the use of the King and Parliament, the
which if you shall do, we shall willingly secure unto you any of your
reasonable desires; but in case otherwise, and that misery follow, the cause of
it may not be imputed unto those who desire your preservation, not your
destruction, and (expecting your speedy answer) rest

March 25. 1646. For the Major, Governor, Aldermen, and Citizens of Worcester
these Your Servants Will. Brereton, Tho. Morgan, John Birch.


To this Summons an Answer was returned from the City (the next day) a Copy of
which follows:

Gentlemen,
IF the Arguments you give for the delivery of this City and Forts were true,
in all likelihood we should (before this time) have received his Majesty's
further pleasure, and until we do we shall take no notice of any Summons; but
according to our Duties, and the trust reposed in us, we shall (God willing)
keep this Town.

Worcester March 26. 1646. For Sir Will. Brereton, Col. Morgan, and Col Birch
Your Servants- Hen. Washington. Will. Glescet Mayor. Ma. Sandys. Iehn
Knotisford. Thomas Hacket. Rich. Henge.


This Answer being received, a Reply was returned from Sir William Brereton,
Col. Morgan, and Col. Birch, the 27. of March, 1646. a Copy of which follows.

Gentlemen:
WE know no cause why you should question the truth of our intelligence, which
we assure you is in every part thereof most true, and therefore to the end you
may more fully inform your selves therein, we will draw our Forces to such a
convenient distance as that you may gain more certain intelligence, and then
we cannot doubt but you will better understand your selves; which if it be
done, within a few days you may expect the performance of what was tendered; if
otherwise, what ever misery befall your City must be imputed to your selves,
and not to

March 26. 1646. Your Servants. William Brereton. Tho. Morgan. John Birch.


FINIS.

