A brief Remembrance When the Report concerning the pretended Riot in the Isle
of Axholm shall be read. Humbly tendered to every individual member of
Parliament, By the Freeholders and Commoners within the Manor of Epworth in
the said Isle, in number near 1200. besides new-erected Cottages. Against
Certain Undertakers, who call themselves Particpants in the drayning of the
Level of Hatfield-Chase; Concerning 7400 acres of Commonable Lands (being no
part of the said Chase, but lying within the Manor of Epworth) taken from the
Freeholders by the said Undertakers about twenty years since, under color of
the late Kings Patent contrary to law. And because the Report does not at all
set forth the proceedings that have been at Law, therefore the Freeholders
humbly inform, as follows: viz.
THat in Hilary-Term, 1654. they commenced their Suits at Law against the
Participants, to try their Title to the said Lands.

In Trinity-Term following, viz. 1646. (and not in 1642. as the Participants in
their Petition to the late Parliament falsely suggest) the Participants
exhibited and English Bill in the Exchequer, to stay those Suits at Law.

In Michaelmas-Term, Vide the Decree, and the Equivocation of Mr. Say and Mr.
Darley the Reporters, in fol. 3. of the Report, when it shall be read, upon
that Decree.
1650. that Bill came to full hearing: and the Decree then made, does establish
the possession no otherwise with the Participants then it was when that Bill
was exhibited.

Where note, That about 4000 acres of the said 7400 acres had been then about
five years before the said Bills exhibiting, in the Freeholders possession: in
which case, all reftitution of possession, under color of a Riot, is by Law
excluded.

Note also, That Decree also gives way to the Freeholders to go to Trial at
Law for the rest.

In Michaelmas-Term, 1651. the Freeholders, in pursuance of the said Decree,
by Order of the Exchequer, had a Trial at that Bar, in the name of Thomas
Vavasour Gent. before which time, the supposed Riot was committed: which
Vavasour was no Ryotor.

There being now about 100 charged as Ryotors, It is humbly submitted, Whether
all the rest of the Freeholders and Commoners, being above a thousand, shall
suffer the loss of their possession so left unto them as aforesaid by the
Decree of Feb. 1650. upon the full hearing of the Participants own Bill in
equity, and afterward recovered by the Freeholders at Law, upon a Verdict in
the name of one that was no Ryoter.

Besides, it is clear by the Depositions (if Mr. Say have taken them aright,
whereof the Freeholders to this day never had copies) that there is no
improvement of the grounds by the said Participants. In all which respects, the
Freeholders now desire to be Improvers of their ancient inheritance, both for
their own and the Commonwealths good.

The Freeholders also humbly inform, That By that partial and wicked contrived
Report of Mr. Say and Mr. Darley, two Members of the late Parliament, the
equitable part of the Cause shall never come to your view, but lie hidden in
the Depositions, whereof to this day the Freeholders never had copies: whereby
it is abundantly proved, as follows. 1. That the Undertakers did but at their
first coming into those parts desire to cut through the Manor of Epworth, that
is in Lincolnshire, to drayn Hatfield-Chase, and many other Manors that lie
in Yorkshire; and that without cutting through the Manor of Epworth, they
could not drayn Hatfield-Chase and those other Manors. 2. That they have been
at no more charge within the Manor of Epworth, then in making one Drayn of
four miles in length; and that in stead thereof, they have stopped up some old
Sewers, and diverted the course of an ancient Navigable River called Idle
within the said Manor; and that the South part of the Manor is as subject to
be surrounded with water as it was before the pretended Drayning. 3. That the
Lands before the pretended Drayning was worth 10 s. an acre per an. one with
another thorowout; and that 3000 acres of the 7400 acres which the Undertakers
took from the Free holders, lying toward the North side of the Manor, was
worth xx s. an acre per an. before the pretended drayning; and 2000 acres more
thereof, lying toward the South, was worht 15 s. and acre yearly. 4. That the
Participants took all the best ground, and left the Freeholders the very
worst. 5. That the grounds before the Drayning fed all manner of Cattle far for
the Butcher. 6. That the Freeholders cannot keep half so many cattle levant
and couchant, that is, winter and summer, upon their tenements, as they could
before the pretended Drayning, but are enforced to Joyst their Cattle in
foreign places, and turn their Meadow grounds into pasture. 7. That in that
respect, diverse sold their estates within the said Manor, and bought and went
to live elsewhere out of the Manor. 8. That the grounds, before the pretended
Drayning, was better in summer, by reason of the overflowing of water in winter.


All which Mr. Say and Mr. Darley have concealed in their Report, purposely
withholding the truth, to induce your Honors the more readily to believe there
is an improvement; whereas indeed there is none: so as unless your Honors take
care that the Depositions be thoroughly perused, or that the Freeholders may
have copies thereof, to make their Exceptions to the said Report, they are
likely to be undone through ignorance, as they have been already in a great
measure; the Books either not being thoroughly perused, or not returned in to the
Council as they were first taken, or ought to have been taken by Mr. Say; which
we have occasion to suspect, in respect of a second Report now made to the
Council, as also by some speeches that lately have been divulged by some of the
adverse party to that purpose.

July 6. 1653

