A Brief Description of an Edition of the Bible, in the Original Hebr. Samar.
and Greek, with the most ancient Translations of the Jewish and Christian
Churches, viz. The Sept. Greek, Chaldee, Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabic, Persian,
etc. and the Latin versions of them all, A new Apparatus, etc.
The use of ancient Copies and Translations compared with the Text.
WHereas the ground of Faith is the Word of God, contained in the Scriptures, it
must needs be a work of highest consequence to preserve those Sacred Oracles in
their original purity, freed (as much as may be) from all possibility of Error,
that may arise either by the negligence of Scribes, and injury of Times, or by
the wilful corruption of Sectaries and Heretics, which (as was foretold)
abound in these latter times, and so to transmit them to Posterity.

To this end nothing can more conduce then the publishing of the Original Text,
according to the best Copies and Editions, with the most ancient Translations,
which have been of greraest Authority in the Church, especially those of the
Eastern Languages; which in regard of their affinity and neernesse to the
Original are fittest to express, and in regard of their Antiquity and general
use in the first and purest Ages are the truest Glasses, to represent that
sense and reading which was then generally received in the Church of Christ, to
whose Care the custody of the Scriptures is committed: The comparing of which
together has always been accounted one of the best means to attain the true
sense in places doubtful, and to find out and restore the true reading of the
Text where any variety appears.

Besides this, the Harmony and Consent of so many ancient Copies and
Translations made in several Ages, and Parts of the World, so far remote one
from another, and continued to this day, agreeing in all matters of moment, are
no less the voice of God testifying from Heaven that those Books proceeded
from a divine Author, who has so marvellously owned and preserved them in all
parts of the World among so many changes and revolutions that have happened,
maugre the malice and power of Satan, laboring by Heretics, and Sectaries to
corrupt, and by Persecutors to extirpate the Scriptures, and therewith
Christian Religion.

Therefore in the greatest Empires and Kingdoms of the World, God has so
ordered by his wise Providence, that the Scriptures have been either originally
written, or translated into these Languages, and by that means spread over the
World (though besides the intention of the Conquerours) as appears by the
Hebrew and Greek Originals, the Syriack, Chaldee, Persiar, Arabic, Latin,
Ethiopick. and other Translations, in which the Praises of God have been
sounded forth over the World, by means of the Assyrian, Greek, Persian, Romans,
etc. Conquests and Victories.

Origens Tetrapla, Hexapla, etc.
Hence it was that when Origin composed his Tetrapla, Hexapla, and Octopla,
though they consisted only of the Hebrew and diverse Greek Translations
disposed in several Columns, yet they were received with such general applause,
that as S. Hierom says, they presently filled all Libraries.

The like care has been taken in this last Age, by sundry Editions of the
Original Texts, and of sundry ancient Translations, made by the Pains and
Industry of Learned Men, and by the munificence of Princes and others, yet none
of them are so complete and perfect (though of great use and high esteem in the
Church) but that the diligence of those that come after, may add something to
perfect the work which they begun, as the Authors of those Editions have done
to those before them.

The chief Editions of this last age.
The chief Editions of this last Age (not to mention those by Bamberg, Vatablus,
Buxtorf. Stephan Munster, Hutter, and others) are 1. The Complutense. 2. The
Antwerp. 3. The Parisian.


1. The Complutense was set forth by the Complutense Divines, at the charges of
Cardinal Ximineus, Archbishop of Toledo in six Volumes, Anno 1520, wherein is
contained, 1. The Old Test. Heb. 2. The vulgar Latin. 3. The Sept. Greek and
Latin. 4. The Chaldee Paraphrase by Onkelos upon the Pentateuch, with the
Latin Translation. 5. The New Testament Greek and Latin. 6. An Apparatus,
consisting of an Heb. and Chald. Lexicon.
An Heb. Grammar, An Index, etc.

2. The Antwerp Bibles in eight great Volumes, set forth by Arias Montanus, and
other Learned Men, at the charges of the King of Spain, Anno 1572. wherein is
added to the Complutense, 1. The Chaldee Paraphrase upon the rest of the Old
Testament, by Jonathan and Josephus Caecus, with the Latin. 2. The Interlineal
Translation of the Old and New Testament. 3. The Syriack New Testament in
Syriack and Hebrew Characters with the Latin. 4. An Apparatus in two Volumes,
containing diverse Lexicons and Grammars, Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, Greek, with
some Tracts for better understanding the Text.
Some Idiotisms, few various readings, diverse Indices, etc.

3. The Parisian Bibles in ten large Tomes, Anno 1645. set forth by Michael de
Jay, Morinus, Gabriel Sionita and others, by Authority of the Cardinals
Richlieu, and Mazarine, and the French Bishops, wherein is added to the
Antwerpe Bible, which (except the Apparatus) is herewith reprinted, 1. The old
Test. Syriack, and Latin. 2. The Arabic Old Test. and New with the Latin. 3.
The Samaritan Pentateuch, with the Samaritan and Latin Versions.
But here is no Interlineal or other literal Translation of the Hebrew in
Latin, none of the Apparatus at all as in the other Editions, no various
readings in any Language, no Index, no Idiotisms, (the edition being abruptly
put forth, by reason of some difference among the Publishers) but only the Text
in the several Languages, and those not according to the best Copies.

Though these Editions be justly had in high esteem, (the second of which was
styled by some Learned Men, Orbis miraculum, though it come short of the third)
yet it must be confessed that diverse Ancient and Useful Translations may be
added, that there are better Copies now, then those followed in the former
Editions, that many things useful then, yet needless now may be taken away, A
new Edition more perfect and useful then any yet extant, and at a far less
price.
that a new Apparatus far more useful may be framed, and the several Languages
digested in better Method, besidas the greatness of the price, and vastness
of the Volumes, which makes them scarce useful for private Libraries, being
printed in such Paper and Characters, as served rather for Pomp then Use, (that
of Paris being sold at 45. or 50 li. the price of an ordinary Library) so that
without detracting from the just praises of the publishers (whose Labors must
be made use of, as they did of other men's that were before them) it may be
said, that a more perfect and useful Edition then any yet extant may be made in
5 or 6 ordinary Volumes, which may be had at a fourth or fifth part of the price
of those of Paris, or thereabouts. The several parts whereof follow.

1. The Old Testament Heb. and the New Test. Greek, with the literal
Interlineal Translation which is wanting in the Paris and Complutense Bibles.

2. The Vulgar Latin according to the accurate Edition of Sixtus Quintus, and
Clem. 8. wherein many 1000 errors and faults of the former Editions are
corrected, as appears by the Catalogue set forth by Lucas Brugensis.

3. The Roman Sept. the Greek whereof was printed by the most ancient Vatican
Copy, written (as is conceived) before S. Hieroms time, which is without doubt
the most authentic of any yet extant. The Latin was gathered out of the
Monuments of the most ancient Writers, by the great industry of Nobilius,
whereby the old vulgar Latin used in the West (before S. Hieroms Translation)
is restored and preserved: whereas the Sept. followed in the other Editions is
made only to agree with the Modern Heb. and accordingly enlarged or cut short,
and may better be called a new Greek Translation of the Modern Heb. then a true
Edition of the Old Septuagint.

4. The Chaldee Paraphrase on the Old Test. by Onkelos upon the Pentateuch, and
by Jonathan upon Josh. Judge. Sam. Kings, and Prophets, about our Saviors time;
and by Jos. Caecus upon the rest, written afterward. All according to Buxtorf.
his exact Edition, wherein many thousand errors are corrected, and the Points
which were added by some ignorant Jew after the invention of Points, are
rectified and reduced to the Analogy of Ezra and Daniel, which was only in
part attempted by Arias Montanus, but not perfected as himself acknowledges.
The Latin Translation also amended according to Paulus Fagius, and others.

5. The Syriack Old and New Test. (the native Language of Christ and his
Apostles) corrected by Copies transcribed out of the most ancient and perfect
M. S. remaining with the Patriarch of Antioch, which is according to the old
and simple Edition (as it is called) translated out of the Heb. about the
Apostles times (the other Syriack Edition out of the Sept. being long after.)
That of the Paris Bibles had many Lacuna's, which they supplied ex proprio
ingenio.

6. The Arabic Old and New Test. corrected and compared with those parts set
out by Erpenius and others, and with other Copies here in public and private
Libraries.

7. The Samaritan Pentateuch (the old Heb. Text, as is conceived, about Esdras
his time, if not before) in the Samaritan Character, which is the Old Heb.
Letter, before Esaras changed it into the Assyrian (the modern Hebrew) after
the return from Babylon.

8. The Persian Pentateuch, by Jacobus Thawasus (formerly printed by the Jews
in the Constantinop. Bibles in Heb. Characters) put into Persian Characters and
translated into Latin, not extant before in any of those other Editions.

9. The Persian Evangelists, with the Latin Version, which are now at the
Press, published by Mr. Wheelock a learned Linguist, and not extant heretofore.

10. The Aethiopick Psalms, Canticles, and New. Test. with the Latin Version,
not extant in any former Edition.

11. Jonathans Targum upon the Pent. The Jerusalem Targum upon the Pent. with
the Latin translation by Pelican or Tailor. The Massoreth Heb. Lat. with
Buxtorf. his Clavis Massorethica, and his Castigationes Massorae. All which may
be added, as an Appendix to the Old Test. None of them are in those other
Editions.

12. The several Languages shall be printed in several Columns, whereby they
may all be presented to the Readers view at once, whereas in the other Editions
diverse great Volumes must be turned over to compare them together.

13. Whereas there is no Apparatus or various readings, etc. in the Paris
Bibles, and the Apparatus in the Antwerp. and Complut. consisting of Grammars,
Lexicons, Tracts, etc. are not so needful now, there being so many helps extant
since, and those more exact. Therefore here shall be added, what is most
necessary and proper, and yet is wanting in the former, viz. A just Volume of
the various readings of all former Editions and Copies, in all the Languages (a
work of as great use to the Reader, as if he had all former Copies and
Editions) with some other things fit to be added, viz. 1. An Extract out of
Capellus his Critica Sacra and others concerning the various readings. Lucas
Brug. de variantibus locis Scripturae, and his two Tracts 1. de Graecis 2. de
Latinis varietatibus.
2. The Keri and Cetib, etc. with the other various readings of the Heb. 3. The
differences of the Samar. Pentateuch from the Modern Heb. collected heretofore
by D. Comber. 4. The various readings of the 70. and the other old Greek
Translations by Aquila, Theodotion, Symmachus, the 5. and 6 anonymous
Translations, collected by Nobilius in the Romans Sept. and by Drusius in his
Fragmenta veterum translationum Graec. to which may be added the different
Readings of that ancient M. S. The Alexandrian Sept. (supposed by some to be
written by S. Tecla) which is now about to be printed. 5. The various readings
and corrections of the vulgar Latin collected by Luc. Brugens. in several
Tracts. 6. The places restored in the Chaldee Paraph. by Buxtorf. with a Tract
by him thereupon written, but not yet printed, and a Tract of the use of the
Chaldee Paraph. by Luc. Brugens. 7. The places restored and corrected in the
Sir. and Arab. with the various readings out of Erpenius and others. 8. The
various readings of the New Test. by Stephan. Causabon and others, with the
readings out of the Greek Fathers gathered in the Wechel. Edition of the 70. at
Frank. 1597. 9. The various readings and notes upon the Sir. Arab. Persian,
Cophti, etc. Versions of the New Test. out of Lud. de Dieu, Munster,
Kirkensten, M. Pocock and others. 10. The Idiotisms of the Heb. and Greek. 11.
The explication of the proper Names in Script. Heb. Greek, Latin. 12. A
perfect Chronology. 13. Several Indices.


14. Before all. 1. Diverse Prolegomena and Prefaces concerning the several
Editions and Translations, their Antiquity, Authority, and Use. 2. Geographical
Tables of the World. The land of Canaan. 3. Arias Montanus his Exemplar, seu de
sacris fabricis, and his Aaron seu de vestibus sacris, with the Figures cut in
Brass. 4. Alphabetical Tables of the several Languages, and what else upon
further advise with Learned Men shall be thought fit.


The Approbation of several Eminent and Learned Men.
WHereas there has been presented unto us a Draught of an Edition of the Bible
in the Original and other learned Languages, with a proof or printed Paper,
wherein the same are in several Columns represented to the Readers view at
once, and that (as is suggested) according to better copies and Editions, The
Approbation by learned men.
then those of the Complut. Antwerp. and Paris Bibles, besides sundry needful
Additions which are wanting in them, whereby the Edition will become more
perfect, and fitter for use then those formerly mentioned, and yet the Price
very much lessened; We whose names are subscribed, having viewed, and well
considered the said Design, and being desired to give our judgments and
opinions thereof, do conceive, that both in regard of the said Editions and
Copies which are more exact and perfect, then those followed in the other
Bibles, and of the various Readings and additions mentioned in the said
Draught, as also of the method and order, wherein the said Languages are
digested, this Work will become more complete and perfect, and also more useful
then any that has been hitherto published in that kind, and that the printing
thereof will conduce much to the Glory of God, and the public Honor of our
Nation. And therefore we do heartily desire that it may receive all due
encouragement from all whom it may concern. Ja. Armachanus. J. Seldom.

To these may be added the concurrent Suffrage of diverse others, the most
Reverend and Learned men of this Church, whose several Testimonies would be too
long to insert, but shall be produced if there be occasion.

The Approbation of the Council of State.
The Council of State by their Order bearing date Sunday the 11 of July 1652.
have given their Approbation and Allowance of the Work, declaring the same to
very honorable, and deserving encouragement. And it is hoped they will promote
the publishing of it.

Propositions concerning the Printing of the Bible in the Original and other
Learned Languages.
WHereas the former Editions though less perfect, and not so fit for use, have
been Printed at the public Charge of Princes and great Persons, and the Charge
of this Work will exceed the Ability of an ordinary person: Whereupon diverse
Persons of Worth have expressed their readiness to join in the Charge of the
Impression, and it is hoped that others who wish well to Learning and Religion
will assist in a Work so much tending to the public good, and Honor of the
Church and Nation, and so free from Interest of all parties, especially
considering, that as the Edition will be much better then any formerly made, so
the price will be much less.

Therefore for the securing of all such as shall promote so good a Work either
by free gift, or advancing of Moneys to be repaid by Copies, and for the
encouraging of such as shall solicit and stir up others to contribute, these
Propositions are offered, which shall God willing be performed.

1. That whatsoever Moneys shall be raised, shall be paid into the Hands of
William Humble of London Esquire, Treasurer for this purpose, who will be
accomptable for the Moneys received, and will give Receipts to every one that
shall pay in any Moneys, whereby they may be assured that the same shall be
employed no otherwise then for the use intended, and not issued out but by
Warrant of such persons as are hereafter mentioned.

2. The like assurance shall be given for receiving of Copies proportionable to
the sums so paid, which shall be put into the hands of some persons
Interested, residing in London to be delivered as soon as the Work shall be
finished, or otherwise as the several Volumes shall be printed, according as
shall be advised by counsel on the behalf of the subscribers, and this shall be
drawn up into Articles, before any Moneys shall be paid.

3. The Treasurer shall not issue any Moneys, but by Warrant under the Hands
of the Lord Primate of Armagh, D. William Fuller, D. Brune Rieves, D. Samuel
Baker, M. Richard Drake, B. D. or two of them, whereof the Lord Primate, or D.
Fuller, to be one, and shall give Account every six months to four persons
appointed by those that advance, to receive the Accounts of all Moneys
received, or issued out, which shall be showed to all persons interested who
shall desire the same.

4. Those that by free gift or otherwise shall in any considerable manner
further the Work, beside Copies to be given them, shall be acknowledged Patrons
and Promoters of so noble a Work.

5. Those that shall collect and raise any sum by the free contribution of
Persons well affected shall for every ten pounds have one Copy: and if any
lesser sum of 40 s. or upwards be so raised by any at present, if the said sum
shall be made up 10 li. by equal payments in four six months next following,
he shall have one perfect Copy, and so according to that proportion for any
greater Sum.

6 Those who shall advance any sum out of their own estate, shall for every 10
li. have one Copy, and for 50 li. six Copies, and so for any greater sum, and
the moneys so advanced shall for the Ease and Security of the Advancers be
paid thus: only a fifth part ^n hand, and the rest in 4 six months, and at
every six months Payment, Account shall be given of the Moneys formerly paid,
and of the Progress of the Work, and then they may also receive such Volumes a
shall be finished, according to the number of Copies due to them, if they
please, they paying another fifth part toward the printing of the next Volume.
And if 50 li. shall be raised by several persons, the sixth Copy shall be to
him that procures their subscriptions.

7. The persons that will assist in preparing of Copies correcting the Press,
overseeing and managing the work, or otherwise in furthering the Edition, are
D. Stokes, Mr. Whillock, M. Thorndike, Mr. Edward Pococke, Mr. (...) Graves,
Mr. Vicars, Mr. Thomas Smith, together with Dr. Walton, and some other to
assist in Prosecution of Business, etc. and if any of them shall be otherwise
hindered; some other shall be nominated, for carrying on the work, whe^ein the
Advice of the L. Primate, M. Seldom, D. Shelden, D. Sanderson, D. Stern, D.
Hammond, D. Fearne, (...) and other learned Men, who have approved the work
shall be desired, as occasion shall require.

8. The work shall not be begun till there be enough pa^^ in to finish the
first Volume, viz. the Pentateuch, viz. 1500 li. nor the other Volumes, till a
proportionable sum for each be brought in, viz. about 1200 li.

9. It is desired that the first payment of Moneys to ^e advanced, may be at
or before the first of May, 1653. and if it shall appear there is enough to
print ^^e First Volume, viz. the Pentateuch, the work shall be begun as soon as
things needful can be prepared, which is hoped will be within three Months
then next following, and within three Years after, it is hoped the whole work
will be perfected: (two Presses being kept at work.)

10. Whatsoever shall be further reasonably devised or p^opounded for the
better managing and carrying on of the Work, and securing of all Persons
interested, shall be willingly assented unto.

Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Gart^wait Stationer, at the lesser
North-gate of S. Paul's Church, London. 1652.

WE whose Names are subscribed, do hereby promise to pay the several Sums by us
underwritten, upon the Propositions for Printing the Bible in the Original and
other learned Languages, according to a Description, and Specimen thereof
Printed. Which Sums shall be paid in one or more Payments, according as is
subscribed. Provided that before payment of the said Moneys, it shall be
certified under the Hand of the Treasurer, that the Subscriptions and
Contributions, will amount to such a Sum as will be sufficient for carrying on
the Work, according to the said Propositions and that such order be taken for
securing the Copies to the Subscribers, as by advise of Council on their behalf
shall be thought reasonable, and just.


