A Brief representation of the sad and lamentable condition of that once
flourishing Town of MARLEBOROVGH, In Wiltshire, as it has been represented by
several letters from credible persons of that place to their Friends in LONDON.
Master Lawrence:
I Doubt not but before you receive this letter, you have heard the relation of
our sad miseryes and afflictions, which the Lord has laid on us in the day of
his fierce anger, against Marleborough; All the heart and principal parts of it
laid in the dust, to the utter undoing of a multitude of Families, that now
want bread. And I have had a great share in this sad afflicton, my Houses being
burnt down to the ground, a good part of my wares plundered, and lost, and
burnt my loss is very great, yet it is a mercy we escaped with our lives: the
most furious fire that ever mortal creature saw. We were all in the dust
within three or four hours: if it had been in the night, we could not have
escaped with our lives, but blessed be the name of the Lord, he has not
utterly destroyed us, as we deserve: we are thereby put out of our habitations
and callings, and if speedy reliese be not sent from the Nation, it will be a
ruinous place and destitute of Trade, and a monument to posterity, that once
there was a flourishing Town, which now mournes in silence. I hope the City
will have a compassionate eye, and lend us their help. I am so tired out with
watching, etc. that I can scarce write sense unto you. I pray let your uncle
Strange and other Friends partake of this sad News. With my kind respect to
your self and Mrs. Lawrence I remain

Yours, Thomas Bailey.
Marleborough, April the 30. 1653.
Mr. Scattergood:
FRiend, had I leisure and strength, I should tell you the saddest story that
I think you ever heard, of a Town no bigger then Marleborough, where in three
hours time were consumed at least two hundred and fifty houses, and all those
the chiefest, not one Shopkeepers house standing, not scarce one sufficient
man's, except Mr. Majors, and that was entered upon by the fire, but God made me
an instrument to save it; and in probability, by so doing the most part of the
poor houses now left: all the other lying in the dust. My loss is about 2000
pounds, 1100 in houses, 300 quarter of malt, 100 l. in wood, besides
housholdstuff, some goods, and money, and goods lent to several men that were
sufficient before this sad calamity, but now are not able to pay four pence.
But all this troubles me not so much as that many honest and sufficient
Tradesmen have not money to buy bread; though I praise God, I have; and diverse
friends in and about the Town would entertain me: but I bless God, I am not
yet brought so low, and I trust that no man shall lose four pence by me,
neither shall they so long as I have three pence lest. I have gotten two rooms
to make a shop of, in the most convenient house, though a thatched one. We have
sent three friends to the General, and I hope every good man will be put
forward by all that have heard of the once flourishing condition of
Marleborough, that it may be built again: If not, we are all utterly undone for
ever both for Trade and Lodging, for we have not one Inn left standing in the
Town. The Lord keep you, and your true loving friend to his poor power.

John Keynes.
Marleborough, The last of April, 1653.
Mr. Eglesfield,
YOurs received, I am to unfold a sad business to you which happened on Thursday
last, I being at the Devises. It pleased God to lay his heavy hand by fire on
Marleboroough, which has burned down our dwelling houses, (I have but very
little saved, not above eight pounds worth of all my goods and Books) so that
we that are in the Town have no habitations, scarce any thing left but our
lives, all burned; the children crying to go home, and I tell them we have none
to go to. S. Mary's Church, with the Market house, and all the chief houses in
the Town on both sides of the high Street burned to dust: three hundred
families at least out of doors. I do not know well what course to take for the
present. Pray tell Mr. Sparks of this. The loss is unspeakable, all being on
fire in an instant of Time. I rest your loving friend

John Hammond.
Marleborough. April. the 30. 1653.
Mrs. Manning,
ON Thursday last there happened in our town a great and lamentable fire, which
did burn down and consume all the eminent parts of the Town. The fire did begin
almost at S. Peter's Church, at Francis Freemans house, a Tanner, on the south
side of the high street, and did burn down both sides of the way: not one house
escaped. It burnt the Town Hall, the Marketplace, and four or five tun of
Cheese in it; also S. Mary's Church, and the chiefest part of S. Mary's Parish
is burnt. The like fire was scarce ever seen by any man in England, it is
thought there are between three or four hundred houses burnt: the loss cannot
be conceived as yet: all the shops and Innes in the Town are burnt to the
ground. It has pleased God to spare our house, (yet we had a great loss) which
we acknowledge his great mercy to us in sparing us. It is a great and sore
affliction; I pray God it may be sanctified to us, that so we may have cause to
say, It was good for us that we were afflicted.

Thomas Keynton.
Marleborough, April the 30. 1653.
A more particular and full relation of the beginning of this woeful fire, and
manner of Gods dealing with that poor and distressed Town in it, you may expect
hereafter, only this for the present, as it has been related, is as follows.
IT pleased God that on Thursday the 28. of April 1653. in the out-housing of
one Francis Freeman a Tanner, almost at the West End of the High Street, near
St. Peter's Church, on the south side, his people being drying of Bark, it took
fire about 7 or 8 of the clock in the morning, and they endeavored to put it
out: the Neighbors espying of it proffered their help, which was refused, Mr.
Freeman himself being (as it is said) from home. At last it prevailed so much
that it took hold of the dwelling house, and grew so violent on a sudden, that
within a short space the fire by the hand of God was carried from this side of
the street to the other side on the North of at: So that it took hold of some
thatched houses, and the stacks of wood in their backside, and so suddenly ran
along the whole length of the Town Eastward, and totally consumed the street on
both sides, in three or four hours space, as is before related.

This ancient market Town being so remarkable a place, for trade and commerce
both with the Cities of London and Bristol, and also serving for a Magazine and
Storehouse for all the Inland Counties near adjacent, and of so great
consequence generally to all people who have any relation in those parts, it is
hoped that all the true and sincere-hearted people of this Nation will
seriously consider the woeful calamities and sad afflictions of those their
Christian brethren and countrymen, so as that they may neglect no time nor
opportunity to move all their friends and such as are in power, to administer
such relief as they are able in this dark, day of their lamentable visitation,
toward the reedifying of that deplo^able place; not knowing whose turn it may
be next to implore the help of others upon the like occasion: from which good
Lord deliver us all.


