A Brief DECLARATION OF All the Civil VVarres that have happened in ENGLAND;

First, in the Reign of King John. Secondly, in the Barrons Wars. Thirdly, in
York and Lancaster Wars. Fourthly, in the Reign of Henry the eight. Fift^y,
in the Reign of King Edward the sixth. Sixthly, in the Reign of Queen Mary.
Seventhly, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Eighthly, in the Reign of King
James. Ninthly, in the Reign of King CHARLES.
Also Declaring the Civil War that happened in other Nations.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1643.

A Brief Declaration etc.
Many there are that speak of peace few that Rightly endeavoure to procure
pe^ce the high Court of Parliament has manifested by there sincere and earnest
proceedings that naught is in there actions but peace it might with honor and
safety both to King and people be obtained, but the contrary oppinions and
desiers of many in this Kingdom could or would not strive to perfect that
work begunn, some are willfally desirous of the destruction of the whole, so
they and their estates may be preserved, though others be ruinated, some are
ignorant of that which may effect a perfect and inviolable peace and therefore
stand as Newters* neither contributing to the Parliament or the perverse party
And some with their persons and estates sustain both parties which diversity
has this present division bin raised and cherished, for composing of both one
thing is nessessary to be observed the sad and deplorable condition of other
nations in present and former times procured only through domistik Broiles and
civil discentions, raised by several factions in the same inhabitants, let us
therefore look Back to former Ages and see the inferiors of other nations, and
then upon but own.

The Kingdom of Italy, whereof Rome is the the Metropolitan Se^, and the Pope
Supreme Governor, who through the insolency of him self and clergy to the
oppressing of the other Churches not only in that Kingdom but in most nations
Eurupe comm^nly denominated Christendom, procured first civil discen^ion and
then called in ^orraigne Assistance till at the last came in by su^^s^ssion as
Conqueor.

The Goths, E^st, and West, Gu^ls Bandalls H^^pani^ns, or Sp^niard, and
Germ^^es, and several ^^stroyed Rome the Head of Cities and po^^^^^d Italy, the
first dest^uction of which was Prelatcall Pride and A^^o^^ncy.

The Empire of Germany torn in pieces and brought ^o confusion and desolation,
by civil broiles and Insurrections, the bishops of Rome and Papist Locusts,
the first me^ers and Pricipall Authors thereof.

The Kingdom of Spain many times much shaken, but now brought to the b^inke
or point of destruction, many premises revo^^ed from the Spanish Crown and
some bec^me inti^e Kingdome^ as Portuegal etc. and the only cause of this
touching Prerogative and Religion.

The mis^r^es S^is^rs Swed^^ B^h^mi^ns and there Palatinate are ^^t and
b^^e^^^g, only touching Religion and Provines, titles.

The French N^tion is (...) and entered into civil bloodshe^ (...) Religion,
which h^th already caused the loss of much Chri^^^^n Blood.

And now I come to our own Kingdom England this nation is filled with
presidents of bloody diffeences between sevetall Princes thereof and Subjects,
touching Prerogative and Religion, in the Reign of King John through civil
broile between him and his peers, stirred up by the Pope, this Kingdom was
surrendered up to hold of the Sea of Rome; and the Subjects Laws, and
Immunities, tied and bounded to the Popes desire and Tyranny, the King
himself, for but attempting to redress there grevances and pull his own neck
out of that yoke of Romish servitude by the consenting to the advi^ of his
Lords and Commons Assem^led in Parliament in the 17. th Year of Reign was
Traitorously Poisoned by amounke.

In the Reign of H. 3. the Barrons Wars began and Continued many year during
which many a thousand lost there* lives much discord was in this land, and all
concerning prerogative and Subjects Liberty.

When these civil wars was ended then began the Yorkeish and Lancastian wars
which continued to H. 7. which in expressable slaughters and bloody Massakers
of the People of this land these wars were only touching title to the Crown,
first begun by Henry the 4th.

In the Reign of H. 8. Between Anno. 28 and 33. during the time of the
Reformation of Relgion, what In^urrections an^ Rebellionr in the most places of
this Kingdom was raised by the Romanists of these times but those troubles
through the wisdom of the Prince agreeing with hi^ Parliament, were appeased
without the sheding of much blood.

Yet was the change in Religion greater then now, for then was an utter
rejection of the Romish Religion firmly established in the Kingdom, but now
the endeavor of the Parliament is only to purge, not change religion, from
erroneous doctrine crept in, and introduced by the Prelates and from
Superstitious and Idolatrous worshipp in the exercise thereof; Therefore if
King and Parliament would but agree, these sadd and bloody distempers would
soon be ended, and the Papisticall and Malignant party soon suppressed and
reduced to due subjection and obedience to their Sovereign and the Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom, till which be obtained, there is little hope of
Peace of Accommodation.

In the Reign of E. 6. many insurrections were raised in this Kingdom to the
great disturbance of the Peace thereof, about Religion and that phoenix of his
time in all the world, in the flower and prime of his youth cut of by private
Treason, as it was strongly presumed and suggested; but the bloody persecutor
raised in the reign of P. and M. brought this Nation into as sadd a condition
as now it is, then nothing but fire and faggot made destruction of
Protestants-blood, for the time not parrelleld in any Nation of Christendom.
The practices and Treasonable Plots agitated privately and publicly against
the life of second phaenix of the world, Q. Eliz. of happy memory, and that
second Solomon of his time K. James* by Priests and Jesuires and Papists, may
make the Protestants take perpetual heed and diligent care of that faction,
to suppress them in time, before they get to strong a party in this Kingdom,
for naught else is their ends of their endeavoures, but slaughter, blood, and
destruction.

The bleeding condition the Realm and Kingdom of Ireland now stands in is
known to all men, and can it be otherwise expected but the same will befall
England if these divisions continue, and no reconciliation be made between
King and People.

It is now time for every member of this great body pollitique to set to his
helping hand, use his best wits and policy to compose these distempers; do
not these Malignants begin to use the same cruelty in those places of the
Kingdom where they obtain the Predommence, as the Popish Rebels do in
Ireland, the late example of them at Cicester, may be a warning piece to the
other parts of the Kingdom, to stand upon their own defense, and not give the
least way to their adversaries; it is better to die then to live in perpetual
slavery, till such time as an honorable and safe Peace may be treated and
concluded. Let therefore all men that have any care of Religion, or of the there
posterity endeavor with his Life and Estate to prevent the destruction of
both, for if one, that is religion; be corrupted or destroyed, needs must the
other be ruinated: for where that is not respected, fraud and oppression must
needs be the let and portion of the other: And I concieve that Peace cannot be
effected by diverse oppinionate persons, several Sects and factions can never
make one entire and safe Government, there must be an uniformity in Religion,
Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline, and in civil Constitutions one
entire Government is sufest: though many and diverse Laws and Ordnances may be
admitted in the Government of a State and Common wealth, yet must they all hang
and have both de^i^ation and dependence upon the Common, received and used
Fundamental Laws of this Realm, And to, chang such a Government cannot be
without destruction and confusion to the same, yet is the whole State not bound
for perpetuity to observe the ancient laws without linutation or restriction,
but as the eversity of times alter and change, the State in its entire body
representative in Parliament may according to the wisdom and present policy
of the same, change or alter Governmeet for the weal and public good thereof.

And thus much shall suffice for a short induceme^t to all w^ll ^ffected
Christians to study and endeavor a speedy Peace, and I shall, as in duty I am
bound to God, my King and Country, pray; That the Lord Almighty who is the
Father or Peace, and his only Son the Prince of Peace, and the holy Spirit
the spirit of Peace* would be pleased to put an end to this unnatural
differences, and graut Peace in this Israel, that every one it Peace and
quietness, may enjoy the fruits of his labor to himself and Posterity.

FJNJS.

