A Brief NARRATION OF THE Carriage and Success OF THE ENGLISH AFFAIRS, in
the hands of the COMMISSIONERS FOR SCOTLAND.
SIR,
WHereas the love and wisdom of Parliament, foresaw that the Malignant humors
of this Church and Kingdom, were very unlikely if not impossible to be removed
without some Northern Physic and their resolution, and necessity had wrought
through those manifold difficulties and oppositions which were continually made
to the calling in their assistance; You remember they appointed Commissioners,
Lords, and Commons, furnished with Instructions, to the better expediting so
weighty an affair, and joined two Ministers of good worth and ability to be
assistant to them in any thing that might concern the Ecclesiastical part of
the Negotiation; who undertook their journey from London, July 20. and lay at
Graves-end to 22. From thence came to Yarmouth, where they were stopped two or
three days by contrary winds, but were by Gods providence released, August 1.
and arrived at Leith, August 7. Where they were nobly and courteously received
by the Earl of Lindsey, and Sir Archibald Iohnston, who conveyed them from
thence to Edinburgh that night, where they received all respect due to their
persons and employment; But a little time served for complement, when a
business of no less consequence quence then the preservation of Religion and
liberty in three Kingdoms was to be propounded; They made therefore speedy
addresses to the Assembly and convention of Estates, who respectively appointed
Committees to treat with them of what they had in command from the Parliament
of England; Our Commissioners according to their Instructions pressed upon them
a firm Union and speedy assistance, a good lesson taught us by ill masters,
the Papists and Prelates, who are incorporate to the danger of Protestant
Religion and Civil Liberty: And though they omitted no time, yet when by Mr
Robert Meldrum a faithful Agent, they received the sad letters from England of
the surrender of Bristoll, with the causes and consequents, they thought fit to
add double diligence, and accordingly with more earnestness they applied
themselves. The Assembly and Convention, equally sympathizing that condition,
though the best means for the accomplishing and expediting this union and
assistance, to be a solemn mutual Covenant into which both Nations should
enter; and therefore offered that one might be drawn by the mutual
approbation of the English Commissioners, and the Scottish Committees, which
was accordingly done August. 15. Which though at first it seemed a hard
morsel, yet it pleased God to frame the spirits of them that were employed, to
that Christian condescension and self-denial, (which God usually makes the
foundation of every great work) that those rubs were quickly removed and the
form agreed on that night, which ought not to be attributed to any slightness
or suddenness in a matter of so great concernment; but to their diligence and
apprehension of the present necessity of the business. And let none wonder
that this way of Christian Association was pitched upon, which though at the
first view it speaks delay, yet it really means expedition; in that that
prudent Nation has experience, that they shall be able, upon a mutual consent
thereto, to do more in a week toward the accomplishment of our desires, then
in a month without it, as their experience in their late troubles made
apparent; where God did miraculously bless that Nation in this way. And
further, it cannot be thought unfit that so religious a work should have a
religious foundation, nor unreasonable, that when the thing to be undertaken is
so full of difficulty and hazard, the undertakers should be obliged in the
most strict and inviolable bands, especially in this revolting and backsliding
age: and our advantage, and the advantage of the Cause cannot be small, thereby
considering that after this mutual obligement, we have not only an assurance
of a present auxiliary, but at all times of whatsoever the power and prudence
of that Nation can contribute to the maintenance of Religion and Liberty. The
Covenant being upon these o^ the like grounds agreed to, it was propounded to
the Assembly by the Reverend Mr Alexander Henderson the Moderator, who carried
the business of that day with singular discretion and affection, and after a
little demurre cast in by the Kings Commissioner, (which gave occasion to the
mention, and so to the denial, of a negative voice to his Majesty in that
Assembly,) the Noblemen and Ministers were required to give their resolutions
concerning it: and here I must beg excuse, neither mine nor any pen is able to
reach that abundant alacrity and Christian affection wherewith their several
votes were delivered for the affirmative, without any contradiction but what
was mentioned. And though the thing it self, scil. the passing such a
Covenant, be of moment, yet I confess the circumstances of it wrought more
upon me, even those impressions which I hope were made by the same spirit that
guided them; so that I should not doubt to say, the special hand of God was in
the business: and unless we be wanting to our selves, I hope we may reap in
joy what they sowed in tears, and that the work of that day, though it may and
must, as every great work in which God delights to be most seen, receive
several checks and interruptions, will not be quashd, will reach Spain and Rome
it self in due time. And as I am certainly informed, by (a person whom, for
honor sake, in regard of his faithful industry in the cause of God I mention)
Sir Archibald Iohnston, at the Convention of Estates it received the like
unanimous and affectionate approbation that same might, who likewise backed it
with the draught of a Proclamation to put the whole Kingdom in a posture of
defense, and commanding them to provide themselves of Arms, and to be ready at
the time and place appointed them. And thus this memorable 17 of August ended;
on the 18. it was dispatched by a Messenger, to whom the Commissioners gave
credit for England, and was brought hither, Aug. 25. and presented to the
Parliament, August 26. And thus is your own business brought to your own
doors, where I hope it will not long lie, though I cannot doubt but it will
meet with manifold opposition in regard that the Popish and Prelaticall
faction, and men that are so deeply afraid of the Word of God and a Government
according to it, know that though they may cheaply contemn English Votes and
Vows, which they see many among us who yet challenge titles of honor, can
dispense with; yet a Scottish Covenant carries strength and resolution with it,
and has already proved fatal to the Hierarchy. For my own part I will not
dissemble my apprehensions in this business, and they are these, That though
we are extreme unhappy, that our Nation should have so much corruption as
that by its natural strength it could not work it out, and that so many among
us should be so industrious in making a grave for their own Religion and
Liberty, which yet may prove their own, and this their Epitaph: Hic jacent and
jaceant sine spe resurgendi Libertatis, tam Christianae, quam Civilis.

Yet we are happy that we have met with friends, who so cordially resent our
dangers and miseries, and may be so fit a counterpoise to the French,
Spaniards, Walloons, Geball, Ammon and Amalek, that are received amongst us,
and confederate against us. Let not any man's thoughts murmr when I say
Cordial resentment, I confess, and do this public penance, that I went with
a prejudice, and expected the fullfilling of my apprehensions as much as my
desires, but find my self happily deceived; for though They do as every wise
man will, take in their own interest, and after conscience has had its due and
supreme work, make use of their best prudence for the compassing lawful ends;
yet I am persuaded that God and Religion and true brotherly affection to this
Nation, have the upper hand in their thoughts and undertakings for this
business: And God has seemed to frame them as those fit instruments which
shall begin to execute the vengeance of the Lord, and the vengeance of his
Temple. And let no man prejudice himself or them, and say, instead of helpers
we shall have Masters, and they will have too strong an influence into our
Religion and Liberty. When as it will be found in that offered Covenant, that
they intend not the least confusion betwixt the Kingdoms and Churches, though
the nearest conjunction, but to maintain the respective liberties and
privileges of both Nations, and press nothing but what our selves have
propounded, The word of God as the rule of our and their reformation. And here
I can not omit a passage full of meekness and wisdom that fell from a
considerable man among them for piety and Learning, Let Scotland help to reform
England, and England, Scotland. God has edged the spirits of the Scottish
Nation more against Popery, Prelacie and Superstition, then the English, let us
help to rid you of them, and mutually receive from you that assistance which
may be requisite to advancing the purity and power of godliness among us both.

It need not be doubted but if we forsake not our own mercy God has stretched
out a hand to us to draw us out of the mire both of corruption and confusion in
which we are, let every one therefore in his place study to promote this
promising union, which it is hoped may in time be an example and encouragement to
other Protestant Churches to join them thereto, to the enlargement and
establishment of the Kingdom of Christ, and the disappointment and destruction
of his and our Enemies. God has begun by them, He is our Rock, and his way is
perfect. If therefore any proposition be made to you concerning money for the
levying and conducting these Forces, let us not keep it to perish with us. I
believe the desire will be modest, and enforced by that necessity which we
have been constrained to bring upon them by the expense they have bin put to in
the maintenance of the Irish Army to which we are so deeply engaged. I hope I
may safely say, they seek not yours, but you and their own. Since therefore
they that are reasonably well skilled in computation of our English affairs,
judge it impossible, without a Miracle, to accomplish a Reformation, sca^cely a
preservation without out them; let us all strive with earnestness and
expedition to promote this present hopeful service, lest hereafter upon the
return of our calamity, which in this sea of misery that overspreads us, is
like again to flow upon us, it be said of us, We had a Price in our hands.
And so I beseech God who has hitherto appeared in this business, to go on to
order and expedite it to the glory of his Name, the establishment, reformation
and propagation of true Religion, the preservation and improvement of liberty,
that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1643.


