AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST THE Poisonous Weeds OF HERETICAL BLASPHEMIES, Which
During the deplorable interval of Church Government have grown up in the
Reforming Church of England. As it was lately presented to the Church of God at
Great YARMOUTH. By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

August. 10. 1650.
Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.



London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith at the sign of the blew
Bible in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1650.

Christian Reader.
AS many other profitable Treatises formerly published by this Reverend Author;
So that called The Arraignment of the present Schism of New Separation in old
England, and this Antidote against Heretical Blasphemies, do represent him,
like that tree of blessing, which brings forth his fruit in his Psalm. 1. 3.
Prove. 25. 11.
season. The seasonablenesse of this Piece (which Gods good Providence has
brought to thine hand) will add both luster and life Ezekiel. 9. 4.
unto it, in the hearts of all them, who sigh and cry for the many abominable
blasphemies which are in these sad times, impudently belched out into the face
of Divine Majesty. The subject matter of this Treatise is necessary, that the
nature, kinds and degrees of blasphemy may be understood, that men guilty, may
be convinced, and all others secured from so horrid an evil, both as
Principals and Accessaries. And the manner of handling this Subject will render
it acceptable to the ingenuous and right godly Christian; for, the method is
clear, the phrase of speech smooth and pithy, the Scripture proofs apt and
pregnant; yea, there is a veyn of Scripture evidence and authority running
through the whole body of this discourse. Herein the learned and laborious
Author, shows himself 2 Timothy 2. 15.
to be approved unto God, a Workman, that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth. Although my ancient and increasing loves might move
me to give a larger Character of him, upon long experience* yet I will be
silent, for Prove. 31. 31.
his works do sufficiently praise him in the gates.

I am Thine in the Service of Christ. Simeon Ash.
August. 24. 1650.
To the CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian,
THose Preservatives which are soveraignly useful at all times, cannot in times
of common Contagion be reputed useless, or unseasonable. Upon that account it
is, that I have now adventured these few Meditations to a public view. Surely,
if ever there was a time of spiritual Contagion, such is this, whereinto
Providence has cast us at this day in this Nation; wherein the Plague of
Heretical Blasphemy is grown so desperately Epidemical, that many (once
seemingly precious) souls are now infected with it. Alas what sad tokens (I
cannot say Gods, but the Devils Tokens) are now to be seen upon some of them,
in whom not long since the Image of God to the judgment of Charity was
hopefully conspicuous; in so much that without a miracle of mercy there is
little hope of their Recovery. And who is there that has the heart of a
Christian, but out of a sad resentment of so dreadful an Evil yet growing and
spreading, would willingly contribute all possible Counsels and Endeavors for
the healing of it? To this end it is that I have now communicated this
Antidote, which (as I am assured it can be hurtful to none, so) if it may be
helpful to any, whether by way of Prevention, or Cure, I have what I aimed at,
and shall rest,

Thine in the service of our common Lord, JOH. BRINSLEY.
Yarmouth, August 22. 1650.
AN Antidote Against the Poisonous Weeds of Heretical BLASPHEMIES.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 2. For men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters,
Proud, [Blasphemers.]


IN the verse foregoing the Apostle gives his Timothy a general advertisement
concerning Evil times, which were to come. [This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come.] Sub extremis diebus comprehendit universum
Christianae Ecclesiae statum. Calv. ad locum. Ita tamen ut mali^a, de qua
loquitur, subinde majores vires sumat, and cum tempore crescat, usque ad
extremum diem. H^rming. ad loc.


In the last dayes], that is, hereafter, in succeeding times: both in Timothies
time, which the Apostle here has an eye unto, as appears from the fifth
verse of the Chapter, where he wills him to avoid such persons as afterward
he speaks of [from such turn away]; as also in after ages of the Church. So
Calvin apprehends it. By the last days (says he) the Apostle here understands
the whole state of the Church under the Gospel; which here he declares and
foretells should not be such a quiet and peaceable state as some happily
dreamed of, but a troublesome and dangerous state. In the last days perilous
times shall come.]

Perilous times] (...). Tempora difficilia, molesta, periculosa. Hard and
difficult times: Troublesome and Grievous times: perilous and dangerous times:
Times difficult, grievous, dangerous in general to all Christians, in special
to Timothies, the faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Formidolosa tempora (as the
Cicero.
Orator has it) Fearful, dreadful times; Such times (says the Apostle) [shall
come]: come upon the Church.

But how so? What is it that should make the times so bad, so dreadful? For
this he assigns the reason in verse 2. A reason taken from the evil
Qualities, and dispositions of men who should live in these times; For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, etc.]

Obs. Lo, what it is which makes evil times, viz. Evil men living in those
times. Herein it is that the Apostle places the evil of those times, which
here he speaks of, not in penal evils, evils of judgment, outward Calamities,
as War, Famine, Pestilence,. etc. (which a carnal eye looks upon as the only
things which make evil times), but in the evils of sin which abound in those
times. This, this it is which makes evil times. It is an evil time (says
the Prophet Amos cap. 5. 13.), but what made it so? Why the manifold
transgressions, and mighty sins of the people; (so the verse foregoing gives
the reason of it.) I, though the times should be never so successeful and
prosperous in all other respects, yet if sin abound in them, they are evil
times: (...), Difficult times, specially for the Ministers of God to bear up
head against the stream. Grievous times. To a gracious spirit nothing more
grievous then to see iniquity abounding, and so the name of God dishonored.
This was the Corrosive which galled and vexed Lots righteous soul, even the
filthy conversation of the wicked Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 7. And Perilous times,
being infectious times, wherein all that live in them are in danger in one kind
or other of being made partakers of the sins of others; either by complying
with them, or coming at them, or not mourning for them, or not appearing for
God against them as they ought to do.

Applic. Let it be taken notice of by the way; Brethren, there are many amongst
us, (I must not say all, for there are some who dream of golden times, and
glorious times, and blessed times, never better, how truly I shall show you
anon), but many and the greatest part) complain of evil times, difficult,
grievous, dangerous times; and therein they are not mistaken, for they are so
in truth. But what is it that makes them so? why, the evils of sin abounding
in these times. True indeed, there are other things which to flesh and blood
are hard, and grievous, and perilous. The sword is yet amongst us, and famine
is amongst us, and decay of trading is amongst us, and though not Pestilence,
yet some other diseases which are looked upon as to a degree infectious and
contagious, are amonst us. But behold greater evils then these. All kind of
sinful abominations are to be found in the midst of us. And these are they
which make the times to be so evil times.

Taking notice of this, withal take notice of the way, the next way, the only
way to mend these times. Every of us mend our selves; mend the Persons, and
mend the Times. As for judgments, it is in vain to repine and murmr at them,
to lift at them. This is but as the galled horse that seeks to shake off his
burden, which, being fastened to him, galleth him so much the more. Judgments
they must do the work for which they are sent, execute their Commission. Let
our hands be against the evils of sin. Every of us endeavoring according to
our (now almost forgotten) Covenant, to go each before other in a real
Reformation of our own hearts and lives. This is the way to make the street
clean; every one to sweep before his own door. And this is the way to make the
times better, every one to mend, to reform one. This is the truest Emondatio
temporum, amending of the times, to amend the persons in those times. So long
as men are such as the Apostle here describes some, it is impossible the times
should be good. No, they will be, they must be difficult, troublesome,
dangerous, evil times.

But what kind of men are they which have such a malign influence upon the
times, to make them so evil? This the Apostle sets forth in the sequel of this
verse; where he reckons up a Catalogue of vices, which if once they come to be
Epidemical, rife and common, they infect and poison the times, proving
dangerous and pernicious to the Church. The first is Self-love, (...) which the
Apostle here places in the front, as a file-leader, and that not without
cause; in as much as this vice makes way for, and ushereth in all the rest.
The second is Covetousness, (...), Love of money, which the Apostle in the
tenth verse of the sixth Chapter of the former Epistle calls the Root of all
evil. The third is Arrogancy, and the fourth Pride, two vices near a kin,
Cosen germans, (...), when men shall arrogate much unto themselves; looking
overly and superciliously upon others. The fifth is, that which I have singled
out from the rest, being led to it by the present occasion, Blasphemy; and upon
that I shall spend my following Meditations. Men shall be Blasphemers].

Blasphemers]. The word Originally is Greek, (...), retained in the Latin and
English. The derivation of the word will Eustathius.
lead us to the proper signification of it. (...), q. (...), (says the
Etymologist) impetere rumoribus, to assault one with rumors and false tales;
or rather (as it is more vulgarly taken) q. (...), Alterius famam maledictis
laedere, to Vide Bez. in Gr. Annot. in Mat. 9. 3. Aut quia est (...). Aretus
Problem. loc. 109. de Blasphemia.
wrong the good name of another. This is Blasphemy at large; any wrong, injury,
indignity offered to the good name, credit, reputation of another, whether of
God or of Man.

1. For Man, the wronging of his good name by slanderous, contumelious
speeches, it may be called Blasphemy. And so we find it, not only among
profane Writers, whith whom the word is common in that sense, but even in
sacred Writ. In that third of Titus v. 2. the Apostle charge Christians that
they speak evil of no man. The Original has it, Blaspheme no man, (...). Of
this kind of Blasphemy it is that the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. 8. where he
reckons up this amongst the Rags of the old Adam; which he requires Christians
to put off, [But now you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
blasphemie], viz. speaking evil of their neighbor. In this sense Paul says
of himself, 1 Cor. 4. 13. and Romans 3. 8. that he was defamed, slanderously
reported of: where in both places the word is, Blasphemed. This Saint Peter
tells us is the lot of Gods people to be thus Blasphemed, evil spoken of by
wicked men; 1 Pet. 4. 4. To wrong the name of any good man is Blasphemy at
large.

2. But most commonly in phrase of Scripture, and amongst Ecclesiastical
Writers* the word is taken in a more restrained sense, as relating unto God;
and it imports some derogation, some wrong or injury offered to the name of
God. Which may be done either by thought, word, or deed. By thought, when any
shall entertain any dishonorable opinions, or conceptions concerning God,
thinking otherwise of him then is meet. By word, when men shall utter and
express those dishonorable thoughts by disgraceful language, speaking
otherwise of God then is meet. In deed, when men shall do that which is highly
dishonorable unto God. Each of these may be called Blasphemy. There is a
Blasphemy in thought. It was Jobs fear concerning his sons, lest in the midst
of their mirth they should have Blasphemed God in their hearts, Job 1. 5. have
let in some dishonorable thoughts concerning the Majesty of God into their
hearts in the heat and liberty of their feasting. And there is a Blasphemy in
Deed. It is the Lords complaint against the Jews, Is. 65. 7. They have Hac
significatione peculiari usurpatur a sacris Scriptoribus nostris, quomodo etiam
apud Platonem bisponitur. Beza Gr. Ann. in Mat. 9. 3. (...) sunt hoc loco qui
in Deum probra congerunt, sed in genere maledici. Vide Leigh Critic. sacra* ex
Sculteto. Blasphemi, in Deum and ejus doctrinam, falsa and impia de eo
loquentes. Claud. Espencaeus ad loc. (...), in ipsum Deum maledici; nam* in hoc
sensueminen^iore sumendam hic hanc vocem, indicat ordo. Grotius. (...),
contemptores aliorum. Idem* ad loc. Epiph. Haeresi 26.
burnt Incense upon the Mountains, and Blasphemed me upon the Hills. There they
had done that which tended to the high dishonor of God, and so blasphemed him,
though not verbally and formally, yet actually and interpretatively. ^ut most
properly Blasphemy is an injury offered to the name of God by word. This is
Blasphemy in an Ecclesiastical sense; To speak impiously and wickedly, so as
either directly and immediately, or indirectly and interpretatively it reaches
unto the contumely of God himself.

Quaest. But what kind of Blasphemy is it which we meet with in the text? [Men
shall be blasphemers] but what kind of Blasphemers? whether of God or of Men?

Answ. Here Expositors are divided. Some understand it in the former sense,
translating the word barely maledici, Slanderers, Defamers, Evil-speakers; and
some of them restraining it only to Men. But others here look upon the Word
with another eye, conceiving the Apostle here principally to point at this
highest kind of evil speaking, impious speaking, and that either directly or
by consequence against God himself. So Espencaeus, Are^ius, Grotius,
[Blasphemers] viz. of God; And the last of them gives a reason why he
conceives it should be so; a reason taken from the order of the words, wherein
he apprehends a kind of Gradation. [Men shall be lovers of themselves,
Covetous, Boasters, Proud, (...), Contemners of other men (as he expounds the
Word) I, not sparing God himself. Blasphemers of him. And if that be true,
which Epiphanius with great probability conjectures, viz. that the Apostle here
in this description aims at those Heretics which should spring up in the
infancy of the Church, as viz. Simon, Menander, Ebion* Cerinthus, Carpocrates,
and the Gnostics; we shall not need to mince the matter; for such were they,
downright Blasphemers in an Ecclesiastical sense; Blasphemers of God. And that
the Apostle speaks here, if not of them, yet of such as they, it is rightly
and clearly collected from the sixth and eighth verses of the chapter. Where
showing, who and what they were whom he spoke of, [Of this sort (says he) are
they which creep into houses* and lead captive silly women, verse 6.] plainly
pointing out false teachers, Heretics, who vented and scattered their false
doctrines and heresies, clancularly and closely in corners, taking advantage
upon the Vide Engl. new Annot. in 2 Timothy 9. 6.
weaker sex, (as the devil at first did,) to make the first impression upon
them, as all Heretics in all ages ever have done, and at this day do. And
again verse. 8. As Jannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist
the truth, men of corrupt minds, concerning the faith reprobate. Such they were
whom the Apostle here speaks of, Blasphemous Heretics. And being such, we
may well conceive this to be the sin which here he charge upon them, viz.
Blasphemy in a restrained sense, even Blasphemy against God.

Having thus found out the kind of evil here charged, our next work must be yet
a little more fully to open the nature of it.

Blasphemy, in proper acceptance, what it is, I have already told you in the
general; It is any Injury offered to the name of God by word: Or speaking evil
of the name of God. So the Lord complains of it, Is. 52. 5. My name continually
every day is blasphemed. To which text the Apostle relates, Romans 2. 24. The
name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles] That is, evil-spoken of. Now for
a more particular explication, that we may dive a little into the bowels of
this sin, let me briefly open unto you these two things. First, What is meant
by the name of God. And secondly, How the name of God may be iujured by word,
evil-spoken of.

Q
1. For the former; by the name of God we are to understand any thing, whereby
God Himself or his Will, his Nature or his Mind, are made known to us, (Thou
shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, Command. 3.) Now this is
done many ways. As by his Titles, Attributes, Works, Word, Religion,
Ordinances, Image. His Titles, as Jehovah, Elohim, God, Lord. His Attributes or
Properties, as Power, Goodness, Mercy, Truth. His Works of Creation and
Providence. His Word, which is his mind and will revealed in the Scriptures.
Religion, the Doctrine and Practice of it. His Ordinances, Prayer, the public
Ministry of the Word, Sacraments, Sabbaths. His Image, whether Essential, as
it was in Christ, who is called the Image of the invisible God, 1 Col. 15. the
express Image of his person, Heb. 1. 2. which is called the name of God, Exodus
23. 21. My name is in him, (speaking of Christ): Or Accidental, as it is in
men, upon whom the name of God is called, as it is upon Magistrates, who are
therefore called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. 6. Exodus 22. 28. And upon Ministers who
stand in the place of God as his Ambassadors, acting in his name, and bearing
his name, (as it is said of Paul, Acts 9. 15.) And generally upon all the
faithful people of God, who bear the Image of their heavenly Father, and are
called by his name, as we have it, Deuteronomy. 28. 10. Jer. 14. 9, By these God
makes himself known unto us, and therefore each may be called his name.

Quest. 2, Now, How may this name of God be said to be injured, evil spoken of?

Answ. I answer in the general, when men shall abuse any of these by word,
speak contumeliously of them. This Contumely redounding unto God himself, every
word so spoken is Blasphemy, As

Titles of God are abused; whether by way of Incantation, as those Jewish
Exorcists called the name of Jesus over them which had evil spirits, Acts 19.
13. or by way of Execration, cursing the name of God, or by his name, which was
the Blasphemy of the Israelitish woman's son, Levit. 24. 11. who blasphemed
Vocem. Blasphemiae. Tremel.
the name of the Lord, and cursed; or by way of Pejeration, forswearing, or by
way of wicked swearing, which Tremelius renders Blasphemia, Blasphemy. Levit.
5. 1.

Attributes, and that three ways.

1. When men shall deny that unto God which properly belongs unto him, and is
agreeable to his nature: As when men shall deny him to be such a one as he has
revealed himself; denying him to be Omnipresent, Omniscient, Omnipotent: which
last was the Blasphemy of Rabshakeh and the servants of the King of Assyria,
who bade defiance unto God in point of power, as if he had not been able to
deliver Jerusalem out of the hands of their Master, 2 Kings 18. 35. compared
with chap, 19. 6.

2. When men shall attribute that unto God, which is not agreeable to his
nature: fasten dishonorable attributes upon him, taking up, and venting of
mean and low apprehensions concerning God, as the Heathens of old, and some
Heretics have done, and Idolaters, and blind ignorant persons daily do: who
misconceiving of God, thinking him to be like nnto themselves (as the Lord
says of the wicked man, Psalm. 50. 21.) express those their misconceivings, to
the disparaging of the Majesty of the infinite God.

3. When men shall attribute that unto the creature, which is proper Dicitur
hic (...), non qui Deo maledicit, sed qui quod Dei est sibi arrogat. Groti. ad
loc.
to the Creator: whether unto themselves; that is the Blasphemy which the
Scribes censure Christ for (though unjustly) Mat. 9. 2, 3. This man blasphemeth
(say they) viz. in taking upon him to forgive sins, which is a work proper
unto God. Or unto others, as when men shall make Gods of men, attributing
divine properties, or giving divine honor to them; as the People to Herod,
Acts 12. 22. And the Lystrians to Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. 11, 12, 13. and
as Court-parasites do sometimes to their Princes, and Romish flatterers to
their lord god the Pope (as some of them have not spared to call him*) Each of
these is Blasphemy. Blasphemy against the Attributes of God.

works of God; His works of Creation and Providence. And thus again God may be
blasphemed three ways.

1. When men shall deny these works, or either of them: deny the works of
Creation, as those Philosophers who would have Opinio Epicuri Deum non curare
res humanas; quae videtur etiam Aristotel^s fuisse sententia: Gro. in 1 Timothy 6.
4.
the world to be from Eternity, coexistent with God himself. Deny the work of
Providence, as Epicurus did, and Aristotle is conceived to have done;
attributing the events of things, either to the course of nature, to Fate and
Destiny, or to Chance and Fortune.

2. When men shall villifie, speak disgracefully of the one or other of these
works* Of the work of Creation* Momus like carping at Gods workmanship in any
of his Creatures. Of the work of Providence, quarrelling with his
dispensations, finding fault with his ordering and disposing of the course of
things, as if it were not in Wisdom, in Justice, etc.

3. When they shall attribute the works of God unto Satan, as the malicious
Jews, who ascribed those miraculous works wrought by the divine power of Christ
unto Beelzebub, Mat. 12. 24. Thus is God blasphemed in his works.

Word of God, the sacred Scriptures. When men shall derogate from their
Authority, Sufficiency, Perfection, Certainty. Such is the Blasphemy of those
who deny them to be the Word of God; or speak contumeliously and disgracefully
of them, as a dead letter, a Lesbian leaden Rule a nose of Wax, Inkie Divinity,
which is the language of some of the Romanists, and others.

Religion of God; When men shall speak against it, as the Jews did against
Paul's Doctrine, Acts 13. 45. They spoke against those things which were spoken
by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.] Or having embraced the true Religion
of God, shall afterward renounce it, make defection from it, whether through
fear, as Paul says that by punishing and persecuting of Christians he made
them to Blaspheme, Acts 26. 11. viz. by abjuring or renouncing their Religion.
Or for any other respect: Thus Hymeneus and Alexander are said to Blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. ult. viz. by making shipwreck of the Faith which they had professed,
and so speaking evil of it.

Ordinances of God, when men shall speak disgracefully of them, any of them; as
of the Ministry of the Word, as they did who called Paul's preaching Babbling,
Acts 17. 18. and the Grecians who accounted it foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. Or of
the Sacraments or Sabbaths, as Jerusalems adversaries did, of whom it is said,
They mocked at her Sabbaths, Lam. 1. 7.

Essential Image, his Son Christ, who is God equal with his Father: and so what
is done to the one by way of honor or dishonor, redoundeth to the other, as
our Savior himself tells the Jews, John 5. 23. but also to his accidental
Image. Thus God is blasphemed in speaking evil of the lawful Magistrate,
concerning whom the prohibition is, Thou shall not revile the Gods (or Judges),
nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Exodus 22* 28. This also is Blasphemy. Naboth
has blasphemed God and the King, King. 21. 10. They speak evil of Dignities,
(says the Apostle of some 2 Pet. 2. 10. (...) blaspheme them. So in
reproaching and slandring the Ministers of Christ. This also in Paul's language
is Blasphemy, Romans 3. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 13. So again to speak evil of any of the
Saints of God, and that because they are such, this also is Blasphemy, 1 Pet*
4. 4. They speak evil of you]. Blaspheme you. Such are the reproaches and
contumelies which are cast upon any for righteousness sake; no less then
Blasphemies, striking at God through their sides, in whom Isa. 37* 23, 24.
his Image is conspicuous. All these ways the name of God may be said to be
blasphemed. So as there are diverse kinds of blasphemies against God.

And as there are diverse kinds, so there are diverse degrees. There is a
Blasphemy which is of Ignorance, and there is a Malicious Blasphemy. The former
when men speak evil of what they know not: speak evil of God* of Christ, of
his Religion, etc. because they know no better. Such was Paul's Blasphemy before
his conversion. I was a Blasphemer (says he) But how so? I did it ignorantly,
1 Timothy 1. 13. The latter is, when men having been enlightened, and having
tasted of the heavenly gift, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc.
(as the Apostle describes the qualification of an Apostate, Heb. 6. 4, 5.)
having received the knowledge of the truth (as we have it, Heb. 10. 26.) shall
afterward fall away, so as to speak evil of that way wherein before they
walked, to deride and mock it; this our Savior calls Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, Matthew* 12. 31. viz. not against the person, but against the work of
the Holy Ghost; against the work of Illumination, and Conviction in the soul.
Of all kinds and degrees of Blasphemy this is most dreadful. Blasphemy, though
it be of ignorance, is a sin of a high nature. So Paul looked upon it after his
conversion; reckoning up this as one of the sins which made him in his own
apprehension the Chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. But malicious Blasphemy is
inexpiable; a sin, and the only sin exempt from mercy. All manner of sin and
Blasphemy shall be forgiven, but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men, Matthew. 12. 31.

Thus have I with what brevity I could, laid before you the nature, kinds, and
degrees of this sin, which the Apostle here foretells should in after times
prove rife and common in the Church. [Men shall be Blasphemers], speaking evil
of the name of God, and so wronging and dishonouring him in his Titles,
Properties, Works, Word, Religion, Ordinances, Image. Some in one kind, some
in another. Such he says there should be in Timothies time, and in after ages;
the Church should seldom want some or other of this kind of men.

Quest. But who, or what were they of whom the Apostle here foretells that
they should prove so desperately wicked? Men shall be Blasph^mers]. But what
men?

Answ. We answer, The men here pointed at are

1. Generally, Christians, not such as were without, Heathens, or Jews, open
and professed enemies to Christ and his Gospel; but such as made an outward
profession of Christianity; and such as pretended themselves members of the
Church. So much we may collect from the fifth verse of the Chapter, where the
Apostle describes those of whom he here speaks, to be such as had (...), a
form of godliness, a vizard of piety, a formal profession of Faith and
Holiness, though denying the power of it. Such they were to be for the
general, Professors.

2. More particularly, not only Professors, but Teachers. Such as took upon
them to teach and instruct others, and were very active, zealous and
industrious in that way. So the Apostle proceeds in his description in the
following verse 6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, etc.] Such as
under a pretense and color of propagating and promoting the Gospel, went about
venting their erroneous and heretical opinions, and Blasphemies, seeking to
make Proselytes, to gain disciples, corrupting those with their pestilent
doctrines who would hearken to them. Such were they, of whom the Apostle here
foretells, they should be found guilty of this great Evil, [Men shall be
Blasphemers].

So he foretold it, and accordingly it has come to pass. Such there were not
a few in Timothies time. In the first Centurie, in the Apostles times, and soon
after, how many of this brood? such as pretending to an outward profession of
the Gospel, yet were blasphemers in some kind or other* Such were Hymeneus and
Alexander and Philetus, of whom our Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 Timothy 2.
17. who amongst others, ((...) of whom is Hymeneus, etc.) had put away Faith
(the Doctrine of Faith) and a good conscience: Erring concerning the faith]. In
particular, denying the Resurrection of the dead, saying that it was past
already. Most probably maintaining their Error by open invectives against that
Article of the Faith: whereupon the Apostle charge them with Blasphemy; for
the cure of which he delivers them up unto Satan by the censure of
Excommunication, 1 Timothy 1. 20. Of this sort were those in Saint John's time, of
whom we find mention, Revel. 2. In the Church of Smyrna there were some which
stood chargable with Blasphemy. [I know the Blasphemy of them which say they
are Jews, and are not, but are of the Synagogue of Satan, (says the Spirit,
verse 9.) Such a generation of men there were in that Church, who said they
were Jews, bragged of the truth of their Religion, whilst they wanted both the
inward power and outward evidences of it; being in truth the Synagogue of
Satan, under his government, and acted by him; and (as it is probable) these
slandered and reviled those which were not of their way, inveighing against the
truths of God* and so became Blasphemers. Such there were also in the Church of
Pergamus, some who held the Doctrine of Balaam, ver. 14. Others that held the
Doctrine of the Nicolaitans* ver. 15. both heretically Blasphemers. And such
also was that woman Jezebel in the Church of Thyatira, v. 20. who called her
self a Prophetess; some noted wicked woman* like unto that old Jezebel* or of
the same name with her, or both; who called her self a Prophetess, pretending
(it may be) to Revelations, or at least to a more then ordinary measure of the
spirit* and so took upon her to teach and instruct others; and by that means,
being naught her self* she taught others to be like her self* seducing them
both to corporal and spiritual fornication, Adultery and Idolatry; and that (as
is most probable) under Religious pretenses; which may well be called Blasphemy.

To these Scripture instances we may add those other which I mentioned before;
Blasphemers upon record in Ecclesiastical History, in the first Century; such
was Simon-Magus the father of August. de Haeresi.
Heretics, of whom it is recorded that he gave out himself to be God, and that
it was he which gave the Law at Mount Sina unto Moses in the person of God the
Father; and appeared in the person of the Son in Tiberius his time* and
descended upon the Apostles in those cloven tongues of fire in the person of
the Holy Ghost at the day of Pentecost: and so required Divine honor to be
given to him; which accordingly it was at his coming to Rome, where they, who a
little before had refused to acknowledge the Divinity of Christ, now give
divine honor to a seducing Sorcerer, setting up his Image with this
superscription, Simoni deo sancto, to Simon an holy God. Out of his ashes
sprung up Menander, in many things like unto his master Simon, but in absurdity
of monstrous opinions far exceeding him. And after him that pair of Heretics,
Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the Divinity of Christ: The latter of which
first broached the opinion of the grosser kind of Chyliasts or Millenaries,
about the personal reign of Christ upon earth, viz. that after the
Resurrection Christ August. de Haeres.
should reign upon earth for a thousand years, during which time the subjects
of this Kingdom should enjoy all kind of sensual pleasures and carnal
contentments. About the same time* or not long after* sprung up that infamous
Carpocrates, from whom came that wicked generation of the Gnostics. A company
of blasphemous Heretics called by the name of Gnostics, because they
pretended to a more then ordinary knowledge in dark and hidden mysteries; whose
opinions and doctrines were so detestable, so abominable, Simpsons History of
the Church. Cent* 2. de Haeres.
that I find some blaming Epiphanius for leaving any record of them to
posterity; they being such as cannot but offend any chaste ear to hear, or eye
to read: Such as justly denominated them (as Augustine tells us they were
called) Borboritae, or Caenosi, men polluted, and wallowing in the mire of all
speculative and practical filthiness. Such were there, some, and not a few, in
those Primitive and purest times of the Church. And such there have been more
or less in all ages of the Church since.

O that I might not say that some such there are to be found in this Kingdom*
in the Church at this day! But alas how is this Prophecy of the Apostles
fulfilled and made good amongst us in these last and worst of times? [In the
last days, etc. mon shall be Blasphemers]. And is it not so? Wherefore is it
that we are met together this day? but to bewail the Blasphemies, the hideous,
horrid, prodigious Blasphemies which swarm almost in all places of this Nation
at this day? To go about to reckon them up, would be a work as endless as
fruitless. Nay a work in attempting whereof I should deserve the like censure
as the aforesaid Historian has incurred; there being some, and not a few of
them so horridly impious, that it is not fit they should ever be so much as
named among Christians; Such, as should I rehearse them, I know they would make
all your ears to tingle.

Not to speak here of the Blasphemies of many wicked and profane persons, of
whom we may say as the Spirit does of that great Whore, Revel. 17. 3. they are
full of names of Blasphemy: not sparing to pierce through, to rend and tear
the sacred name of God in pieces by impious hellish* Oaths and Imprecations Not
regarding how contumeliously they speak of God, of his works, of his Religion,
Ordinances, Officers, Image. Such a generation there is to be found amongst us,
true Malignants, such as David describes, Psalm. 73. 9. They set their mouth
against the heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth]: they speak
profanely of God, and of his works of Providence: Such is their pride that they
speak of every thing at their own pleasure, without any regard either to God or
man. Not unlike that Beast in the Revelation, Rev. 13. 6. of whom it is said
that, he opened his mouth in Blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name,
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven^ So do they, they spare not
to open their mouths in Blasphemi^ against God, against his Religion, his
Ordinances, his Saints, ^^ch as serve God in holiness and righteousness,
being fellow-Citizens of Heaven, and of Gods household. Thus being imbittered
against the true Religion of God, at least against the power and practice of
it, they care not how basely they speak of it, and of those who hold it forth
by a visible profession and practice; not caring what opprobrious and
disgraceful terms they cast upon them, and all for their holiness sake, for
the Image sake which they bear; which (as I have shown you) is no less then
Blasphemy against God, whose servants they are, and whose cognizance they wear.
But to leave them;

The Blasphemy which we are this day principally to take notice of, is the
Blasphemy of those who say they are Jews, but are not; such as pretend to
Religion, making an outward profession of it, and yet are Blasphemers. And are
there not such to be found in this Nation that I say not in this place)?
Professors, and yet Blasphemers. Men that profess to stand for God, and for
Christ, and for his Religion, pretending to more of God then others, and yet
Blaspheme all. Would to God the charge did not lie so justly against some, and
many of this kind. Should we take a general survey of some particulars; what
one Article of the Christian faith shall we find which is not by some such
either denied or perverted? As for God himself, though he be acknowledged in
word, yet how is he in truth denied by those who will not allow him to be a
distinct Essence, subsisting by himself? Such is the Doctrine and language of
some. There is no God but what is within us. As for that Orthodox distinction
betwixt Essence and Person, how is it exploded? The very name of Trinity jeared
at; and the thing renounced. The Deity of Christ the Son of God, as also of the
Holy Ghost, and their equality whith the Father, how is it professed against? I
might go on, and show you the like in many other of the Articles, if not all.
As also touching the Scriptures, which are made to be no other but a humane
breath, and that blowing (as the wind) contrary ways; containing in them many
silly, vain, gross and contrary things, the Prophets and Apostles therein
(poor men) speaking according to the present tempers of their spirits (it is
their own language). And so for the Ordinances of God, that they are poor and
low dispensations; worthless, useless, at least to them. All Religious duties
in public or private, are but forms, bodily exercises, merely legal. And
there may be as much of God seen and enjoyed in any servile labor, as in the
Ministry of the Word, Prayer, etc. To these I might add the opprobrious and
disgraceful language that is poured out upon the servants of God; and that not
only his servants at large, (as all true Christians are), who if they be not of
their way, are sure to hear ill enough, what ever else they be; but also his
servants in Ordinary, the Ministers of the Gospel, who are reproached and
vilified, and disgraced, and that not for any personal miscarriages; See the
Testimony of the truth of Jesus Christ by the Ministers of London, Anno 1648.
Mr. Bartlets Sovereign Balsom. in fine.
but with reference to their public capacities, as Ministers; the very office
it self being decryed as of no longer use in the Church of God. But I find
this work already done to my hand by others, who undertaking to give testimony
of the Truth of Jesus Christ, have posted up some of these Heretical
Blasphemies in aeternam rei Infamiam, presenting them to the view of the world,
to their eternal Infamy.

Thus Professors not a few are turned Blasphemers. I, some who (at least in
their own apprehensions) seemed to be of the highest form. I more, such as
have been, or have taken upon them to be Teachers and Instructers of others. So
fully is Paul's Prophecy here fulfilled, and accomplished amongst us; never
more, and more desperate Blasphemers of this kind to be found in any age, in
any Nation of the world then at this day in this.

Quest. But how comes it so to pass, that this so ill, so poisonous a weed
should thus spring and grow in this Garden of God? And that in this weeding
time; in this time of pretended, and by many really intended Reformation? It
will not be amiss a little to enquire into the causes and occasions of it.

Reas. 1. Deus non est Author cujus est ultor. Fulgent. Comfort for Believers*
etc. page 36, 37.
Answ. 1. For answer (in the first place). This God permits. I do not say he
is the Author of it, (That is one of the Blasphemies of the Times, to make God
the Author of sin, and not of the Action only, in and with which sin is, but of
the very Pravitie, Ataxie, Anomie, Irregularity, and sinfulness it self which
is in it, in which terms it is by some delivered); but yet he permits it,
and that with an effectual Permission: which he does

1. In a way of Judgment, punishing one sin with another. Men have been
ungrateful, unfruitful, unanswerable to times and means, not walking worthy of
the Gospel, not prizing it, but waxing wanton under it; therefore has God
given them up after this manner. This is the Reason which the Apostle gives
why the Gentiles were given up to such Moral and Practical wickedness as they
were, Romans 1. 21, 24. Because when they knew God (viz. by the light of nature)
they did not glorify him as God, (give that honor and respect unto him which
they could not but apprehend due to the Divine Majesty), neither were
thankeful, (for those common mercies which they received from his hand,
Therefore God gave them up unto uncleanness, etc.] so punishing the breach of
the first table by giving them up to the violation of the second. And for the
like cause it is that God in his just judgment sometimes gives up men to this
height of speculative wickedness, to turn Heretical Blasphemers: Because when
they knew God (by the light of the Word), they did not glorify him as God (by
serving him according to his will revealed), therefore has he thus given them
up unto Satan's delusions. Whilst the Truth was held forth unto them, they did
not afford it an answerable reception. So the Apostle renders the reason of it,
2 These. 2 ^0, 11. where speaking of Apostates who had made defection from the
faith, Because (says he) they received not the love of the Truth (that is,
(says Grotious) they did not prize the love of God in holding forth his Truth,
the truth of the Gospel unto them; or rather they did not entertain that
truth, embracing and laying it. up in their hearts as they should have done),
Therefore God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe a lye].
Therefore he gives men up to the embracing of Heretical and soul-damning
doctrines. This God does in a way of judgment to some.

2, And secondly, he does it by way of Probation and Trial unto others. Surely
for this end is this hour of temptation come upon the Church at this day, to
try them that dwell upon the earth, Rev. 3. 10. To try the Faith and Patience
and Constancy of those who are sound, and will cleave unto God, and unto his
Truth. This reason the Apostle gives why there must be Heresies in the Church,
1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies (says he) among you, that they which are
approved may be made manifest]. And so we may say, There must be Blasphemies,
God sees it expedient to permit them, and that to this end amongst others,
that they which are (...), Sincere and constant unto God and his Truth may be
made manifest to themselves and others. This is one of Gods winnowing seasons,
wherein by this wind he severs the sound and weighty corn from the chaff:
showing who they are that are stable with him, and who are otherwise.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, as God permits this in justice and wisdom for these, and other ends
known to himself, so Satan acts it. This has the Enemy done (says the
Husbandman in the parable concerning the Tares which were grown up in his filled
among his good corn), Matthew. 13. 28. These Tares are Schismatics and
Heretics, with Eng. New Annor.
their Heretical Doctrines, which like Tares, intoxicate the brains of men which
will take them down. Now these are of Satan's sowing. That (...), that envious
man (as he is there called), envying to see Gods corn grow and flourish, to
see the prosperity of the Church, and the flourishing of the Gospel, he poisons
the ground with this pernicious Tinetare. This he does to cross and hinder
Gods work in his Church. Even as in the rebuilding of the Walls of Jerusalem, he
made use of those Samaritans, (pretended friends, but real adversaries to the
Jews), to hinder the work what they could, Ezra. 4. 1. etc. Even so in this
time of an intended Reformation, he has stirred up many such Heretical spirits
to render all endeavors that way ineffectual. Even as God once frustrated that
design for the building of Babel by dividing the languages of the builders; so
does Satan now by a like practice, seek to hinder the building of Jerusalem,
the Church of God amongst us, by dividing the Hearts and Tongues, and Pens of
men; that whilst some speak the language of Canaan, of heaven, holding forth
the Orthodox truth of God, others who pretend to be builders too, should speak
the language of Hell, holding forth pernicious Errors, Heretical Blasphemies.

Reas. 3.
3. Again, thus it comes to pass through the remissness and negligence of
those to whom the care of the Church is or should have been committed. Whilst
men slept (says the Parable) the Enemy sowed Tares among the wheat, Matthew. 13.
25. whilst those who are, or should be, betrusted with the Church, either fall
asleep, or are laid asleep, so as they do not act so vigilantly and vigorously
as they ought to do for the welfare and preservation thereof, such Tares, such
evil Instruments creep in. A truth lamentably experimented in this Nation at
this day. Where, whilst the golden reins of Ecclesiastical Government have
been relaxed and let loose; and the Civil sword otherways employed, so as
Errors of an inferior alloy have been connived at, and de facto tolerated, men
(as the nature of sin and error is) growing worse and worse through this
Liberty, have at the length arrived at this desperate height, to speak
Blasphemies, write Blasphemies, Print Blasphemies, daring to pour out their
Vials upon the Sun, cast a dark foil upon the clearest and most comfortable
truths upon the whole Religion of God.

Reas. 4.
Fourthly, again, In men themselves we shall find somewhat which disposes
them unto this great evil. Men do not ordinarily become Blasphemers at the
first. Nemo repent fit pessimus; They climb to this height of wickedness by
certain degrees and steps. Some of which we shall meet with in the former part
of this verse, whereof the text is part. Men shall be lovers of their own
selves, etc.] Mark how men come to be Blasphemers. First, they are Lovers of
themselves, seeking their own things, their own honor, credit, preferment;
making self the end of all their actions. And secondly, they are Covetous,
accounting gain to be godliness. And thirdly, they are vainglorious,
arrogating much unto themselves, highly conceited of their own worth: And
fourthly, they are proud, supercilious, despisers of others, thinking meanly of
others in comparison of themselves. And being such, no wonder now they come to
be Blasphemers* When Satan has thus got them up to the top of the Pinnacle, now
he casts them down; having got them to the top of the Ladder, now he turns
them off, putting them upon such desperate ways and courses (unless mercy
step in) to their utter destruction.

Applic.
Thus you see that it is so, and why it is so. That which now remains is the
Application. Which I shall direct first Generally, then Specially. Generally to
all Christians: Specially to Timothies, the Ministers of the Gospel.

Use. 1.
1. For all Christians, Let not them (in the first place) be offended at such
times, such Persons. So effended, as to like the Church of God, the Religion of
God ever the worse for that. A needful Caveat; this being a thing which men
are very subject to. It is not for nothing that our Savior pronounces a
blessing upon them who shall not be offended at him. Blessed is he whosoever
shall not be offended at me, Matthew. 11. 6. This he foresaw the world would be
subject to, to take offense at him, at his personal condition, the meannesse of
it, and the sufferings attending it. Herewith the Disciples themselves were
offended. So their Master foretold it would be with them, Matthew. 26. 31. All ye
shall be offended because of me this night] And accordingly it came to pass.
When they saw him apprehended, carried away, and used in that disgraceful
manner, they began to entertain other thoughts of him then before they had
done; and failed in the duty and respect which they ought unto him. And as at
his personal condition, so at the condition of his Church. This men are subject
to be offended at, as in regard of troubles and persecutions arising from
without, (of which our Savior speaks in the Parable, Matthew. 13. 21. whereby
the stony ground setting forth the Temporary Professor, he gives this
character of him, that however at the first he hears and receives the word
with joy, yet when tribulation and persecution arises, by and by he is
offended:) So also in regard of those Pests of Heretics and Blasphemers which
are bred in the womb, and nursed up in the bosom of the Church. These are in
themselves a great eyesore, a great offense. But let them not be so to any of
us. Neither is there any reason they should be so. This is no other then what
the Spirit of God has forewarned us that it should be: And therefore
forewarned us, that we should not be offended when we see it come to pass. For
this end it was that our Savior foretold his Disciples what times should
follow after his departure from them; These things have I spoken unto you
(says he) that ye should not be offended, John 16. 1. And for the like cause
did the Apostle here advertise Timothy of what manner of men the Church of God
should be pestered and infested within succeeding times, that neither he nor
others might be offended at that Apostatizing generation, so as to like the
Gospel ever the worse for their sakes.

And this use let us make of this Premonition. There is sprung up in the bosom
of this Church within these late years, such a generatio n of Apostates,
Heretical Blasphemers, such, and so many, as scarce any age (all things
considered) ever bred Professors turned Blasphemers. Those who had lain in the
Churches bosom sucking the sincere milk of the word from her Breasts, the
Scriptures; held forth the profession of Religion in an exemplary and more then
ordinary way, yet they are fallen off; now speaking evil, (I cannot say of the
things which they knew not, (for then (as our Savior said of the persecuting
Jews to whom he had preached, John 15. 22.) they had not had sin,) their sin
had not been so great) but of the things which they have known and approved;
speaking evil of the Truths of God, which have been precious unto them*
speaking evil of the ways of God, wherein they have conscientiously walked;
it may be even jearing at some of the most fundamental doctrines and practices
of Christian Religion; speaking evil of the Ordinances of God, which have been
to them heretofore the avowed power of God to their salvation: Now they look
upon them as poor low dispensations, empty formalities, things which are
beneath them, and no longer useful to them. Never such a scandal given, never
so much dirt cast upon the face of Religion by any generation of men in any
place, in any age of the world, since it was called Christian. Well, yet let
not us be offended at all this. It was a good resolution in Peter, (had he not
taken it up in his own strength), Though all men shall be offended at thee
(speaking to his Master) yet will I never be offended, Matthew. 26. 33. Every of
us take up the like in the strength of Divine grace assisting; Though many be,
though all should be offended at the Religion of God, yet so will not we be.
Though never so many scandals be given by others, yet they shall not be taken
by us; so taken, as that we should in the least be distasted with the ways and
Truths of God. As for Heretics and Blasphemers, such in all ages there have
been, and such there must be. So says Paul of the former, There must be
Heresies (or Sects) 1 Cor* 11. 18. And so may we say of the latter. There must
be Rlasphemers amongst us, God sees it expedient to permit it, for those
forementioned ends, and other ends known to himself. Let not any of us then be
scandalized by it, offended at it.

Use. 2.
2. And as not offended at it, so not disanimated, disheartened by it. A thing
which Christians in this case are no less subject to then the former. And
indeed there may seem to be a cause for it. To see such a flood of waters cast
out of the mouth of the red Dragon, who but may fear the carrying away the
woman by it? To see such a deluge of Heresies and Blasphemies cast out of the
mouth of Satan, who but may fear the drowning of the Church? the extinguishing
of the light of the Gospel amongst us? But let not all this disanimate. It is
one end wherefore Paul here gives his Timothy warning of this desperate
generation of men, that he might not be out of heart, discouraged by them, as
if the Gospels cause were desperate; but rather to steel his spirit, and to
make him so much the more courageous for God and his Truth, bearing up head
against those Errors of the times (as I shall have occasion to show you
hereafter). And this use let us make of this advertisement. Now that we see it
come to pass according as the Apostle here foretold it, let us not be
disanimated by it. The Husbandman when he goes into his field in the spring
time, it may be there he espieth abundance of Weeds growing up amongst his
corn, and so much the more by how much he has bestowed the more cost upon it
by manuring it; but this does not put him out of heart. He knows that they
will all wither before the harvest. Upon the like consideration let the Lords
people, those which wish well unto his Religion, bear up their hearts and
spirits in the midst of these perilous and amazing times. In this spring time
of desired Reformation, there are abundance of evil weeds, Heresies and
Blasphemies, that are sprung up in this Church of God, threatening to eat out
the good corn; and for the present they are not only an eyesore, an offense,
but an annoyance, hindering not a little the growth and flourishing of it (I
mean of the Church and Gospel). But here is the comfort, before the Harvest all
these shall wither, and the good corn, the Truth of God, shall get the upper
hand. Magna est veritas, Great is the Truth of God, and it shall prevail
against all the dreams and fancies of men. The earth shall swallow up all these
waters. As it was with the waters which drowned the world in the days of Noah;
when they had done the work for which they were sent, washed that sinful
generation from off the face of the earth, then they return again to that
Abyss, that great deep from whence they came, Genesis 7. 11. and 8. 3. And so
shall it be with this flood of Heresies and Blasphemies which is broke forth
upon this Nation at this day; when these have done the work for which they are
permitted and sent, viz. made manifest those which are approved, they shall
return again to that Abyss, that great deep, that bottomless pit, the pit of
Hell, from whence they came.

And therefore for us, let us in the mean time with Noah and his family, keep
close within the Arc, within the Arc of the Church, waiting for the abating
and drying up of these waters; not doubting but that God in his due time will
find an Ararat for his poor weather-beaten Church to rest upon. Thus be not
offended, be not discouraged by what is come to pass amongst us.

Use. 3.
3. But yet (in the third place) do not overlook it, slight it, as not worth
the taking notice of. So do they seem to do which cry up the present times for
such glorious times, such happy and blessed times. Now surely, if blessed Paul
were alive in these times, he would not think them so. In his judgment such
times as these, wherein Professors turn Blasphemers, they are (...), Difficult,
Grievous, Perilous times, Evil times. And I cannot but wonder how any one that
has the eye af a Christian, should look otherwise upon these times. The spirit
of God in Scripture measures the goodness and badnesse of times by the
binding and loosing of Satan. In Revel. 20. v. 2. there we read of the binding
of Satan for a thousand years, that he should not deceive the Nations. There is
the prosperous state and condition of the Church, a good time. In the seventh
verse of that chapter we read of the loosing of Satan. [When the thousand years
shall be expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his Prison, and shall go out to
deceive the Nations.] There are sad times for the Church, Evil times. And
surely such are the times whereinto we are fallen. How is Satan let loose
amongst us, even to the deceiving of the Elect, if it were possible? How many
of those who have had the name of Christ called upon them, written upon their
foreheads, (I, and we hope upon their hearts too, are deceived by the subtilty
of Satan, and carried away even to the highest of Evils, even unto Blasphemy.
Professors turned Blasphemers. Surely this is no other but an Evil time. a
Perilous time, a Sad time. So let us look upon it.

And so looking upon it, let us be accordingly affected with it, mourning for
the evils in these times: Not so much for Penal evils, the outward Calamities
and Judgments which are amongst us, (which yet are to be laid to heart) as for
the sinful Abominations which are to be found in the midst of us which are
indeed the dreadfulest of Judgments. Mourn we for these. Such, all such, and
only such they were, whom the Angel had Commission to mark out for temporal
salvation and deliverance, viz. such as sighed and cried for all the
Abominations that were in the midst of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. 4. For these sins
the Land mourns at this day; and (unless God in mercy step in) is like to
mourn yet more then ever. For these let us mourn.

And as for all the rest of the abominations, so for this in a special manner.
The horrid and prodigious Blasphemies that are to be found in the midst of us.
O let every soul that hears them, or hears of them be thus affected with
them. So were the people of God amongst the Jews wont to be affected with this
sin. No sin went so near their hearts as this, this of Blasphemy. So much
they were wont to express by the rending of their garments at the hearing of
the name of God* blasphemed. So did Hezekiah's Commissioners, Eliakim and the
rest; when they heard Rabshakeh's Blasphemies, they rent their clothes, Isa.
36. ult. And so did Hezekiah himself, when it was by them reported to him, he
did the like, chap. 37. verse 1. The like did the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas,
when they heard the Blasphemy of the Lystrians, crying up them for gods, They
rent their clothes, Acts 14. 14. This did they to express the rending of their
hearts with grief and indignation at what they heard, or heard of. And what
cause have we to do the like, who hear of those horrid Blasphemies which are so
rife in this Nation at this day?

Especially when we consider from whom these Blasphemies come, from what mouths
they break forth. Not from black profane, unhallowed mouths, from which little
other language can be expected; but from the mouths of those who style
themselves Saints, such as say they are Jews, pretending to an high
profession, and extraordinary power of piety. Now surely this is no small
aggravation of their sin, and so should be of our sorrow. The Jews had a Canon
(as Ainsworth reports it out of their Maimonie), that whosoever heard Blasphemy
of the name, whether he Ainsworth in Levit 24* 11.
heard it himself, or heard it from the mouth of another, he was bound to rend
his clothes. But he that heard it from the mouth of a Heathen was not bound to
rend his clothes. And Eliakim and Shebna had not rent their clothes (say they),
but that Rabshaketh was an Apostate from the faith.] Surely no Blasphemy to be
so much laid to heart and lamented, as the Blasphemy of Apostatized
Professors. For this mourn we, and that in a threefold respect.

1. As it is a sin: a heinous sin whereby the name of God is exceedingly
dishonored. The name of God! It should be dear to every Christian, even dearer
then his own life. So it was to Moses and Paul, who rather desired to have
their names blotted out of the book of life, and to be accursed from Christ,
then that his name should suffer through the miscarriage of his people, Exodus
32. 32. Romans 9. 3. And if so, how deeply should this affect us, to hear the
name of God thus dishonored, thus Blasphemed as it is?

2. As it is a Judgment. Many judgments there are abroad amongst us at this day
which call for Humiliation, (deserving some of them to be bewailed with tears
of blood), but none like unto this. Of all judgments none like spiritual
judgments, judgments seazing upon the spirits of men. And such is this. A
spiritual judgment, and that a dreadful one: that men professing the name of
Christ, and pretending to Religion should be given up to such a (...), such a
Reprabate mind, a mind so void of judgment. Here is cause of deep lamentation.

Propter talia delicta, and fames, and terrae motus, and pesses eveniunt. Vide
Alsted. Theolog. Casaum. cap. 15. Cas. 5.
3. And thirdly, as it is a Prodromus a forerunner of judgment. So that good
Emperor Justinian looked upon it, who making this sin Capital, gives this
reason for it. Propter talia delicta, etc. For sins of this nature come
Famines, and Earthquakes, and Pestilences. And surely such black clouds are
full of water. Such horrid sins are full of divine wrath; threatening us in this
Nation at this day, not only with temporal plagues, but with spiritual
judgments, even the removing of our Candlestick. When so many Dorrs are
striking at the light, who but may fear the putting out of the Candle? In this
threefold respect mourn we for this evil as it is a sin, as it is a judgment,
as it is a forerunner of judgment; that so the first may be pardoned, the
second removed, the third prevented.

Use. 4.
And being thus affected with it, now take we heed that we be not partakers in
it. This is the counsel which Paul gives to his Ephesians, cap. 5. ver. 7.
Having made mention of some wrathprovoking sins, and sinners, as Fornicatours,
unclean persons, covetous, etc. he subjoynes, Be not ye therefore partakers
with them]. And the same counsel the voice from heaven suggests to the people
of God concerning Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins]. And let the same counsel be acceptable unto us. We
hear of many wrath-provoking sins which are abroad, this amongst the rest, of
Blasphemy. [Men are Blasphemers]. Take we heed that we be not partakers with
them, partakers in their sin, and that whether as Principals or Accessories.

Principals, Lest we also should fall into the same evil. This use the Apostle
Saint Peter makes of the very like Premonition to that in the Text, 2 Pet. 2.
17. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, (know that
dangerous Seducers shall come, such as other of the Apostles had given them
warning of, and himself had foretold and described, cap. 2. ver. 1. There shall
be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies,
denying the Lord that bought them], Through whose means many should be seduced,
as it there follows, v. 2. Many shall follow their pernicious ways, etc.)
beware (says he) lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from your own steadfastness.] And let the like Caveat be directed to every
of us; which is not so needless as some happily may imagine. Time was (and that
not long since) when some of those who are now deeply engaged in the guilt of
this sin, would have thought themselves as free from any danger of it as the
best of us now can. Should one some few years since have come and told some of
them, that they should do thus, and thus; that they should turn Blasphemers,
that they should jeare at the Trinity, jeare at Scriptures, jeare at
Ordinances, jeare at Ministers, opposing the truths and ways of God, would
they not have been ready to reply as Hazael did to the Prophet, 2 King. 8. 13.
What, Are we Dogs, that we should do such things? Nay, should it have been told
us concerning some of them, that we or they should have done thus, would we not
(with the Apostles in the like case) have been ready to suspect our selves as
soon as them? yet are they thus fallen. O let these their falls make us
jealous over our selves* knowing that we also are made of the same mould, and
are (...), men subject to the like passions, the like infirmities; Such as,
unless the grace of God do support, are subject to be carried away as they have
been. And therefore presume not upon our own strength. (This it was that
brought Peter to deny and abjure his Master), but be jealous over our selves.
Taking the Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks that he
stands take heed lest he fall] Many of those who are thus fallen, time was
when they thought they stood, and stood fast, so as they should not have been
so soon removed to another Gospel (as Paul complains of some of his
Galathians, Gal. 1. 6.) they should not have been brought to renounce and speak
evil of those truths, and ways, and Ordinances, and Ministers, which before
were so dear and precious in their eyes.

Quest.
Quest. But how shall we be preserved and kept from this great Evil?

Answ.
Answ. A useful Question. For your direction herein, take notice of some
things to be avoided, some things to be practiced.

viz. Such things as make way for this sin. Such are those four particulars
which precede the word in the Text, Self-love, Covetousness, Arrogancy,
Pride, Each a step to this great sin of Blasphemy. And therefore as we would be
free from this, take heed of them.

1. Of Self-love. Inordinate self-love, of setting up our selves, making our
selves the end of all our Actions. So the Philosopher defines a Self-lover,
(...). One that does what ever he does with an eye to himself, his own profit,
honor, pleasure, etc. One that seeks his own things, and not the things of
another, (contrary whereunto the Apostle wills Christians to do, 1 Cor. 10,
24) One that seeks his own things, and not the things which are Jesus
Christ's, (as Paul complains of many (for so the word [All] must there be taken,
(...) pro (...), All for many) in his time) Phil. 2. 21. Now beware of this, of
thus setting up our selves, of being thus inamoured with our selves, doting
upon our selves, Narcissus like, to be inamoured with our own facts, our own
fancies, our own opinions, so as to set up our selves above God and his Word.
Which if we shall do, no wonder if in the end we come to be metamorphosed, and
make bold with what ever is his, and so come to blaspheme him.

2. Beware of Covetousness; which as it is the root of all evil, so sometimes
of this* This it was that made Demas forsake Paul and his way, turn his back
upon both, even his embracing this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. This it was
that made that rich young man turn his back upon Christ, Matthew. 19. 22. He had
great possessions, and they had him possessing his heart. This it was that made
the Pharisees to jeare at the Doctrine of Christ, to deride him, Luke 16. 14.
They heard all these things, but they derided him, For they were covetous. And
this it was that made Judas to betray his Master, even his coveting those wages
of unrighteousness. And this, if it take possession of the heart and hold it,
it will make thee, if need be, to blaspheme him.

(...), ab a intensiva, and (...) Sumo
3. Take heed of Arrogancy. Of arrogating too much to our selves (as the word
there properly signifies). Of boasting of things without our line, our
measure, (which thing the Apostle disclaimeth, 2 Cor. 10. 13.) Take heed of
being puffed up with an high overweening opinion of our own graces, gifts,
parts, whether real or imaginary. It is Solomon's counsel, and it is very
proper in this case, Prove. 3. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes].

(...) ab (...), and (...), appareo, quod quis enimere se and caeteris
mortalibus superiorem esse persuasum habeat, Cui respondet Latinis Superbia, q.
super ire. Leigh Critic. Sacra. (...) his Contemptores aliorum. Grotius ad Text.
4. Take heed of that which is near akin to this, Pride, (...):*
Superciliousnes; of being so highly conceited of our selves, our own worth, our
own abilities, as to look overly upon others, despising and contemning them, as
Golia sometime did David; and as men upon a high Tower look down upon them
which are below. Of all these beware.

Surely some one or other of these it is that has been the bane of most of
these miserable Apostates, seducing Teachers, who are now turned Blasphemers.
Observe them, and we shall find them to have been men deeply in love with
themselves, their own opinions, in love with their own credit and reputation,
men that would be somebody in the world; Self-seeking men in some kind or
other. It may be they have been in love with money, for which they have parted
with truth. Being men of low or desperate fortune, they have not cared by what
ladder they climbed to preferment. However, this we shall generally find
amongst them, that they have been (...), Arrogant, Proud; Vainglorious,
Supercilious; men highly conceited of themselves, thinking meanly of others,
specially such as were not in their own way. And by this means it is that they
have now climbed up to the highest staff of the Devils ladder, even become
Blasphemers. That we may never split upon the same rock, take heed of stearing
the same course. Take heed of Self-love, take heed of Covetousness, take heed
of Arrogancy, take heed of Superciliousnesse.

To these I might add many more. I shall only hint unto you two or three,
which are very proper to the present times, and present case.

5. Take heed of renouncing Church Communion. This Direction I shall hold forth
with all respective tenderness to those upon whom it may seem to entrench; yet
so as the truth of God may not be concealed or dissembled. Take heed of
forsaking Communion with the true Churches of Christ, in his public
Ordinances. This Saint Jude points at as an inlet unto this sin. Jude verse 19.
Having minded those to whom he writes of what the Apostles had foretold, how
that in the last times there should be mockers, (such as Paul here calls
Blasphemers), he presently adds, These be they who separate themselves]
(...), makers of Sects (as the Geneva renders it), or Separatists, men dividing
and separating themselves from the true Churches of Christ, renouncing their
Communion, forsaking their Assemblies (as the Author to the Hebrews describes
the like Apostates, Heb. 10. 25.) and so (it may be) casting off the public
Ordinances. Such (says St. Jude) are the Mockers, the Blasphemers of the last
times. And is it not so amongst us at this day? Who, or what are the
Blasphemers of the times? Are they not for the most part, such as separate
themselves? Gross and rigid Separatists, and Sectaries? Mistake it not. I do
not say that all those who have thus separated themselves, are such; (No, God
has yet kept many of them, and my prayer shall be yet, he may keep them from
this so great an evil); But those who are such, are they not for the most part
of that number? such as have separated themselves, and that in a rigid and
bitter way (for of such I now speak); renouncing Communion with the true
Churches of Christ, crying them down for Antichristian Church^s, false
Churches, no Churches. Let it be seriously and impartially observed, and I
suppose this will be found to be the ordinary door at which this desperate
Evil has entered, and broke in upon the Church of God in this Nation. And I
dare not forbear to give you notice of it, that upon this ground you may so
much the rather beware of it.

6. Take heed of usurping upon public offices and administrations in the
Church. Being private persons take heed how you take up on you the office of
public teaching, not being called, not being sent; how you usurp upon the
Ministerial function. You know the story of King Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. and
19. How that being (as the Text says) strong, and his heart lifted up, not
contented with his kingly dignity, he would be usurping upon the Priests
office; thereupon he advances into the Temple, the Holy place, where it was
not lawful for any but the Priest to enter; and there he attempts to offer
Incense, which it was not lawful for any but the Priest to do. But what was
the issue? Why, presently the Leprosy rose up in his forehead from beside the
Incense-Altar]. The Diodati ad lo
very ashes of the Altar (as some conceive of it) flew in his face* and turned
to a Leprosy. And has not the like happened to many amongst us, who have been
guilty of the like usurpation? They being strong in their own conceits, and
their hearts being lifted up in the apprehension of their own gifts and
abilities, and envying to the Ministers of God the appropriation of their
Ministerial functions, they have taken upon them the office of public
teaching, without any mission, or Commission from God or man, scorning to enter
at Christs*doore, by the way of the Churches orderly Ordination. But what has
been the issue? Why, God has met with them in the like manner; The ashes of
the Altar have flown in their faces, the Leprosy of Blasphemy has risen up in
their foreheads, so as they have become of Orthodox Professors, Heretical
Seducers, indangering all that came within the breath of them with the
contagion of their Doctrine. Of this kind were those Blasphemers which our
Apostle here speaks of. Such as took upon them to be Teachers of others, and
for that purpose went about from place to place (as some and too many
circumforaneous teachers, (like Saint Judes Planets, wandering stars, Jude 19.)
do in all places at this day), creeping into houses, and bycorners, to vent
their Heretical and Blasphemous doctrines. That you may be kept from the like
evils, take heed of the like unwarrantable presumption.

Mistake it not. It is far from my thoughts to discourage any in doing their
duty; Parents in instructing their children. Masters their families, or
Christians in edifying one another in their holy faith in a private way,
whether it be by praying together, conferring together, or in helping one
another in calling to mind what they heard in public; for all which they have
the Apostles warrant to bear them out, 1 These. ^. 11. But for private persons
to take upon them to teach in a public and ordinary way without any mission
from the Church, this is the presumption which here I tax, and look upon as
rendering men so obnoxious unto this spiritual judgment.

7. To these I shall add but one more; would you be kept from this sin? take
heed of curiosity, and inordinate affection of novelties in matters of
Religion. You know how fatal it proved to those men of Bethshemesh, who dared
to look into the Ark of God; In seeing that, they saw their last, 1 Samuel 6.
19. Of such dangerous consequence is it when men will be prying into Gods
secrets; will not be contented with what the Apostle confines Christians to,
Romans 12. 3. (...), to be wise (or understand) unto sobriety (as those words are
most properly rendered), but they will be unlocking of Gods closet, picking of
his Cabinet. Being surfeted with old and wholesome Truths, they long for
Novelties; like those Athenians, Acts 17. 19. who were very desirous to hear
Paul doctrine, merely for the newness of it. [May we know what this new
doctrine is whereof thou speak?] Being glutted with plain and open truths,
they hunt altogether after unrevealed mysteries: not fearing to plunge
themselves over head and ears in those depths where the Elephant may swim, nay
where never any yet could find a bottom. If such adventurous spirits be
drowned in a sea of Errors, what wonder? Pliny the younger was swallowed up of
his Vesuvius, that smoking burning gulf, whilst he dared to approach too nigh
to find out the cause of that Eruption. Nothing more dangerous then an
overcurious disquisition and enquiry into the depths and hidden mysteries of
God. Herein he spoke rightly who said of himself, Mallem ignorare sine crimine,
quam scire cum discrimine. I had rather be ignorant of what I am not bound to
know, then to hazard my self in seeking to know it. It had been well for Eve if
she had never tasted of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Some there
have been who have dangerously miscarried by affecting too ambitiously to be of
Natures privy counsel. Prying too far into those abdita naturae majestatis;
seeking to find out the secret of nature, they have lost themselves. But more
by prying into divine secrets; overcuriously enquiring into those ever to be
adored mysteries concerning the Trinity of Persons in the unity of the Godhead,
the manner of Christ's Incarnation, etc. not suffering their faith to go a step
farther then carnal reason could conduct and carry it. Here has been the rise
of Arminian errors, Socinian Blasphemies, and the Blasphemies of many other
heretical spirits at this day. That you may be preserved from the like
miscarriage, take that other branch of the Apostles caveat in that place
forenamed, Romans 12. 3. (...). Do not presume to understand above that which is
meet for you to understand. Non supra scriptum* Not above that which is
written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. Content your selves with revealed truths.

And amongst them, spend your zeal upon those which are most necessary, most
useful. All truths are not of the same alloye, or of the same weight. Some more
precious, more ponderous then others. Reserve your zeal for those which are of
chiefest concernment, fundamental truths* As for Problematicall truths,
Controversal and Questionable points, which are agitated and discussed amongst
men learned and pious, and are not of, nor near the foundation, be not over
eager about them, in opposing and censuring those which are otherwise minded
then your selves. And as for Metaphysical speculations, Platonical Ideaes, and
other like aerie, empty notions, leave them as whetstones to sharpen young wits
withal. Such stones are no bread for Christians, affording no solid
soul-nourishment, and therefore not to be fed upon, but declined. So Paul
prescribes it by way of advice unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 20. where giving him a
charge to keep that sacred depositum, the doctrine of the Gospel which was
committed to his trust as an Evangelist, a minister of it, to keep it himself,
to transmit it to posterity as he had received it, pure and uncorrupted; in the
next words he directs him how he might the better do it. [Avoyd (says he)
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of science falsely so called].
Profane and vain bablings, (...), vain contests and disputes about things
which are not revealed, or are not worth the time which is lavished out upon
them, not tending to spiritual edification: such as those fables and endless
Genealogies, which the same Apostle speaks of chap. 1. verse 4. of the same
Epistle, which minister questions rather then edisying: Such profane and vain
bablings here he wills him to avoid. With oppositions of science falsely so
called] (...); Such oppositions and disputes as are made against sound doctrine
by the adversaries of the truth, who pretend to a greater measure of knowledge
then others; (as those forenamed Gnostics did, whom the ancient Vide Grotium
ad loc.
Greek fathers conceive the Apostle there to point out as it were by name). Such
vain and fruitless contests with proud adversaries Paul wills Timothy there
to avoid. In the next words showing him the danger of the contrary; Which some
(says he) professing, have erred from the faith]. Here is the danger of being
addicted to such curious, vain and fruitless speculations, and such endless
disputes. Hereby some have been, others may be brought to desert the truth of
God which formerly they have professed; upon this ground take we heed of this
affectation.

And among other things (to mind you of that also by the way) beware of holding
up Arguments against the truth, by opposing Reason, or humane Authority, or
pretended Revelation against Scripture (as the manner of some is). This also
will come within the compass of these profane and vain bablings, of which
this Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy ^. 16. That they increase unto more ungodlines].
Such Errors as these do not stay where they begin, but they breed Error upon
Error, proceeding from lesser to greater, till at the length they arrive even
at Blasphemy. But I find my Meditations running out beyond the limits I
intended them, when I took this Text in hand. To contract my self, as much as I
may:

You see now what things are to be taken heed of, that you may be preserved
from this dreadful evil. done. Here I shall not multiply directions. Take
some which I conceive to be most proper.

1. In the first place, Labor for a distinct, sound, well grounded knowledge
in the principles of Christian Religion. For the most part Blasphemy is the
fruit of Ignorance. These men (says Saint Jude, speaking of Blasphemers, who
speak evil of Dignities) they speak evil of things which they know not, Jude
v. 10. And truly, so do Blasphemers for the most part, they speak evil of
things which they know not. So did Paul before his conversion, he was a
Blasphemer, speaking evil of Christ and his Religion, but he did it
Ignorantly. Certainly, did men know God and his Religion, they would not dare
to open their mouths against them Had they known, they would never have
crucified the Lord of Glory, (says Paul, speaking of the Princes, the Rulers
of the earth), 1 Cor. 2. 8. And so may we say of many Blasphemers; did they but
know God and his Truth, they would not Crucify them, pierce them thorough as
they do. Labor for a wel-grounded knowledge of God and his Truth.

2. Receive the love of the truth. For the want of this it is that God gives
men up to strong delusions that they should believe lies, false doctrines,
Heresies and Blasphemous opinions, [because they receive not the love of the
Truth, 2 These. 2. 11.] They receive the truth into their Heads, in a
speculative way, so as to be enlightened by it, but not into their Hearts, in an
affective way, to be warmed by it. Let not us content our selves with the
former of these. Those Revolters whom the Author to the Hebrews speaks of, were
such as were once enlightened, Heb. 6. 4. such as had received the knowledge of
the truth, cap. 10. v. 26. It is no news for illuminated Doctors, learned men
to turn Apostates, Heretics. Labor we to find heat as well as light; that
with the knowledge of the truth, we may have a love of the Truth. This Love
will be strong as death (Cant. 8. 6.) nothing shall conquer it.

3. In the third place, knowing and loving the Truth, Walk in it: This is the
commendation which Saint John gives of the children of that Elect Lady, Joh.
2. v. 4. They walked in the truth. This is the true Christians commendation,
not that he knows the Truth, of talks of it, but that he walks in it;
acknowledging th truth, the Doctrine which is according to Godliness (as our
Apostle describes the doctrine of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1.) and
that by reducing it to practice, which is the truest acknowledgment; leading a
life befitting the profession of the truth, in all uprightness and sincerity.
Thus knowing God, let us glorify him as God, by walking before him in Truth;
not daring to do any thing against the Truth. We can do nothing against the
Truth, but for the Truth, (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 13. 8. Being thus sincere
with God, walking in the Truth, we shall through his grace be kept from this
great transgression.

4. But (in the fourth place), walk humbly. This is one of the things which the
Lord requires from his people, that they walk humbly with their God, Mic. 6.
8. O that every of us could but take out this lesson! Surely the want of this
it is that has proved so baneful to many of our now seducing and seduced
brethren. They seemed to walk with God; I, but they did not walk humbly with
him. Their souls were lifted up within them, lifted up in the apprehension of
their own graces, gifts, parts, etc. And therefore is it that God has thus left
them into the hands of this his messenger Satan, thus to be buffeted by his
Blasphemous tentations. Let their fall be a Caveat to us. Take we heed lest our
hearts be exalted, through the abundance of what ever spiritual privileges we
are made partakers of. The story tells us of King Hezekiah, when the Babylonian
Ambassadors came to congratulate his recovery from that dangerous sickness,
Isa. 39. he in a vain glorious humor showed them all his treasures, that so
the fame of his wealth and magnificence might be carried abroad to foreign
Princes. But what was the issue? This vainglory proved fatal to his Kingdom,
betraying all those treasures into the hands of those Babylonians. Thus deals
God sometimes by his people, when they will be proud of their spiritual
treasures, making ostentation of their gifts and graces, God leaves them into
the hands of Satan to be made a prey of by him, and for a time to be taken, and
carried captive by him at his will, (as our Apostle speaks of some Apostates,
2 Timothy 2 2, 26.) And therefore see that we walk humbly with God, thinking
meanly of our selves, preferring others before our selves.

To these obvious directions I might add many more. St. Jude furnishes me
with three or four very proper in this case. You shall find them lying
together in two verses in his Epistle. Having in the 17. and 18. verses minded
those to whom he writes of what our Apostle here warns Timothy, [But beloved,
remember ye the words which were spoken before by the Apostles of our Lord
Jesus Christ, how that they told you there should be mockers in the last
times], Professors some of them should turn Blasphemers, speaking evil of, and
mocking at the Truths and ways of God, which formerly themselves had professed
and walked in: In the 20. and 21. ver. he subjoyns and lays down some
directions whereby Gods faithful people might be preserved from the like evil.
[But ye beloved, build your selves on your most holy faith, etc.] In which two
verses we may take notice of a fourfold direction, each useful to our present
purpose.

1. Buildup your selves on your most holy faith]. Faith, the Doctrine of Faith
(for of that the Apostle therespeaketh) is the foundation on which Christians
are laid and built. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, (says Paul to his
Ephesians) Ephesians. 2. 20. that is, upon the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Doctrine
of Faith and Holiness contained in their writings. Now being laid upon this
foundation, built upon this faith, they are as living stones to build up
themselves upon this faith. Not seeking for any other foundation, (other
foundation can no man lay (says the Apostle) then that which is laid, 1 Cor.
3. 11.) not questioning the truth and soundness of this Gospel foundation,
they are with confidence and resolution to build upon it, and to build up
themselves on it, endeavoring to advance themselves in their spiritual estate
upon this foundation. And this do you (Brethren) who would be preserved from
the Apostacy of the times. That foundation which you have been built upon,
that Doctrine of Faith and Holiness which has been preached unto you, and
received by you, this is the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and other
foundation can no man lay, then what has been laid amongst you; If any shall
pretend to do it, though it were an Angel from Heaven, Paul's Anathema will
light upon him, Gal. 1. 8. And therefore build you your selves on this
foundation, with confidence and full assurance build upon this doctrine, as the
infallible truth of God; adventuring your salvation, laying the weight of your
souls upon it. As the stones of the building lay all their weight upon the
foundation, firmly and immovably resting upon it: So do you rest upon that
Doctrine which you have learned. Not calling in question any of the Principles
of your Religion, any of the fundamental truths of the Gospel. This
Scepticisme, questioning Principles of Christianity, specially if they shall be
arraigned at the bar of humane Reason, it makes way for Apostacy, and in the
end (as experience has made it good upon some) for Atheism. And therefore in
this sense Lay we not again the foundation of repentance from dead works and of
faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and
of the Resurrection of the dead and Eternal Judgment, (as the Apostle dehorts)
Heb. 6. 1, 2. This do some at this day, who call all these and al^ other
fundamentals of Christian Religion into question. Let not us dare to do it.
But, leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ; (leaving them as we
found them, immovable and unshaken, taking the Principles of onr Religion for
indubitable and unquestionable truths) let us go on to perfection in knowledge
and practice; so buiding up our selves on this our most holy faith, going on
forwards from faith to faith, from one degree of faith and holiness to
another. Not looking back (as Lots wife did, for which she is made exemplary to
all Apostates, being turned into a pillar of salt to season and preserve
others), but go on until we come to the Mount of God, until we come to see
what we have believed, and shall receive the end of our Hope, the salvation of
our souls.

2. The second direction follows, [Praying in the Holy Ghost]. This is one of
the pieces of the Christian Panoplie, of that complete spiritual Armor which
the Apostle wills the Christian soldier to take up, and make use of, Ephesians.
6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit]. This
piece of Armor Paul himself made use of against those buffetings of Satan,
(supposed to be Blasphemous temptations); he betook himself to his prayers; For
this thing I besought the Lord thrice; 2 Cor. 12. 8. i. e. frequently, and
importunately. And the like use make we of it at this day. This is a time
wherein Satan's fiery darts fly abroad, never thicker, never more dangerously.
Let us therefore all of us betake our selves to our prayers, Praying in the
Holy Ghost, soliciting the throne of grace with frequent importunity, that God
himself would stand by us, and deliver us from every evil work. Thus being
jealous of our selves and our own weakness, fly we under the shadow of the
wings of a divine protection; daily begging it from God that he would deliver
us from the snare of the fowler, and from this noisome pestilence; So as though
a thousand should fall at our side, and ten thousand at our right hand, yet it
may not come nigh us; but that through his grace we may be kept from falling,
and be presented blameless before the presence of his glory, which Saint Jude
assures the believers of his time, that God was able to do for them. Jude 24.

3. Keep your selves in the love of God]. A direction which may be taken and
understood three ways, and each useful to our present purpose.

1. Keep your selves in the love of God, viz. Gods love to you. Being in grace
and favor with God, and having some comfortable apprehensions thereof, take
heed of doing ought that should cause God to turn his face from you, to
withdraw the light of his countenance, the sense and feeling of his love and
favor from you, or cause him to frown upon you. This will every presumptuous
sin, every sin against light and conscience, do. Every such a sin will be like
a dark cloud coming betwixt the Sun and the earth, intercepting the light of
Gods countenance. So did David's sin, Psalm. 51. Whereupon he begs a restoring of
the joy of his salvation. O therefore, being in the love of God, keep your
selves in it, Be afraid to offend him, lest he should hide his face from you,
and so suffer you to wander in the dark, and so to stumble and fall.

2. Keep your selves in the love of God, viz. your love to God. Finding your
hearts once closing with God, and a cleaving to him, now persevere in that
love; laboring to find your hearts more and more inamoured with him, more
enlarged toward him. This love of God and of Jesus Christ will preserve the
^soul from making defection from him and his truth. This it was which caused
Paul to keep faith and a good conscience, so as he could do nothing against the
truth; the love of Christ constrained him, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

3. Keep your selves in the love of God, viz. in a fraternal love, love to the
Brethren, which may be called the love of God, in as much, First, as it is
commanded by him; and Secondly, wrought by him, (in both which respects he is
called the God of love, 2 Cor. 13. 11.) and Thirdly, it is for his sake. In
this love of God keep your selves, not suffering your hearts to be divided,
alienated from, much less set against those who are members of the same body.
This opposition, or alienation will increase unto more ungodliness. Keep your
selves therefore in the love of God.

4. The fourth and last direction is yet behind Looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life]. A useful direction specially in
difficult and dangerous times, wherein Christians are in danger of being
compelled to blaspheme, to renounce, and abjure the truths of God, which they
hane professed, through the rigor of cruel and merciless persecutors who have
got power into their hands: which was the case (as I showed you) of some of
those Primitive Christians which persecuting Paul had to deal with, Acts 26.
11. Now in such times, wherein men can expect no mercy, (nor yet justice)
nothing but extremity of rigor from men, now look for the mercy of the Lord
Jesus Christ: who taking notice of the patience and constancy of his Saints in
maintaining his truth, will not be wanting to them in a gracious remuneration.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me (says that Amon, that faithful
and true witness, the Lord Jesus) Rev. 22. 11. Christ ere long will come; and
when he comes, he will not come empty-handed. He will give to every man
according to his works (as it there follows). And therefore (as the verse
foregoing has it), Let him that is righteous be righteous still, and he that
is holy let him be holy still]. Have we owned God and his truths, and appeared
for them by profession and practice? Do we so still. So doing, what ever we
meet with from men, we shall be sure of the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And thus have I (with what brevity I could) presented unto you some useful
directions, which may be as preservatives unto you against the poison of those
Heretical Blasphemies of seducing Teachers and Apostatized professors, which
are so rife in this Church at this day, whereby you may (through the mercy of
God) be kept from the infection of them, from partaking in them as Principals.

But this is not enough. Take heed (in the second place) lest you partake
herein as Accessories. Here is the second part of this Admonition, which I
beseech you give ear unto, as that which in some branch of it will concern
every of you. This is Paul^ Caveat to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Be not partaker of
other men's sin; Keep thy self pure]. Pure, not only from being a Principal in
them, but also an Accessory to them, (of which latter the Apostle there
properly speaks, as I shall show you anon. And let the same counsel be as
acceptable to all of us as it is in it self seasonable and needful. Take we
heed of partaking in this great and dreadful evil of Heretical Blasphemies, not
only as Principals in it, but as Accessories to it. Which men may be many
ways. Give me leave to instance in some of the most obvious, that you taking
notice of them, may the better decline them.

1. By countenancing of them. This I take from Saint John in his second
Epistle, ver. 10, 11. If there come any among you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; For he that bids
him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds]. A passage which speaks home
to the point in hand. Reflect upon it again. If there come any unto you and
bring not this Doctrine], that is, bring a contrary doctrine, contrary to the
doctrine of which he speaks in the verse foregoing, the Doctrine of Christ,
[receive him not into your house] lodge him not, entertain him not: [neither
bid him God speed] show him no countenance, give him no encouragement: [for he
that bids him God speed, is partake of his evil deeds] makes himself
accessory to his sin by this collateral consent and allowance, by seeming to
approve of what he ought to reprove.

2. If by countenancing, much more by impowring such manner of persons. This I
take up from the Apostle writing to Timothy in the place forenamed, 1 Timothy 5.
22. where he gives him this Caveat, Lay hands suddenly on no man, viz. in
Ordination (so it is most commonly, and most properly expounded). Herein Paul
wills Timothy to be advised, so as not to have any hand in instal ing any
into any Ecclesiastical function, who were not approvable both for Doctrine
and life. Adding this for a Reason; Neither be partaker of other men's sins].
Timothy by ordaining, impowring of an Heretical false teacher, giving him an
advantage to spread his false doctrine with authority, should make himself
accessory to all that mischief which should redound unto the Church by so
pernicious an Instrument.

A point which I wish it might be taken notice of by all those who have or may
have power to empower others, whether in a Civil or Ecclesiastical way, to
promote and install any in any place or office of public trust, whether in the
Church or Commonwealth. If so be they be men of dangerous and poisonous
principles, such as those Heretical Blasphemers I have been speaking of, let
them take heed how they lay hands on them (unless it be in securing their
persons from doing any farther harm); how they have any hand in putting
advantages into their hands, whereby they may spread the contagion of their
Errors to the indangering of the souls of others. In so doing they shall make
themselves partakers of their sin, accessories to all the evil that accrueth
to the Church of God by their means.

3. A third way is by tolerating and suffering of such. This I take from the
spirit writing to the Churches, Rev. 2. Writing to the Church of Pergamus, he
lays this to the charge of the Angel there, that he had in that Church them
which held the doctrine of Balaam, ver. 14. and them which held the doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, verse. 15. Pertinacious Heretics, for so much the word there
imports, (...), such as held fast those doctrines. So the same word is
translated in the verse foregoing, ver. 13. Thou h^ldest fast my name, (...)
And so the word here signifies, an obstinate and pertinacious holding of those
heretical doctrines, (which properly makes an Heretic). Such Heretics there
were some in that Church. But what was that to the Angel, the Minister, or
Officers in that Church? Yes, (...), Thou have them, i. e. thou toleratest and
suffer them, not proceeding against them according to that authority
committed unto thee. So you have it more plainly in that charge against the
Church of Thyatira, v. 20. I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer that woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach
and seduce my people]. This TOLERATION, where that power which God has
committed to any for the suppressing, reforming, or punishing of such Heretical
Blasphemers, is not put forth, but they are connived at, born with, this
involves those who are herein failing in their duty, in the guilt of that sin,
makes them accessories to it. The Rule is ancient and true, Qui non vetat
peccare cum possit jubet, who so having power to prohibit or hinder an evil,
shall not put forth that power, makes himself (at least) accessory to it. This
do Church Officers in the state Ecclesiastical; Having liberty to exercise that
power which Jesus Christ has committed to them for the edification of his
Church under himself, if they shall not put it forth for the suppressing of so
great an evil as this, they thereby become accessories to it. And so does the
Civil Magistrate, being by Gods appointment keeper of both Tables, if he shall
not draw forth the sword which God had put into his hand, for the vindicating
of the name and cause of God against these open and professed enemies of it,
for the Punishing of Blasphemers according to the power and authority committed
to him: by this whether voluntary, or negligent Toleration and connivance, he
involveth himself in the guilt of this sin.

Quest. Happily some by the way may interrupt me, and demand of me, What
punishment is due unto this sin.

Answ. Give me leave to turn aside a little to return them an Answer. For the
right stating whereof we must distinguish. There are diverse kinds of
Blasphemies and Blasphemers. To follow the Casuist Alsted; there are two kinds
of Blasphemy; the one Immediate, Alsted. Theol-Casuum. cap. 15. Cas. 5. De
Blasphemia.
the other Mediate. Immediate, which strikes directly at God himself, denying
him to be, or to be such a one as he has revealed himself; or attributing
something to him which is inconsistent with his nature, or highly dishonorable
to his Majesty. Mediate, which does only obliquely, indirectly,
interpretatively, and by consequence redound to him, and reflect upon him: As
when his Image, Word, Works, Ordinances are contumeliously spoken of, which
redoundeth unto God the Prototype, and Author of them.

Again, Blasphemy is either of Infirmity, or Pertinacie. Of Infirmity, which is
sudden, and occasioned through the distemper of some passion, or the violence
of some temptation. Of Pertinacy, when men in cold blood do advisedly blaspheme
the name of God; or when they do (...), pertinaciously and obstinatly maintain
some damnably Heretical and Blasphemous doctrines.

Now according to the quality, kind and degree of this sin, so is the
punishment to be proportioned. As for Immediate Blasphemy against God himself,
the divine law makes it capital. You may read it, Levit. 24. where Moses
enquiring of God concerning the Blasphemer, which was then in ward, what they
should do with him, the Lord returns him an answer, both concerning him, and
all others in the like case, ver. 13, 14, 15, 16. The Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Bring forth him that has cursed without the Camp, and let all that
heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the Congregation stone
him. And thou shall speak unto the children of Israel, saying Whosoever curses
his God, shall bear his sin. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall
surely be put to death.] Here is the Divine Law, which has been followed by
the Civil Law. Blasphemi Vide Alsted. ibid. Jura Civilia praecisione linguae
punierunt aliquando hoc peccatum, etc. Alii ut terribilior esset p^na,
jusserunt per occiput eximi linguam. Aretius Loc. Com. 109. de Blasphemia.
ultimis supplici is afficiantur. Blasphemers, let them be punished with
capital punishments, with death. Others have adjudged this sin to be punished
with cutting off, or plucking out the tongue, And that (says Aretius) most
deservedly. For unworthy is that tongue ever to speak more, that shall dare
once to speak against its Creator.

Afterward the Canon Law has relaxed, and mitigated the punishment, commuting
it into pecuniary Mulcts and Penances, etc. But by what Authority it has taken
upon it thus to dispense with the Divine Law, it cannot be said. Sure it is,
this unwarrantable lenity has been no small advantage unto the sin. As for the
Law of Jura Canonica pessimo exemplo induxerunt mitigationem paenarum, etc.
Dedit enim ista tantam Blasphemiarum segetem ut nihil srequentius sit inter
Christianos, quam impune nomen domini Blasphemare. Aretius. ibid.
God, it is express and peremptory; He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord
shall surely be put to death; which being understood of manifest and notorious
Blasphemies, where God himself is peirced or struck through, (as the word there
used (Nakab) properly signifies, and that by a person that is Compos mentis,
in his right wits, is an universal law for all Nations, being indeed of the law
of nature. So much is collected by some from those words of Jobs wife to her
husband, Job 2. 9. (being read as our Translation renders them, Curse God, and
dye; Intimating that by that means he should soon be dispatched, cut off by
the sword of the Magistrate. A construction taken from a not improbable
supposition, viz. that the very light of nature did carry those heathenish
Nations to as high and severe a revenge against the highest sin, as the Vide M.
Carill. in Job. 2. 9.
law of Moses did the Israelites. It was natural divinity that taught the
Athenians to adjudge their Socrates to death for some dishonorable and
contumelious language against their gods. And so Perkins in Galat. cap 3. v. 25
much our judicious Perkins observes from that Decree of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3
29. who, though a Heathen, yet gave in commandment to his people concerning the
God of Shadrach, Mesheck and Abednego, being convinced that he was the only
true God, that if any one Blasphemed him, spoke any thing amiss concerning
him, that he should be cut in pieces, and his house made a dung-hil]. (From
whence the aforesaid Author collects, that manifest and convicted Atheists, if
they be put to death, they have but their deserts). This did that conscientious
Heathen by the light of nature.

A precedent which will rise up in judgment against many Christian Magistrates
at the last and great day, who, notwithstanding that they have not only the
same law of nature, but the written law, the law of the Word to go before them,
to direct and bear them out, yet they can suffer the name of God to be peirced
and struck through, and that in a presumptuous way by manifest and notorious
Blasphemies, and yet connive at it, not drawing forth the sword to avenge the
quarrel of their Creator. Egregie profecto vicarii and vasalli Dei! (says
Alsted speaking of such); full well do Alsted. ubi supra.
they deserve to be called Gods Deputies and Vicegerents, who whilst they are
most tender of their own names, their own honors, their own privileges, they
care not how the name of God suffer by impious and blasphemous tongues.
Immediate Blasphemy is Capital, deserving death by the law of God, and by the
law and light of Nature.

Object. But if so, how came Moses to be at a stand concerning that Blasphemer,
that he should so solicitously enquire of God what he should do with him?

Answ. To this it is answered. This Moses did not out of any scruple that he
had, whether he deserved death or no. Well did he know what sentence of the law
had passed upon those which should curse their father or mother, Exodus 21. 17.
He that curses his father or mother shall surely be put to death]. And
consequently he could not make a question whether Blasphemy against God
deserves the like, or no. But his scruple was about the kind of death, which
in as much as God had not determined in particular, he made a question whether
that which was inflicted for a far less offense, were not too light for this.
Blasphemy being the highest sin deserves to be punished extremis suppliciis
(as the phrase of the Civil law is) with the highest kind of punishment. So
does Immediate Blasphemy.

As for Mediate and Immediate Blasphemy, it is to be weighed and considered
according to the aforesaid Modification and respects; whether it be sudden or
deliberate; whether of infirmity, or pertinacy; and accordingly the punishment
is to be qualified. So much we may learn from St. Jude, who speaking of such
kind of persons, wills Christians, of some to have compassion, making a
difference, Jude v. 22. yet so as the sin ought not to be connived at, not
passed by. Specially in confirmed, habituated and presumptuous blasphemers,
such as do advisedly or customarily utter, or obstinately maintain what tends
to the high dishonor of God. In this case the name of God calls for a
vindication from them who do not bear the sword for naught: who if they shall
now connive at offenses and offenders of this nature, suffering them to go
unpunished, in so doing they make themselves partakers of the sin, Accessories
to it. This do public persons by Tolerating, not Punishing.

4. And this (in the fourth place, to hasten in that which remains) may private
persons do, by not reproving, not showing their dislike, and detestation of
this sin. Not Reproving of it. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but reprove them rather; So the Apostle lays down the general
Injunction, Ephesians, 5. 11. agreeably to that Prescription in the Law, Levit. 19.
17. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him].
This are Christians to do with a wise and holy zeal; as in other cases, so in
this making use of seasonable Admonitions and Reprehensions, where there is any
hope they may take place. Otherwise the Rule is, Cast not pearls before swine,
Matthew. 7. 6. Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate thee, Prove. 9. 8. Persons
desperately wicked and profane are not to be dealt withal in this way.
Admonitions and Reprehensions so spent, will be misspent; Nay, it may be,
prove like oil to the fire, inflaming instead of quenching. Upon this ground
it was that Hezekiahs Commissioners when they heard Rab shakeh blaspheming in
that desperate way, they answered him not a word, Isa. 36. 21. deeming it in
vain to make any reply, when it would but incite him to farther outrage. But
where there is any hope that reproofs may be hearkened to, Christians may not be
tongue-tyed, they ought to speak for God.

However, some way or other they are to manifest their dislike and detestation
of this sin. It was a Canon amongst the Jews (as I hinted it before), that
whosoever heard Blasphemy of the name of God, whether he heard it himself, or
heard it by the report of another, he was bound to rend his clothes. And so did
those Ambassadors (as I told you), though they held their peace, yet they rent
their garments. This Ceremony was Jewish, but the Moral and meaning of it is
Christian. Christians ought not to have the name of God blasphemed, but they
ought some way or other to manifest their detestation of it, and indignation
against it. Which not doing, they may seem to approve of what they do neither
by word nor sign reprove, and so may become Accessories to this highest of
sins.

5. Again (in the fifth place) this may be done by a voluntary associating with
such kind of persons, entertaining unnecessary familiarity or society with
them. This Christians may not do. It is Paul's charge to his Corinthians
concerning scandalous persons in general, that they should not company with
such, not eat with them, 1 Cor. 5. 9. 11. that is, not have any intimate and
unnecessary familiarity with them. The like the same Apostle requires from his
Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. If any man obey not our word (receive not our
doctrine, but oppose it) note that man, and have no communion with him, that he
may be ashamed. And the like direction he gives to Timothy concerning these
Blasphemers and Seducers in the fifth verse of this chapter (2* Tim. 3. 5.)
From such turn away; (...), i. e. (...), have no society, no communion with
them. This would not St. John have with that blasphemous Heretic Cerinthus,
whom when he espied washing himself in the Bathe, he refused to enter into the
same place, fearing lest the roof should fall on his head which covered so
wretched a miscreant* (as it is reported from Policarpe by Ireneus and Eusebius.).
And this ought not Christians Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 3. Eusebius, lib. 4. cap. 14.
and lib. 7. cap. 23*
to have with men of the like spirit. If a man have a Plaguesore upon him, they
who take notice of it shall not need to be dissuaded from keeping him company.
Now surely the contagion of Heretical Blasphemy is no less dangerous to the
soul* then the Pestilence to the Body. Besides, intimate and unnecessary
familiarity with the sinner carries with it a seeming approbation of the sin,
and so makes a man accessory to it; and in that respect to be declined. The
Garment spotted by the flesh ought not to be touched, nor come nigh, Jude 23.

6. Again (in the sixth place) Christians may be made accessories to this sin,
by not mourning for it. Thus are all Christians to be affected with the
scandalous falls of their brethren. Paul blames his Corinthians, that taking
notice of that Incestuous person, they were yet puffed up, and had not rather
mourned, that he who had done that deed might be taken away from among them, 1
Cor. 5. 2. In not doing it they make themselves accessory to the sin. So did
all they in Jerusalem who did not mourn for the sins of the times. And so do
they in England at this day, who hearing of such horrid Blasphemies as are
daily belched out against the God of heaven, against his Truth, his ways, his
Ordinances, and being called upon to humble their souls for them, are yet
puffed up with an apprehension of such glorious times, such happy and blessed
times; and do not rather mourn, mourn for the sin, that so the offenders might
either be reformed, or punished.

7. In the last place (to name no more) Christians may be accessory to this sin
by being occasions of it. This is that which is charged upon David, 2 Samuel 12.
14. By those foul sins of his he had given great occasions to the enemies of
God to blaspheme. And this the Apostle charge upon those Jews, who making
their boast of the Law, yet walked contrary to it by open violations of it, The
name of God says he) is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles through you, Romans 2.
24. And thus is the Religion of God subject to be blasphemed through the
scandalous lives of Christians. When they shall walk contrary to their
Professions, profane persons will be ready to cast this in the face of their
Religion. Lo what a Religion is this which yields such fruits! So as by these
means they become accessory to the Blasphemy of others. Which let all of us
beware of. A Caveat pressed by our Apostle once and again, 1 Tius. 6. 1. Tit.
2. 5. And let every of us take it home to our selves, making use of it;
Especially in these catching times, wherein many lie in wait for such
occasions, that they might have somewhat to cast in the face of the true
Religion of God, and those who show themselves constant in the profession of
it. Be we so much the more watchful over our ways, over our walkings, that so
we may be no ways accessory to these their Blasphemies.

And thus have I at length dispatched this useful and necessary caveat
concerning this great and wrath provoking evil of the times. Take heed that we
be not partakers in it, whether as Principals or as Accessories.

Use. 5.
And thus washing our own hands of the sin, now do what we may for others; for
our brethren, for the Church of God amongst us.

1. For our Brethren, which are of two sorts, such as are fallen, such as yet
stand. A word for each.

1. For the former, do what we may for their Recovery. A duty incumbent upon
all, who themselves standing upon the shore, ought to reach forth a hand to
those whom they see swiming in the stream. When Abraham heard how his kinsman
Lot was taken and carried away captive, presently he arms himself, and makes
out for his resone, Genesis 14. Do we the like for our brethren, whom we see or
hear of to be thus taken captive by the devil, and carried away at his
pleasure. O do what we may for their rescue, their recovery.

Quest. What shall we do for them?

Ans. Herein hearken to St. Jude, who having first showed Christians what they
are to do for themselves in such Apostatizing times, Keep your selves in the
love of God, v. 21. Then he directs them what to do for others, such as are
carried away with the errors of the times, v. 22. 23 Of some (says he* have
compassion, making a difference. And others save with fear* pulling them out of
the fire]. And this let all of us do concerning our seducing and seduced
brethren. Puttiing a difference betwixt the one and the other; On some have
compassion, viz. of weak, wel-meaning, simple, seduced souls; such as follow
their seducing teachers (as those 200 men did Absalom, 2* Sam. 15. 10.) in the
simplicity of their hearts, being carried away by their plausible pretenses,
and specious glosses which they set upon their false and damnable doctrines, On
such have compassion, (as praying for them, so) seeking their recovery by
gentle means, gentle admonitions, instructions, reprehensions; endeavoring to
hold forth a light untothem, to convince them of their wanderings, and to direct
them into the way of truth again, from whence they have so dangerously gone
aside. Thus deal with them as tenderhearted Surgeons do with dis-located or
dis-joynted bones, handle them with a gentle hand, restoring them (as the
Apostle alluding to that Metaphor exhorts, Gal, 6. 1.) with a spirit of
meekness.

As for others, pertinacious and obstinate Heretics, perverse and proud
seducers, or men confirmed and hardened in their blasphemous errors, if it may
be, save them also. As much as in us lies be instrumental in their salvation.
But they are to be proceeded with in another way, in a way of severity. [Save
them with fear]. terrifying them by thundering out the judgments of God against
them; where other means avail not, making use of the sharper and severer
censures of the Church. In this case, where those milder remedies of
admonition, and suspension will not take place, the highest censure of
Excommunication is seasonable. This is the Churches last remedy, prescribed by
the Apostle in the like case unto the Church of Corinth to be used toward
their Incestuous brother, 1 Cor. 5. 5. I have judged (says he) that he who
has done this deed, be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus]* And what Paul
prescribes, himself practices in the case we have now in hand. Having to
deal with a pair of blasphemous Apostates, Hymeneus and Alexander, he
betaketh himself to this as the last and only means left for their recovery; I
have delivered them unto Satan (says he) that they may learn not to
Blaspheme.] 1 Timothy 1. ult. meaning thereby the sentence Vide New Annot. Eng. in
1 Cor. 5. 5.
of Excommunication, (as appears by comparing this with the form^r Text): A
censure which if rightly dispensed (however the ill managing of it in former
times has rendered it contemptible in these) would be found a terrible
thunderbolt. So it was found by many in the Primitive times, where those which
were struck with this censure were oft-times given over by God into the hands
of Satan to be buffeted, vexed and tormented by him both in their spirit^ and
bodies, with inward horrors and terrors, and with outward diseases. And truly
were the right use of this Censure restored unto the Church, I doubt not but
this twig of Christ's rod would be found to have some power in it; God would
manifest himself in and by this Ordinance, so as to make it an effectual means
for the recovering of some who are dangerously fallen, and for the staying of
others who are in danger of following them, and so consequently for the
stopping of the course of this and the like evils, which for want hereof are
like to increase and multiply to the eminent hazard of souls, and endangering
of the Church.

Thus are these Hymeneus's and Alexanders, desperate Apostates and Seducers to
be dealt with, saved with fear, even pulled out of the fire (as it there
follows). Thus deals the tenderhearted mother by her young child which she
sees to be fallen into the fire, she lays hold where she can, plucking it
out hastily and violently, not caring though she endanger a limb to save the
life of it. And thus are this desperate generation of men to be dealt with.
Their danger being present and eminent, no less then if they were in the fire,
they being ready to fall into the fire of hell, nay that fire having already
taken hold of them, their tongues being set on fire with it; O seek we by any
way or means to pluck them out of this fire. This do we for those of our
brethren who are fallen.

2. For those who through the mercy of God supporting them, do yet stand, do
what we may to hold them up. Strengthening the weak hands, and confirming the
feeble knees (as the Prophet has it) Isa. 35. 3. To this end, dealing one with
another, as men wading over a deep, but fordable river, where the current
runs strong, they take another by the hand that they may not be carried away
with the stream. Thus let Christians, (and (where it may be) Churches) join
together in holy combinations, taking one another by the hand, mutually
confirming and strengthening each other, that so we and they may be able to
stand against that strong stream of Blasphemous Errors, whereby many have been
carried away already, and others are daily endangered.

3. For the Church, as all of us are bound, do what we may to free that, that
these Red*Deagon waters may not prevail upon the face of it. To that end I
have but one word more to say; Let all of us, and all others whom it
concerns, do what in us lies that the Government of Jesus Christ may set up
and established in it. When there was no King in Israel (no Civil Government)
every one did that which was right in his own eyes, Judge. 17. 6. not that which
was right in Gods eyes, but what every man fancied and pleased. And truly thus
has it been in this unhappy Interregnum, this deplorable interval of Church
Government in this Nation. While the former government has been laid aside,
and no other effectually substituted in the room of it, every man has done in
matters of Religion what was right in his own eyes. And hinc illae lachrymae,
hence is it that this sea of evils has broken in upon the Church of God. For
the stopping of the course hereof, let all who wish well to Jerusalem, do what
in them lies to promote the cause of God, in erecting a Government in his
Church. This is the means which Christ has sanctified for the freeing of his
Church from these great evils. Of the force and efficacy whereof all ages have
had sufficient experience. In the last age, (as bad as the Government then was,
whether in the Title or Exercise, whether in the Constitution or Administration
and management of it, yet) such nightbirds as these durst not then fly abroad.
Though some comparativly sleighter errors began then to put up head, yet
grosser Heresies durst not appear. (An instance sufficient to make good that
received maxim, that Tyranny is better then Anarchie. Better an ill-managed
Government then no Government.) In other of the Reformed Churches, where that
form of Government, which was supposed to be modelled and laid out for this
Church, has obtained establishment and countenance, such evil weeds as these
have not been ordinarily found to grow, at least not to flourish under the
shadow of it. So far has Christ owned that (for substance) his own Ordinance,
as that few such desperate Blasphemous Heretics have been found in those
Churches. That the Church of God amongst us may enjoy the like mercy, all of us
contribute what we may, our Prayers and endeavors, that the work of God may be
carried on for the setting up of a wall, a fence about this his vineyard, his
sheepfold; a wall, a fence of Ecclesiastical Government about this Church,
which till it be, it cannot in a rational and ordinary way be expected or
hoped, that these Foxes should be kept from spoiling our Vines, or these Wolves
from tearing and worrying the poor Lambs of Christ Thus far the Application
has run in a more general way.

Applic. 2.
Come we now in a few words to direct itin a more special way to the Ministers
of the Gospel. Upon them the Text seems to look with a more special eye. Know
thou (says Paul to Timothy here) that in the last days there shall be
perilous times, for men shall be (among other vices which they shall be given
up to) Blasphemers. This Timothy must take special cognizance of. And wherefore
he more then others? For this take a double Reas. 1. That he might not be
dismayed or discouraged by it. 2. That he might be awakned, quickened, animated,
to be so much the more vigilant, constant courageous, in appearing and acting
for God, and for his truth against those open adversaries of it, and in
opposing, and bearing up head against those vices and errors of the times. And
in this way let this Premonition be useful to all the faithful Ministers of
Christ. Now that we see this prediction verified amongst us in so punctual a
manner.

Be not discouraged at it. Truth is, such times as these are discouraging
times. They are so to all Christians who desire to be found faithful with God.
But specially to the Ministers of Christ. Paul would have Timothy here to know
that there were (...), difficult and perilous times acoming; Perilous specially
to men of his Coat, his Calling. And such they are. When Professors turn
Apostatizing Blasphemers, then let Timothies, the Ministers of God look to
themselves. Then every Athanasius shall be a Satansius, and what not? they
shall be loaded with slanderous imputations and obloquies to render them odious
in the eyes of the world. But let not this dismay or discourage. A thing which
the best of men in this case may be subject to. We see it in Jeremy, when he
saw what entertainment his person and message found among many, how The Word of
the Lord was made a reproach unto him, and a derision daily, how his doctrine
was slighted, derided, mocked at by such men as the Apostle here speaks of,
Blasphemers, what were his thoughts hereupon? you may read them Jer. 20. 8, 9.
Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name.]
Hereupon Jeremy, what with fear and discontent, he begins to take up a
resolution of silencing himself of laying aside his calling. Such
discouragements in such times the Ministers of Christ are subject to. But let
them not give way to them. Thus it has been, and thus it is here foretold that
it should be. And wherefore foretold? but that the Ministers of God (whom after
a special manner it concerns) might not be so offended at it, as to be
discoraged at it. These things have I spoken unto you that you should not be
offended (says our Savior to his Disciples, speaking of the evil times which
were to come after his departure from them, John 16. 1.) And so, this thing
has the spirit of God foretold, that the Ministers of the Gospel being
forewarned, might also be forearmed against what ever disheartnings or
discouragements.

Awakened, Excited, animated, to greater Vigilance, Constancy, Courage.

1. Vigilance. When Foxes and Wolves are abroad, it is time for the Shepherds
to look out. And such are seducing Teachers. Foxes. [O Israel, thy Prophets are
like the Foxes in the deserts, (says the Prophet Ezekiel) cap. ^3. 4 Such are
false Prophets, seducing Teachers being (as Paul says of Elimas, Acts 13. 10.)
full of all subtilty and craft. And as Foxes, so Wolves. I know (says Paul to
the Elders of Ephesus) that after my departure grievous Wolves shall enter in
amosg you, not sparing the flock, Acts 20. 29. meaning thereby Seducers, false
Teachers, whom our Savior describes to be Wolves in Sheeps clothing* Mat. 7.
15. And being such, it stands the Ministers of God (his Shepherds, as they
are often styled) in hand, to look out to them. To them is that speech
directed, Cant. 2. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the
Vines] It is the speech of Christ to his Ministers (says our new Annotations
upon it, exciting them to look out, and have an eye to false teachers who
seduce weak Christians. And Paul foretelling the Elders aforesaid what Wolves
should break in upon the Church, in the next words he gives them an Item,
bespeaking their vigilance, Therefore watch, Act, 20. 31. The Ministers of
Christ hearing of such dangerous instruments abroad, should be so much the more
vigilant over their flocks.

2. And as vigilant over others, so Constant in respect of themselves. This is
Paul's charge to Timothy in this chapter, 2 Timothy 3. Having foretold him what
times and persons were to come, he gives him his lesson, v. 14. But continue
thou (says he) in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured
of]. And let all the Ministers of Christ take it home to themselves. In the
midst of what ever revolutions and turnings, though the whole world should turn
round, yet let them stand like so many Centers, not so far complying with any
error of the times as to decline any way or Truth of God, which they have
believed, professed and held forth.

3. And being constant in the Truth, let them be so much the more zealous and
courageous in defending it, and opposing the Adversaries of it. So far should
this opposition be from damping their spirits, as that it should by an
antiperistasis make the fire of holy zeal to burn so much the more intensly
within them. Such effect it had in Paul; when Elimas the Sorcerer, a seducing
Teacher, withstood him, seeking to turn the Deputy from the faith, Act. 13. 8,
9. See how Paul's spiritwas stirred within him, Then Paul filled with the Holy
Ghost set his eyes on him, and said, O full of all subtilty, and all mischief,
thou child of the Devil, etc.] with such a holy zeal did that good Polycarpe
Saint John's disciple confront that Blasphemous Heretic Marcion, who meeting
him, and demanding Vseb. l. c. 14.
of him whether he knew him, Yes says he, Agnosco te primogenitum Diaboli, I
know thee to be the firstborn of the Devil. So far should the Ministers of
Christ be from being dismayed or terrified by these Adversaries, that they
should (as Calvin speaks upon the Text) Animos potius ad resistendum colligere,
rather gird up their loins, and gather up their spirits, that so they may go
out more courageously in the strength of God against them.

This branch of the Application I might yet amplify and enlarge, by showing
you in what ways, and by what means the Ministers of God are to go out
against such adversaries of the Truth; as viz. by preaching against them,
writing against them, confuting their Errors, plucking off the Masks and
Vizards and disguizes from their faces, discovering their Impostures; that so
their folly being made manifest to all men, they may proceed no farther (as our
Apostle has it, ver. 10. of this chapter). But I have already expatiated far
beyond the limits which I propounded to my self when I first took this subject
in hand, and therefore shall here conclude, desiring God to make these
Meditations as profitable as they are seasonable.

FINIS.

