A Brief Narrative OF The great Victory, which it has pleased God to give to
the Army of this Commonwealth against the Scots Army, near Dunbar, in
Scotland, on Tuesdaie morning, the third of this instant September, related to
the Council of State by an express Messenger of the Lord General, sent from the
Army; which Messenger was present at the Action.

seal of the Commonwealth

7ber 7th LONDON, Printed by William Du guard, by the appointment of the Council
of State. Anno Dom. 1650.

Die Saturni 7th Sept. 1650. At the Council of State, at Whitehall.
Whereas it has pleased God to give the Army of this Commonwealth, now in
Scotland, a great Victory against the Scots, which coming to the knowledge of
the Council this morning, And the Parliament not now sitting; It is thought fit
by the Council, and accordingly hereby Ordered, that the following brief
Narrative, should be published in all Churches and Chapels within the late
lines of Comunication to Morrow, being the eighth of this instant September,
that thanks may be given to God for so great and wonderful a mercy, until the
Parliament shall give order for a more General and Solemn Thanksgiving. And that
the Lord Major and Sheriffs of London do cause this Narrative to be distributed
to all Churches and Chapels within the said late lines of Communication. And
all the Ministers of the said Parishes and Churches are required to publish the
same Narrative, in their several Congregations, that the people may take notice
thereof, and give God prais for this his great and signal mercy to this
Commonwealth.

Signed by Command of the Council of State. GUALTER FROST Secretary.

COR VNVM VIA VNA
A brief Narration of the great Victory, which it has pleased god to give to
the Army of this Commonwealth, against the Scots Army near Dunbar in
Scotland, on Tuesday morning, the Third of this instant September; related to
the Council of State by an express Messenger of the Lord General sent from the
Army; which Messenger was present at the Action.
OUr Army having long faced the Scot's Army to the West of Edinburg, and
finding they could not draw them to fight, thought fit to draw off to Dunbar,
to refresh themselves. And being com to their old Quartrers at Mussleborough,
and beginning their march on Saturday night they were pressed upon by the
Scot's Army close after them, so, as they were sometimes within a mile, and
sometimes half a mile of their Army. Our Army quartered that night at
Haddington: Sunday morning our Army marched to Dunbar, whither we came on
Sunday night. And their whole Army followed, consisting of eighteen Regiments
of Foot, which, together with their Horse, and Dragoons (as themselve say) were
27000, our Army about 12000. They there drew up their Army upon a very high
hill, within a mile of the Town; and ours stood in Battalia in the Cornfieldsd,
between them and the Town, ready to engage. Monday morning the Enemy drew
down part of the Army to the foot of the Hill toward our Army. On monday the
Lord General, Major General Lambert, and Lieutenant General Fleetwood, drew up
our men into Batalia in the Field, where they stood. The Enemy brought down
their Train to their Army, before drawn down, and their Horse were in the
Fields on each wing of their Foot. There was between both Armies a very great
Ditch of 40 or 50 Foot wide, and near as deep; in the bottom of which was a
little rill of water; this place was of great disadvantage to those who should
first attempt to pass it.

That night our Army, by command, marched as close to the said ditch as
possible they could, and placed their Field Pieces in every Regiment. Tuesdaie
morning at four of the clock we drew down a Brigade consisting of three
Regiments of Horse, viz. Major General Lambert's, Commissarie General
Whalley's, and Colonel Lilborn's; and two Regiments of Foot toward a Pass, that
is upon the Road-waie, between Dunbar and Barwick, by which we might with more
eas pass over to their Army; And there gave the Enemy and hot Alarm, firing
hard one at another; the dispute lasted there above an hour: the issue was, our
men gained the Ground, and possessed the Pass. Then the Enemies Horse charged
strongly, being most Lanceers, and coming down the Hill, our Horse gave way a
little; but presently Rallying, and our Foot of that Brigade advancing and
charging the Enemy, put them suddenly to the Rout, it being now about six of
the Clock in the Morning: their Foot seeing this Rout and the Flying of their
Horse, threw down their Arms and Ran away; their Left wing of Horse seeing that,
fled also; our Horse and Foot both pursued them to, and beyond Haddington, cut
down and killed in the pursuit above four thousand: and have taken, as near as
can be judged, ten thousand Prisoners, and above then thousand several Arms.
They left all the Guns they had, behind them, being in number nine, with all
their Ammunition, bag and baggage, and all they there had. We have taken one
hundred and eighty Foot-Colors. Prisoners of quality, brought in before the
Messenger came away, were, Sr James Lumsdain, heretofore Governor of
New-Gastle; and now the Lieutenant General osc their Army; General David
Leslie's Lieutenant Colonel: which Lieutenant Colonel says, that he supposes
David Leslie himself is slain. Diverse other Captains and Officers, of whom a
particular account was not taken when the Messenger came away. We lost none
after the dispute for the Pass; and in that dispute not above twenty. No
Commission-Officer slain, or wounded: only Major Brown was shot in the Wrist
the day before: Major Lister was taken Prisoner; but presently released.
Commissarie General Whalley had his Horse killed under him; but himself had no
hurt.

This is the brief of what was known when the Messenger came away, which was
the same day a little after Noon.

FINIS.

