THE DRINKING OF THE BITTER CUP: OR, THE HARDEST LESSON. IN CHRIST's School,
Learned and Taught by Himself, Passive Obedience.

WHEREIN, Besides diverse Doctrinall Truths of great Importance, many Practical
Directions are held forth, for the teaching of Christians how to submit to
their Heavenly Father in suffering his Will, both in Life and Death, Patiently,
Obediently, Willingly.

As it was lately presented to the Church of GOD at Great YARMOVTH, By JOHN
BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

Heb. 5.8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which
he suffered. 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example
that we should follow his steps. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Joseph Cranford
at the Castle and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Mr. BRINSLEY of Passive Obedience.

To all his Near and Dear RELATIONS, Natural and Spiritual, within the TOWN of
Great YARMOVTH, or elsewhere; Grace and Peace.
Much affected in the Lord,
NOT having a better Legacy to leave you, I do here present you with a Cup,
your Saviors Cup, which having himself drunk, he has left it for you to
pledge him in. A thing which sooner or later, in some kind or other, you must
all make account to do, meeting with many Crosses and Conflicts here upon
Earth, and at length be brought under the power of that last Enemy, Death. Now
that you may learn so to drink this Cup as your blessed Pattern did, submitting
to your Heavenly Father, in suffering his Will, Patiently, Obediently,
Willingly, is the Design of this Treatise. Wherein you shall meet with many
useful and needful Directions tending to this end. These I shall desire you
carefully to lay up in the Closet of your Souls, that you may have them at hand
to make use of, as Providence shall offer occasion. Which that they may be
blessed to my self and you, and through Grace made effectual for the purpose
to which they are designed, is and shall be the Earnest Prayer of him who is

Yarmouth, Anno 1659. M. 2. D. 23. Yours in the best and nearest Relation, John
Brinsley.

THE DRINKING OF THE BITTER CUP: OR, The Hardest Lesson in Christ's School,
Learned and Taught by Himself, Passive Obedience.
JOH. XVIII. 11. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?


Sour Herbs are sometimes more wholesome then sweeter morsels. Of all
Meditations which the Soul of a Christian has to feed upon, I know none more
useful in this Vale of Tears, then those which concern his Passive Obedience,
his Drinking of the bitter Cup, his suffering of Affliction. A handful of
these herbs, The occasion of undertaking this Subject; the loss of two hopeful
Sons, the one succeeding the other in his Apprentiship and Sepulcher.
a few of these Meditations (such as my own soul has (as heretofore, so) of
late been dieted with) my purpose is through Gods assistance to present unto
you, and set before you; being assured, that as they may be seasonable to some,
so they will not be unusefull to any. For this purpose I have here taken up
these words, which fell from the mouth of our blessed Savior a little before
his Passion.

Upon what Occasion, Occasion of the words.
the Verses foregoing will readily inform you. Judas, with the Highpriests
Officers, coming to apprehend his Master, Peter more forward then the rest,
steppeth forth, draws upon them, attempts a rescue, and making an Assault,
cuts off Malchus's Ear. Whereupon, his Master, interposing himself, takes the
peace of him, commanding his Sword into the Sheath, [ Put up thy Sword into the
Sheath:] For which he subjoyns this Reason; [ The Cup which my Father has
given me, shall I not drink it?]

In which passage we meet with two Generals, Division. Two General parts, the
Fathers Dispensation, the Sons Submission.
presenting themselves to our consideration; The Fathers Dispensation, and The
Sons submission. The Fathers Dispensation, in giving this Cup to his Son, [ The
Cup which my Father has given me.] The Sons submission in receiving and
drinking of it. [ The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?]

Begin we with the former of these, Fathers Dispensation in giving this Cup to
his Son, First General part, wherein three particulars.
[ The cup which my Father has given me.] In which words, for the more
distinct handling of them, we may take notice of three particulars. What is
here said to be given, By whom, To whom. What, [The Cup.] By whom, [The Cup
which my Father has given.] To whom, [The Cup which my Father has given me.]
Upon these look we severally, each of which will afford us somewhat worthy the
taking notice of. Begin with the first.

What is here said to be given, [The Cup,] The thing given, The Cup. (...),
quod potum contineat. S^gnif^cat id ^idc b^bitur, sive Cyathus, sive Calix,
sive V^ceus sit. Leigh Cri. Sac.
(...), (from whence both the Latin Poculum, and our English, Pot, are
conceived to have their Original,) it properly signifies Potorium, (a word
answering it both in sound and sense) a Drinking Vessel, Id unde bibitur. Any
kind of Vessel that men use to drink out of, of what material, size, or
fashion soever. This is the proper signification of the word.

Improperly it is both frequently and variously used in Scripture, where we
meet with diverse sorts of Cups. Among the rest, A Mystical and Metaphorical Cup.
two of special note. Calix mysticus and metaphoricus. A Mystical Cup, and a
Metaphorical Cup.

1. A Mystical, a Symbolical Cup. A Vessel, Mystical Cups.
imports some spiritual Mystery. Such was that Cup which the Psalmist
speaks of, Psalm. 116.13. I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord.] Cos Jeshugnoth, calieem salutum, The cup of Healths,
salvations. A Cup of Wine, or some such other Liquor, which the Jews at some
solemn meetings were wont to take and drink, in token of their thankfulness
to God, the Author of their temporal, and spiritual salvation. And such was
that Pasch^l Cup, which was in use in the Passover, of which we read (for so
are we to understand that Text) Luke 22.17. where it is said, He took the Cup,
viz. The Paschal Cup. And such was that other Cup, which we there meet with,
verse. 20. Likewise after Supper he took the Cup; viz. the Eucharistical Cup,
that Sacramental Cup, which at his last Supper he blessed, and gave unto his
Apostles to drink in remembrance of him, leaving it unto his Church as a
Memorial of his Death and Passion until his second coming. Of which St. Paul
speaking, calls it, The Cup of Blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. (...), that is, the
Blessed, Consecrated Cup, set apart by the Word and Prayer from a common to a
sacred use. These are Mystical Cups, representing some spiritual mystery. To
leave these,

2. Metaphorical Cups, Metophoricall Cups.
so called by way of Allusion and Resemblance. Of these we meet with two kinds
in Scripture.

A sweet Cup, and a Bitter Cup.

1. sweet Cup, a Cup of Prosperity, an happy and prosperous state and condition
in the world, A sweet Cup.
when men abound with temporal comforts and contentments. Of this Cup speaks
David, Psalm. 23.5. My Cup runs over. God had given him a large portion, as
of spiritual, so of temporal mercies, so as he had not only for necessity and
convenience, but even for superfluity. But this is not the Cup which here we
meet with in the Text. Surely had such a Cup been presented unto Christ, Peter,
who was so ready to bid him favor himself, and consult his own security,
(which he does Math. 16.22.) and had so many thoughts about a Temporal
Kingdom, that his Master and his Followers should enjoy upon earth, would not
have been so forward in putting it from him.

2. Besides this, there is also a Bitter Cup. Cup of Wormwood and Gall, A
Bitter Cup.
a Cup of Affliction and Suffering. This in phrase of Scripture we often times
find set forth under the name of a Cup, and that both in the Old Testament,
and New. Of this speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 75.8. In the hand of the Lord
there is a Cup; that is, a Cup of wrath and vengeance. Such was the Cup which
the Prophet Jeremiah received at the hand of the Lord to carry it to all the
Nations, Jer. 25.15. viz. a Cup of fury, (as it is there expressed.) And such a
Cup it is which the Spirit threatens, that all those who have received the
mark of the Beast shall drink of, Rev. 14.10. (...), a Cup of wrath, The Cup of
Gods indignation. And such a Cup it is that our Savior speaks of once and
again; As Matthew. 20. verse. 22. where he puts this Question to the sons of
Zebedee, Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? So again, Cap.
26. verse. 39. If it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. And so here again
in the Text, The Cup which my Father has given me,] meaning a Cup of
suffering, that Bitter Cup of his Passion, the bitterest that ever was drunk
upon earth. Of this Cup our Savior had already tasted in that bitter Agony of
his in the Garden, Hoc loce nihil est unde certe coll^gas sudori huic sanguinem
suisse p^rmistum: Nom non dictum est (...); Vide Theophilac: and Euthym. ad
loc. Sudor vix solet (...), Grot. ibid.
where conflicting with the apprehension of what he was ere long to undergo,
it put him into a strange bodily distemper, an unheard of sweat, insomuch as he
sweat, either drops of blood (as it is generally received,) or rather, as it
were drops of blood, so the Original has it, Luke 22.44. (...), that is, a
thick sweat, as it were clottered and congealed blood; And made him to break
forth into that thrice-repeated Deprecation; Father, if it be thy will, let
this Cup pass from me. And this Cup he was now to drink, to drink it off, to
wring out even the dregs thereof, which he did in that painful, shameful,
accursed death upon the Cross. And this bitter Passion it is which our Savior
here calls a Cup: (...), The Cup.]

Q. And why so called?

A. Christ's Passion why called a Cup.
The expression (as I told you) is Metaphorical, and borrowed. Reasons and
grounds of the Metaphor held forth by Expositors are diverse. Dicendo autem
poculum, insinuat mortem dulcem and desid^rabilem in salutem h^minu^. Theophyl.
ad loc.
To let pass that of Theophylact, who conceives our Savior here to call his
Passion a Cup, to intimate how acceptable and welcome the work of Man's
Redemption was unto him, and in order unto that, his Passion, even as
grateful, as desirable as a cup of drink is to a thirsty man. In which sense
some understand that word of his upon the Cross, Joh. 19.28. I thirst, viz.
after the Redemption and Salvation of lost Mankind. As also that other of a
later Expositor, Id^o calicem nominat, ut estendat ^^am g^avissimas
affu^ctiones in hoc mundo nihil esse (ut ua dicam) ^isi unum hauslum, statim
^^im cessahunt. Ferus in loc.
who conceives in and by this word to be insinuated the momentaninesse, the
short continuance of all afflictions and sufferings upon earth: which be they
never so bitter and grievous, yet they are but as it were one draught, a cup,
soon swallowed down, soon put over, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light Affliction which is but for a moment, etc. To let pass these
with some other, which I look upon as more witty then weighty.

With more probability the Metaphor may be conceived to be borrowed from one of
these three Heads, A threefold ground of the Metaphor.
all taken notice of by Aretius writing upon this Text.

1. Heathen, From a deadly Cup given to Malefactors. Formula petita a ritu
Gentium, quo noxios poticnibus missis in corcerem to^libant e medio. Atet. Com.
in loc.
who were wont sometimes to put malefactors to death by giving them a deadly
cup, a Cup of Poison to drink. So Historians tell us of Socrates, that famous
Moralist, that being condemned to dye, a poisonous potion, a Cup of the juice
of Hemlock was sent him to drink, which having done, he ended his days. To
this custom some conceive that forenamed passage to allude, Jer. 25.16. where
the Prophet is sent to the Nations with a cup, to cause them to drink it. Vid.
New Annot Engl. in Mat. 20. verse. 22.
And so they look upon the word here in the text. And it must be acknowledged,
the allusion is very proper and fit. Christ having taken upon him the sins of
the World, he was now by Imputation a grand Malefactor, a great sinner, the
greatest that ever was, having the sins of the World charged upon his account.
Hereupon God the Father, as a just and impartial Judge, for the satisfying of
his Justice, gives him this deadly cup, this poisonous potion of an accursed
death to drink, to undergo. But I shall not insist upon this, though a truth,
and an useful one.

Applic. Useful, as to other ends, Sin continued in, will be biternesse in the
la^ter end.
so to deter all presumptuous sinners from daring to go on in any known evil;
which if they shall dare to do, let them know that it will be bitterness in the
latter end. As Abner once said to Joab concerning his over-eagre pursuit of his
Brethren, 2 Samuel 2.26. Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the
latter end? So may I say to all wicked and ungodly men, who are so eager in the
prosecution and pursuit of their sinful ways and courses; Know ye not that it
will be bitterness in the latter end? So the Savior of the World, the
eternal Son of God, found those sins which he as a Surety had taken upon
himself: And surely so shall you find those sins which now you give over your
selves unto; they will be a bitter Cup, a Cup of Poison in the end. Upon the
Wicked God shall rain snares, fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this
shall be the portion of their Cup. Psalm. 11.6. But I shall not dwell here.

In the second place, From the Physicians potion.
others conceive the Metaphor taken from the Physician, who sometimes
prescribes unto his Patient a churlish Potion, Vel, a medicis, qui aegris
propinant potiones, ac interdum satis amaras ac acerbas. Ita Deus Pater hanc
potionem Filio suo propi^at, ut pro salute omnium fidelium mortem subeat. Aret.
in loc.
distastefull to the Palate, and loathsome to the stomach, in it self (it may
be) deleterious, little better then poison, were it not corrected, and so made
medicinable. Which Cup being prepared, he presents, requiring his Patient to
drink it off, for the saving of his life, the preserving or recovering of his
health. And of this Allusion we may say, (as of the former) that it suiteth
well with our present purpose, and that whether we make a particular, or
general Application of it.

1. particular case in the Text. The Death and Passion of Jesus Christ it was
such a Cup, Christ's passion a medicinable Cup.
a Medicinable Cup, a bitter Potion, which God the Father, as a wise Physician,
prescribed, prepared, and presented unto his Son, that he should drink it for
the salvation of his Elect people. Thus the Head takes in that Potion which is
medicinable to the whole Body. And thus Jesus Christ, the head of his Church,
he drinks this Cup, which however to him it was a bitter and distastefull
Cup, yet it was a Cup of salvation to his whole mystical Body, a true and
sovereign Catholicon, healing all the diseases, taking away the sins of the
World, the Elect World. Thus in particular.

2. general way. Afflictions, crosses, sufferings, Such are all Afflictions to
Gods people.
wherewith God is pleased to exercise his people upon earth, they are but a
Medicinable Cup, which he as a wise Physician mixeth and tempereth for them;
and administreth to them for their good, for the health of their souls.

Applic. A useful Meditation, A ground of patience.
did I intend to insist upon it. Useful, (as otherwise, so) specially for the
promoting of that design I have now in hand, the teaching of Christians quietly
and contentedly to submit to the will of their heavenly Father in the bearing
of whatever sufferings he shall be pleased to exercise them with. Thus do
Patients submit to their Physicians. Apprehending them skillful and faithful,
they put themselves into their hands, being ordered by them, taking whatever
Dose, or Potion they prescribe unto them. Even thus should Christians submit
unto their heavenly Physician, their God and Father, knowing him to be both
wise and faithful, they should now yield up themselves to his disposure in the
drinking of whatever Cups he shall prepare for them, Three ordinary ground, of
Impatience, all which this Metaphor meets with.
quietly and patiently submitting to whatever afflictions, not murmuring, not
repining, not quarrelling his Dispensations and dealings with them, whether in
regard of the Quality, or Multiplicity, or long Continuance of them. These are
the three things which ordinarily make men impatient. O (says one,) were my
Cross a common ordinary one, I could bear it, but it is a heavy one; My Cup is
a bitter Cup, no sorrow like my sorrow. That is the Churches complaint in her
captivity, Lam. 1.12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger. And
Christians are ready to take it up; when the hand of God lies heavy upon them,
O now there is no sorrow, no Affliction like unto theirs. O (says a second)
were it but one affliction I should make shift with it, but I am compassed
about on every side. That is David's complaint, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils
have compassed me about. And such is the condition sometimes of Gods dearest
children. Their Crosses are (like Jobs Biles, which were from the sole of his
foot unto his Crown, Job 2.7.) many of several kinds; they are afflicted (as
he also was) in Body, Estate, good name, Wife, Children, no part free. O (says
a third) My burden, were it but for a short time, I could undergo it. But far
carriage makes a light burden heavy; the long continuance of my Affliction
makes it unsupportable. Now this Metaphor which we have in hand it fitly meets
with every of these.

1. sharp and bitter, The sharpness of afflictions.
remember it is a Potion, a medicinable cup, and those sometimes must be such,
viz. where the necessity of the Patient requires it. And such it may be is thy
condition; a gentler medicine would not work upon thee. It may be thy
corruptions are strong, and so require a strong Potion to work them out; which
were it weaker, it may be it would do thee no good, but rather harm. Now God is
a wise Physician, who knows what is fit for his Patient. And therefore submit
unto him; not quarrelling the bitterness of thy Cup. Bitter Drugs which help
to evacuate evil and noxious humors, and to cleanse the stomach, are better
then sweeter meats which might breed dangerous surfets.

2. For the Multiplicity; The Multipl^city of them.
remember again this is a medicinable cup. Now in such a cup the Physician
often mingles many Ingredients; which he does, that they may meet with several
humors, and that one may help, or correct another. And thus deals God by his
people. Sometimes he puts diverse Ingredients into their Cup, exercises them
with sundry kinds of Afflictions and trials; which he does for the like ends.
It may be their corruptions, their Soul-maladies are many. And it may be one
affliction alone would not work so kindly, so thoroughly. And therefore he is
pleased thus to mix his Cup. Which he does not, but where his people have need
of it. If need be ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, (says St.
Peter) 1 Pet. 1.6. (...). Where one Simple will serve the turn, the wise
Physician will not trouble his Patient with Compositions. Surely, if God do
make his people heavy with multiplicity of Afflictions, there is a cause for
it. They have need of every Ingredient in this cup.

3. continuance of Affliction. The long continuance of them.
Here still remember this is a Medicinable Cup. Now (whatever the covetous and
self-ended may) the wise and faithful Physician will not hold his Patient in a
course of physic longer then need is. If he still prescribe potion after
potion, surely he sees there is a cause for it. And thus is it with our
heavenly Physician, if he do keep his people in a course of afflictions, it is
not that he takes any delight in it. No, though earthly Parents may sometimes
chasten their children for their pleasure (as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
12.10.) our heavenly Father does it not. He sees that there is a cause for it.
Con^inuance of Afflictions sometimes needful.
He sees that they have need of it, need of those afflictions wherewith he
exercises them, and under which he holds them. Need, either for the cure of
some old Malady, or for the prevention of some new one, which he sees them in
danger of.

1. For the cure of habituated lusts.
For the cure of some old Malady. Possibly there may be some old habituated
Lusts, which through a long custom and continuance have taken a deep rooting
in the soul. Now these are not easily, or suddenly wrought out. There must be
a course of physic to cure an inveterate disease. M. Paul Bayne Christian
Letters, 33.
It may be (as I remember a reverend and holy man writes to a friend concerning
himself) the sweet ways of youth have bred such a bed of Worms in our souls,
that our heavenly Father sees it necessary for us to continue our Wormwood and
Aloes. Thus God does this sometimes by way of cure.

2. prevention. Though for the present (it may be) the soul may be in a sound
and healthful plight, For the preventing of spiritual maladies.
yet he foreseeth what infirmities it is subject to, and in danger of, and
hereupon it is that he follows his people with a succession of Afflictions.
Even as the Physician that purges his Patient every Spring and Fall, that so
by those seasonable Evacuations he may prevent the sickness which he is
inclined to. Thus does God, knowing the temper of his people, he often follows
them with afflictions and trials to prevent those spiritual Maladies, which
otherwise he sees would breed in their souls. To which end he keeps them (it
may be) continually under his correcting hand, holding them (as I may say) in a
course of physic, even all their life long.

And shall he be pleased so to deal with any of us, let not us repine or
murmur. True it is, Repine not under long afflictions.
to be held long, much more continually, under affliction, it is a wearisome
thing to flesh and blood. As we say of physic, Qui medice vivit, misere vivit;
To be always in the Physicians hands it is a miserable course of life: And
truly so it is to be continually under Gods afflicting hand, to nature it is a
wearisome condition. But here let Grace correct and help Nature, by minding us,
that this is the condition which our heavenly Father sees fit for us. And
therefore quietly and contentedly submit unto him, to the drinking of whatever
cup, or cups, he shall prescribe unto us.

Only laboring to find the kindly working of every of them, Labor to find a
kindly working of them.
that we may be bettered by them as to our spiritual condition; that we may
find all sinful and inordinate lusts more and more purged out of our souls
(and the peaceable fruit of righteousness brought forth.) So shall we have
cause to bless God for this his dealing with us; acknowledging with David,
that it is good for us that we have been afflicted, that we might learn his
statutes, Psalm. 119.71. which is a sweet and blessed fruit. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach out of thy Law, Psalm. 94.12. When
Nocumenta thus prove Documenta; when chastening and teaching go together, this
is a blessed thing. But I am not come where I intend to fasten.

There is yet a third head, Metaphor, A third head of the Metaphor. From
Governors at Feasts.
which is looked upon as most genuine and proper; which is to fetch it either
from a custom among the Ancients, who in their Banqueting and Feasting, being
wont to drink by measure, they had one who was appointed to be the Moderator or
Governor of the Feast; Sumpta est Metaphora vel a more convivantium. Veteres
enim in conviv^ is, singulis portionem suam per dispensatorem assignabant;
Latinis Modiperatores erant, etc. Aret. in loc.
as you shall find it at that Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee, which our
Savior graced with his presence, Joh. 2.8, 9. Him the Greeks called (as it is
there) (...) or (...), and so after them the Latins, Modiperatores quasi modum
imperantes.
Architriclinus, or Symposiarcha, whose Office it was to order all things at
the Feast, and in special to see a measure kept in drinking (from whence he
was called Modiperator) to which end he appointed every one his cup, which he
must drink, and no more. Or from Masters of Families.
Or else more plainly and simply, (as others conceive of it) from a Master of a
Family, Metaphora sumpta a more Veteri, secunaum quem Pater-familias singulis
domesticis, ut certam cibi partionem edendam, sic etiam certam poculi, id est
vini seu potus, mensuram bibendam distribuebat, etc. P. Ravanell. Thesaur.
Calvin; Piscator, etc. ad loc.
whose manner anciently was, to give to every one in the Family, children and
servants, their several portion, as of Meat, so of Drink, to every one their
cup. Even so does God, the great Moderator, the wise Disposer and Governor of
all things, and the Father of all the Families in heaven and in earth,
distribute to every of the sons of men their portions, as of mercies and
blessings, so of sufferings, which in phrase of Scripture is called their cup.
Whence it is that we find these two sometimes put together; as Psalm. 11.6.
This shall be the portion of their cup; And again, Recte a viris doctis
annotatum est per (...) Hebraeum, cut respondet Hellenistarum (...),
significari sortem prosperam aut improsperam, quae Deo inspectante ac moderante
cuique obtingit. Unde and vocem (...) interdum adjuactam legimus. Grot. Annot.
in Math. 20. verse. 22.
Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup. So
then by [ Cup] understand we that portion of sufferings which God by his
providence lays out unto the sons of men. which he does not at random, but
by measure. Mark it. This is the Doctrinall conclusion which I shall from hence
take up.

Afflictions, sufferings are dispensed by God unto men by measure. Sufferings
dispensed by God by measure. Perinde ac Pacerfamilias cibum and potum filiis ac
domesticis suis distriouit, ita hoc juris in nos habet Deus, ut singulos
tractet prout visum est. Calvin Cem. in Text.
So were the sufferings of the Son of man, the Lord Jesus; and so are the
sufferings of all the sons of men. They do not fall upon them by chance, or
fortune, but by a divine providence. Neither are they poured out upon them
without any regard of stint, (as I may say) but by measure. As for the former
of these, none but an Atheist will deny, or question it. It is that which
Eliphaz wills Job to take notice of, Affliction comes not forth of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground, Job 5.6. Crosses, afflictions,
sufferings, of what kind soever, they do not happen by chance, nor yet have
they their Original merely from secondary causes. There is a hand of Divine
providence in every of them. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has
not done it? Amos 3.6. This is Gods work.

And this he does by measure. God does all things by weight and measure.
So he does all things, by weight and measure. As Job says of the Waters, Job
28.25. He weighs the waters by measure;] He so orders the waters of the
Sea, as that they keep within their banks, as if they were weighed, or
measured. And so may it be said of the waters of Affliction, of sufferings, God
weighs and measures them out, giving to every one his dimensum, his
proportion, his Cup.

For the prosecuting and clearing of which truth we may take notice of two
sorts of sufferings, Sufferings of two sorts, satisfactory and castigatory.
two sorts of punishments which God inflicteth upon the sons of men. There is
Poena satisfactoria and castigatoria. There are some punishments which are
satisfactory, other castigatory: Which two, however for the matter of them they
are one and the same, the same Cup, the same liquor, (as I may say) yet they
are differenced according to the subject, the persons on whom they are
inflicted. The former are judgments, or punishments properly so called, which
befall wicked men. The latter corrections, chastisements, trials, wherewith
Gods own people are exercised. Both dispensed by mersure.
Now of both these it is alike true, that God dispenses them by measure. Mark
it, Punishments and chastisements, (so call them for distinctions sake) God
dispenses them both by measure, though not by the same measure. Though not by
the same measure.
The one he measures out by a measure of justice, the other by a measure of
mercy, proportioning the one to the desert of the sinner, the other to his
strength; which two we may (with the Schools) call the one an Arithmetical, the
other a Geometrical proportion. Yet in both he deals by measure; measuring
out punishments unto wicked men, and measuring out chastisments unto his own
people. I shall deal with them severally. Begin with the former.

1. Punishments properly so called, satisfactory punishments inflicted for sin,
Punishments inflicted by measure, a measure of justice. The sufferings of
Christ thus measured.
God pours them out by measure. By a measure of justice (as I said)
proportioning the punishment to the sin. Thus did God measure out the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, those satisfactory punishments inflicted upon him,
they were proportioned to the sins which he had undertaken. This is that which
the Prophet Isai sets forth so clearly and fully, Isa. 53.6. where speaking
of the Messiah, of Christ, he says, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all; or (as the Margin in our new Translation reads it according to the
Original.) He has made the iniquity of us all to meet on him;] inflicting on
him whatever was requisite for the satisfying of his justice for the sins of
his Elect people, for whom Christ, as their surety had undertaken. So the next
Verse explains it, verse. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted; or (as the
Original has it word for word,) It was exacted, and he answered.] God the
Father, as a just Judge, required full satisfaction from him, and he therein
answered, by paying a full price, and so discharging of the debt wherein his
Elect were engaged.

And after the same manner will he deal with all those who have not a share in
that satisfaction, even all wicked and ungodly men. The sufferings of wicked
men thus measured.
To them will God measure out punishments by the same measure, a measure of
justice proportioning them to their sins. Temporal punishments sometimes.


Thus does he often times measure out unto them temporal plagues and punishments
in this life, therein dealing with them according to their sins. This David
prays for, that God would so deal by his mischievous enemies, Psalm. 28.4.
Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
endeavors, give them after the work of their hands, render to them their
desert. And this God often does, proportioning judgments to sins: Thus is he
said to deal with Mystical Babylon. Babylon the Mother of Whoredoms, spoken of
Rev. 17.4. is there said to have a Golden Cup in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness.] There is the measure of her sins, A full cup.
And behold how her punishment answers it. To her God gives the cup of the
wine of the fierceness of his wrath, Rev. 16.19. And that a full Cup; A Vial
full of the wrath of God, (as those Vials are described, Cap. 15 7.) In the cup
which she has filled, fill to her double, Rev. 18.6. Thus a full cup of
abomination meets sometimes, often times, with a full cup, an answerable
proportion of temporal plagues and judgments, wherein God renders unto men
according to their demerits. So he threatens, Deuteronomy. 32.41. If I whet my
glittering Sword, and my hand take hold of vengeance, I will render vengeance
to mine Enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

However, Eternal punishment.
this he will do hereafter, at that great day of retributions, when the Lord
shall render to every man according to his deeds, (as the Apostle has it, Romans
2.6.) then shall he pour out wrath and vengeance upon all wicked and ungodly
men; which he shall do by a measure of justice, proportioning their plagues to
their sins. To the nature and quality of them. The greater the sin, the greater
the punishment. Sins of ignorance shall meet with fewer stripes, sins of
knowledge with more; so our Savior tells the Jews, Luke 12.47, 48. And so for
the number; the more sins committed, the oftener repeated, the greater weight of
Judgment. Thence is that phrase used by the Apostle of heaping, or treasuring
up wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2.5. A heap, a treasure is increased by
daily additions; and so is that punishment which shall be inflicted upon wicked
men at the last day, it shall be increased by the multiplying of their sins.
Every sin being as it were a Faggot to feed that eternal fire withal. Now the
more Fagots are cast on, the greater is the flame. And the more sins a man
commits here, the greater (without repentance) shall his punishment be
hereafter.

Applic. Wicked men deterred from going on in a course of sin.
The consideration whereof might be of use for the deterring of all wicked and
ungodly men from daring to go on in a course of sin, as too many do, who add
drunkenness to thirst, (as the Lord there speaks, Deuteronomy. 29.19.) add one sin
to another, drinking iniquity like water, Job 15.16. multiplying their
transgressions, as if they could never have their fill of sin. Alas, what do
they hereby but fill up this cup? the cup of the wrath of God, which at the
last day, that day of wrath and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, shall be poured out upon them. But I shall not insist upon this.

The cup which we meet with in the Text, Father, Chastisements inflicted on
Gods own people.
[ The Cup which my Father has given me.] And so points more directly at that
later sort of punishments, which I call castigatory, such sufferings as Gods
own children are here subject to. Afflictions, chastisements, trials; these,
all these God dispenses by measure. Even as a Master of a Family (for from
thence, as I told you the Metaphor is most fitly derived) gives to every
child and servant in his house their dimensum, their portion of meat and
drink, what he thinks fitting and convenient for them, Admonemur hac
meraphora admensu rationem quandam esse in cruce, quam suis imponit Caelestis
Pater. Muscul. com. inloc.
so does the Lord dispense afflictions and trials unto his people, giving to
every one their cup, what he sees fitting and convenient for them, afflicting
them by measure. Mark it. This is the point which my eye is here principally
upon; the manner of Gods dealing with his people in afflicting them.

This he does by measure. Israel in their Captivity. Dispensed by measure.
So the Prophet Isai sets it forth, Isa. 27.8. In measure, when it shoots
forth, thou will debate with it.] When it shoots forth, (...)
or (as the Margin in some of your Bibles has it, In emittendo eum. Montan.
Tremell.
according to the Original,) When thou sendest forth, viz. into Captivity;
then did God debate with that people, calling their sins to remembrance, he
punished them for them. But this he did in, or by, measure. In measure when
thou sendest it forth.] (...)
Besuassaah, In sato, (says Montan.) The same word with that which we find 2
King. 7.1. where the Prothet Elisha foretelling the incredible plenty of
Victuals that should be in Samaria, he tells the Elders of Israel; To morrow
about this time shall a measure of fine Flower be sold for a shekel, and two
measures of Barley for a shekel: Thus does God dispense afflictions unto his
people, not at random, but by measure, even as men measure out Corn by the
Peck or Bushel. When he debateth and contendeth with them, he does it in, and
by measure. Measuring out their sufferings. Which he does both as to the
quantity and continuance of them.

1. For the quantity, he weighs them out. Even as the Physician prescribing
to his Patient, number and kinds of Ingredients, so for the quantity of each,
As to the quantity.
so many Ounces, Drams, Scruples, Grains, and no more. Thus does God order the
afflictions of his people; as for the kind, what they shall be, so for the
measure how great they shall be, so much and no more. So was it in the
sufferings of this his Son. Every drop in this his Cup, every grain of his
passion was weighed and measured out unto him. Insomuch that all his enemies
could not add one drop, one grain more to it. How came it to pass that not
one bone of this Paschal Lamb was broken upon the Cross? What, was it the mercy
of his enemies? nothing less. Such was their malice that they would not have
omitted any thing that might have imbittered his cup, made his death more
grievous. But it was the overruling providence of God, which limited their
rage, and his sufferings. This was done (says our Evangelist, Joh. 19.36.)
that the Scripture should be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken. God
had predetermined what they should do; and he should suffer, (as St. Peter
tells the Jews, Act. 4.27.) And to this they could not add the least scruple
more. And thus does God limit the sufferings of all his people. So far shall
they reach and no farther. So great shall they be and no greater. Even as he
limited the fire of Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, which though seven times hotter
then usual, yet it could reach no further then to the bands of those Martyrs
which were cast into it. Their bands were burnt, but upon their bodies the fire
had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed, neither were their clothes
changed nor the smell of the fire passed upon them, Dan. 3.27. Thus has God
limited and bounded all the sufferings of his people. Even as he has bounded
the waters of the Sea* So far shall they go, and no further. It is not all the
men upon earth, that can add a drop to their cup beyond what God himself has
appointed. No nor yet all the Devils in Hell. That one instance of Job may
serve instead of many. Satan could not touch his Body, his Children, his
Estate, until he had still received a new Commission from God for every one of
them. He could not set a step, but as God still let out another link of his
Chain. Thus does God measure out the afflictions of his people for the quantity
of them.

2. continuance of them; As to the continuance.
as it was said concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.16. etc. Let seven times
pass over him; that is, seven Years, or seven Weeks, or seven Days, (as that
Text is variously construed) So deals God with his people, he numbreth and
determines the Years, the Weeks, the Days, (as of their lives, Man's days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee, and thou have appointed
his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14.5. so) of their affliction. So he did
the four hundred years of Isreal's bondage in Egypt, (as he tells Abraham, Genesis
15.13.) And the seventy years Captivity of the Jews in Babylon. Seventy weeks
are determined upon thy people, (that is 70 years) Dan. 9.24. When this term
was at an end, so was their Affliction. When the Land (the land of Judea) had
enjoyed her Sabbaths, (lain desolate) to fulfill threescore and ten years (the
term foretold for their Captivity) then in the first year of Cyrus King of
Persia, (that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
accomplished) the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to proclaim liberty to
that people to return to their own Country, as we find it, 2 Chronicles. 36.21,
22. So exact is God in measuring out the continuance of the sufferings of his
people, for a year, nay for a d^y. When the four hundred and thirty years were
exp^r^d, the self same day departed all the hoasts of the Lord ^ut of the Land
of Egypt, (so that Text has it) Exodus 12.41. Thus does God number the days of
his peoples affliction. Ye shall have tribulation ten days, (says Christ to
the Church of Smyrna) Rev. 2.10. that is, for a set time. Even as it was with
our Saviors resting in the Grave; his lying under the power of death, it was
for a set time, for so many days, beyond which he could not be detained in
that prison. Thus has God determined and set down the days of his peoples
lying under an affliction, with the day of their deliverance. After two days
he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up, (says the Church)
Hos. 6.2. In which Text the Prophet is by some conceived to have an eye to the
Burial and Resurrection of Christ; showing how God would raise up hi hua Grch
and people out of the grave of affliction at the set and appointed time. Even
as he raised up Christ out of the Grave. There he lay two days, but the third
day he was raised up. So did God deal with the Head, and so will he deal with
his mystical Body, and all the members thereof, his Church and people: However
for a time, for two days, (as it were) he may suffer them to lie buried under
an affliction, yet when the third day comes, the time by himself appointed,
then will he raise them up, nothing shall hinder their deliverance. When the
third day was come nothing could hinder the Resurrection of Christ. Not the
Stone rolled upon the Spulcher, not the seal set upon it, not the Watch set to
guard it. Maugre all these, he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4. And so shall it be with his Members, the Saints and
servants of God. Let the Stone be never so great, the pressure never so weighty
that lies upon any of them; let men and Devils conspire, and use all ways and
means they can to keep them still in the grave, under an affliction, yet in
despite of all, the third day they shall rise again; when the time by God
prescribed and determined is come, deliverance shall not be deferred. Thus does
God exactly measure out all the sufferings of his people, both for the quantity
and continuance of them.

Q. But by what measure does he thus measure them?

A. Christisements measured out by a measure of mercy to Gods people.
To this I have in part returned answer already. This he does by a measure not
of justice, but of mercy. Such is that measure which the Prophet Isai there
speaks of in the Text forecited, Isa. 27.8. In measure when it shoots forth
thou will debate with it.] In measure, by measure, a measure of mercy:
moderate, (as Tremellius renders it) with moderation: So does God deal with his
people in afflicting them, not as with his and their Enemies. Has be smitten
him as he smote those that smote him? (says the verse foregoing.) God in
debating with his Enemies, in punishing them, he proceeds in a way of justice;
not so in correcting his people, with them he deals in a way of mercy: Whereas
he pours out his wrath upon the one, Pour thy fury upon the Heathen that
know thee not, Jer. 10.25. he measures out his anger unto the other, and that
by a measure of mercy, dealing with them in a way of discretion, and merciful
moderation. So he tells his people, the Jews, that he would deal with them,
Jer. 30.11. repeated cap. 46.11. I will correct thee in measure, and will not
leave thee altogether unpunished.] God being provoked by his people, he spares
not to punish them, but it is in measure. (...) In judicio.
Lammishpat (says the Original) by judgment, (so the former Translation,
there properly renders it; and the like does our new translation elsewhere; as
Jer. 10.24. where the Prophet speaking in the person of the people, makes it
his Request, Correct me O Lord, but with judgment; whereas the word is the
same, Bemishphat.) Thus does God deal with his people, though he does correct
them, and that sometimes sharply, yet still it is in measure, with judgment,
proportioning their sufferings, not to their sins, Proportioned to their
strength.
but to their strength. Even as the Physician (as I told you) in praescribing
Pills and Potions, he has a respect as well to the strength and ability of his
Patient, as to the nature and quality of the disease. So deals God in
afflicting his people, he does not proportion his judgments to their sins,
their deserts. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities. Psalm. 103.10. But to their abilities and strength.
So the Psalmist there goes on, verse. 13, 14. of that Psalm. Like as a Father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. For he knows
our frame, he remembers that we are but dust. Thus does he deal with his
people, not as a Judge, who proceeding according to the strict rule of justice,
regards not the person of the Offender, but the nature and quality of the
offense, to which he proportioneth the penalty; but as a Father with his
children, whom if they offend, he corrects, but with a wise moderation and
temper, having a regard to their age and strength, proportioning his strokes to
their weakness. So deals God with his children. If they offend, they shall
feel the smart of his rod. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments, then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89.31, 32. But herein he deals with them in a
wise and merciful way, having a regard to their strength. So much Paul
assures his Corinthians of, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful (says he) who will
not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able.] (...). God will not
himself afflict, neither will he suffer Satan or his Instruments to oppress
his people beyond their strength. Gods people how said to be pressed out of
measure, above strength.


Obj. No (it may be said) Does God always thus measure out afflictions to his
people, proportioning them to their strength, what then means that information
of the Apostle St. Paul himself, 2 Cor. 1.8. where acquainting his Corinthians
with some great afflictions which had happened unto him, he tells them
expressly, that he was pressed out of measure, beyond strength. For brethren,
(says he) we would not have you ignorant of our trouble (or Affliction, (...))
which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength.
So it was, whatever the affliction was, whether the great danger that he was in
at Ephesus, in that tumultuous sedition there raised by Demetrius of which we
read, Act. 19. (as most looked upon it,) or some dangerous sickness wherewith
he was visited, or whatever it was, it so seized upon him, as that he was
overburdened with the apprehensions of it; pressed out of measure, above
strength: (...). A Metaphor (says Calvin) taken from a Porter, Metaph^ra
sumpta ab iis qui sub gravitate ponderis d^ficiunt: Vel a nov bus quae nimio
onere merguntur: Calv. com. in loc.
who has a greater burden laid upon his shoulders, then he is able to stand
under, or from a Ship, that is laden beyond her bearing. So was it with this
great Apostle in this affliction. The apprehension of the eminent danger
wherein he was over burdened in his soul. And was it not so also with our
blessed Savior himself? Who in the midst of his passion cries out, as sinking
under his burden, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. How
then is he said to afflict his people by measure, such a measure, so as to
proportion their sufferings to their strength?

A. For answer, we must distinguish of strength, A twofold strength, natural,
supernatural.
which is twofold: Natural, Supernatural, (it is Aquinas his distinction upon
that Text.) The strength of Nature, and the strength of Grace. The former may
be called our strength, Pati supra virtutem, potest intelligi dupliciter, vel
supra virtutem naturalem, and de hac loquitur hic, supra quam Deus aliquando
permittit sanctos tentart: vel supra virtutem Gratiae, and de hac intelligitur
illud, 1 Cor. 10.13. Aqu. in Com. in loc.
the latter Gods strength. Now look at the former of these, our own strength,
the strength of Nature, and we shall find it no news, no wonder that the
people of God should be overburdened with their afflictions, laden beyond their
bearing, pressed out of measure, above strength; this strength being no other
then weakness. Thus it is said of our Savior, 2 Cor. 13.4. He was crucified
through weakness; meaning his flesh, his humane nature. Such is the strength
of nature no better then weakness: Not able to stand out against Death, no nor
yet to look it in the face. The reason why many mere natural men do engage
with this enemy with such resolution as they do, is because they do not
apprehend it aright: their senses are stupefied, intoxicated. Even as the Jews
were wont to give stupifying potions to Malefactors before their Execution,
that so the fear of death might be thereby taken away. Even so are the hearts
of natural men often times stupefied, so as they do not apprehend the terrors of
Death; which if they did, it were not all the power of nature that could be
able to support and bear up the spirit against it. Now beyond this strength it
was that Paul was there pressed, being in eminent danger, insomuch that he even
despaired of life (as he there says) he found his spirit begin to fail him, he
was not able to bear it. And so was it with our blessed Savior himself in that
his passion; the Godhead for a time (as it were) hiding it self, withholding
its wonted influence, the Manhood being thus left to it self, it was pressed
beyond strength, and so ready to succumbe.

But there is another strength in the people of God, even a supernatural
strength, Supernatural strength supporting Gods people in their sufferings.
the strength of Grace, whereby they are upheld, and carried on, as in their
active, so in their passive obedience, beyond the strength of nature, enabled
to do and to suffer more then flesh and blood could do. In themselves they
are poor, weak, impotent creatures, not able to do, or suffer any thing as of
themselves; but by and through the Grace of God strengthening and enabling of
them they are able to do and suffer all things. So says Paul of himself, Phil.
4.13. I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me. (...)
(says the Original) I am able for all things, viz. to suffer them. Such are
the things which he there speaks of in the verse foregoing, rather passions
then actions, as to be abased, to suffer want, etc. these things Paul
apprehends himself able to do. But what made him so strong? Not any strength of
his own, but the power of supernatural grace received from his Lord and Master
Christ. Through Christ that strengthens me. And the like may every true
Believer say, how weak soever of himself, yet through the grace of Christ
strengthening of him, he shall be able to bear, to suffer whatever God shall
please to lay upon him. Thus it is not the strength of Nature, but of Grace,
which makes them thus able. Even as it is with a Leaden Vessel, which of it
self, being empty, is subject to melt with a little fire, but put water, or
other liquor into it, and now it is able to endure the hottest Furnace; so it
is with Christians, of themselves they are weak and feeble, their hearts are
ready to melt within them upon some great trial. As it is said of the
Israelites, when they were smitten at Aye, Josh. 7.5. The hearts of the people
melted, and became as water. And the like says David of himself, Psalm. 119.28.
My soul melted for heaviness. So is it sometimes with the best and strongest
Christians; being brought into a Furnace of affliction, some fiery trial,
their hearts are ready to melt within them. But being by grace strengthened in
the inward man, through this supernatural strength, they are made pares oneri,
able to suffer that which all the strength of Nature could not do.

And to this strength it is, Afflictions proportioned to Gods strength in his
people.
that God proportioneth the sufferings of his people: Not to their own
strength, but to his strength. Not to the strength of Nature, but to the
strength of Grace; that strength which either already they have, or which he
supplyeth to them. For so it is when God comes to lay greater burdens upon his
people then they are able to bear, now he comes in with a new supply of
strength unto them. In this way it was that Paul was supported under that
Temptation wherewith he conflicted, by a supply of Grace. My grace is
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. The stronger conflicts any of Gods people
meet with, the more Grace does he confer upon them, for the inabling them to
withstand those assaults. And thus is his power made perfect in weakness (as
it there follows;) putting forth, and showing it self more in supporting his
people under such trials, as in themselves do far exceed their strength. And
thus you see this Doctrine confirmed and made good, how God dispenses all
afflictions to his people, by measure, and that a measure of mercy,
proportioning them to their strength, that strength of grace which they have,
or which he gives them.

And will you know why he deals with them after this manner? God corrects
his people.
this he does in as much as he corrects them in love, for their profit.

1. In love. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth. As many as I love I rebuke and
chasten, In love.
Rev. 3.19. Hence is it that natural Parents correct their children, not out
of hatred but love. And so does the Lord his children. Whom the Lord loves he
corrects, even as the Father the Son in whom he delights, Prove. 3.12. And
thus correcting them out of love, and good will which he bears them, he
deals with them in such a way of mercy; proportioning their sufferings, not
to their desert, but their strength.

2. profit. For their profit.
In this the Apostle shows how the heavenly Father differs from some earthly
Parents, Heb. 12.10. They verily for a few days chasten us after their own
pleasure, but he for our profit, (...), for our spiritual advantage and
benefit, That we might be partakers of his holiness.] Even as the Physician,
intending the health of his Patient, he orders his Potions in that manner,
proportioning them to his strength. But I shall no longer dwell upon Doctrinall
illustration. Bring we it home by way of Application.

Where let me (in the first place) serve in this Cup, as a Cup of consolation,
A Cup of consolation to Gods people.
a ground of comfort to all the Saints and servants of God. What does God,
their heavenly Father, thus measure out their sufferings unto them? then let
not them fear. That is the use which the Lord himself makes of it in that Text
forenamed, Jer. 46. last. Fear not O Jacob my servant, says the Lord, etc. I
will not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in measure. And such
use let all the Sons of Sion, all true Israelites make of it. However God may
correct and punish them for their sins, (which he will do as soon, or sooner
then any other, You only have I known of all the Families of the earth,
therefore you will I punish for all your iniquities, (says the Lord to
Israel,) Amos 3.2.) I will not leave thee wholly unpunished (says the former
Text,) yet here is the comfort; he will not punish them as he punishes others.
Has he smitten them as he smote those that smote him? Isa. 27.8. He will
correct them in measure, with judgment, with a wise and merciful moderation.

Which let it serve to byace and bear up the hearts and spirits of the sons and
daughters of Affliction under whatever sufferings. Which be they never so many,
never so grievous, of never so long continuance, yet let them know, it is but
their Cup, the portion which God in wisdom and mercy hach measured out unto
them.

And O that all the Lords people were but fully persuaded of the truth hereof!
that all their afflictions are thus dispensed to them. How patient, how
contented, how cheerful, how thankful would it make them, under whatever
suffering? What is the reason that the hearts of men are so subject to melt and
faint under afflictions? Surely one chief cause of this deliquium, this
soul-fainting is, unbelief. Men are not fully persuaded that there is such an
overruling hand of Providence in the ordering and disposing of them, that they
are thus measured out for the breadth, the length, the greatness and the
continuance of them; they look upon them as happening to them by chance or
fortune. Which while they do, no wonder if they sink under their burden. But
so let not Gods children look upon their sufferings. Whatever they be let them
look upon them under this notion, as their Cup, their portion measured out unto
them;

And that by a measure of mercy. There is the consolation. The punishments of
wicked men are measured out too, they also have their cup. But it is by a
measure of justice, proportioning them to their sins. But the sufferings of
Gods people are measured out by a measure of mercy, proportioned to their
strength. And what a support may this be unto them, (if rightly considered)
under whatever afflictions? Be they what they will, they shall not exceed their
strength, the strength which they have, or that which God will supply unto
them. For this the Apostle is bold to engage Gods Fidelity in that forecited
Text, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is Faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above what you are able. And what an encouragement is here? Of all
discouragements there is none greater to a Christian in his suffering
condition, then the apprehension of his own weakness, want of strength to
undergo what he feels or fears. What is my strength (says Job) that I
should hope? Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of brosse?
Job 6.11, 12. O (says the poor soul) had I but strength to bear my burden,
were it never so heavy I should be contented with it, but my burden is great,
and my strength little. How then shall I but faint in the day of adversity? (as
the wise man has it, Prove. 24.10.) But let not this discourage any true
Believer. Thou want strength; alas, who does not? When as such a tall Cedar
as that blessed Apostle was, should be pressed beyond strength with the
apprehension of an imminent danger, how should such Shrubs as thou and I ever
look to hold up head, if we look at our own strength? I, but remember to whose
strength it is that God proportioneth the sufferings of his children; it is not
their strength, but his own strength. Christians are much deceived when they
look upon themselves for strength, either to do, or suffer any thing. No, this
is a condition on Gods part, not ours.

A comfortable meditation. Gods Covenant with his people to give them strength,
as to do, so to suffer his will.
When God enters into Covenant with his people (the Covenant of grace,) they
covenant with him to be willing to do and to suffer what he shall require and
impose, so to be at his ordering and disposing, both as to their active and
passive obedience. This is the condition on their parts. But on the other part,
God graciously covenanteth with them to give unto them strength to do what he
commands. That is the condition on Gods part. As when he sends Moses upon
that Embassage to Pharaoh, Moses yields his service, but God covenanteth with
him to enable him for it. Certainly I will be with thee, Exodus 3.12. as to
protect, so to direct and enable thee. So is it in Passive Obedience. So long
as Gods people are willing to suffer what he shall impose, he will be with
them. When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, Isai. 43.2. so
is God with his people in all their sufferings, supporting them under them as
well as delivering them out of them. How then is it that Christians in their
sufferings look so much at themselves, their own strength, as if this were a
condition on their part? No, God has engaged himself for it, and he will make
it good. Only see that we be willing to suffer. As for strength in suffering,
leave that to that God, who will so order the affliction, that we shall be
through his strength able to bear it.

And therefore trouble not our selves in this case, Christians not to trouble
themselves with needless fears.
(as too many do) with distrustful and distractfull thoughts and fears about
what may befall and happen unto us. Strange it is how Christians do sometimes
disquiet their own hearts by anticipating of their sufferings, forecasting how
they should do, in case such or such a trial, such an affliction should happen
unto them. O (says one) the afflictions which I feel are great, but those
which I fear are far greater. O, if God should bring upon me the evil which I
fear, how should I bear it? Should God deal with me as with his servant Job, or
with some others of his servants, how should I undergo it? Thus do they
disquiet their souls often times with vain apprehensions of what God (it may be)
never intends to do to them; so making the burden of the present day a great
deal heavier then it would be, by pulling to morrows burden upon it. Against
all these causeless fears the Meditation in hand may serve as a sovereign
Cordial. God, when he afflicts his people he does it by measure, by a
measure of mercy, proportioning their sufferings to their strength: So as if he
shall call any of them to sufferings above, and beyond their strength, he will
make a proportionable supply. And if he give a greater measure of strength for
the bearing of it, it is all one as if the affliction were lighter. And why
then should we disquiet our souls with these ifs and ands, these doubts and
fears of what may come hereafter? Come what will come, come what shall come, it
shall not exceed that measure, which our wise and merciful God sees fitting
and convenient for us.

And therefore being persuaded hereof, Christians quietly to submit to divine
dispens^tions.
(to close up this point with a word of Exhortation) let all of us quietly and
contentedly submit to whatever dispensations we meet with. Looking upon them as
our Cup, our portion, take them, and submit to them, and that not only
patiently but willingly. Children who are contented with such portions of meats
and drinks as their Parents reach forth to them, many times speed the better
for it; whereas those which lowre when they have not what they would, are sent
away fasting. Never did any child of God get any thing by repining and
murmuring at Gods dispensations and dealings with him. Hereby many times they
double their afflictions: And therefore whatever it be, take it contentedly.
This bitter cup being thus drunk, may make way for a sw^eter. So it did to our
blessed Savior. His Cross, which he thus took up upon his shoulder, made way
for his Crown. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, the death
of the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him. Phil. 2.8, 9. Ought
not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory? Luke 24.26.
Where the Bread of affliction and water of adversity, are taken, and swallowed
down contentedly, in a way of Obedience, God has sweeter morsels in store. As
the Physician who after his churlish potions gives pleasant and refreshing
Cordials. Such Cordials has God in store for his people, which he waits to
bestow on them, when he sees them fit for them. Therefore will the Lord wait
that he may be gracious unto you (says the Prophet Isaiah to the Jews) And
therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy on you; for the Lord is a
God of judgment, blessed are all they that wait for him. Isa. 30.18. Mark it;
The Lord is a God of judgment,] one that does all things with wisdom,
moderation and discretion, especially in his carriage toward, and dealings
with his children, (as our new Annotation there rightly expounds it. And
therefore, Blessed are all they that wait for him; such as quietly and
composedly sit down under his correcting hand, not rising up against him, not
running out from him, to seek relief by any indirect ways and means, but
expecting his deliverance, in his time, and way, when to him it shall seem
seasonable to send it. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more fully in
the latter part of the Text, to which I shall adjourn the further prosecution
of it. I have done with the first particular; What is here said to be given, [
The Cup.] Pass we now to the second.

By whom it is given. By whom given, where consider.
[ The Cup which my Father has given.] Where take we notice of two things;

The Agent,

And the Action. Singula verba singularem Emphasia habent, Ferus Com. in loc.


The Agent [My Father.]

The Action, [Hath given.]

Look we upon them severally. For (as Ferus truly observes) there is not a
word in this Text but has its weight, a special emphasis in it. Begin with the
former.

The Agent, The Agent, God; Who is called a Father.
the Person reaching forth this Cup, [My Father.] (...), (says the Original)
The Father. A Relative title, which in Scripture we find given two ways,
(...);

Essentially,

Personally.

1. Essentially.
Sometimes Essentially. And so it relates to the whole Godhead, to all the
three Persons jointly considered, who being but one God, are called by this
name of Father. Thus is the word used in the entrance to the Lords Prayer, Our
Father which art in heaven.] Where the word [ Father] is to be understood
essentially, as comprehending all the three Persons in the Trinity, to whom
jointly the prayers of Gods people are to be directed. And so Malach. 2.10.
Have we not all one Father, meaning God.

2. Personally.
But most commonly the word is used Personally, as a Relative Title, serving to
distinguish the Persons. And so it points at the first Person. So are we to
look upon it wherever we find it pointed with either of the other persons. As
Math. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Where, by the Father we are to
understand the first Person. And so is it most properly looked upon in all
those Texts, where Christ makes mention of his Father. Among which, this we
have now in hand is one [ The Cup which my Father has given me.]

For the opening of which Title, God a Father in diverse respects.
we may take notice that God is said to be a Father in diverse respects.

1. In reference to all creatures. There is one God, Generally. To all his
Creatures, to whom he is a Father.
and Father of all, (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 4.6. of all creatures. Which he
may be called upon a diverse account.

1. A Father by creation. All things having their Original, their being from
him. By Creation.
Unto us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, 1 Cor. 8.6.
(...). All things have their being from him, as a Child from the Father. Have
we not all one Father? has not one God created us? (says that forecited Text)
Mat. 2.10.

2. And (secondly) a Father by Providence; By Providence.
as he gives them their being, so he takes care of them, providing for them
as a Father does for his children. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou
give them their meat in due season. Psalm. 145.15.

3. similitudine vestigii, In regard of similitude.
in regard of some similitude and likeness betwixt him and them, there being
never a creature but has some print and footstep of God imprinted upon it.
Quaelibet herba Deum. Never a creature, but whosoever looks upon it, may see
something of God in it. Thus is God a Father to all Creatures, universally.

2. Mankind. Specially to Mankind.
In whom there is not only similitudo vestigii, but imaginis, not only some
footsteps, but even the Image of God. So was Man at the first created. Let us
make man in our own image, after our likeness. Genesis 1.26. So God created man
in his own Image, in the image of God created he him, verse. 27. resembling his
Creator, as a child does the Father, like unto him, as in diverse other
perfections, so especially in knowledge, holiness and righteousness.

3. Peculiarly to true Believers.
Among men he is said to be a Father more peculiarly to all true Believers. To
them a Father by the grace of Adoption. Having predestined us to the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, Ephesians. 1.5. As also by the grace of
Regeneration. Bless d be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again, 1 Pet. 1.3. Hereby he
renews his Image in them, making them partakers of the divine nature (as St.
Peter calls it, 2 Pet. 1.4.) (...), not (...), not of the Divine essenee, or
substance, which is incommunicable to any creature, but of divine qualities;
whereby they are made like unto God in grace here, and glory hereafter. And
being thus related, he performs all the offices of a Father to them,
providing for them necessaries and conveniences, both temporal and spiritual
upon earth, and laying up an Inheritance for them in heaven. Behold a sea of
matter, which I might here lanch into, and that without any wrong either to
you, or the Text. But I shall confine my self.

In the fourth and last place, Properly unto Christ.
God is most properly a Father unto Christ. Blessed be God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.4. So we find our blessed Savior often calling
him. My Father works hitherto, Joh. 5.17. and frequently elsewhere, (...).
And so our Translations, both old and new, do here render the Text, [ My
Father.] And so God may be said to be the Father of Christ; and that in a most
peculiar way; so his Father, as he is not of any other. His Father, and that in
reference to both natures, God a Father to Christ in reference to both natures.


His Godhead,

His Manhood.

1. In respect of his Godhead; According to his Godhead.
so he was his natural Father, begetting him by an eternal, wonderful,
unexpresseable, unconceiveable kind of generation, communicating the whole
divine essence and substance unto him, as a natural Parent communicates his
nature to his Son. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, says God
the Father to his Son Christ, whom according to his divine nature he begat from
all eternity, Psalm. 2.7. Whence it is that he is called the only begotten Son
of God, Joh. 3.16. the only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1.14. Not only
Primogenitus, but Vnigenitus, not only the first born, (which he is also said
to be [ The firstborn of every creature,] Col. 1.15. The firstborn among many
brethren, Romans 8.29. in as much as he is the heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.
(having the preeminence among all Gods children,) but the Only begotten Son,
(...). So he was according to his Godhead.

2. According to his Manhood.
And (secondly) according to his Manhood. So God may be called his Father. And
that

1. In regard of the wonderful Conception of it.
In regard of that wonderful and extraordinary operation of the Father in his
conception; which was effected by his sending of his holy Spirit to work it.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
over-shadow thee, (says the Angel to the Virgin,) Luke 1.35. (...). Even as
it was in the Creation, where it is said that The Spirit of God moved upon the
waters, Genesis 1.2. putting forth a secret and immediate power in the production
of those creatures; so did it over-shadow the Virgin, effecting this conception
by an immediate, and extraordinary power. And upon that account (though not
only or chiefly that, as Socinians would have it) Christ is called the Son of
God. So it there follows, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born
of thee shall be called the Son of God. Thus was God the Father of Christ
according to his Humane nature, in respect of the conception of it.

2. Personal union, In regard of the Personal Union.
which was, and is, betwixt the Godhead and the Manhood. The Manhood being (as
it were) married unto the Godhead, made one Person with it, by an inseparable,
indissoluble union, God who was the Father to the one by nature, he becomes
also a Father to the other. And upon these accounts it is that Christ here (as
frequently elsewhere) makes claim to this Relation, calling God his Father.

And to him it is that here he looks in the business of his Passion. Christ
in his Passion looking unto God his Father, as his Father.
Being now to drink this bitter cup, which he saw coming toward him, he
looks up unto God his Father, and he looks upon him as his Father: Each of
which will afford us somewhat for our Instruction.

1. Christians to eye God in all their sufferings.
In that Christ here looks up unto God his Father, see we whither it is that
Gods people are to look in all their Grosses and Afflictions that befall them.
Look upwards, see God in them. So does our heavenly Pattern here, the Lord
Jesus. The Highpriests, with the Scribes and Pharisees had conspired against
him, Judas, his own servant, had betrayed him, Notandum, hic est quod non
dicit, An non bibam poculum quod infundunt mihi Judai, inimici and hosts, sed
Quod dedit mihi Pater. Admonemur hic ut in ferenda cruce suspiciamus ad Putrem
coelestem. Muscul. Com. in Text.
the Highpriests Officers, with a band of Soldiers were ready at hand to
apprehend him, but he looks beyond all these, looks up unto God his Father,
looking upon this Cup as prepared and presented by him. [ The Cup which my
Father has given me.] Thus should Gods children in all their afflictions and
distresses, look through Instruments, Hic docet nos in adversis non respicere
in hominem, aut Daemonem mala inferentem, sed in Deum permittentem. Ferus
Annot. in Text.
beyond secondary causes; look through them unto God himself. So did holy Job,
(the story is well known;) when he heard what the Chaldeans and Sabeans had
done to him, how they had plundered him of his substance, driven away his
Herds and his Flocks, what says he to it? Why, The Lord has given, and the
Lord has taken, Job 1.21. Non Chaldaei, non Sabaei, (says one) he does not
say, the Chaldaeans, the Sabaeans have done this, but The Lord has taken. As
for them they were but Instruments, it was God that set them on work to do
what they did. And therefore Job looks beyond them unto him. And the like did
David, when Shimei came like a mad Dog with open mouth, foaming and barking
against him, for which Abishai would have had him have given him commission to
take off his head, what says he? Let him alone, and let him curse, for the
Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. This had God done, though not by any
order or direction, yet by a secret providence, so ordering and disposing of
Shimeies malice, that he might be isntrumental, for the further humbling of
David. And David taking notice hereof he disdains to look at that despicable
Varlet, but looks higher unto God, by whose permission, yea secret
commission, he did what he did.

So it is, In all man's sufferings God the principal Agent.
in whatever sufferings, whoever be the Instruments, God himself is the
principal Agent. What they do, they do it by Gods ordination and appointment.
It was one thing which Rabshakeh would have Hezekiahs servants to tell their
Master, concerning his coming up against Jerusalem, Isa. 36.10. Am I now come
up without the Lord against this place to destroy it? The Lord said unto me,
Go against this place, and destroy it. This he spoke falsely, and yet truly;
falsely as pretending to a Commission and Warrant from the Lord for what he
did; yet so as there was a truth in what he said. Though he had no word from
God, yet it was by his secret counsel and appointment that he came up thither.
So the same Prophet, speaking from the Lord, elsewhere asserts it, Isa. 10.5. O
Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, the staff in their hand is mine indignation.
So it is in what hand soever it be, the Rod, the staff of Affliction and
Suffering is Gods. If the Assyrian come up against Jerusalem, it is God that
sends him. [ I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge; (so it there follows) verse. 6.
True it was, he intended nothing less then the doing of Gods work, the
fulfilling of his will, as the next verse has it, [ Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his heart think so, verse. 7.] He came of his own head, to do what
was in his own heart, to satisfy his ambitious and cruel mind, in conquering
of Kingdoms, and making havoc of the people where he came. That was his
design. Yet so as herein he had a secret Commission from God, who sent him as a
scourge against that people. Thus is God the Orderer and Disposer of whatever
evils befall his people. Shall there be evil in a City, (and so in a Family)
and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. Evil of affliction and suffering is
Gods work, issuing out of his mouth. That is the Churches acknowledgement in
her captivity. Lam. 3.37, 38. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass,
when the Lord commands it not? Out of the mouth of the most High proceeds
not evil and good? As prosperous successes, so cross issues, they are all of
them by Gods determination and appointment. I form the light, and create
darkness, I make peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things. Isa.
45.7. So it was in the sufferings of our blessed Savior, (as I have in part
showen you already, and shall (God willing) do it yet more fully,) it was God,
his heavenly Father that measured them out to him. He it was that mixed, that
tempered that Cup for him, his natural Son; and the like he does for all his
adopted children. And if so, then great reason there is why they (as their
blessed pattern here does) in all their afflictions and trials should look up
unto him, taking notice of his hand in the ordering and disposing of them.
Without which they can neither have support under them, nor yet a sanctified
use of them.

Which let it be applied by way of Reprehension, Applic.
Exhortation.

Use 1. Reprehension of such as in their afflictions look only downwards.
By way of Reprehension. Were the eyes of our blessed Savior in his sufferings
thus raised upwards, what then mean our eyes to be cast altogether downwards,
as often they are? In afflictions and sufferings, whither is it that men
ordinarily look? Some they know not to what, to Chance and Fortune, things
which are not; others to Instruments and secondary causes. So it is for the
most part. If men be plundered and spoiled of their goods, whither do they
look? To the Chaldaeans, the Sabaeans, the spoylers, Robbers, Enemies that did
it. If themselves or theirs, be visited with sickness, what is it that they
pore upon? The time, and place, when and where they got it, how they came by
it, and by what means they may be rid of it. And so for Slanders, their inquiry
only is after them that raised them. This is the highest pitch that carnal
spirits rise unto. As for God, he is not in all their thoughts (as David says
of the wicked man, Psalm. 10.4.) And as for Gods own children they are often times
blameworthy in this kind, for looking too much downward, too little upward.
And thence is it that they are so impatient under their Crosses, as too often
they are like Horses champing upon the Bil, not considering the hand that
holds the Bridle; biting the stone, not taking notice of the hand that
throws it. Exhort. to follow Christ's example in looking upwards unto God.


Use 2. Whom, be we (who profess our selves his Scholars) exhorted in this, to
imitate and follow. In all the crosses and afflictions which befall us look
upwards. It was Eliphaz his speech to Job, in that text forecited, and it was a
true one, Job 5.6. Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground; wherein he gives him to know (what he was
not ignorant of) that afflictions have a higher rise then men ordinarily look
at. They are not things which happen by chance, neither do they depend merely
upon secondary causes; they have God himself for their principal Efficient. And
therefore in all our Afflictions look upwards. So must they do who would find
out the Head of a River, they must go upwards. And the like course take we,
that we may find out the head of every affliction, look upwards, look above
and beyond all secondary causes, Instruments, means, occasions, look up unto
God himself. The thoughts of a Christian in his suffering concondition should
never rest till they come at God.

Nay, till then they will never rest, The only way to quiet the spirit in
Affliction, to see God in it.
till they come to see God in every trial, take notice of his hand. Whence is
it that Impatiency so often surprizeth the hearts of Gods own people as it
does? Surely from their looking so much at the Creature, so little at the
Creator as they do. When once a man comes to see God in an affliction, this
quiets all. Such effect it had upon David; I was dumb (says he) and opened not
my mouth, because thou Lord did it, Psalm. 39.9. In his affliction, so long as
he looked at secondary causes, he could not be quiet. No, then (as he tells us
verse. 3.) his heart was hot within him, while he was musing the fire burned,
and then he spoke with his tongue, venting his Passions in some unbecoming
expressions. But when once he came to see God in it, seriously to consider,
that this was his doing, this apprehension quieteth and silenceth him, working
in him that patience, that quiet composure of Spirit, which by all his
reasoning he could not attain unto. And the like effect it will have wherever
it takes place. The soul coming to apprehend that it has to deal with God,
that it is God who has done what it feels, this silenceth the Tongue. So it
did to Aaron, Lev. 10.3. when his two sons were taken away by that strange and
unheard of judgment, devoured by fire from heaven, Moses telling him, (what
there he does) This is that which the Lord spoke, I will be sanctified in them
that come nigh unto me,] it follows, And Aaron held his peace,] quietly and
patiently submitting to the will of God. And so it was with Job; seeing God in
all his Afflictions, In all this (says the Text) he sinned not, in thought,
word, or deed, Job 1. last. And such effect it will have upon a sanctified
soul; coming to see God, seriously to consider, that it has to deal with him,
so as if it strive and contend, it must contend with him, the Pot-sheard with
the Potter, this silenceth the tongue, and keeps the heart in temper from
rising up in inordinate Passion. This it was which made our Blessed Savior so
patient in this his Passion, insomuch that he was brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearer is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth, (as the Prophet Isai describes the manner of his suffering) Isa. 53.7.
This it was that made him so willingly submit to the drinking of this Cup, he
saw his Fathers hand in it: As for the Judas and the Highpriests, and
Soldiers, etc. they were but as the Apothecary, by whom this Potion was
brought and ministered unto him: in the mean time he looked upon God his Father
as the Physician, who had prescribed and ordered it for him.

And herein looking upon God his Father, Father. Christ looking upon God as his
Father.
There is the second thing which I propounded here to be taken notice of, The
Cup which my Father has given me.] Thus eying God in these his sufferings, he
looks upon him under the notion of a Father.

And such is God to his people, God afflicting his people, he is still their
Father. Signanter autem non dicit, Deus aut Judex dedit, sed Pater, utsciamus
Deum, etiam quum flagellat, Patrem esse. Ferus Annot. in Text.
even when he afflicts them, he is still their Father. Let that be a second
Observation, no less useful then the former. When God is most angry, and
deals most severely with his people, yet even then they may call him Father.
So we find the Church doing, Isa. 63.15, 16. where expostulating with God
about his alienating himself from her, Where is thy zeal (says she) and thy
strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained? God did not manifest himself in such conspicuous signs and tokens
of his affection toward his people as in former times he had done, which she
sadly bewails; But mark what follows; Doubtless thou art our Father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not; thou O Lord art our
Father. And the like again we find in the Chapt. following, cap. 64.7, 8.
where the Church taking up the like complaint concerning Gods dealing with her,
Thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our Iniquites,
yet in the next verse she subjoyns, But now O Lord thou art our Father. Thus in
her saddest condition, even then when God hid his face from her, and dealt most
severely with her, yet still she lays claim to her Relation, calling him her
Father. And the like may all true Believers do, whatever their state or
condition be, yet still they may call God their Father.

Reas. Relation being an everlasting Relation. This Relation everlasting.
Such is the Covenant betwixt God and his people, I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, Jer. 32.40. When God takes a people into Covenant with
himself, (the Covenant of grace) giving himself to be their God, and taking
them to be his people, this Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, a Covenant
that shall never be broke; Betrothing them unto himself he does it for ever. So
runs that promise which God makes to his Church, Hos. 2.19. I will betrothe
(or marry) thee to me for ever. Thus is he an everlasting husband; and so an
everlasting Father to his people. That is one of the Titles given to the
Messiah, to Christ, Isai. 9.6. The everlasting Father. And so is God to his
people. Once a Father, and ever a Father. As it is with natural Parents, though
they fall out with their children, and fall upon them, are angry with them, and
make them feel their displeasure, yet this does not dissolve the Relation that
is betwixt them; no more does it betwixt God and his children.

Use 1. comfortable meditation, and so let it be to all the sons and daughters
of Zion, Comfort to true Believers.
even all true Believers, who are sometimes, often times, sons and daughters of
Affliction, lying under the correcting hand of God. Such was Jobs condition,
whom we hear complaining to his friends, that the hand of the Lord had touched
him, Job 19.21. And the like does David, Psalm. 38.2.3. where he sadly bemoans
his condition unto God. Thine arrows (says he) stick fast in me, and thy hand
presses me sore.] So again, Psalm. 32.4. Day and night thy hand was heavy upon
me. And in the like language we may hear the Church bewailing her calamity,
Lam. 3.2. Surely against me is he turned, he turns his hand against me all
the day. Thus does Gods hand, his afflicting and correcting hand, often lie
heavy upon his dearest Saints. But let it not discourage them, so long as it is
the hand of their Father; which it is even then when God reaches forth unto
his people the bitterest Cups that can be, yet still he is their Father. A
Father when he frowns, as well as when he smiles, when he strikes, as when he
stroketh, still retaining the same Relation.

Yea, and the same Affection. Gods affection to his people still the same.
As he is an Everlasting Father, so his Love is an everlasting love. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. God sometimes, often times,
changes his countenance toward his people, but his Affection is not changed.
Sit licet in natos facies austera Parentum,
Men's tamen aequa manet --
Natural Parents sometimes frown and bend their brows at their children,
there is nothing but anger and wrath in their countenance, yet even then their
affection toward them is the same that ever it was. And so is it with God our
heavenly Father; being offended and displeased with his children, he frowns
upon them, so as it may be there is nothing but wrath in his face, yet even
then there are bowels of fatherly compassion within. So runs that known promise
which the Lord makes to the Seed of David, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33. If they break
my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from them, etc. God does not take
away his loving kindness from his people though for a time he may hide his
face from them. In a little wroth, I hid my face from thee for a moment, but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer. Isa. 54.7, 8. Joseph's bowels never yearned more toward his Brethren,
then when he turned his face from them, and dealt most rigorously with them,
binding Simeon before their eyes, (as you have the story) Genesis 42.24. God is
never more affectionately compassionate toward his children then when he
deals most severely with them. Is Ephraim my dear Son (says the Lord in that
patheticall passage, Jer. 31.20.) is he a pleasant child, for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him.] Ephraim, the people of Israel, (one Tribe put for the whole
Nation,) they had not behaved themselves so as that they deserved to be owned
by God, as a dear Son, as a pleasant child, that he should so look upon them,
so acknowledge them; no, they had walked unanswerably and unsuitably to that
high Dignity conferred upon them, and given God just cause for ever to reject
and cast them off; whereupon he spoke against them, threatening them by his
Prophets, yea and proceeding against them in a way of judgment, yet he still
remembered them, having still a fatherly affection toward them; His Bowels were
troubled for him;] A humane expression suited to vulgar apprehension. When a
man takes a thing to heart, and is deeply affected with it, it makes his
bowels yearn and move within him, sending forth deep sighs and groans; even so
was the Lord affected with the condition of that his people. In all their
affliction he was afflicted (as he elsewhere expresses it) Isa. 63.9. Even as
every stroke which a tender Mother gives unto her dear child it goes to her
own heart, even so is God affected toward his people; when being provoked by
their sins he takes the Rod in hand, and deals sharply with them, this is so
far from alienating his fatherly affection from them, that it is hereby rather
inflamed and increased.

A strong Consolation, Gods heart toward his people when his hand is against
them.
which being rightly applied may be of great use for the bearing up of the
hearts and spirits of all Gods Saints and servants in the saddest condition.
Even then when God seems to be turned their enemy, so as they have no sense
and feeling of his love and favor toward them, but all things are against
them, his countenance is against them, his hand is against them, he writes
bitter things against them, (as Job says of himself, Job 13.26.) proceeding
against them in a way of Judgment, yet even then his heart is toward them. He
is still the same that ever he was; I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6.
Though he come against them as a Judge, yet still is he the same tender and
compassionate Father that ever he was. At this time when Christ was to drink
this bitter Cup, to endure these bitter sufferings, God the Father had now put
upon himself the person of a Judge, requiring and exacting from him a full
satisfaction for all the sins which he as a Surety had undertaken, so as his
Fatherly affection seemed now to be laid aside, yet even now does he lay claim
to this Relation, calling him his Father, still looking upon him under the same
notion. Now if he did so look upon him even then when he was pouring out Vialls
of wrath upon him, inflicting upon him those satisfactory punishments, how much
more may his children so look upon him, when he is inflicting upon them only
castigatory punishments, exercising them with afflictions and trials for their
good. Which, be they what they will, never so sharp, never so bitter, yet let
them rest assured that they cannot dissolve that Relation, that Affection which
is betwixt God and them, so as to separate them from his love. This is the
matter of Paul's triumph in that known Text, Romans 8.35. Who (or what) shall
separate us from the love of God in Christ? This shall not whatever Tribulation
or distress do (as it there follows.) God being once a Father, he will be
ever a Father to his Children.

Only then (in the second place) labor we every of us to make sure this
Relation, Make sure this Relation, that God is our Father.
that God is once our Father. Our Father, and that not only by Creation, which
he is to all Creatures; nor yet only in respect of an outward visible Covenant,
as he was to Israel, I am a Father to Israel, Jer. 31.9 and is to all within
the pale of the visible Church; but by Adoption, that he has by a special
grace adopted us into the dignity of his children. Which we may be assured of
when once we have received that Spirit of Adoption, which the Apostle speaks
of, Romans 8.15. (...), the holy Spirit of God regenerating of us, and working
effectually in us, working in us a childe-like disposition, filial affections
toward this our heavenly Father, a filial fear, a filial love, a filial
affiance, causing us to fear him as a Father, to love him as a Father, to trust
in him and depend upon him as a Father. Finding such a disposition, such
affections in our hearts, now may we be assured that God is our Father.

And being our Father let us now call him so. Call God our Father.
This is that which the Lord says of his servant David, Psalm. 89.26. He shall
cry unto me, thou art my Father. And it is that which he requires from his
people the Jews, Jer. 3.4. Will thou not from this time cry unto me, My
Father? viz. from the time that he had admonished them of their duty, and
corrected them for their sins. And so again verse. 19. of the same Chapter, I
said, thou shall call me My Father, that is, so own and acknowledge me. And
this let all the Lords people do. This is the language which the Spirit of
Adoption teaches all Gods children, to call God their Father. Ye have received
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father, (says Paul to his Romans)
Romans 8.15. And the like to his Galathians, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
And this do we, call God our Father, and that not only with our tongues but our
hearts, so looking upon him, so owning and acknowledging of him. Which do we at
all times, in all estates and conditions, God to be looked upon by his Children
as a Father.
in Adversity as well as Prosperity, in whatever God does to us, or we to him,
still look upon him under the notion of a Father.

1. in receiving of mercies and blessings from him, In receiving of mercies.
take them as from the hand of a Father, as pledges and tokens of his love,
therein acknowledging his Fatherly affection.

2. confessing of sins, and begging pardon for them, In confessing of sins.
come unto God as unto a Father. So does the Prodigal Son in the Parable, Luke
15.18. I will arise (says he) and go to my Father, and will say unto him,
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee.]

3. deploring of wants, spiritual or temporal, In deploring of Wants.
and making suit for a supply of them, come unto God as a Father. So our
Savior teaches us to do in that Pattern and Form of Prayer which he has left
us, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Luke 11.6. directing
Christians to make all their addresses unto God under that notion, as a Father.
When thou pray st pray to thy Father, Math. 6.6.

4. Deprecations of evils feared, when God seems to be coming against us, In
deprecating of evils feared.
yet call him Father. So did David his Father-in-law, King Saul; when he was
coming out against him, hunting his soul to take it, (as he speaks) yet even
then he calls out to him. My Father, 1 Samuel 24.11. And the like do we to our
heavenly Father. Though he come against us as an enemy, yet still call him
Father. So does our blessed Savior, when he saw this bitter Cup coming toward
him, apprehended his Passion at hand, He fell on his face, (says the Text) and
prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me,
Matthew. 26.39.

5. And the like also in Evils felt. In present sufferings.
pressing us sore, yet still call him Father. So does the Church in those Texts
forecited, when God hid himself from her, dealt most severely with her, yet
still she challenges her Relation, calling him her Father, Doubtless thou art
our Father, Isa. 63.16. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father, Cap. 64.7. And so
does our blessed Savior in the Paroxisme of his Passion, hanging upon the
Cross, still he retains his former language, calling God his Father. Father
forgive them, Luke 23.34. And when the pangs of death were upon him, he
breaths out his soul with those words, Father, into thy hand I commend my
Spirit, verse. 46. of that Chap. And the like do we, stirring up our hearts to a
holy imitation of this our heavenly Pattern. In all our afflictions and
sufferings of what knide soever they be, yet still call God Father; so look we
upon him, so apprehend, and acknowledge him.

A good sign of a gracious spirit so to do, To call God Father, when he
frowns, a sign of a gracious spirit.
(I scarce know a better,) then to call God Father when he frowns upon us, is
angry with us, has a rod in his hand, when he is correcting us. An easy
matter it is so to do whilst he is smiling upon us, whilst we receive or
expect blessings and favors from him. Bless me my Father (says Esau to
Isaac) Genesis 27.34. But when he has (as I said) a rod in his hand, and we feel
the smart of it, when his hand lies heavy upon us, when he writes bitter
things against us, when he is turned to be our enemy, fighting against us by
his Judgments, then to call him Father, so to look upon him, so to apprehend
and acknowledge him, surely this is no other but a fruit of that Spirit, the
Spirit of Adoption.

And this let all Gods children stir up their hearts to do, To look upon God
as a Father, of great use in Afflictions.
thus to look upon God in all their afflictions. A thing which will be of great
use to us for the quieting, and comforting, and supporting our spirits under
whatever sufferings. So long as a man looks upon God as an Enemy to him, or
as a severe Judge coming against him, he can have no comfort, being conscious
to himself of his own demerits, but when once he comes to look upon him as a
Father, this sweetneth the bitterest Cup, making a man drink it the more
willingly, whilst it gives him a comfortable hope and assurance of a wise and
merciful moderation of his Affliction, a gracious support under it, and a
seasonable issue out of it; all which it does.

Q. How this may be attained.
But how shall we attain to this, thus to look upon God in our suffering
condition.

A. Learn to live by faith.
For this, learn to live by Faith. So lives the Righteous person, as the
Prophet Habakuk tells us, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith; Live by
it in all estates and conditions. This is the Anchor which he rides by in
whatever storms and tempests. When sense and feeling fail he lives by Faith.
And thus let us learn to live. So lived our blessed Savior in his Passion upon
the Cross; when sense and feeling failed him, so as he did not find those
sweet influences, and gracious communications from God his Father as formerly
he had done, as to his present apprehension he had even forsaken him, (of which
he complains) yet even then he lives by Faith, setting that awork, still
calling God his God, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46.
Thus did he by this eye of Faith see one contrary in and through another, Mercy
in the midst of Judgment, a tender Father in the habit of an angry Judge. And
thus learn we of him to live. This is the proper life of a Christian, to live
here, not by sense, but by Faith. The life which I now live in the Flesh I live
by the Faith of the Son of God, (says Paul of himself) Gal. 2.20. Whilst he
lived in the Flesh, in the body, he lived by Faith, Faith in Christ, resting
and relying upon Gods grace through him. And thus let us live; and that in all
estates. Whatever our condition be, however the Lord be pleased to deal with
us. Suppose as ( Hezekiah complains, Isa. 38.13.) he breaks all our bones as
a Lion, or that with Job, we feel the Arrows of the Almighty sticking in us,
the Poison whereof drinks up our spirits, and the terrors of God set
themselves in array against us, as he speaks (Job 6.4) or that, with Paul, we
are troubled on every side, having fightings without, and terrors within, (as
it was with him, 2 Cor. 7.5.) being exercised both with Temporal and
Spiritual conflicts, in the outward and inward man, (both which Gods dearest
children are subject to in this life) yet even in this condition set faith
awork to look through all these clouds, that so we may behold our Fathers face,
see the light of the countenance of a reconciled God and Father in Christ,
making discovery of his yet continued love and favor to us.

Q. But how shall Faith make this discovery?

A. Why, by looking through the Glass of the Promise, which represents God as
he is, not as he seems to be. And this let us have recourse unto, hearkening
what the Promise will say to us. In our saddest extremities when sense and
feeling represent God unto us as an Enemy, now hear what the Promise says.
That will give us assurance of what we have heard, that being once our Father,
he will be ever our Father. So as though he may be angry with us, yet he will
not utterly reject those whom he has taken into Covenant with himself. If they
break my Statutes, etc. I will visit their transgressions with the Rod, and
their iniquities with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, (so runs that Promise forecited.) Now the word of
Promise is a sure word, a word of truth, which God will not fail in the
performance of. I will not suffer my faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I
not break, (so it there follows.) And therefore, whatever sense and feeling
say, hear what the Promise says, casting our Anchor upon that ground, living
by Faith in it.

It is the want of this that makes Christians so dejected under their
afflictions and troubles as often they are. Living by Sense, a cause of great
dejections.
They live by sense and feeling, apprehending God to be as they feel him.
Whereas if Faith were acted, and set a work as it might be, what a constant
clear Sunshine day might the life of a Christian be? Were a man aloft above the
Clouds, he should see the Sun shining clearly in the darkest gloomiest day of
Winter; and were the soul mounted, (as it might be) by Faith upon the wings of
the Promises, what a constant apprehension of Gods love and favor might it
enjoy? beholding God as a reconciled Father even then when there is nothing but
wrath and anger in his face. Which let all his Children endeavor to do.

To close up this point, Father when he strikes, Christians to receive correct
on from God, as from a Father.
then receive we correction from him as from the hand of a Father. So our
blessed Savior here takes this Cup, as from the hand of his Father. And so
take we all those Cups which he shall reach forth unto us, all those
Afflictions and Crosses wherewith he shall please to exercise us, take them as
from the hand of a Father.

Q. And how is that?

A. Why, With a quiet and humble submission.
with a reverent and humble submission and subjection; neither slighting of
them, nor fainting under them. My Son despise not the chastening of the Lord,
neither be weary of his correction (says the Wise man to his Son) Prove. 3.11.
But quietly and contentedly submit to his Dispensations. Humbling our selves
under his hand, (as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 5.6) So do children, if
ingenuous, well-natured and nurtured, receive correction from the hands of
their natural Parents, and in like manner receive we chastisements from the
hand of our heavenly Father. That is the Exhortation which the Apostle
presses, and that upon this very ground. Heb. 12.9. Moreover (says he) we
have had Fathers of our bodies which corrected us, and we gave them reverence;
should we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits? For within
the next Verse he subjoyneth a Reason. For they verily for a few days
chastened us after their pleasure, but he does it for our profit, that we might
be partakers of his holiness, verse. 11. Natural Parents sometimes prove
unnatural to their children, correcting them in passion, it may be out of some
mistake, or out of a corrupt judgment, so doing more hurt then good by their
Corrections. But so does not our heavenly Father; who being a wise and
merciful God, never corrects his children but where need is, and then he
does it in such a manner as may be for their spiritual advantage, so as they
may be the better for it. And therefore whatever the Rod be, kiss it; whatever
the Cup be, take it as from the hand of a Father, drinking it not only
patiently, but willingly, submitting our wills to his will. So does our
heavenly Pattern, our blessed Lord and Savior. However, he could have wished
that this Cup might have passed from him, yet he submits his will to the will
of his heavenly Father. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat.
26.39. And this he does willingly. The Cup which my Father has given me shall
I not drink it? But of this I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. Thus
I have done with the Agent, who it was that presented this Cup to our Savior,
My Father.]

Come we now (in the next place) to the Action it self, The Action.
which is,

The Giving of this Cup, The Cup which my Father has given me.] (...).

So it was, God the Father which gave this Cup to his Son Christ. God the
Father gave this Cup to his Son, gave his Son to dye.


Mark it. Here is the chief and principal Doctrine that this former part of the
Text affords us. God the Father gave this Cup to his Son Christ. Which in
effect, and for substance speaks one and the same thing with that of the
Apostle, Romans 8.32. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all. So was it in the Type, Abraham offered up his Son. By Faith Abraham, when
he was tried, offered up Isaac, and he that received the Promises offered up
his only begotten Son, (so the Apostle to the Hebrews has it,) Heb. 11.17.
And St. James the like. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when be
had offered up Isaac his Son upon the Altar? Jam. 2.21. This did he
intentionally, in affection and resolution, binding his Son, and laying him
upon the Altar, stretching forth his hand with the sacrificing Knife to slay
him, as the story sets it forth, Genesis 22.9, 10. Which in Gods acceptance was
all one as if he had done what he purposed and intended to do. And so was it
in the truth of that Type. God the Father offers up his Son, his only begotten
Son Jesus Christ, offers him up upon the Altar of the Cross. Where, (as the
Prophet Isai describes his Passion) Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him, he has put him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for
sin, etc. Thus did God the Father give this bitter Cup to his Son; giving him
to suffer, and die that painful, shameful, accursed death of the Cross.

Obj. But was this the Fathers act, How is Christ said to give himself.
(here to remove a stone which lies in my way, to meet with an obvious
Objection) Did God the Father give this Cup to his Son, give him to the death,
how then is Christ said to give and offer up himself? So we find it frequently
elsewhere expressed. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us, Tit.
2.14. Who gave himself for our sins, that he might redeem us from this present
evil world, Gal. 1.4. Who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself, Heb.
7.27. He poured out his soul unto death. Isa. 53.12. So runs the phrase of
Scripture ordinarily, speaking of the Death and Passion of Christ as his own
voluntary act. I lay down my life for my Sheep, Joh. 10.15. Therefore does my
Father love me, because I lay down my life, verse. 17. And again (as it
follows) No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power
to lay it down, etc. verse. 18. How then is this here attributed to the Father,
that he should give this Cup to him?

A.

1. Christ as God co-working with his Father.
If we look at Christ as God, the Son of God, here that trite, but true Maxim
will be of use, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. All the external works
and actions of the Trinity, such acts as they do out of themselves, for or upon
the Creature, they are common to all the three Persons, so as they may be
indifferently referred and attributed to all, or any of them. Such was the work
of Creation, the joint work of all the three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; and so attributed sometimes to one, sometimes to another. And such was
this work of ^ed^mption, however undertaken by one, yet it was designed by all
the three Persons, being done by the mutual consent and agreement of all,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; all concurring in the design; though not in the
execution of it. What Christ as Mediator suffered he did it by the joint
consent of all the three Persons. And therefore is it sometimes attributed to
one, sometimes to another. Sometimes to the Father, and sometimes to the Son;
who as they are one God, so they have one will, and one work. The Son can do
nothing of himself (says our Savior) but what he sees the Father do. For
what things soever the Father does, these also does the Son likewise, Joh.
5.19. Thus did Christ the Son, not only imitate his Father, doing works like
unto his, but Cooperate with him, doing the same works. And hence is it that
the same Action is attributed sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other.
Thus we here find the giving of Christ to the Death, which yet was his own
act, attributed by him to God his Father, he being the first worker in respect
of Order, and manner of working, The Gup which my Father has given me.]

But (secondly) look upon Christ as Man, Mediator, as God and Man, As Mediator
subservient to him.
so we shall find him subservient to his Father, readily doing his will. Lo I
come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7, 9. And as doing, so suffering it. Which
he did in obedience unto him. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the
death, Phil. 2.8. And thus, as his Father gave the Cup, so he drank it, so
giving himself to the Death. Even as it is not without ground conceived
concerning the Type forementioned, Abraham's offering of his Son Isaac. This was
Abraham's act, and yet so as his Son concurred in it, and that more then as a
mere Patient, being obedient to his Father, at his command carrying of the
Wood, yielding himself to be bound, and laid upon the Altar, all which he did
willingly. So was it with our blessed Savior. Being acquainted with his
Fathers will, he yields himself to be bound, -- which he was first in the
Garden (as we have it in the verse after the Text.) and then by Caiaphas, (as
we find it Mar. 15.1.) bears his Cross, submits unto the Death. Thus the
Father gave his Son, and yet the Son gave himself. But not to insist upon this.

Q. What God the Father did, in and about the passion of his Son.
The way being thus cleared, now come we by way of Explication to make enquiry,
what God the Father did in and about the Passion of his Son, that he is here
said to give the Cup to him. The resolving of this Question will clear up this
great and usetull truth.

A. This concurrence consisting in diverse particulars.
The Action and concurrence of God the Father, in and about the Death and
Passion of his Son it consists in diverse particulars. Take we notice of five
or six of them.

1. privy to it, he foresaw it, he foreknew it. He foresaw it.
This he did from Eternity. So he does all his Works. Known unto God are all
his works from the beginning of the World, Act. 15.18. Whatsoever God brings
to pass in time it is known to him before time: And so was this work, the work
of Redemption, wrought by the sufferings of Christ, it was foreseen, foreknown
by God from Eternity. This none will question.

2. Foreseeing of this before it was done, he also permitted it to be done.
Foreseeing whatever should be done to his Son Christ by Satan and his
Instruments, he gave way to it, permit^ing Satan to enter into Judas, and Judas
to betray his Master, and the Officers to apprehend him, and carry him away,
and Pilate and the rest to sit in judgment and pass sentence upon him, and to
execute that sentence. All which he could have hindered if he had pleased.
Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give
me more then twelve Legions of Angels, (says our Savior to Peter) Math.
26.53. God the Father wanted no power to have hindered all that was done to his
Son, but he permitted it. Thus far Bellarmine, and the whole Church of Rome
will go along with us. But we must not stay here. The phrase in the Text
imports more. Gods giving this Cup to his Son imports more then a bare
provision or permission. And therefore here leaving them, pass we on.

3. In the third place, God as he foresaw and permitted this, so he willed it.
He willed it. Bradward. contra Pelagianos. lib. 1. cap. 33.
So he does whatever he permits. So Bradwardine rightly determins it. Respectu
cujuscunque est Dei permissio est and ejus volitio actualis. Whatever God
permits to be done he also actually wills that it should be done. And so he
did the Death and Passion of his Son. So much we may learn from those words of
our Savior, Math. 26.39. where praying that if it were possible this Cup might
pass from him, he subjoyns, Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. God
did not only permit his Son to dye, but he willed his death. Upon which account
it is that the Prophet Isai there says, It pleased the Lord to bruise him,
Isa. 53.10. Dominus volu^t. It was his will, his pleasure that he should suffer
what he did; having in his secret Counsel decreed and determined it from
eternity. For this express is that known Text, Idem est (...), et 1 Pet. 1, 2.
nam (...) in his libris Decretum soepe significat. Grot. Anno^. in loc.
Act. 2.23. which informs us, that Christ was delivered by the determinate
counsel, and foreknowledge of God; That is, by his decree, for so are we to
understand the word (knowledge) there, not barely of a simple prescience, a
foresight, but of a determinate and absolute decree. So we find the word
elsewhere used, as 1 Pet. 1, 2. where Believers are said to be elect according
to the foreknowledge of God, that is, according to his Decree. And so was
Christ delivered according to the foreknowledge. the determinate Counsel of
God. (...). God in his eternal Counsel and Purpose had decreed that his Son
should suffer and dye. Upon which account (among some other) he is said to be
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. Rev. 13.8. He was so in Gods
Decree, who had determined that he should dye. The Circumstances of Christ's
death all determined by his Father.


And determining the thing he determined also all the circumstances concerning
it. As what kind of death he should dye, even that accursed death upon the
Cross. So much our Savior intimated to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.14. where he tells
him, that As Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son
of man be lifted up, (...), oportet exaltari, must be lifted up, so. Patris
decreto (as Grotius there rightly) according to the Decree of God the Father
lifted upon the tree of the Cross. And the like to the Jews, cap. 12. of the
same Gospel, verse. 32. where speaking in the same language, he tells them, that
If he were lift up from the earth he would draw all men unto him, This he said,
(says the next verse) signifying what death he should die; viz. the death of
the Cross. And so also the Time, when he should dye, which till it was come,
his enemies could not lay hands on him. As yet no man laid hands on him,
(says that Text, Joh. 8.20.) for his hour was not yet come, the time appointed
by his Father for him to suffer in. And as the time so the place. So much he
declared to his Disciples, Math. 16 21. where he tells them that he must go to
Jerusalem, Neque enim hic aut de praefinito Dei consilio, aut de utilitate rei
agitur, sed res futura nude praedicitur. Grot. Annot. in loc.
and suffer many things of the Elders, and be killed. (...), (where I know not
any just ground why Grotius should refuse to expound the word ((...)) as he did
in that former Text,) Oportet eum ire, He must go thither: It was not a thing
left to his own liberty, or choice, but being determined by his Father, it was
now necessary; necessitate decreti divini, in regard of Gods Decree which was
immutable, (as Pareus expounds it.) Haecerat aetrrni Patris voluntas
immutabilis. Pareus, Com. in loc.
And the like we may say for the Persons, who should be Actors in this Tragedy,
and what part every of them should act, what they should do. Never a
circumstance but was predetermined by God. So that one Text sets it forth most
fully, Act. 4.27, 28. Of a truth (says Peter) against thine holy Child Jesus,
whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and
the people of Israel were gathered together to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
Counsel had determined before to be done. Thus did God the Father (as I said)
appoint and order all the several Ingredients; every grain that was to be put
into this Cup, decreeing and determining whatever his Son was to suffer.

4. He revealed his will concerning it.
And (fourthly) having thus in his secret Counsel decreed this his suffering,
he also revealed it, making known his will concerning his Son, that he should
suffer and die. This he had done by Types and Figures. As that of Abraham's
offering his Son, his only Son, in whom all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed, (of which I spoke before.) So also in and by all those bloody
Sacrifices under the Law, all which were shadows of what was to come,
representing the death of Jesus Christ, who was to be offered up a true
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the World. But more clearly by
Prophesies, diverse of which we meet with in the Old Testament. Among which that
of the Prophet Isai is most clear, Isa. 53. where he describes the Death and
Passion of Christ, rather like an Evangelist then a Prophet, as if he had been
a Spectator of it. And so other of the Prophets, they foretold what things
Jesus was to suffer. As St. Peter sets it forth, Act. 3.18. These things (says
he) which God before had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ
should suffer, he has also fulfilled. Thus God reveal^d what before he had
decreed. Which our Savior taking notice of, he here speaks of his Passion
after this manner, Non loquitur dubitative, fortasse Pater ^^c vult, sed
assertative, Calicem quem dedit. Ferus Com. in Text.
calling it the Cup which his Father had given him. Being fully acquainted with
his Fathers will, he speaks of what he was to suffer non dubitative, sed
assertive, (as Ferus notes upon it) not as a thing doubtful, but certain. The
Cup which my Father has given me.]

5. He delivers him up.
he also delivers him into the hands of those who were to execute that his
decree. Who was delivered for our offenses, (says the Apostle speaking of
Christ) Romans 4. verse. last; (...), delivered unto death by God his Father, as
that other forecited Text explains it, Romans 8.32. He spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all. This he did when by his all-disposing
providence he brought him into the Garden, where the Officers should come to
apprehend him, and so delivered him into their hands, and into the hands of
other his enemies.

6. And lastly, empowered them for the doing of what they did to him. So our
Savior upon his Arraignment tells Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou could have no
power against me at all except it were given thee from above. That Authority
which Pilate had to sit in Judgment and pass sentence upon him, and so that
power which others had to execute that sentence, they had it from above, from
God. In all these they were but Instruments made use of by him, in the mean
time it was he that had the main stroke in the work, he being the chief and
principal agent.

Thus you see how God did concur in the death and Passion of this his Son. He
not only was privy to it, and permitted it, but he decreed and determined it,
and every circumstance in it, making known his will concerning it, delivering
him into the hands of his enemies, and giving them power to execute what he had
decreed. So as putting all these together, well may we conclude, what our
Savior there asserts concerning this Cup, that it was given him by his Father.

But was it so? Two questions of great importance.
calling for satisfaction before we proceed any further. If God the Father, did
thus give this Cup to his Son Christ, why then,

1. How did the Jews sin in putting him to death?

And (secondly) if they did sin, How then is Ged free from being the Author of
that sin, or from partaking in it?

Two Questions of great importance. I shall endeavor to give a full solution
to both.

To begin with the first. Cup to his Son, How the Jews finned in executing of
what God had thus decreed.
so concurred in this his Passion as we have heard, how did the Jews sin in
putting him to death? Quaeritur, si Pater dedit Christo hunc calicem, quid
pe^caverunt Judaei, qui cum Christo dederunt, intulerunt, and propinaverunt.
Carthus. Enar. in Text.
When as they were but Instruments, only reaching this Cup to him, God himself
being the principal Agent, how were they culpable?

To this let me return a threefold Answer. They were voluntary Instruments.


1. Distinguishing of Instruments; which are of two sorts, Merely
Isntrumental, or Ministerial.


Mere Instruments are such as have no activity, nor efficacy in themselves for
the doing of any thing further than as they are acted by another. Such is the
Axe in the hand of the Carpenter, and the Sword in the hand of the Soldier.

But such were not the Jews, they were not mere, but Ministerial Instruments,
voluntary Agents, doing what herein they did, not by any coaction or
constraint, but freely, willingly. Impii dum peccant non sunt propr^e
Instrumenta Dei, mota sc^ sine interno principio motus, sed metaphorice, ita
sc. mota ut libere moveant semetipsa. D. Ames Bellarm. Enerv. t. 4. c. 2.
Hominis voluntas est quodammodo Dei Instrumentum, non purum and merum, sed
liberum, Alvartz. Disput. 68.5.
Such an Instrument is man in the hands of God. Being a reasonable creature,
endued with understanding and will, what he does, he does it freely, there
being no violence in any thing offered to his will. True it is, the will of man
also is Gods Instrument, but such an Instrument, not a mere, but a Ministerial,
a free and voluntary Instrument. Being moved it moves of it self, not being
subject to coaction or compulsion. Voluntas si cogeretur desinit esse voluntas.
If the will could be compelled it should cease to be a will; it ever acts
freely. And so did the Jews in putting the Lord of life to death, they were
not mere Instruments, but voluntary Agents, and so cannot be excusable in what
they did.

2. The Jews were culpable in acting of that which God had decreed and
determined, They had no warrant for what they did.
no rule for what they did. Nay, they went against the rule. What is the Rule
by which all the actions of men ought to be squared? Why, Gods secret will no
warrant for man.
it is the Revealed will of God. As for his secret will, that is his own rule,
not Man's. Secret things belong unto the Lord, but revealed things to us and to
our children, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

Obj. Why, Whether this will of God was revealed to the Jews, that Christ,
should die.
Caiaphas the High Priest by a Prophetical Spirit tells it them, that it was
expedient for them, that one man should die for the people, Joh. 11.50. so
prophesying, that Jesus should die for that Nation; and not for that Nation
only, but that he might gather together in one the children of God that were
scattered abroad, (as it there follows) verse. 51, 52.

A. Yet had they no word of command to put him to death.
But suppose they had understood this, (which yet Caiaphas himself did not;
This spoke he not of himself, (says that 51. verse.) God only made use of his
Tongue, to utter an Oracle which he knew not the true sense and mystery of) yet
could not this have been an excuse for them, inasmuch as they had no direction,
no word of command from God to put their hands to this work. This it is which
is man's warrant for all his actions, without which, actions which in themselves
seem to be good and commendable, become evil and sinful. Saul's sacrificing,
take it with all the circumstances of it, and it seems at least not to be so
great an evil, yet haing no rule, no such warrant for it, it was displeasing to
God, and proved fatal to him, and his. And so Vzzahs putting his hand to stay
the Ark when it was in danger of falling, it was to the outward show a pious
action, yet being irregular, without warrant, it became to him a mortal sin,
he was struck dead for it. So on the other hand, Actions which seem to be, nay
in some respects, are unlawful and sinful, yet if Gods word of command come
upon them, it is like the Kings Stamp upon a base piece of Metal, which makes
it current, it makes them not only excusable, not sinful, but an acceptable
service. If Judas and the Highpriests, and the rest who imbrued their hands in
the blood of this sacrifice, who had a hand in putting Christ to death, had had
but a word of command from God for the doing of what they did, and in obedience
to that command had done it, this had been no more sin in them then it had been
in Abraham to have actually offered up his Son, which he intended to have done;
or then it was in the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians, as they did, by
borrowing what they never intended to pay, Exodus 3. verse. last; or then it is
in an Executioner, to execute that sentence upon a Malefactor which is passed
upon him, which another might not do. It was their swerving from the Rule,
acting without a Warrant, which made this act of theirs so horrid and sinful.
It matters not what God had purposed and determined in his secret Counsel,
that was no rule to them, nor can it be any plea for them.

3 And again, (in the third place) however, This Act of the Jews done by them,
yet was this evil and sinful in them, inasmuch as they did what they did out
of an evil principle, and to an evil end.

1. Out of an evil and sinful principle. Out of an evil Principle.
What was it that put them upon the doing of what herein they did? Why in some
of them it was base covetousness, as in Judas. What will you give me, and I
will deliver him unto you? (says he) Matthew. 26.15. In others it was malice; so
it was in the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees, and some other, His Citizens
hated him, (says the Parable) Luke 19.14. They have hated both me and my
Father, Joh. 15.24. In some it was fear, as in Pilate, who being willing to
content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he
had scourged him, to be crucified, (as St. Mark sets it forth) Mar. 15.15. Out
of a base servile fear he would complie with a giddy, enraged multitude, doing
what they would have him, though against his own conscience. And others out of
a blind and furious zeal. So was it in many of the vulgar, for whom our
Savior in his Passion puts up that charitable Prayer, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do, Luke 23.34. Now this Evil principle rendered the
Action sinful in them, though it had been warrantable in it self.

Secondly, End. What was it that herein they aimed at? To an evil End.
it Not the Glory of God, not the fulfilling of his will, not the salvation of
his Elect people, but the executing of their own covetous, ambitious, malicious
purposes, in taking that great Prophet out of the way, and so extirpating of
that Doctrine which he had preached amongst them. As for Gods ends they never
came into their thoughts. Unde nec excusantur, quia nec ea intention Christum
occiderunt qua pater voluit eum mori. Carthus. Enar. in loc.
As it was with Sennacherib the King of Assyria, (of whom I spoke before.) God
sends him against the people of the Jews, that he might be a scourge unto
them, to punish them for their sins. This was Gods end, but this was not his
end. Howbeit (says the Text) he means not so, neither does his heart think
so, but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off Nations not a few. Isa.
10.6. His intent and purpose was, not to obey God in executing of his will, but
to satisfy his own cruel and ambitious desires. Even so was it here. God
delivers his Son into the hands of the Jews to be crucified, which he did
for just and righteous ends. But this came not in their thoughts. The ends
which they propounded were sinister and wicked. As it was with Joseph's Brethren
in selling him into Egypt, However God meant it unto good, to save much people
alive, yet they thought evil against him, (as he tells them) Genesis 50.20. they
thought to make him away, that they might never see, or hear of him more. So
here, however God had a gracious purpose in this delivering up of his Son, even
the saving of many people, of all his Elect, yet the Jews thought evil
against him, thinking by this means to take him out of the way, that they might
never hear of him, nor of his Doctrine any more. Now where the end is evil,
the Action cannot be good. Thus were they guilty of sin in executing of what
God had decreed and determined. Being voluntary Instruments, acting without
warrant, against the revealed will of God, out of an evil Principle, to an
evil End. Thus you have the former of these Questions resolved. Pass we to the
latter.

How comes God to be free from this sin of theirs, so as not to be the Author
of it, How God was free from this sin.
or a Partaker in it?

A scruple of great intricacy. The Protestant Doctrine vindicated, that God is
not the Author of sin.
Which I shall the rather do, for the vindicating of the true Protestant
Doctrine from that odious Charge which Papists and Arminians would fasten upon
it, viz.

That it should at least by necessary consequence, make God to be the Author of
sin.

A Doctrine which all our Divines have with one consent disclaimed, as a
Doctrine to be abhorred. And so it is, being directly contrary to Scripture,
which every where asserts God to be a just, a holy God, free from all iniquity.
The Lord is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and righteous is he,
(says Moses, in that his Swanlike Song) Deuteronomy. 32.4. And we find the Apostle
seconding him, What shall we say them? Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. Romans 9.14. And so St. John, 1 Ep. 2.16. All that is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not in the
Father.] He is not the Author of any sin. Let not any think to charge their
sins, in whole, or in part upon him. Let not any man say, (says St. James)
when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man, Jam. 1.13. Sin is no ways Gods work. At the first
his works were all good, very good. And God saw every thing which he had made,
and behold it was very go^d, Genesis 1. last. He did not then create Evil; neither
has he done it since. The evil of sin I mean. As for the evil of Punishment,
that he challenges to be his Creature. I create evil, Isa. 45.7. the evil of
Punishment. Not so the evil of sin. That was the Devils Creature, having him
for the Author of it. Thence it is that our Savior tells the malicious Jews;
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father you will do,
Joh. 8.44. And St. John lays it down as an universal truth, He that
commits sin is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. So much of sin as there is in a
man, so much of Satan; he being the proper Author of it. When he speaks a lie
he speaks of his own, for he is a liar, and the Father of it, (says our
Savior in the former of those Texts) Joh. 8.44. And the like may be said of
all other sins; they have Satan for their Father, their proper Author. Whence
it is that he is called by the name of (...), The, (or that) evil one, the
wicked one, 1 John 2.13. and elsewhere. As for God, he being absolutely good,
evil is inconsistent with him, it cannot dwell with him, (as the Psalmist has
it) Psalm. 5.4. Being holiness it self, he hates sin, cannot behold it without
abhorrence. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity, (says the Prophet) Hab. 1.13. Such an utter Antipathy there is
betwixt the pure and holy nature of God, and Sin, that he cannot look upon it
without detestation. It is the only thing which he perfectly hates; so hating
it, as that he hates the Workers of it, for its sake. So it there follows,
Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. So hates them as that he will
not let their sins go unpunished. Fulgent. l. ^. ad Monym.
Now (as Fulgentius rightly) Deus non est ejus rei Auctor cujus est ultor. God
cannot be the Author of that whereof he is the Avenger. This is the true
Protestant Doctrine, which as it has been, so let it ever be held and
maintained, that God neither is, nor can be the Author of sin, any sin, or yet
a partaker in it.

Q. But what say we then to the case in hand? The case in hand cleared.
Was not he the Author of this sin, the horridest sin that ever was committed,
the putting of the Lord of life to death, which if he so concurred in as has
been declared, how can he be free from it?

A. For answer hereunto, The Evasion of some Romish Doctors. Actum Judaeorum
non voluit Deus, passionem vero Christi voluit. Et p^stea] Voluit itaque tota
Trinitas ut Christus pateretur, nec ta^en voluit ut Judaei occiderent; quia
voluit poenam Christi, sed non voluit culpam Judaeorum. P. Lumb. Sent. l. 1.
Did. ult. Cap. 2. (...) Non volebat Deus actionem Judaeorum quae mala erat,
sed volebat passionem ^^n^m, Idem. cap. 3. ibid.
if we will consult with some of the Romish Doctors, they will here help us
with an Evasion. God the Father (says P. Lumbard) did indeed will the death
and suffering of his Son Christ, but not the Act of the Jews in putting him to
death; the one whereof was good, the other evi^. That Christ should suffer, it
was good, but that they should lay hands upon him, was evil. In malis operibus
saepe accidit ut actio sit mala, and passio bona. Bellarm. lib. 2. De Amiss.
Great. c. 11.
And to the same purpose Bellarmine, treading in his steps, determines the case
after the same manner. God (says he) did indeed will and determine that Joseph
should be sold into Egypt, and that Christ should be slain, but the wicked Acts
of those who sold the one, and crucified the other, he neither decreed nor
willed, but only foresaw and permitted. Thus would they here have it, that God
gave this Cup to his Son to drink, Deus igitur voluit ac praedefinivit opera
ista virtutum quae in passione consistunt, cum voluit ac praedefinivit ut
Jeseph venderetur, and Christus occideretur. Opera autem mala vendentium
Joseph, and occidentium Christum, non voluit, nec praedefinitiv, sed praescivit
and permisit. Idem. ibid.
but not to Judas, and Pilate, and the rest, that they should hand, and reach
it unto him. He willed that he should bear this punishment, not that they
should inflict it: His passion being good, their Action evil.

But as for this, Retracted and rejected.
we find it ingenuously retracted by some of their own. Suarez, a late learned
Jesuit, states and concludes the point generally and confidently; Dicimus tam
esse certum Deum influere immediate, ac per se in omnem actionem creaturae, ^t
id negare erroneum sit in fide. Suarez Metaph. tom. 1. disp. 22. Sec. 1. number. 7.
and that not as his own private opinion, but as agreed upon by the most
approved Schoolmen, that God has an immediate influence upon every action of
the Creature, and that to deny this, is E^roneum in fide, an Error in the
Faith. Yea it is positively laid down by another of them, as the common Tenent
of the Schools (though the Pope could never be brought to determine it one way
or other) that the very Act of sin, as it is an act, Thom Cajer. Ferrar.
Capreol. Albert. Alexand. Greg. Scotus, ibid. citati.

Actus peccati in quantum ^ctus est, a Deo est tanquam a Causa. Alvarez. Disp.
24.


is from God as the Cause of it. And it must needs be so, inasmuch as the
Creature, as it has its being from God, so also its motion, Man living in him
also moves in him, and from him, according to that of the Apostle, In him we
live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28. And therefore to leave them.

For the returning of a full satisfactory Answer, Two things here cleared up
I shall clear up unto you these two things, (which I shall do with as much
plainness as I can.)

1. How God willed the death of his Son: And

2. How he concurred with Judas and the rest in putting him to death, and yet
both without sin.

For the First. God gave this Cup to his Son, willed that he should suffer, and
dye. Gods willing that his Son should die, which he might do
And this he might do, in as much as

1. He has jus Supremi Dominii, a right of Supreme and absolute Dominion and
Sovereignty over his Creatures; Man do, In respect (...) his supreme and
absolute deminion.
in as much as he is not such an absolute Lord over what he injoyes. It is not
properly his own. He is but usu fructuarius, having only the use of what he
possesses, not properly a Proprietary of any thing. Neither his life, nor
estate are his own. He is but Gods Steward, and so must be accountable. But God
is an absolute Lord, and so may dispose of all his Creatures according to his
own pleasure; and who shall challenge him of injustice? This is that which
warranteth all those actions which we read of in Scripture to have been done by
his command, being in themselves against the Rule. As that act of the
Israelites in spoiling the Egyptians of their goods. This they did by an Order
from God, with his allowance, which made it warrantable, inasmuch as he has a
Supreme and absolute right to the goods and estates of men, and so may dispose
of them at pleasure, giving them from one to another. Is it not lawful for me
to do what I will with mine own? (says the Lord of the Vineyard to his
Laborers) Matthew. 20.15. And so again for Abraham's slaying of his Son, this was
no more then what God might require him to do: Inasmuch as he is the absolute
Lord, as over the estates, so over the lives of men, which he only lends them
to use and improve for him, and so may without any injustice call for them at
what time, and in what way he pleases. And so for the Case in the Text, Gods
delivering his Son to the death, it was no more then he might do, being his
Sovereign and absolute Lord. This makes the act in him not to be unjust.

2. Gods giving his So^ to dye an act of justice.
Nay Secondly, this was in him not only not unjust, but it was an act of
Signal justice. Christ having taken upon him the sins of the World, become a
Surety for his Elect, engaged himself to make satisfaction to the Justice of
God his Father, it was no other but Justice to exact this Debt. Christ being
now become a Malefactor, a sinner by Imputation, made sin for us, (as the
Apostle has it, 2 Cor. 5. last) yea, the greatest sinner that ever was, having
a world of sin charged upon him, for God not to spare him, but thus to deliver
him up, was (as I say) signal justice.

3. And thirdly, as this was an act of Justice, An act of grace and favor.
so of grace and favor. As of Justice toward his Son, so of Grace and Favor
toward his Elect people, for whose sake he did what he did, in giving up his
Son, that so by the giving up of one, many might be saved; which the
High Priest judged to be a thing most expedient; It is expedient for us that
one man should die for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not, Joh.
11.50. These were the motives and ends which God had an eye at in thus giving
up his Son: Which being far different from those which the Jews propounded to
themselves, makes that to be sinful in them, which was not so in him. But not
to insist upon this, which will be yielded at all hands. For God thus to
dispose of his Son, thus to give this Cup to him, to will his suffering and
death, it was no more then he might do.

But what was it for him to concur with Judas and the rest, How God concurred
in this Act, yet without sin.
in such a manner as has been declared, not only to foresee what they would
do, and to permit them to do it, but to will, decree, determine whatever they
should do, and to give them power for the executing of it, how shall we here
free him from concurring and partaking with them in the sin? yea from being the
Author of that their sin? here lies the main difficulty.

For the clearing hereof, The former particulars reflected upon.
let me briefly reflect upon every of these now mentioned particulars, showing
you, how that there is not that in any of these which can fasten any such
charges upon God.

1. For the first, his foreseeing of this; His foreseeing of the sin, no cause
of it.
this he might do, and yet be no cause of it. The Sun shines upon noisome
Dunghills and Kennels, yet is it neither the cause of those offensive Vapors
which are exhaled from them, nor yet infected with them.

2. Nor his permitting of it, which he might do. being not bound to hinder
evil.
He permitted that wicked act to be done, which he could have bindered; so he
does all other; and it is no more then he may do, inasmuch as

1. He is not bound to hinder what evil he can, which man is; and that makes
this to be sinful in man. For him to permit sin, when he can hinder it, is all
one as to act it. Malum qui non impedit, quando potest, facit. Inasmuch as the
Law requires it from him. But so is it not with God. He is not bound to hinder
sin, to afford his restraining grace unto his Creature, to hold it up from
falling into this or that sin, though he could do it.

2. And knowing how to bring good out of it.
And again, he certainly knows how to order it, how to dispose both of the
sinner and sin, so as to bring good out of evil. And therefore he may permit
it. A man that rides upon a mettalled Horse, so long as he holds the Bridle
in his hand, he may let loose the reins, and so suffer him to fly out, because
he knows how to check, and take him up, or turn him at his pleasure. Such a
Bridle has God upon all the Sons of men, (I will put my book in thy nose, and
my bridle in thy lips, (says the Lord to Sennaeherib, Isa. 37.29.) He can
restrain or turn them at pleasure, knowing how to dispose of them and all their
sinful actions, how to turn them to good. This cannot Man do. And therefore as
he may not upon this account act sin, for any to say, Let us do evil that
good may come, this Paul charge as a most desperate and damnable Doctrine,
Romans 3.8. so neither may he willingly permit it. But this God can do, and that
certainly, infallibly. He who at the first brought light out of darkness, can
bring good out of evil: This was his design in permitting Joseph's Brethren to
sell him, he meant it to good (as I have shown you.) And so it was in
permitting the Jews to crucify his Son, he knew how to bring the greatest
good out of this worst of evils, which also he did, and therefore he gave way
to it; which upon this account he might do.

3. And (thirdly) he not only permitted, willed this action of theirs. But how?
God willed this not with a will of Approbation, but Permission, and Ordination.
Alsted. Pos^m. p. 465.
Here we must distinguish. There is a twofold will in God, Voluntas
approbationis and complacentiae, and Voluntas Decreti, Permissionis, and
Ordinationis. A will of approbation, whereby he wills that a thing should be
done, as well-pleasing to himself. And a will of Permission and Ordination,
whereby he wills to permit a thing to be done, and to order it in the doing,
and when it is done. Now in this latter way did God will this wicked act of the
Jews; not by way of approbation, giving them any allowance for what they did,
but only by way of permission and and Ordination, he willed to permit them to
do it, and then to order what they did, making use of it for those righteous
and gracious ends which he had propounded to himself.

Fourthly and lastly. conour in the very act it self, as in delivering his Son
into their hands, Gods concurring in this Act not sinful.
so in powering them for the executing of what he had d^creed.

Quest. But how could this be without sin? Bellarmine left to his shifts.


To this Bellarmin and some of the later Jesuits return Answer. Deus non
efficit actionem illam quae homini est peccatum, ut causa particularis, sed ut
causa universalis, praebens vim, and influxum quendam indifferentem and
communem ad illam actionem, and ad contrariam, qui a concursu secundae causae
Innita^ur. Bellarm. ^ubi supra.
That God does concur with the Creature in finfull actions, not as a
particular, but as a general, an universal cause, affording to it only a kind
of general influence and assistance, which in it self is indifferent to carry
it this way, or that way, to the doing of this action, or the contrary to it,
good or evil, the determining whereof is left to the Creature it self, to the
liberty of man's own will.

But as for this new device of theirs, Gods concurrence in humane Actions more
then general. Vid. Alvarez. Disp. 21.
we find it justly rejected by others of their own, who look upon it, (as well
they may) as not a little derogating from the wise Providence of God, making it
to be confused and imperfect, and altogether uncertain, which it must needs be,
whilst it depends wholly upon the Creature for the determining of the event
of it. Absit quod Deus quicquam velit in universali and consuse, and illud
nolit in particulari and distinct. Bradward. l. 1. c. 34.
For a man to spur and put on his Horse, leaving him to choose his own way, all
would conclude it to be no wisdom in the Rider. And for God thus to leave the
Creature to it self for the determining of its own actions, whilst he only
affords such a general concurrence, Wisdom. In every sinful Action two
things, the Act it self, and the Deficiency in it.
And therefore to leave them.

More soundly, for the resolving hereos, take we notice, that in every sinful
Action there are two things, the Materiale and the Formale (as some call them)
there is the Act it self, and the Inordination or Deficiency in that Act. A
known Distinction, usually explained and cleared up to vulgar capacities by
those plainer and obvious similitudes. In a horse that halteth there is his
going, and his halting, the one is the act it self, the other is the deficiency
in that act. So in a cracked Bell, when it is struck, there is the sound and the
jarring. Even so in every sinful actien, in sins of Commission, (for in sins
of Omission there is nothing but deficiency) there is the Act it self, and the
inordination in that act. Instance in the case in hand, the Jews putting
Christ to death, there was the Act, their crucifying of him, and the
inordination in that act, the evilnesse of the action, which was their doing it
without a warrant, and with such evil intents and purposes as they did. Now to
apply the distinction.

As for the Act it self, God the Author of the one, not of the other.
that action in the doing whereof the Creature sins, God has a hand in it,
and that not only in the ordering and disposing of it, but concurring in it, he
being the principal Agent, and the Creature only his Instrument in acting of
it. But for the deficiency, the inordination, wherein properly lies the evil
of the Action, and so the sin, that is the Creatures own, God is not the Author
of that, nor any cause of it at all. This is a man's own work, the fruit of his
own Corruption, which is properly the Mother of all sin, as Satan is the Father
of it. How this may be, those forenamed similitudes do very fitly illustrate. A
man that spurreth a lame horse, or strikes a cracked Bell, he is the cause of
the motion of the one, and of the sounding of the other, but not of the halting
or jarring; that is from themselves. So here, the motion or action is from God,
without whom (as I told you) the Creature cannot move, but the deficiency
therein is from man himself. Siene aer sole Iucente per vitrum coloratum, lumen
habet a sole, colorem a vitro, sic hominum actiones malae habent a Deo ut sint,
ab hominibus ut malae sint. Alsted Theol. Polem. p. 402.
And so that other made use of by some later Divines expresses it well. The
Sun shining through a colored glass, it is the cause of the light, but not of
the color, that is from the glass it self. Thus does God make use of man as
his Instrument in doing of this or that action, in acting whereof the man
sins, the action here is Gods, the sin is the man's own. So is it with all
sinful Actions, they have their existence, their being from God, their
evilnesse from man.

Now apply this general to the particular case in hand, Applied to the present
c^se.
God did concur with Judas, and the Highpriests, and the rest in all those acts
which they did in putting Christ to death. They were herein but his
Instruments, it was God that acted in them, and by them. Thus the Act was his,
but the sin was theirs. So it is, No action in it self is simply evil, as it
is an action. To put a man to death is not evil in it self. The Judge
pronounces sentence against a Malefactor, and the Executioner exeutes it, and
it is evil in neither. But to put a man to death without Authority, or without
cause; to do it wrongfully or cruelly, there is the evil. That Christ was put
to death by the Jews it was Gods action, and in him (as I have shown you) not
unjust, but that they did it without warrant, without cause, maliciously and
cruelly, that was their sin, How Gods Providence reaches to the evil of
sinful actions.
which God had no hand in.

Q. But what then, does the Providence of God reach only to the Actions, does
it not extend also to the evil of the action, to the sin it self?

A. To this I have in part returned Answer already. Take it again briefly. It
does. However God be not the Author of the sin that is acted, yet his
Providence is exercised about it. And that (as I said)

1. In permitting it to be done. In permitting it.
but in order to those just and righteous ends which he propounds to himself.

2. And secondly in Ordering it. Negative permission, In ordering it.
a not hindering of the evil which is done, but an Operative, an Effectual
permission, (so Melancton, Dicitur autem permissio efficax, non quod Deus
peccatum efficiat, sed Ordinem illius. Alsted. ubi supra.
and Beza, and some other of our Divines call it,) Efficax permissio, not that
God effects the evil of sin, but orders it. Thus did his Providence extend
to this sin of the Jews in crucifying of Christ; which he so permitted, as
that he ordered it, making it subservient to his own designs in effecting that
great and good work by him intended, the redemption and salvation of his Elect
people.

And thus have I endeavored to clear up unto you this important truth. Which
if I have not done so clearly as you could have wished, let it be imputed to
the depth of the matter, and not to any affectation of obscurity in my handling
of it.

To close it up with a word of Application. Three Attributes of God shining in
this Glass.
Did God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son, here behold and admire
Wonderful wisdom, Exemplary Justice, Unparalleled Love;
all clearly shining in this Glass, manifested and declared in this one Act.

1. Wonderful wisdom. Such is the wisdom of God which he has manifested,
Won derfull wisdcome.
as in the work of Creation, so of Redemption, in finding out a way and means
of restoration and salvation for lost Mankind. Which is effected in a
wonderful way, such a way as all the wisdom of Men and Angels could never
have thought of, viz. by giving this bitter, this deadly Cup unto his Son,
which being drunk by him might be a Cup of salvation to all that believe on
him. Were it so that a Physician could find out such a medicinable Cup as
would cure all Diseases, who but would therein admire his skill? Of such virtue
is this Cup which God the Father gave unto his Son, a true Catholicon,
sufficient for the cure of all souldiseases in them who shall apply it to
themselves through faith. Herein admire we the wisdom of God in finding it
out; in finding out such a means whereby, satisfaction being made to his
Justice, there might be way made for the full exercise of his grace and mercy
toward forlorn sinners. Never was the wisdom of God more wonderfully
manifested in any act then in this. Thence is it that the Apostle speaking of
Christ, and Christ crucisyed, he calls him the wisdom of God. 1 Cor, 1.24.
We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness, but unto them which are called Christ the Power of God,
and the wisdom of God. A crucified Christ was, and is to the Jews a scandal,
a stumbling block. They having dreamed of a Temporal Messiah, that should be
outwardly pompous and glorious, armed with power for their deliverance, they
could not endure to think of a crucified Savior. He who could not save himself
was no Savior for them. He saved others, himself he cannot save, (say some of
them in a scoffing and deriding way, when they saw him hanging upon the
Cross,) Math. 27.42. And in like manner he was to the Greeks foolishness, who
could not by all their supposed wisdom see any Reason, why salvation should be
expected in such a way, from such a Savior. But to them that are called]
called out of darkness into light, endued with a right understanding of this
sacred mystery, to them is Christ the Power of God, and Wisdom of God,] so
called, in as much as the Power and Wisdom of God were wonderfully manifested
in him and by him; and that as in his Life, so in his Death, His Power in
conquering his and his Churches Enemies, Sin and Satan, His wisdom in this way
and by this means executing his most wise Counsel and Decree, touching the
Redemption and Salvation of his Elect people. Here was wisdom. We speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, (says the same Apostle speaking of the Doctrine
of the Gospel) 1 Cor. 2.7. And hereof give we unto God the glory, admiring and
adoring it; saying with that Apostle what he does upon another account, Romans
11.33. (...)! O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God.

2. And thus beholding his Wisdom, Justice, Exemplary Justice.
which was also in this act wonderfully declared and manifested, in God the
Fathers thus giving this Cup to his Son. His Son having undertaken for his
Elect, to make satisfaction for their sins, he being thus become their Surety,
God his Father spares not him, but delivers him unto the death. So just, so
impartial is God in the punishing of sin, not sparing it wherever he meets
with it, but requiring satisfaction to his Justice; which because men of
themselves are not able to make, therefore he required it of this their Surety.

3. Love, Unparallelled Love.
Herein is love (says St. John) that God sent his Son to be a Propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4.10. Herein is love,] (...), that love. God has in many
other passages manifested his love to his Elect people, but in none like unto
this, his sending his Son into the world for their sakes, and that not only to
teach and instruct them by his Doctrine and Example, but to be a Propitiation
for their sins, to redeem them by his blood, to die for them. Here was
unparallelled Love, as in God the Son in thus giving himself, so in God the
Father in thus giving his Son. Herein did Abraham express his love to God, in
offering up his Son to him. And herein did God the Father express his love to
us, in offering up his Son for us. Give we unto him the glory of this grace.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, says the Church
in that ancient Hymn, giving us to take notice that there is a peculiar glory
which is due unto each of the Persons in the blessed Trinity. And so there is
from this work of Redemption. Besides the glory which is due unto the whole
Trinity, whose joint design this was, there is (as I may call it) a Personal
glory due unto each Person. Glory to the Father for giving his Son, Glory to
the Son for giving himself, and Glory to the Holy Ghost for revealing this
mystery to us, and in us. Now give we to each what is their due. As to Christ
the glory of his suffering, his drinking of this Cup, (of which I shall (God
willing) speak hereafter,) so unto God his Father the glory of this act of
grace in him, his thus giving his Son, giving him this Cup to drink for us. And
thus have I done with this Second Particular in the former part of the Text. By
whom it was that this Cup was thus presented, viz. by God the Father. The Cup
which my Father has given.] The third is yet behind, to which I now come.

To whom this Cup is here said to be given. To Whom.
To Me.]

God the Father gave this bitter Cup to his Son Christ; This Bitter Cup given
to Christ.


He was the Subject of this Passion. Jesus Christ the Son of God. So Scripture
every where asserts it. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, Joh. 3.16. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up, Romans 8.32. To
him was this bitter Cup given.

But how to him?

And wherefore to him?

The resolving of these two Questions will be sufficient for Explication and
Illustration.

For the former,

How is this Cup said to be given to Christ? Whether to Christ as God, or as
Man, or both.
How was he the subject of this Passion, whether as God, or as Man, or both?

To this take the Answer briefly.

This Cup was given to the Person of Christ. Whole Christ was the subject of
this Passion. Whole Christ the subject of this Passion.
It was that Person who was both God and Man which suffered, dyed. It was not
the humane nature alone, as abstracted and separated from the Divine, which
thus suffered, but whole Christ; Christus (...), Christ God and Man. It is a
true Rule, that all the Actions and Passions of Christ, whatever he did or
suffered as Mediator betwixt God and Man, they are all to be attributed unto
his whole Person, as God and Man. And such was this work which he did upon the
Cross, the satisfaction which he there made it was Opus Personale, a Personal
work, wherein both the Natures were interested. Not the Manhood alone, or the
Godhead alone, but both together in one Person, The Cup which my Father has
given me,] (...). The word is Personal. It was not given to him as God, or as
Man, but as both God and Man in one Person.

Q. Yet suffering only in his Humane nature. August de Haeres. c. 70. (...),
Deipassiarii, Superiore etiam saeculo in Germania nostra quidam ausi sunt
asserere Christum secundum utramque naturam passum esse, Polan. Syntag. l. 6.
c. 18. The Divine nature impassible.
But what then, did both Natures drink of this Cup? Did Christ suffer in, and
according to both natures?

A. So indeed some Heretics of old asserted it, that Christ suffered not only
in his humane nature, as Man, but also in his Divine nature as God. From whence
they were called by the name of Theopassians; who have not wanted some to
follow them in after-ages, and some of late times. But this is justly condemned
as an Error, a gross one, asserting a plain impossibility. True it is, all
things are possible with God, viz. to do them, but himself not passible in any
thing, so as to suffer from his Creature. Christ as God he could not suffer, he
could not dye; the divine nature being impassible, as well as immortal. A
Truth fitly illustrated by a familiar similitude. Whilst the Axe heweth a
piece of Timber upon which the Sun shines, the Wood is cut, but the Sunbeams
not touched, they still remain impassible. Even so was it in the Passion of
Christ; the humane nature suffered, but not so the Divine. Though united unto
the humane whilst it suffered, yet it remained impassible. As it is with the
soul and body in man, though both be united together whilst the man suffers
some corporal punishment, yet the Body properly feels the smart of it, the
soul not suffering, save only by way of sympathy. So was it here in the
sufferings of Christ, the Godhead and Manhood were both united in the Person
suffering, but the Godhead suffered not. So as we must then conclude it, that
the whole Person of Christ suffered, but properly in, or according to his
humane nature. So Scripture explains it self. Christ suffered for sins, etc.
being put to death in the Flesh, (says St. Peter) 1 Pet. 3.18. And again, in
the Chapter following, verse. 1. Christ suffered for us in the Flesh.] It was
Christ that suffered. The Person of Christ, he who was both God and Man, but
how? What, in his divine nature? Not so, but in his humane, in the flesh,
(...), that is, according to his humane nature. This is that which St. Paul
means, 2 Cor. 13.4. where he says, that Christ was crucified through
weakness. (...), that is, through the weakness of his Flesh, his humane
nature, which was subject to all humane infirmities, sin only excepted. In this
nature it was that Christ suffered, in his humane nature, and only in that. As
for his Godhead, it suffered not.

Q. No, How God is said to have suffered and dyed.
(you may say) what then means that of the same Apostle, Act. 20.28. where he
tells the Elders at Miletum, that God purchased the Church with his own blood,
(...). And that other Text, 1 Cor. 2.8. where he says of the Jews, that they
crucified the Lord of Glory. And so St. Peter, Ye have killed the Prince of
life, (...), the Author of it, Act. 3.15. Texts made use of by those Heretics
of old for the maintaining of the suffering of the divine nature in Christ.

A. To this the answer is obvious and easy. In Christ there are two natures,
which are so united as that they make but one Person. And from this union
flows a communication of properties, Passio Christi Divinae naturae tribuitur
Dialectica tantum and verbali, (ut aiunt) praedicatione, non autem Physica and
reali, per (...), Danaeus de Haeresib. c. 73. Vid. Engl. N. Annot. in Act.
20.28.
(as they call it) whereby that which is proper to one nature is sometimes
attributed to the other, or rather (as some of our Divines do more warily and
soundly explain it,) that which is proper to one nature is attributed to the
Person denominated from the other nature. In hoc utroque loco quod proprium est
humanae naturae tribuitur Personae a divina natura denominata per
communicationem Idiomatum. Polan. Syntag. ubi supra.
And so look we upon it in those Texts. To shed his blood, to be crucified,
killed, it was proper to the humane nature of Christ, but it is there
attributed to the whole Person being denominated from his Divine nature. God
shed his blood, that is, that Person who was ruely God, as well as Man, shed
his blood, not as God, but as Man. Deus sed non qua Deus, God, but not as God.
Deus sed non Deitas, God in the Concrete, not the Godhead in the Abstract. The
Lord of glory was crucified, the Author of life was killed, that Person who was
so in respect of his divine nature, was crucified, killed in his humane nature.
That which is proper to one nature is attributed to the person. So is it with
man, in whom soul and body are united, that which is proper to one of these is
attributed to the Person. As when the Body is sick, wounded, buried, we say the
man is so. So in the sufferings of Christ, it was his Manhood which suffered,
not the Godhead, yet it is attributed to the person. Which is (as I say)
sometimes denominated from the one nature, sometimes from the other. It was the
humane nature of Christ, or the Person of Christ in and according to his humane
nature, which properly suffered.

And this he did in his whole man, Christ suffering in his whole man. In his
Body.
both in his Body and Soul.

1. In his Body. This it was which was bound, scourged, spit upon, Crowned with
thorns, which first bare the Cross, and then was born of it, which was pierced
by the Nayls, and the Spear, which shed its blood. Thus did he bear our sins in
his own body on the Tree, (as St. Peter has it) 1 Pet. 2.4. And we are said to
be sanctified, (that is, freed from the guilt of sin, and consecrated to the
service of God) through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, Heb. 10.10.

2. But not his Body only, but his Soul also. In his Soul.
That also did bear a part in this suffering; which it did not only by way of
sympathy with the Body, but immediately in and by it self. So it did in that
Agony of his in the Garden, where he made that sad complaint to his Disciples,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death, Matthew. 26.38. And afterward
upon the Cross, where being under a sad Eclipse, the light of his Fathers
countenance being hid from him by that black Cloud, the sins of the World, in
that conflict he cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew.
27.46. Thus did he then suffer in soul. His soul being made an offering for
sin, (as well as his Body, (as the Prophet Isai has it) Isa. 53.10. Thus did
he suffer in his humane nature, in his whole man, both Body and soul.

Q. But (it may be said) what then, did not the Godhead also act a part in this
Tragedy? Was that only a Spectator, a Looker on, whilst the Manhood suffered.

A. The Godhead acting in the suffering of the Manhood.
Not so, the Godhead at this time was not idle, though it did not bear, yet it
acted a part in this Passion. Though it did not suffer with the humane nature,
yet it concurred with it in sufsuffering. Which it did in diverse particulars.
Take we notice of Four or Five of them.

1. Voluit. It willed that suffering. Christ as God willed that his suffering
as Man. Willing that it should suffer.
So much he intimates unto his Disciples, Joh. 10.17, 18. where he tells them,
I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self. He laid down his life, how? why by the same power by
which he took it up again, by the power of his divine nature, according to
which he is properly called the Prince (or Author) of life, Act. 3.15. By this
power it was that he raised up his body from the death, and by this power it
was that he gave it up to death. It was not the power of his humane nature that
could do this, to lay down his life, and take it up again at pleasure. This
was an act of his divine nature, as well as his humane.

2. Quievit. As the Godhead willed that the Manhood should suffer, Resting that
it (...) suffer.
so it rested that it might suffer. The divine nature was not withdrawn and
severed from the humane in the time of its passion, the union betwixt them
being indissoluble, but it rested, not putting forth its power in any way of
resistance, which if it had done, it was not all the Powers of Hell, all the
Men and Devils in the World that could have brought him to the Cross. The
Godhead rested, slept (as it were,) even as Sampson did whilst his locks were
cut off) which it did for those three days, during which time Christ seemed to
be wholly left in the hands, under the power of those his bloody enemies, for
them to execute their rage and malice upon him. Thus the Godhead though (as I
said) not separated from the Manhood, (which it never was, even then when Soul
and Body were separated the one from the other, the Godhead was severed from
neither) yet it rested. Even as when a man is asleep, his soul is not departed
from his body, yet it seems to have left it, inasmuch as it does not exercise
those operations which before it did, not looking out by the Eye, not speaking
by the Tongue, not working by the Hand, etc. So was it here. The Godhead being
still with the Manhood, dwelling in it, and that (as the soul does in the body)
Bodily, In ipso in^^hitat plenitudo divinitatis corporaliter, quia in Templo
habitaverat umb^alite^. Grot. Ann^t. ex August. in loc.
(that is Paul's word, Col. 2.9.) (...), Non umbraliter, (as Augustine explains
it) not in the shadow, as it dwelt in the Temple, but Corporaliter, Bodily,
that is, Personally, substantially, yet it rested for a time, not showing it
self, not exercising its wonted operations. The Godhead rested that the humane
nature might suffer.

3. Sustentavit. Supporting it in suffering.
yet it secretly supported and bare it up in suffering, inabling it to drink
this Cup, to suffer that which otherwise of it self it could never have been
able to have done, viz. the wrath of God due unto the sins of the World. An
insupportable burden. Such is the least drop of it; Who knows the power of
thine anger? Psalm. 90.11. What is then such a full Vial of it as was poured
out upon Christ in his sufferings? This could his humane nature of it self
never have borne. But it was secretly supported by the divine nature. As it is
in Man, where (as the Wise man has it, Prove. 18.14.) his spirit sustaineth his
infirmities, the soul being of a cheerful temper bears him up under his
bodily ailments. So here that Eternal spirit, which dwelt in the humane nature
of Christ, sustained and bore it up under those otherwise unsufferable
sufferings.

4. And making it a Conqueror.
but made it a Conqueror in them, and over them. Such was Christ, and that even
upon the Cross. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of
them openly, triumphing over them in it, (says the Apostle) Col. 2.15. (...),
In and upon his Cross, that being to him as a Chariot of Triumph, where he
conquered and triumphed over all the powers of Hell. This did he by the power
of his Godhead. Which was to his Manhood (as one makes the comparison) even as
the hook is to the Bait, R^^^ous in Synibol. (...) Cyp^^anum.
which not only keeps it from being devoured by the Fish, but takes the Fish
which swalloweth it. Such a bait was the Flesh, the humane nature of Christ, a
Worm, (as David says of himself, Psalm. 22.6. I am a Worm) frail weak flesh;
and this bait was exposed to those Levi^thans, Satan, Hell, Death, all which
bite at it, ready to devour it, Hell opened her mouth upon him, the Grave
swallowed him up, so as he seemed now for ever lost; I but there was a hook
within this bait, the divine nature, which was (as it were clothed and covered
over with this Flesh, and by the power hereof this Infirmity of Christ (as the
Apostle there calls it in that Text forenamed) his humane nature, though in
it self weak and frail, was made not only able to suffer, but to overcome in
suffering. So as to lead Captivity captive, even as the Fish is taken by the
Hook which it had swallowed down.

5. Efficaciam dedit. gave efficacy to the sufferings of the Humane, Giving
efficacy to those sufferings.
making them effectual for the ends intended, for the satisfying of divine
Justice, and the meriting salvation for his Elect people, which without the
concurrence of the divine nature they could never have been. So Damascene
rightly, Patienti carni conjuncta est divinitas. Patienti carni conjuncta erat
Divin^^^ menens imp^ssiblis, and (...) u^ (...) essent sal^^^. Dama^c O^thod.
Fid. 3. c. 15.
To the Humanity of Christ suffering was joined the Divinity, which in it self
remained Impassible, yet gave virtue and efficacy to those sufferings, making
them meritorious and saving* As for the humane nature alone, that could have
merited nothing, at least not for others. Though it had sulfilled the Law, (as
it did) yet could there not have been any super-erogation in that due
obedience, so as the merit thereof should extend beyond it self. And whatever
it had suffered, yet being in it self but finite, it could not have made an
infinite satisfaction, such as the Justice of God required for the sins of the
world. It was the divine nature concurring, which made this Obedience of his,
both Active and Passive, so meritorious; which gave such virtue to these his
sufferings, causing the merit thereof thus to overflow the banks, to extend to
the whole world of his Elect. This it was which made this satisfaction in the
value of it infinite, inasmuch as though it was made in a finite nature, yet by
an infinite person, God shedding his blood, that Person who was so. The divine
nature being personally united to the humane whilst it suffered, it gave
efficacy to those sufferings.

Thus did this our High Priest, the Lord Jesus (as the Apostle tells us, Heb.
9.14.) through the eternal spirit offer up himself unto God. His divinity
offering up his humanity, (as Aaron did the sacrifices, who was therein a
figure of Christ as God,) and giving efficacy to that sacrifice, making it to
be of an infinite value and virtue for satisfying and sanctifying. Here have
you an enumeration of five particulars; wherein the Godhead of Christ concurred
with his Manhood in suffering.

But I shall no longer insist upon this. Thus you have the first of these
Queries resolved, How this Cup was given to Christ, how he was the subject of
this Passion. The Second is yet behind, of which briefly.

Why did God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son Christ? Why God ^ave this
Cup to his Son.
Why to him? And Why only to him? So we may divide the Question into two.
Q. him? Why to him.


A. This he did, not for his own sake, Not for his own sake.
not that there was any fault in him. As to this we have his Judge for his
Compurgator. Pilate having thoroughly examined him, though (questionless) he
sought matter against him, before he passes sentence upon him, acquits him,
declaring to his Accusers, that he found no fault in him, I find in him no
fault at all, verse. 33. of this Chapter, whereof the Text is part; which he
inculcates once and again in the Chapter following, Cap. 19. v. 4. and 6.
(...), no cause at all why they should proceed against him in such a manner as
they desired, nothing worthy of death. Man could find no fault in him, nor yet
did God his father find any; who by a voice from heaven gave this testimony to
him at his Baptism, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased, Mat.
3.17. He was then well-pleased with him. Neither had he any cause to be
afterward displeased with him, he being obedient to his Father in all things.
So he was throughout his whole course; not being guilty of any sin, whether in
his nature or life. He was that immaculate lamb of God, as St. Peter calls him,
1 Pet. 1.19. (...), The Lamb without blemish, and without spot.] Without
blemish, free from Original corruption. That holy thing which shall be born of
thee, (says the Angel to Mary, speaking of her Son, Luke 1.35. And without
spot] Free from all actual sins and transgressions. He did no sin, neither was
there guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. Thus was he, (as the Apostle
describes him, Heb. 7.26.) Holy, Harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.
So as there was no desert in him why his Father should give this Cup to him,
why he should afflict and put him to grief in this manner that he did. This was
not for his own sake.

But it was for our lake. But ours.
He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, Romans 8 32. Even as
Joseph was sold into Egypt, that he might save much people alive; and Jonas was
cast overboard, that the rest which were in the Ship might not perish. Thus was
this bitter, deadly Cup given unto Christ, that it mgiht be a wholesome Cup, a
Cup of salvation unto others: He suffered for us. So the Prophet sets it forth
most fully in that known Text, Isa. 53. Surely he has born our griefs, and
carried ou^ sorrows, verse. 4. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, verse. 5
all we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, verse. 6. For the
transgression of my people was he stricken, verse. 8. Thus did he suffer, not
for his own sake, but ours. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. Having taken upon him the sins of the World, he was
now made sin, who knew no sin, a sinner by Imputation. And being so, God gives
this Cup unto him, as standing in the room of his Elect, requiring satisfaction
to his Justice from him.

Q. Cup given only to him, why not to any other but him? Why only to him.


A.

1. able to drink it but he. It is our Saviors speech to the Sons of Zebedee,
Matthew. 20.2^. No other able to drink it.
Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? So it is, others may
taste of this Cup, sip of it, but none to drink it. Not this Cup. Mihi hic
calix datus est, noa alteri, nemo enim ad hoc sufficit, praeter unum me, Ferus
in Text.
As for the Cup of castigatory afflictions, Gods own people may, and often do
drink deep of it. So did those two sons of Zebedee, to whom he there speaks,
James and John, whom he tells in the next verse, Ye shall indeed drink of my
Cup, verse. 23. this accordingly they did, the one of them (James) being
Martyred, Act. 12.1. the other (John) after many sufferings, banished, Rev.
1.9. But for the Cup of satisfactory punishment, which properly was Christ's
Cup, none could drink that without perishing by it, but himself, none but he
who was more then Man, God as well as Man.

2. As none other was able to drink it, None else needed to drink it.
so none else needed to drink it, his sufferings being sufficient, sufficient
for all Men, and all sins. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. of all Believers,
in all Ages and Nations, whether Jews or Gentiles. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, ( c. 1. v. 7. of that Epistle) from Original sin,
Actual sin. He gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. Now
this one Cup which was given to Christ, being such a Pan-pharmacon, such an
all-sufficient remedy, there needed not a second of the same kind to be given
to any besides him.

3. This Cup was given only to him, all the honor of this great work, That he
might have all the honor of this work.
the work of Man's Redemption. I have tiodden the Wine Press alone, and of the
people there was none with me, (says the Lord, speaking of the destroying of
his, and his Churches enemies, which he would do by himself alone,) Isa. 63 3.
And so did Christ in his Passion, (of which the greatest part of Expositors,
(though not so rightly,) understand that Text,) he there trod the Wine Press
of his fathers wrath, and he did it alone, having no creature, whether Man or
Angel for his Coadjutor. And this he did that all the glory of this great work,
the work of Redemption, might redound unto him. Which accordingly we find
acknowledged by that Quire of Angels and Elders in that Song of theirs, Rev. 5.
Thou art worthy, etc. for thou have redeemed us unto God by thy blood, v. 9.
And again, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, v. 12.

Thus have I dispatched the Doctrinall part of this other important truth,
touching the subject of this Passion; wherein I have showen you, to whom it was
that God the Father gave this Cup, viz. to the Person of his Son Christ, who
suffered in and according to his Humane nature, having the Godhead concurring
with it; And why he gave it to him, and not to any other besides him. That
which now remains of this is Application.

Which let it be directed these four ways, Applic.
By way of Information, Terror. Comfort. Instruction.


1. Information. Did God thus give this Cup to his Son? Information.
give him to suffer in this manner? Here again reflect we upon what was touched
upon before, the strictness of Gods Justice, the greatness of his love; The
strictness of Gods justice.


1. The strictness of his justice in punishing of sin, which he would not
spare in his own Son. Jesus Christ had not offended his Father in his own
Person, (as I have shown you) he had no sin of his own, whether Original or
Actual, yet taking upon him the sins of others, and so become a sinner by way
of Imputation, God his Father will not spare him, but causes him to seel the
smart of it. If ever sinner might have hoped to have met with a favorable
connivence, surely he that was only made sin in such a way, especially being a
Person so nearly related to, and dearly beloved of the Father might. But we see
how far God was from indulging of sin in him. He prepares a bitter Cup for
him, and gives it to him, causing him to drink it, bruising him and putting
him to grief, pouring out a full Vial of his wrath and indignation upon him.
The most exemplary and signal piece of Justice that ever was. The drowning of
the World with water, the destroying of Sodom and Gomorrah by fire, the
plagueing of Egypt, and the like, they were remarkable demonstrations of divine
justice. But none like to this, Gods not sparing his own Son, but giving him to
the death. Such is his Justice, so strict, so impartial, that he will not
spare sin in what subject soever he meets with it. The reason whereof is,
because he hates sin as sin. Now a quatenus ad omnes, etc. (say the Schools)
he who loves or hates a thing for it self, loves or hates it wherever he
finds it. And thus God hates sin. It being contrary to his nature, he hates
it for it self, and therefore wherever he finds it, he will not spare it. Such
is the strictness of his Justice.

2. greatness of his love, his love to his Elect people, The greatness of his
Love to his Elect.
which he expressed in giving this Cup to his Son for their sakes. This Cup was
their due, the desert of their sins, The soul that sins it shall dye; yet
here God was pleased to find out a Surety, and to lay their iniquities upon
him, even upon his own Son, not sparing him, that he might spare them,
delivering him unto death, that he might deliver them from death. Never was
there such a declaration of love as this.

When Abraham had laid his Son upon the Altar, ready to sacrifice him in
obedience to Gods command, from hence the Lord concludes the truth and
sincerity of his affection toward him, Now I know (says he) that thou fear
God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me, Genesis 22.12.
And from hence may all true Believers conclude the entireness of Gods
affection toward them, saying in like manner unto him, Now Lord we know that
thou love us, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son thine only Son from us,
but have given him up to the death for our sakes, giving this bitter Cup to
him, which otherwise we must have drunk, laying the burden of our sins upon
him, which otherwise we must have lain under unto all eternity. Wonderful,
unparalled love, to be for ever admired and adored by all those who can
evidence their interest in it. But this I have touched upon before. This by way
of Information.

2. By way of Terror. Son, his dear Son, Terror to Gods Enemies.
to give such a bitter Cup to him, what then may his Enemies expect and look
for? This is the Application which our Savior himself makes hereof. Luke
23.31. If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in a dry?
Christ himself was as a green tree, which having sap and moisture in it, is not
so combustible, so apt to take fire, the Jews were as a dry tree, fit Fuel
for the fire. Now if this green tree were thus used, Christ himself, who was a
just and a righteous person, having no guilt, no just matter of condemnation in
him, (save only as he stood in the place of sinners) if he were thus left to
suffer such things as he did from them, what then had they cause to expect, who
in regard of their manifold impieties were fit fuel for the fire of Gods wrath
to feed upon? And let it in like manner be applied to all wicked and ungodly
persons, who being no better then dry trees, having no sap of grace in them,
void and destitute of all goodness, and so no other but Vessels of wrath
fitted for destruction, (as the Apostle calls them, Romans 9.22.) if it was
thus done to this green tree, this so just and righteous a person, what do they
think will become of them? This use St. Peter makes of the sufferings of Gods
Saints, wherewith God is pleased sometimes to exercise them, 1 Pet. 4.17. If
Judgment first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
the sinners appear?] If the righteous,] such as being true Believers, are
justified by faith, and endeavor to prove themselves righteous to God and Man;
if they scarcely be saved,] pass through so many difficulties, meet with so
many sufferings in their journey to Heaven; where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear?] Unbelievers, such as live in a state of sin, being wholly given up to
it, and as it were drowned in it, what shall become of them when Christ shall
come to judge the world in rightecusnesse, and to give to every man according
to his works? And such use make we of this dealing of God with his own Son
after this manner. Did God his Father give such a Cup to him, notwithstanding
that he was in all things his obedient Son, (as the Apostle tells us, Phil.
2.8.) Oh what then may the children of Disobedience expect and look for?
Certainly there is a black Cloud which hangs over their heads, even the wrath
of God, which without repentance shall be poured out upon them. Because of
these things (says the Apostle, speaking of wicked and ungodly courses and
practices) comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6.
And this let all such make account of, taking notice that God has a Cup for
them, and that a dreadful one. In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, (says
the Psalmist) and the wine is red, it is full of mixture, and he pours out of
the same, but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them
out, and drink them, Psalm. 75.8. So it is, God the Supreme Moderator, and wise
disposer of all things, he has appointed and measured out afflictions and
sufferings to all the Sons of men, so as his own people have their share in
them, they are made to drink of this Cup, to taste of it, I but the wicked and
ungodly shall drink of it after another manner, they shall wring out the dregs
thereof, and drink them. God has terrible Judgments in store for them such as
shall end in endless despair, and utter destruction. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimstome, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the
portion of their Cup, (so the Psalmist sets it forth) Psalm. 11.6. And O that
this were but seriously thought of by all of this number! that all profane, and
ungodly persons would but consider this! that amidst their Oath- Cups, those
Cups of abomination, wherewith they are intoxicated, they would but take notice
of this Cup in the hand of the Lord, this Cup of red wine, his fierce wrath,
which is reserved for them to drink! Certainly the very thought hereof, being
let into their souls, it could not but fill them with horror and terror. So did
the apprehension of this Cup, which our blessed Savior saw coming toward him,
work upon him, it put him into a strange and unheard of Agony, (as the story
sets it forth.) And certainly such operation would the like apprehension have
upon the most obdurate and obstinate sinner, did he but seriously think of the
fierceness of that wrath which one day without repentance he shall be sure to
feel, it could not but work horror and terror in his soul.

Now then suffer (I beseech you) this Meditation to take place with you, What
wicked men must expect.
you who lie in a state, and go on in a course of sin, daring to give allowance
to your selves in any known evil; what, did God so severely punish those sins
which were only imputed to his Son Christ, and so were not properly his, save
only as he was a Surety for others, how can you ever think that he should pass
by those sins, which you dare with so high a hand commit against him? It is
that which the Prophet Jeremie says unto Edom, the Edomites, the Posterity of
Esau, Jer. 49.12. Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the Cup have
assuredly drunken, and art thou he that shall go altogether unpunished? Thou
shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it. Seeing God had not
spared his own people, his people Israel, who in regard of the Covenant which
was betwixt him and them, might have expected more favor then others, much
less had those accursed Edomites, who had no such Relation, any reason to hope
that they should be spared. And so say I here concerning the sufferings of
Jesus Christ. Did he, whose judgment was not to drink of this Cup, drink it?
Did the Lord Jesus, who had so near a Relation to God his Father, and of
himself had deserved nothing but well at his hands, did he yet suffer what he
did? And are you, you wicked and ungodly wretches, they that shall go
altogether unpunished? No, you shall not go unpunished, you shall surely drink
of this Cup, the wrath of God sooner or later shall be poured out upon you.
However for a time he may spare you, (which he sometimes does, with much
long-suffering he indureth the Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, (as the
Apostle there has it, Romans 9.22.) not presently executing his judgments upon
ungodly sinners according to their deserts) yet he will not ever so do. My
spirit shall not always strive mith man, Genesis 6.3. No, this Cup here given to
Christ shows, what all those who are out of Christ, even all unbelieving and
impenitent sinners, who stand chargeable with their own sins, must expect and
make account of. The Cup of the Lords wrath shall be reached forth unto them,
and they shall drink it; yea so drink it as the Prophet Jeremy says the
Churches enemies should drink of that Cup which he brought unto them, Jer.
25.27. They shall drink and be drunken, and fall, and rise no more. This by way
of Terror.

3. By way of Consolation. God the Father thus give this Cup to his Son, his
natural son, Consolation to Gods Children.
here is comfort for all his Adopted children, who by this means are freed and
delivered from those sufferings which otherwise they had deserved, and must
have undergone. The justice of God being in this way satisfied, they are
discharged. This Cup being given to Christ as standing in their room and stead,
they are hereby freed from the drinking of it; viz. The Cup of satisfactory
punishment. True indeed, as for the Cup of Affliction, Fatherly chastisements
and trials, this they must make account to taste of. That which our Savior
said to the Sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.23. may be applied to all the Sons and
Daughters of God, They shall indeed drink of Christ's Cup, and some of them
drink deep of it, being thus made conformable to him in his sufferings, so
filling up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in their flesh,
(as the Apostle speaks of his own sufferings, Col. 1.24) but as for
satisfactory punishments, issuing from the wrath of God, and inflicted by the
hand of Revenging Justice, that was the portion of Christ's Cup, which being
given to him, and drunk by him, there remains no more suffering of this kind
for them. There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1. Who shall n^w lay any thing to the charge of Gods Chosen? verse. 33. who is
he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, verse. 34. This will not God himself
do. Nay, (with reverence may we speak it) this in Justice he cannot do.
Justice requires satisfaction but once. Now, shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? Genesis 18.25. Satisfaction being, and that by a mutual agreement
betwixt the Father and the Son, once made in the Person of Christ, as a Surety
for his Elect, for all that shall believe on him, God will no more require it
from them. This God the Father exacted from his Son, and he Answered it. So
that Text before mentioned, is most properly read, Isa. 53.7. It was exacted,
and he answered; So the Original has it word for word, a Text which (as our
late Annotator observes upon it) being so rendered, and rightly understood,
makes much for the vindicating of the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction. So it
was, satisfaction was required and exacted by God the Father for the sins of
his Elect, a full satisfaction, and in this he was answered by his Son Christ,
and that to the full. So then, this debt being thus discharged, it stands no
longer upon the account of those that are Christ's, for whom he undertook, which
he did for all those that should believe on him. A ground of everlasting
Consolation to all those who can evidence to themselves their Interest in this
blessed Mediator, their Interest in Jesus Christ; being in him, they satisfied
in him. This Cup (as has been shown) was given unto Christ not for himself,
not upon his own account, not that either he had deserved to suffer, or that
(...) designed to merit any thing for himself by suffering, but it was upon the
account of Gods Elect, whose Iniquities were laid upon him, as the sins of the
people were upon the head of the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.21. And being laid on him
they were taken away by him, (as their sins were carried by the Scapegoat into
the Wilderness,) taken away as to the Guilt of them. So as justice being in
this way satisfied, all true Believers may now come, and come with boldness to
the throne of Grace, looking upon God as a reconciled Father in Christ. Thus is
this bitter Cup which was given to Christ to drink, a sweet Cup, a Cup of
Consolation to all those that are his. Being given to him, it shall not be
given to them.

In the Fourth and last place, Instruction.
by way of Instruction. Did God thus give this Cup to his Son, then let every
of us take heed of giving any way unto sin, through hopes of mercy. Take heed
of giving allowance unto sin.
He that did not spare sin in his natural Son, when it was only imputed to
him, will not spare it in his Adopted children, if it shall be willingly
committed by them. However, (as has been said) this Cup was Christ's peculiar
portion, and so belongs not unto those that are Christ's, yet God has other
Cups even for them, and those bitter Cups too. Moses, and Elie, and David, and
many other of the Dear Saints of God have found the truth hereof in their own
experience. Let not any presume of better then what they found. Shall we dare
to give allowance to any known sin, how sweet soever it may seem to be for the
present, it will be bitterness in the latter end. As Abner told Joab, when he
was pursuing his brethren in such a revengefull way as he did, Know thou not
(says he) that it will be buter^esse in the latter end? 2 Samuel 2.26. So let it
be said to all those who shall dare to pursue any sinful way or course; how
pleasing soever for the present it may be to corrupted nature, yet let them
know, it will be bitterness in the latter end. So were the sins of others unto
Christ. And so will the sins of all impenitent sinners be to themselves. Give
not allowance to any sin.

Nor yet spare it. Not sparing it,
This would not God do in his own Son. This let not us do; spare not sin
wherever we meet with it.

Not in others. In others.
Though the person be never so near, never so deer to us, yet let not that
plead a toleration for his sin. Accursed is that affection, which so blinds a
man's eyes, that either he should not see sin in another, or seeing it, should
connive at it. God spared it not in his Son, being imputed to him. Let not
Parents spare it in their Children, nor Masters in their Servants, nor yet
Husbands in their Wives, so as not to reprove and restrain it what they can. We
know what old Elies indulgence to his Sons cost him, I will judge his house for
ever (says the Lord) for the iniquity which he knows, because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not, (he frowned not upon them (says
the Original) 1 Samuel 2.13.

And whilst we do not spare sin in others, Much less in our selves, but
taking vengeance upon it.
much less do it in our selves. But here take we vengeance upon it; dealing
by our sinful lusts, as the Jews did by our Savior, crucifying them. This
Paul makes to be a Property of those that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24. They that
are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. And this
dowe. Looking up unto the Cross of Christ, and there taking notice how dear
our sins cost him, let us crucify them, mortify them, not living in them.
Which if we do, the same Apostle will tell us what we must look for. If ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die, but if through the Spirit ye do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Thus take revenge upon our
sins.

And taking revenge upon them, And upon our selves for i^.
take we also a holy kind of revenge upon our selves for them, and that by the
renewing of the exercise of Repentance and Mortification; giving a bitter Cap
to our selves, afflicting our selves with godly sorrow for them. Which will
prove no less wholesome to our souls, then Cups of Wormwood, or other bitter
Potions oft-times are to our Bodies. Thus practicing upon our selves, we may
escape the hands of God, which otherwise we must make account to feel of. If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31. The only way to
prevent Gods judgments, Temporal and Eternal, is to forejudge our selves, by
examining, arraigning, and condemning our selves at his Bar, and so humbling
our selves before him. Thus giving unto our selves this Cup, we may hereby
prevent Gods giving unto us some other bitter Cups, which otherwise we must
expect to drink of.

And thus have I done also with this Third Particular, the subject of this
Passion, to whom this Cup was given, and so with the former part of the Text,
the presenting of this Cup by God the Father to his Son Christ. Come we now to
the latter, which is,

The Sons submission in drinking of this Cup. Part. 2. The Sons submission.
[The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?]

Shall I not drink it?] What meant by Drinking this Cup.
In the words there is no difficulty. The metaphor having been explained
before, in showing you what is here meant by the Cup, viz. the bitter death and
Passion of Jesus Christ, which was then at hand. So then to drink this Cup is
no more but to suffer that death. A metaphorical expression of frequent use
among the Heathen, with whom Eodem peculo hibere, to drink of the same Cup, was
a Proverbial speech, signifying a partaking of, and communicating in the same
calamities. So in phrase of Scripture we meet with it often, both in the Old
Testament and New. As in that Text which I have formerly had recourse to, Jer.
25. where the Prophet is sent by God with the Wine-cup of his fury to cause the
Nations to drink it, verse. 15, 16, 17. and 26, 27, 28. (in every of which we
meet with the same words used in the same sense) that is to partake in the
Judgments and Punishments which God would bring upon them. So we find it
plainly expounded in the 49 Chap. of the same Prophecy (a Text also before
made use of,) where the Prophet speaking to the Edomites, verse. 12. Behold
(says he) they whose judgment was not to drink of the Cup, have assuredly
drunken, and art thou he that shall go altogether unpurished? thou shall not
go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink of it; the one explaining the
other, To drink of the Cup is to seel the Judgments of God. So again in the
New Testament. Are ye able to drink of the Cup that I am to drink of? (says
our Savior to the Sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.22.) that is, to suffer what I am
to suffer. Thus they who worshipped the Beast, or received his mark (the
followers of Antichrist) are threatened, Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of
his indignation. Which the next words explain, [And he shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone] Thus to drink is to suffer. So look we upon it in the Text.
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? that is, suffer
what he has appointed and laid out for me.

Shall I not drink it? (...); This Interrogation containing a Reprehension and
Resolution.
The Interrogation is emphaticall, carrying with it a double force; of a
Representation and a Resolution, a Check and a Choice. A Reprehension or Check
to Peter, and that a Tart one, a Resolution or Choice as to Christ himself, and
that a strong and firm one. You shall find them both in the handling of them,
which I shall do severally; beginning with the former.

The Reprehension, or Check to Peter, A Reprehension to ^eter. Vim^ tu
prchib^re quo in ^as impleam quid Patri placet, Grot. Annot. in loc.
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? As if he had
said, What, will thou go about to cross the determinate Counsel of God, and
to hinder me from yielding obedience to his will, and so frustrate that great
design which I have now in hand? Whatever it is that mine enemies shall
inflict, or my self shall suffer, it is no other then what my Father has
appointed, who has sent me into the world for this very end, that I should
suffer and dye, and so by this means purchase the Redemption of his Elect
people. Non vis tu homo, Creatura, servus, quod vult Deus Creator, and emnium
Deminus? Ferus Annot. in loc.
And what, will thou who art but a Man, a Creature, a Servant, dare to
interpose, go about to resist the will of thy Creator and Lord? And will thou
stop me in the course of my obedience, and so hinder that great and good work
which I am now about? What, has my Father mingled this Cup for me, and is now
reaching it unto me, and will thou take it out of his hand, and from my mouth,
hinder me from the drinking it? The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I
not drink it?]

Here then take we notice of a threefold evil, A threefold Evil, each
deserving Reprehension.
each deserving a just reprehension in whomsoever shall attempt them: 1. To
resist Gods will, 2. To take man off from his duty. 3. To hinder his salvation.


All these was Peter at this time guilty of in this unadvised act of his, and
for all these he is here reprehended by his Master. And the like do they
justly deserve, who are, or shall be guilty of any of them. Let me touch upon
them severally.

They who make resistance to Gods will. M^king resist^nce to Gods wid.
This did Peter in going about to keep this Cup from his Masters mouth; herein
he resisted the will of God his Father, who had given it him to drink; and upon
that account he is here checked by his Master, for that his unadvised zeal. And
so was Abishai by his Master King David, when he offered his service to him in
taking revenge upon Shimei for reviling and cursing of him in that manner that
he did. A service, no question, tendered out of a loyal affection which he bare
to him. But what says David to it? You may read it 2 Samuel 16.10. What have I
to do with you ye Sons of Zerviah? (speaking to him, and his Brother Joab,
who, as is most probable, had given that counsel to Abishai, though he alone
offered to execute it,) so let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him,
Curse David; who shall then say, Wherefore have thou done so? Thus David
looking upon this as willed by God, ordered by his disposing Providence, and
intended as a Rod of correction for the chastising and further humbling of
himself, he would not permit that any should go about to cross Gods design
therein, but gives Abishai a check for that his proffered service, which
otherwise in it self deserved acceptance and thanks. And this do all attempts
and endeavors deserve, which have any such tendency, as to make resistance to
Gods will.

And not without cause; Inasmuch as,

1. They are vain attempts, Who has resisted his will? Romans Which is a vain
attempt.
9.19. This have many attempted, but all in vain. What are we stronger then he?
(says the same Apostle) 1 Cor. 10.22. This have they need to be who shall make
resistance to another. But this is not Man then God. O Lord thou art stronger
then I, (says Jeremy,) Jer. 20.7. Alas, compare man with God, and there is no
compare. The very weakness of God is stronger then men, (as the Apostle has
it) 1 Cor. 1.25. And as the former part of that verse has it,) The
foolishness of God is wiser then men; that is, that which the men of this
world count foolishness and weakness. In vain is it then for any, whether by
power or policy, to think to frustrate his Counsels, to cross his designs, to
resist his will; Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?
Psalm. 2.1. So is it for any to take counsel against the Lord, and against his
Anointed, to oppose themselves against God and Jesus Christ, thinking to resist
their will. Such was this attempt in Peter here, a vain attempt.

2. Impious.
And as such attempts are vain, so impious. Gods will being the Creatures Law.
Such is his revealed will, which the creature is bound to comply with, and
yield an absolute obedience to, without either quarrelling or questioning the
equity or expediency of it. And for his secret will, this also Christians are
to submit unto, desiring that it may be done. So their Master has taught them
in that Pattern of Prayer, which he has left them. Thy will be done; not only
his Revealed, but secret will. So then, to make resistance to this will, where
it is known, is no other but downright impiety; and where it is not certainly
known, yet being through preposterous and unadvised zeal opposed, this though
it may excuse a tanto, yet not a toto, though in part, yet not in whole. Still
such resistance is justly blame worthy.

Which let all of us be exhorted to beware of. designed and purposed
resistance: Christians to beware of such resistances.
This is that which Stephen charge the Jews with, Act. 7.51. Ye
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye. They resisted the will of God
clearly revealed, and made known to them by his Prophets, as also by Christ and
his Apostles. This (as I said) is downright impiety, which let all, as they
love their souls, beware of. But also of all unadvised opposing of it through
rash and inordinate zeal. This was Peter's case in the Text. What he here did,
he did it (as you have heard) out of a good intention, out of zeal for his
Master, yet inasmuch as this act of his tended to the opposing of Gods will,
the crossing of his design, therefore he receives a check from his Master for
it. And let such zeal never expect better acceptance at the hands of God. Take
we heed of making resistance any way to his will.

Obj. But what then, Whether means may be used for the removing or diverting of
Evils. A fanaticall Conceit rejected.
may not Christians make use of means, for the defending and securing of
themselves or others, for the removing or diverting of evils felt, or feared?

A. So indeed some fanaticall spirits have conceived, who taking notice, that
all things come to pass according to the determinate counsel and appointment
of God, thereupon they refuse to make use of any means for the preserving or
freeing themselves from any present, or impendent evils. As in case of
sickness they will not make use of Physic for the recovery of health, or
saving of their lives, lest that in so doing they should seem to resist the
will of God, who has measured out their days, determined, as that they shall
dye, so when, and where, and how they shall dye. And so in other cases, they
will not make use of means of preservation or deliverance, as not willing to
put from them that Cup which God gives unto them. Me^ ^s may and must be used.
But this is justly rejected as erroneous and unchristian. Christians in such
cases not only may, but ought to make use of means, and Remedies, knowing that
God brings his purposes to pass by means. God who had decreed and promised
unto Hezekiah that he should recover of his Disease, yet prescribes him a
Receipt, willing him to apply a Plaster of Figs to his Sore, Isa. 38.21. Which
however some look upon as no more proper for his trouble, then the Clay and
spittle which our Savior gave to the blind man was to recover his sight, yet
by others it is conceived to have been a proper remedy, Figs having in them a
mollifying, ripening, and dissolving property, and so fitly applied to such a
malignant Ulcer as his was. Means, where God either injoyns, or affords them
for our good, whether spiritual or temporal, they may not be neglected. They
who upon this ground neglect means for their Bodies, may upon the same ground
also as well neglect them for their Souls, neglect all Ordinances, inasmuch as
God has determined what shall become of the one as of the other. To neglect
means is a tempting of God, which our blessed Savior would by no means incur
the guilt of. And therefore when the Devil would have tempted him to cast
himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple upon the assurance of a Divine
protection, which he had the promise of, he repells his temptation with that
Scripture Text, It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.7.
He would wait upon God in the use of means for his coming down from thence. And
the like are Christians to do. They not only may, but must use means for the
diverting of evils. A threefold Provi^o.
Only take it with these few Provisoes and Cautions.

1. will of God be not revealed to them to the contrary, his absolute will,
That Gods will be not revealed to the contrary.
so as they may take notice of it. Upon this ground it was that our Savior
here would not admit of any resistance to be made to those who came to
apprehend him, because he was acquainted with his Fathers will. And upon this
ground was Peter here justly reproveable for making this resistance, inasmuch
as his Master had before acquainted him herewith, showing to him, and the rest
of his Apostles, that he must go up to Jerusalem, and there suffer and dye,
Mat. 16.21. and withal, had given him a sharp reproof for his advising him to
the contrary, verse. 23. And but even now he had been again put in mind hereof
in and by that Sacrament, whereof he had been a partaker, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, wherein the breaking of the Bread represented the breaking of the
Body of Christ, and the pouring forth of the wine represented the shedding of
his blood, as Christ himself had expounded to him, and the rest of his
Apostles, the mystery and meaning thereof. So as Peter could not be ignorant
what was the will of God, and his Masters will herein. And therefore, for him
to do what he did in a way of resistance to that will, it was in him justly
blameable.

2. unlawful means. That also was Peter's case here. That they be lawful
means. Privato homini non licuit contra eo^insurgere qui publica outhoritate
i^structi erons. Calv^. Com. in Tex.
The means which he used for the rescuing of his Master was unlawful. Inasmuch
as he, being but a private person, ought not in such a way to have resisted
public Authority, by drawing his Sword upon their Officers. In this he acted
out of the sphere of his Calling, which Christ would not give allowance to.

3. used lawfully. Used lawfully.
As Paul says of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.8. The Law is good, if it be used lawfully,
that is, as a rule of Obedience, not so as to seek Justification by it, and so
to rest upon it. So may I say of many means which are useful unto men for
self-preservation and safety, they are lawful if used lawfully; if used in
obedience to God, with submission to his will, so as not to trust in them, but
in God, who is able either to bless or blaste. With these cautious means of
preservation from, and deliverance out of temporal evils both may, and ought
to be used. But not so as to make any resistance to the will of God. Which
whosoever does, whether advisedly or rashly, deserves a just Reprehension. And so I
have done with the first of these Particulars, upon the account whereof Christ
here gives this Check unto Peter, his making resistance against the will of
God his Father. Pass we on to the Second.

His going about to take Christ off from his duty, and obedience to his Father:
Taking off others from their Duty.
For this again, instead of thanks, Christ gives him a Check. And such
entertainment are Christians to give unto those Counsels or attempts, Non est
tolerandus qui a divinorum observantia mandatarum abducit, etiamsi in verbis
praeferat pietatem, led i^ c^epandus, etc. Ferus Annot. in Text.
which do any ways tend to the taking them off from their duty and obedience
to God their heavenly Father, by whomsoever they are offered, and out of
whatever intention, yet hearken not to them, but reject them. Peter here an
Apostle, a faithful servant to his Lord and Master Christ, out of that entire
affection which he bare to him, ingageth for him, and that not without hazard
of his own life, and this he did out of a pious intention. Yet inasmuch as this
service of his tended to the interrupting and hindering of Christ in the course
of his obedience, see what entertainment it finds with him. His heart rises
against it, he rejects it, and that not without a holy anger and indignation,
giving a check to the undertaker of it. The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it? What, will you go about to hinder me in this last act of
my Obedience? So far was he from accepting this well-meant service, this
service of love, (for so it was, of carnal love) in him, that he gives him a
secret rebuke for it. And what he does here more closely, we find him
elsewhere upon a like occasion doing in plainer terms, Mat. 16.21. (A Text even
now made use of.) Where Peter hearing his Master declare unto his Disciples,
what sufferings waited for him, how he must go up to Jerusalem, and there
suffer many things, from the Elders and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be
killed, hereupon he takes him aside, and (as the next verse. has it) he began
to rebuke him, saying, It be far from thee, Lord, (or, spare thy self, (...))
this shall not be unto thee. This did Peter out of a tender affection to his
Master, as tendering his life. And if we look upon the Counsel it self, at the
first hearing it may seem such as might deserve a kind reception. But what
says our Savior to it, and him? That we have in the next words, verse. 23. But
he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, etc.] Never did any
hear tarter language come out of that mouth. He who was afterward led as a Lamb
to the slaughter, and as a Sheep that is dumb before the Shearer, so opened he
not his mouth, Isa. 53. Who, when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he
suffered he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. Whatever wrongs and injuries his
enemies did unto him, he bare all patiently, not giving an ill word to any of
them; yet see here how he takes up Peter for this his friendly advice. Not
only rejecting the Counsel, but the Counselor also, whom he would not endure
in his sight, bidding him Avaunt, Get thee behind me,] Language one would think
fitter for a Dog then a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle. Nay more, Get
thee behind me Satan,] Satan, the word signifies properly an Adversary, and
therefore in Scripture commonly given to the Devil, the Arch-adversary to God
and Man. And this term (then which he could not have found a worse) does our
Savior give unto Peter for his suggesting of this counsel to him, wherein he
was an Adversary to God, opposing his will, and an Adversary to Man, going
about to hinder his salvation; as also an Adversary to Christ, in taking him
off from his work, from his obedience. Thus did our Savior there look upon
him, as an Instrument of Satan, actuated and set awork by him in the handing of
this Temptation, which tended to the taking him off from the work, which his
Father had given him to do. And thereupon he rejects his counsel, and that
with indignation, though to flesh and blood never so acceptable. Never should
the counsels, suggestions, attempts, endeavors of any find better
entertainment with a Christian, which tend to such an end, to the hindering of
him in the course of his obedience unto God, whether in doing or suffering his
will, whatever the Person be from whom they come, though never so near,
whatever the Affection be from which they proceed, though never so dear,
whatever the Intention be, though never so good, yet herein hearken not to
them, but looking upon them as Instruments of Satan, actuated and set awork by
him, reject their endeavors. So did holy Job, when his Wife gave him that
counsel which we meet with, Job 2.9. bidding him, Curse God and die, or (as it
may be read) Bless God and die, for the word Barach there used signifies
both, Benedicere and maledicere, Blessing and Cursing, and in Scripture it is
most frequently used in the former sense, seldom in the latter, and so
Charity, which still inclines to the better part, may induce us to construe it
there; But however it be, her meaning was, she would have Job use some means,
that he might have a speedy riddance out of that trouble and misery wherein he
was, which she thought to be best for him. Now what says Job to her? You have
it in the next verse, v. 10. Thou speak as one of the foolish women
speaks. Thus he who in all his sufferings before had not shown any the least
Passion, save that of sorrow, not an angry posture or expression, now his
spirit is stirred within him, so as he rejects this counsel of his Wife not
without indignation, casting it back in her face with a tart Reprehension. Thou
speak as one of the foolish women speaks, or, as a wicked woman, (for so
that word [foolish] in Scripture is often taken.) And why is he so angry with
her? Why inasmuch as this counsel of hers (make the best of it) tended to the
taking him off from the course of his Passive Obedience, to make him throw away
the bitter Cup which God had given him, before he had drunk it out. So himself
gives the reason of this his impatience in the next words; What, shall we
receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? Shall we drink
the sweet Cup of Prosperity, and shall we not also drink the bitter Cup of
Adversity, if God see it fitting for us? Thus does he reject that counsel
which tended to the taking him off from his suffering work, and so from his
obedience to God.

And the like let all of us be exhorted to do. Christians to rej^ct such
counsels and endeavors in whomsoever.
Never giving better entertainment to such suggestions, such counsels, such
attempts or endeavors as tend to such an end, whoever be the conveyors of
them, or actors in them. Such is Satan's policy that he often insinuates himself
into the bosoms of men, through the mediations of such as are near and dear
unto them. Thus did he at the first convey that poisonous Apple to our first
Parent Adam, through the hand of his second-self, her that was nearest and
dearest to him, his Wife, Genesis 3.6. And thus does he often convey his
Temptations through the tongues or hands of unsuspected Instruments, by which
means they find the readyer acceptance. Poison reached forth by the hand of a
friend is least suspected, and so more easily swallowed down. And so do
poisonous suggestions, being conveyed by a friend, a familiar, and so mixed
with declarations of affection and love, they find an easier passage to the
heart, they are more readily received and embraced. Great need therefore have
we to be wary and cautious, not taking the services of others (whoever they be)
upon trust, knowing that they being subject to be deceived themselves, may
become Isntrumental in deceiving of others. And therefore bring we them to the
Touchstone, to the balance of the Sanctuary, trying and examining whether they
be for God, or against him; whether they persuade obedience to his will, or
dissuade from it. If they be for God, putting us on forward in the course of
our obedience, receive them, embrace them, though coming from the hand of an
Enemy. If otherwise, come they from what mouth, from what hand, from what heart
they will, reject them. Herein Christians must learn warily to distinguish
betwixt Satan and their Friends, betwixt their Friends speaking and acting, and
Satan's speaking and acting i^ them, and by them. If they persuade any thing
contrary to the mind and will of God, it is not so much they that speak, as
Satan in them. So then, love and respect thy Friend still, but abhor Satan,
though in a friend. Peter was the same in Christ's eye still, when he dissuaded
him from going up to Jerusalem, that he was before, still he loved Peter, I,
but Get thee behind me Satan. Take we heed of so respecting our Friends, as to
hearken to Satan in them. An usual thing it is when God calls any to
services of difficulty and danger, for friends to interpose themselves, (as
Peter here did betwixt his Master and those who came to apprehend him,) to
hinder them from the undertaking of them. What more common with the Martyrs of
all Ages? Being called forth to some eminent sufferings, to seal the Truth of
Christ with their blood, presently what importuning of Friends, what soliciting
of Acquaintance, what beseechings of Kinsfolks, what tears, cries,
heartbreaking entreaties and supplications of Wife, Children, and other near
and dear Relations? every one crying out in Peter's language, Master, Friend,
Brother, Father, Husband, favor thy self, these things shall not be unto thee.
It was Paul's own case, Act. 21.11. when Agabus had prophesied and foretold of
his bonds and sufferings at Jerusalem, presently the Disciples, his friends,
with others of Cesarea, they come about him, earnestly beseeching him that he
would not go up thither. God having made known his mind and will what service
he had for Paul to do for his name, they presently persuade him to favor
himself, to decline it, not to come upon the Stage where he was to act that
part, not to come near where the danger was. (An ordinary thing for some or
other thus to attempt to pull the Cup from the mouths of Gods servants which he
has given them to drink.) But what says Paul to the motion? what ear does he
lend them? what Answer does he return them? you may read it in the verse
following, ( v. 13.) What do ye weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not
only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. See
how this service of carnal love in them (for such it was) meets with a
check, a rebuke from him. And no better intertainment let those unfriendly
services of such as out of the like carnal affection, shall endeavor to
hinder us in our duty to God, from doing or suffering his will, meet with at
our hands. Do they go about to withdraw our necks from his yoke? shake them
off. It is our Saviors advice, Math. 5.29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee,
pluck it out and cast it from thee. If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off,
and cast it from thee. Now what greater offense can there be to a Christian
then to go about to hinder his obedience unto his God? Get thee b^hinde me
Satan, thou art an offense to me, (says our Savior there to Peter upon this
account.) Accursed is that Relation, that Affection, which shall weigh down our
Relation, our Affection to our heavenly Father, so as to take us off from our
duty to him. As for our Obedience to God, that is absolute. Others must be
respected and obeyed only in him, and for him. If they advise, request, command
any thing that is contrary to his will and our duty, stop the ear against them.
If they be Superiors, and so command, sear them not, rather suffer then yield,
remembering what Peter and the other Apostles there tell the Rulers, Act. 5.29.
Increpandus si subditus, si aqualis, penitus non f^rendus, si vero superior
sit, nullo medo timendus est. Ferus Annot. in Text.
We ought to obey God rather then men. If Equals, and so advise, regard them
not; If Inferiors, and so entreat, reject, rebuke them. So did our Savior here
to this his servant, his Apostle. Going about by this his rash interposure to
hinder him in the course of his Obedience, he gives him a check for it. What
will thou do such a disservice to my Father and me, thus to take the Cup from
my mouth which he has given me to drink? The Cup which my Father has given
me, shall I not drink it? And so I have also done with this Second Particular.

Briefly of the Third, hinder the salvation of others. The hindering the
salvation of others.
This also was Peter's case here. In making this attempt he did, as much as in
him lay, hinder that great work which Christ was then about, the work of Man's
Redemption, so as had he had his will, himself and all others must have
perished, and been for ever lost. And upon this account again our Savior here
gives him this Check. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink
it? Non vis ut ego cum bibam? Quis ergo alius cum ^thet? Si ego hunc calicem
non bibam, aterna siti omnes peribitis. Ferus Annot. in loc.
As if he had said, What will thou not have me to drink this Cup? Who then
shall? If I do not drink it, you must all perish with everlasting thirst: No
such disservice can be performed by any to their brethren, as to be any ways
Isntrumental in hindering or endangering their salvation. This is that which
our Savior charge upon the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.13. They would
neither enter into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer them that were
entering to go in. A heavy charge.

Take we all of us heed of any ways coming under the guilt of it, Christians
to beware of doing this, whether
of being any ways accessory to such a disservice, of hindering the salvation
of any. Which may be done diverse ways.

1. evil counsel provoking others unto sin. As Jobs Wife there did him, By
evil counsel.
(if the words be rendered as our Translation reads them,) bidding him, Curse
God and dye. And so David in the matter of V^iah, whom by his Letter he advised
Joab to murder. 2 Samuel 11.

2. By evil example.
By evil example, whether drawing others into evil. As Peter, who by his
Judaizing drew others into the like dissimulation, Gal. 2.13. Or prejudicing
them against that which is good, as David, who by his scandalous sins of
Adultery and Murder, gave great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. to think and speak evil of God, and of his people, and Religion. A
thing which the Apostle charge upon the Jews, who by their walking
unanswerably to their Profession, made the name of God to be blasphemed among
the Gentiles, Romans 2.24.

3. By False Doctrine, seducing others, By fall Doctrine.
A thing which the Lord complains of against the Shepherds of Israel, Jer.
50.6. My people have been lost sheep, their Shepherds have caused them to go
astray. Which we find elsewhere more plainly expounded, cop. 23. verse. 13. of
the same Prophecy. I have seen fo^y in the Prophets of Samaria, they
prophesied in Baal, and caused my people to err,] drawing them into Idolatry.
And the like we find charged upon that wicked Woman Jezebel, who calling her
self a Prophetess, she by her teaching seduced the servants of God to commit
fornication, both Corporal and Spiritual, Idolatry and Adultery, (which two
go often times together) Rev. 2.20.

4. By laying stumbling blocks in the way of others, By scandals.
This we find expressly charged upon Balaam and Bolack, Rev. 2.44. the one
taught the other to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, by
setting fair and beautiful women before them, which being Idolaters, enticed
them to Whoredom and Idolatry. And thus did the sons of Ely lay a stumbling
block before the people, whom by their lewd practices they made to abhor the
offering of the Lord, (as we find it 1 Samuel 2.17.) utterly to neglect his
Worship and Service, when they saw it so polluted and profaned by the horrid
impieties of those who had the management of it. A thing which the Prophet
Malachi also charge upon the Priests in his time, Mal. 2.8. Ye are departed
out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law; through their
wickedness giving occasion to the people to daisdain the Worship and service
of God. And so do they who by the abuse of their Christian liberty offend, or
endanger their weak brethren. A thing which the Apostle, as he disclaimeth it
in his own practice, If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13. so he
cautions his Corinthians against it, v. 9. of the same Chapter, Take heed lest
by any means this liberty of yours, viz. (in eating meat offered to Idols)
become a stumbling block to them that are weak, (by enticing them to do the
like, though against their own consciences) and so through thy knowledge shall
thy weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed? his salvation may hereby be
endangered. A caution, which upon the like occasion, he also gives to his
Romans, cap. 14. verse. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed.

Fifthly and lastly (to name no more) This may be done by hindering others from
the means of salvation, By hindering others from the means of salvation.
keeping them from the means, or the means from them. This is that which our
Savior charge upon the Scribes and Pharisees in that Text even now named,
Matthew. 23.13. denouncing a Woe upon them for it. Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men. And
how did they do this? Why by taking away the Key of Knowledge from them. So St.
Luke explains it. Woe be to you Lawyers, (so he calls the Sribes and
Pharisees, who took upon them to be the Keepers and Expounders of the Law^y Ye
have taken away the Key of Knowledge, keeping the people from knowing the true
sense and meaning of the Holy Scriptures, which they obscured and perverted by
their false glosses. A thing which the Pope and his Clergy at this day stand
notoriously, and palpably guilty of, who in like manner take away the Key of
Knowledge from the Laity (as they call all but themselves) shutting up the
light of Gods Word in a dark Lanthorn; so as it may give light to those that
carry it, but not so to others, shutting up the Scripture in an unknown Tongue,
that so the vulgar may not be able to understand it. As also withholding from
them the Cup in the Sacrament. Even as Peter would have withheld from his
Master this Metaphorical Cup, so do they from the people this Mystical Cup,
so hindering them from that which might be a means for the furthering of their
salvation.

Which let all Christians beware of thus hindering the salvation of any; and
that as in any of the aforesaid ways so especially in this. By keeping the
means of salvation from them, (which (though unwittingly) was Peter's attempt
here.) Or by keeping them from the means. Which Parents are guilty of in
keeping their children from Baptism, not putting them under the Covenant, when
God offers opportunity for it. And so Mosters of Families in keeping their
Servants unnecessarily from the Word. As also they who shall by their Examples,
or otherwise, keep others from that other Sacrament, the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

Obj. But are not you your selves guilty of this, A Cavil answered.
(may some say) whilst you keep men from this Sacrament, which is a means of
salvation, are not you therein hinderers of their salvation.

A. A heavy charge, if true. But herein as our own consciences acquit us, so we
doubt not but our Lord and Master, whose servants we are, will, whilst we only
design the keeping of this Ordinance of his pure, by not prostituting of it to
a promiscuous participation; whereby as the Ordinance would be polluted, so the
souls of many would be endangered, who by eating and drinking at the Lords
Table unworthily, might eat and drink their own Damnation. This we must
profess we would not willingly be accessory to. But as for those to whom this
Sacrament might be a hopeful means for the furthering of their salvation, such
as are in any measure meet to be partakers of it, we are so far from keeping
them from it, or it from them, that we hold it forth to them, desiring,
entreating, beseeching, nay in the name of God requiring and commanding them,
and that under a threatened penalty, (which in the language of the Parable is
called a compelling them, Luke 14.23.) to come, and lay claim to this, which we
acknowledge to be their right. Only we desire that this may be done in a
regular and orderly way, so as that the hedge may not be broken down, and laid
open, which should keep others at a distance from it, who have no such right
unto it. But I hope that this is a thing so evident unto candid and
unprejudiced spirits, as that it shall not need any further vindication. Thus I
have also done with the third Particular here intimated unto us in this
Interrogation; And so with the former consideration of these words, as they
contain in them a Reprehension and Check to Peter.

Come we now to the second, Rosolution, Christ's Resolution.
Shall I not drink it?] I will drink it, I will certainly drink it, nothing
shall hinder me from the drinking of it. Thus did the Lord Jesus, not only
patiently and contentedly, but willingly and resolvedly subject and yield up
himself to his Fathers disposure, in suffering whatever he should inflict upon
him for the satisfaction of his Justice, and Redemption of his Elect people.
This Cup was a bitter Cup. And this our Savior full well knew. Having but
tasted the top of it, it put him into a sweat (as you have heard) such a sweat
as the world never heard of before, nor since. What then would the dregs do?
Yet will he drink it, and drink it off. (...), not (...), not drink of it,
taste it, but drink it, drink it off. Such was his Resolution, whatever God his
Father should please to put into his Cup, he will drink it, and that every drop
of it, suffering whatever he in his wisdom should think fit.

Thus was the Passion of Jesus Christ in him a voluntary act. Christ's Passion a
voluntary Act.
What he suffered it was not without his own consent and will, he did it
willingly. A truth lately held forth to you from that Text, Tit. 2.14. which
informs us that Christ gave himself for us. Not only was given by his Father,
but gave himsef, which elsewhere we find plainly asserted by himself. I lay
down my life for the Sheep, Joh. 10.15. No man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self, verse. 18. Thus was this offering of his a free offering, his
suffering a voluntary act. Upon the Doctrinall part, whereof I shall not now
enlarge, having had occasion lately to insist upon it.

Only enquire we about the ground and reason hereof. What made Christ so
willing to drink this Cup.


What it was that made Christ so willing to drink this Cup, to suffer this
accursed death, that he would not be taken off from it.

For this a threefold Reason may be assigned,

1. His obedience to his Father.
His Father had given this Cup to him to drink, and therefore he will drink it.
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? God his Father had
decreed, willed that he should suffer and dye, and this his will he had made
known unto him; And therefore in obedience to his command he thus willingly
yields hereunto. I lay down my life of my self, (says he) but wherefore?
Why, This Commandment I have received from my Father, (so himself there gives
the Reason of it,) Joh. 10.18. Even as Isaac (herein a type of him) in
obedience to his Father yields himself to be bound and laid upon the Wood to
be sacrificed, Genesis 22. which he did willingly, without the least reluctance or
resistance that we read of. So did the Lord Jesus, in obedience to his Father,
he willingly yielded up himself to the death. He humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8. Such an absolute
and universal compliance there was betwixt Christ and his Father. What his
Father willed that he willed. So himself declares it, Joh. 5.30. I seek not
mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And again in the Chapter
following, v. 38. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me. Thus did he, as God perfectly comply with the will of
his Father. Being one God with him, there was but one will betwixt them. What
the Father willed, the Son willed. And as Man, he was in every thing
subordinate to him. Not doing his own will. I seek not mine own will. As Man,
if it had been consistent with the will of God his Father, he could have wished
that this Cup might have passed from him; which he does Matthew. 26.39. Father,
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. There was the will of his humane
i^firmity, Nature being desirous to preserve it self, which it might do
without sin. But this will he submits, and resolves into the will of his
Father. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, (so he there limits his
desire) And again, verse. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not pass from me
except I drink it, thy will be done. Thus was there a perfect conformity of his
will as God, and subordination as Man, to the will of his Father. And from
hence flowed this willing submission of his in drinking of this Cup. This he
did in obedience to his Father. Which I shall (God willing) make some
Application of hereafter, for the present passing it by.

2. Father willing this, so also to his Elect people needing it. His good will
to his Elect people.
Their redemption, their salvation depended upon it. As for what he had already
done in his Active Obedience, in fulfilling the Law, this alone could have been
no ways available unto them. The Justice of God required further satisfaction,
even the suffering of death. This was that which the Law had threatened, In the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, (says the Lord to Adam)
Genesis 2.17. thou shall die the death, be subject, and bound over unto death, not
only temporal, but eternal. And under this sentence do all the Sons of Adam
by nature lie, being bound over unto death, not only in their Bodies, but in
their Souls, bound over unto eternal death. Now this Law must be satisfied
before the Elect of God could be redeemed. And how should this be without
shedding of blood. Without shedding of blood, there is no Remission, Heb. 9.22.
And upon this account again it was, that our blessed Savior was so willing to
drink this Cup, to subject himself to this accursed death, not only to a
natural, but to that which was equivalent to an eternal death, to suffer the
wrath of God due unto the sins of the World, that so he might free his Elect
people from that Curse. Which he did out of an unspeakable love to them. This
it was that induced God the Father to give this Gup to his Son. God so loved
the World that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Joh. 3.16. And this it was
which also induced him so willingly to drink it, in this way to give himself
for them. Who loved me, and gave himself for me, (says Paul) Gal. 2.20. Christ
has loved us, and has given himself for us an offering, and a sacrifice to
God, Ephesians. 5.2. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, v. 25. This it
was which (next to the will of God his Father,) put him forward upon this
service with such resolution and willingness; even that ardent affection which
he bare to his Elect people.

This will love do. The power of intense Love.
It bears all things, (as the Apostle says of it) 1 Cor. 13.7. Where it is
intense, it will make a heavy burden light. Jacob loving Rachel he served a
Seven-years Apprentiship for her, And (says the Text) they seemed to him but a
few days for the love he had to her, Genesis 29.20. And thus would men serve
their God, did they but love him as they ought, though it were for many years,
their service would not be tedious unto them. So was it here with our blessed
Savior. Loving his Elect people with such an intense affection as he did, he
thinks nothing too much, that either he could do, or suffer for them.

Applic. Where, before we pass any further, This Love of Christ to be admited.
make we a stand a little, suffering our thoughts to be taken up with an holy
Contemplation, and high admiration of this matchless love which our blessed
Savior does herein express, in showing himself so willing to drink this Cup.
A Bitter Cup, So he had found it already. Yet behold, he not only submits to
the drinking of it, but will not endure that it should be taken from his mouth,
till he had drunk it off. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not
drink it? As if he had thirsted after it, no less then a thirsty man does
after a Cup of drink to quench his thirst withal. Thus was he carried on to
this his Passion with an earnest desire. Even as he was to the drinking of that
mystical Cup, concerning which he tells his Disciples, Luke 22.15. With desire
I have desired (that is, Earnestly desired) to eat this Passover with you
before I suffer, (meaning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) so was he to the
drinking of this metaphorical Cup, (whereof that was a forerunner and a sign,)
his Death and Passion, this was a thing which he was carried to with the like
earnest desire. This is that which he tells his Disciples, Luke 12.50. I have a
Baptism to be baptized with, (so he calls his Passion,) and how am I straightened
till it be accomplished? (...); Quomodo constringor? how am I pressed? ( viz.
in spirit) how earnestly do I desire the accomplishment thereof? So we find
that word used, Act. 18.5. where it is said of Paul, that He was pressed in
spirit, and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ. Intus (...) apud se
astuabat prae ^tli ardore. Beza Gr. Annot. in loc.
(...); he had a strong motion upon his spirit, which put him upon that
service. (...). (...) Annot. in loc.
And so is the same word here looked upon by some. How am I straightened? how am I
pressed in spirit unto this work. So it is explained by some of the Ancients.
As by Epiphanius (taken notice of by Beza,) who reads that Text thus. (...),
etc. I have a Cup to drink, and how do I hasten to the drinking thereof? And I
have a baptism to be baptized with, (...) Grot, ad loc. ex Iren.
and how do I wish that I were even now baptized with it? And to the same
purpose Irenaeus, (taken notice of by Grotius,) who cites it, (...). I have
another Baptism to be baptized with, and I am carried on with an earnest
desire to it. And what he there tells them, he here makes it good, by not
enduring that any should hinder, or delay his drinking of this Cup. And what an
unparalled affection was this which the Lord Jesus bare to his Elect people,
which should thus put him on upon this work, this service? That for their sakes
he should thus endure the Cross^e, and despise the shame, (as the Apostle says
of him, Heb. 12.2.) not so regarding whatever it was that attended his Passion,
as that he should withdraw himself from it. Thus do we here see the truth of
what the Spouse says concerning Love, Cant. 8.6, 7. Love is strong as death,
many waters cannot quench Love, neither can the floods of waters drown it. So
it is with true love, where it is intense, it is inexpugnable and
unconquerable, Omnia vincit amor. No dangers, no difficulties can quench or
quell it. And such was this love which Christ bare to his Church; it was not
the fear of death, though a painful, shameful, and accursed death; it was not
all the waters of Marah, bitter waters, nor the Floodgates of Divine wrath,
which were now set open, ready to be poured out upon him that could quench this
love of his. Come what will come, can come, nothing shall take him off from
this undertaking, which he had designed for the Redemption and salvation of his
Elect people. He had tasted of the bitter Cup already, and now he is resolved,
how bitter soever, he will drink it off for their sakes. Which love let all
those who have an interest in it, for ever admire.

And admiring it, now study how to answer it. Chri^ians to answer this love.
it is the nature of Love, it will be repayed in its own coin. And thus do we
answer this love of Jesus Christ with love; loving him who has thus loved us.
Which whosoever does not, the Apostle thundereth out an Anathema against him, and
that a deserved one, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. Let him be accursed for ever.

And this express we, (as in other waves, Being willing to suffer for Christ.
so) in and by our readiness to suffer for him. Which if he shall call us to,
do it willingly. Willingness in performance sets a mavelous gloss and
luster upon all the services of a Christian; as upon his Active, so upon his
Passive Obedience. Shall Christ call any of us forth in any kind to suffer for
him, do it willingly. This is that which Paul professes in that Text
forecited, Act. 21.13. I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem
for the name of the Lord Jesus. And let the same mind be in every of us. Being
ready even to die for him. This was Peter's resolution, and had he not taken it
up in his own strength, it had been highly commendable and exemplary; I will
lay down my life for thy sake, Joh. 13.37. And the like take we up in the
strength of Christ. Taking notice that whatever we suffer for him, it is no
more then what he has done for us. No more, (say I) nay not the thousandth
part so much. An infinite disparity and disproportion there is betwixt our
sufferings for Christ, and his sufferings for us. Put all the sufferings of all
the Martyrs, that ever have been, together, and suppose them all meeting in one
and the same person, yet were they not worthy to be compared with the
sufferings of Christ. One drop of the wrath of God poured out upon the soul is
more then all the most exquisite torments that cruelty it self can inflict upon
the Body. But behold here not drops, but Vials of wrath poured out upon the
Lord Jesus. A full Cup measured out unto him by a measure of Justice, his
sufferings being proportioned to the sins of the World. Alas, as for those
spittings, scoffings, buffetings, scourgings, the p^ercing of his hands and
side with the Nails and Spear, his sufferings in his body, (which we would
account eminent sufferings,) they were the least drops in his Cup. It was his
suffering in soul which was the soul of his suffering. No compare betwixt his
sufferings and ours, his for us, and ours for him.

And besides, A service honorable and profitable to them: Not so to Christ.
Christ's sufferings no Honor to him.
there are many inducements which may put us upon suffering for Christ, and
make us willing therewith. This is to us both an honorable and a profitable
service. But for him to suffer for us, was neither. What honor could there be
in that infinite abasure? That he, who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, (being coessentiall, and so co equal wih his
Father as God) should make himself of no reputation, (which the Apostle tells
us he did, Phil. 2.8. (...), he evacuated, emptyed himself of that Glory and
Majesty which he had from all eternity, reducing himself as it were to
nothing,) and that he should take upon him the form of a servant, (as he there
goes on) subject himself to such a mean and servile condition as that was
wherein he lived upon earth, this may well be looked upon as a strange and
wonderful abasure. But what was it then for him, (as the Apostle there goes
on,) to humble himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross; to such a shameful, such an accursed death; and to do this for us, us
poor worms, vile worthless creatures? Nothing less then honor in this
fervice. Never was there suffering in it self so dishonorable, so ingi^rious.

Neither was there in it properly more Profit then Honor. To us indeed it was
profitable, Nor profit.
as to our Holiness and Happiness, but not so to him? It is but a groundless
conceit of the Church of Rome, that by his sufferings, he merited the
glorifying of his Humane nature. True indeed, this was the way by which he
passed to his Kingdom and glory; so he tells his Disciples, Luke 24.26. Ought
not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory? But not the
meritorious cause of it. As our works are to us, so were Christ's sufferings to
him; Via ad regnum, non causa regnandi, the way to his Kingdom, not the cause
of his reigning. He had no need to merit any thing for himself: For, as he was
God, so he was coequall with the Father, infinitely blessed and happy from all
eternity, and so there could come no accession or addition of glory to him from
his sufferings, only a reassuming of that glory, which for a time he had laid
aside. And as he was Man, so (by the Papists own confession) he was
comprehensor, non viator, even from the very first instant of his conception,
he was made blessed, by the union of the divine nature with the humane, from
which union also flowed the glorifying of the Humane nature after it had
suffered. But I will not stand to dispute the Controversy with them. This we
are sure of, the spirit of God in Scripture, speaking of the Death and Passion
of Christ, it still refers the merit, fruit and benefit of it unto us. Hereby
were we redeemed, and reconciled unto God. Hereby did he obtain for us
deliverance from sin and death, with righteousness and eternal life. By his
stripes we are healed; through the merit of his death the gates of Heaven are
set open to us, which were shut before, as Parad^se was against our first
Parents. For all these Scripture is express. Thus all the profit is ours. Yet
did he undertake this dishonorable, this unprofitable service for our sakes;
and this he did willingly, resolvedly.

And shall not we be ready to do the like for him? In our sufferings for him
there are both these;

Both Honor,

And Profit.

1. Sufferings for Christ honorable to the Christian.
What service so honorable as to suffer for Christ? Wounds for his sake make
honorable scars. Reproaches, revilings, spittings upon, such base aspersions
as are cast upon us for his sake, are honorable badges. Which (as Job says he
would do by whatever charge his Adversaries should bring against him, Job
31.36.) we may take upon our shoulders, and bind as a Crown to us. It is a
mistake, if any shall think (what we are ready to do) that God and Christ are
really honored by their suffering for them. Alas, this honor reaches not
unto them, no more then David says of his goods, or goodness, Psalm. 16.2. It
reflecteth wholly upon our selves. The honor of whatever we do or suffer for
God and Christ, is ours, not theirs. The Apostles when they had been beaten by
the Jews, for preaching of Christ, they departed from the presence of the
Council, (says the Text) rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer
for his Name. Act. 5.41. This is an honorable service.

2. And no less Profitable.
And no less profitable then honorable. Profirable here, making us like unto
Christ, conformable to his death, (which the Apostle makes so much of, Phil.
3.10.) Profitable hereafter. Not a wound, not a stripe, not a scoff, not a
taunt, not a reproach which we have suffered for Christ, but shall turn to a
good account another day, meeting us in heaven with an abundant recompense of
reward. If we suffer with him we shall be glorified with him, Romans 8.7. They
who are here partakers of Christ's sufferings, when his glory shall be revealed,
they shall be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. No service so profitable as
this, for which we have our Saviors own ensurance, Matthew. 19.29. Verily, I say
unto you, every one that has forsaken houses, or lands, etc. for my Names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, (viz. now in this life, as St. Mark
explains it, Mar. 10.30. of secular goods, if good for them, or of spiritual
riches, which are better) and shall inherit everlasting life.

And what a shame is it then for Christians to bear the Cross of Christ so
heavily, To bear the Cross of Christ heav^ly, a shame to Christians.
as for the most part they do. Alas, every thing that we suffer for Christ we
are ready to think it enough, if not too much. How willingly do we withdraw our
necks from his yoke? How willing are we to hearken to that counsel which Peter
would have given to his Master, to spare and favor our selves? How ready to
accept of all means for the taking of this Cup from our mouths? Herein how
unlike unto Christ? How far from suffering for him, as he did for us? not only
patiently but willingly. Such spirits indeed there have been in some of the
Lords worthies. They have kissed this Cup, they have readily embraced and
rejoiced in their sufferings, taking pleasure in them. So did Peter and those
other Apostles, of whom I spoke even now. And the like did Paul, who tells his
Corinthians, that he took pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in
necessities, in pers^cutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. And
so did those Primitive Martyrs, who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
Heb. 10.34. And the like have many of the Martyrs in succeeding Ages done, who
have gone to the Stake, as our Savior here did to his Cross, not as to a
place of torment, but as to a Chariot of Triumph. Oh that there were the same
spirit in all the Lords people! Beloved, they are but trivial sufferings, which
God calls any of us to at this day for the cause of Christ; for the most part
but Tongue-persecution: And what shall we not bear this with patience, nay with
cheerfulness? Was Christ so willing to suffer so much for us, and shall not we
be willing to suffer a little for him?

And being willing to suffer for him, Christians not to be unwilling to suffer
for those that are Christ's.
be we not unwilling to suffer for his. Herein follow we his example. We see
how willingly he offers up himself for his Church: Do we the like, if ever God
shall honor us so far as to call us to such a service. An honorable service,
next to our suffering for Christ, to suffer for his Spouse, his Body, his
Church. A service which we are tied to by many bonds. We profess our selves
Members of that Body. Now every Member should be ready to suffer for the whole.
He who was the head of his Church, we see how free he was of his dearest blood
for it. And shall we, to whom it is an honor, if we may be but accounted the
meanest Members, the feet of that Body, be willing to part with so much as our
Nayls for it? Such are our goods, our Estates to us, they are but as the Nayls
to the Body, which though there be some use of, yet the Body may subsist
without them. Such are our Estates, at least our superfluities, matters of
convenience, not of necessity. Does God call for them in the behalf of h^s
Church, withold them not. Such was the zeal of the Primitive Christians, that
(as the story tells us, Act. 4.34.37.) for the relief of the Churches
necessities, many of them sold their Lands and Houses, and brought the price
thereof and laid it down at the Apostles feet. Being willing not only to part
with the Rent, but with the Fee-simple of their Estates. And shall not they who
profess to walk in their steps, be willing to part with something out of their
superfluity for the Churches sake; and for the relief of their necessitous
brethren?

And being ready to do and suffer for their Bodies, Specially for their souls.
much more for their Souls. Here if God call, not only for our Estates, but for
our Liberties, nay for our lives, even these should not in this case be dear to
us. This is no more then Paul was willing to do for his Corinthians, whom he
tells, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, (...),
(says the Original) for your souls (as our M^rgin reads it.) And the like
he tells his Philippians, cap. 2. v. 7. If I be offered up, ((...), if I be
pou^ed forth as a drink Offering) upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith,
I joy and rejoice with you all. Thus should Christians prefer their brethrens
souls before their own bodies. Such a mind we see there was in the Lord Jesus.
And (as the Apostle exhorts) let the same mind be in us that was in him, Phil.
2.5. Learning this our duty from him. So St. John presses it, 1 John 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and
we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, viz if God call us to it.

Thus have I showed you two of those reasons and grounds, whereupon our blessed
Savior did thus freely and willingly subject himself to the drinking of this
Cup. This he did in obedience to his Father. And this he did out of that love
which he bare to his Elect. There is yet one other behind, which I shall
insist more largely upon.

Thus did the Lord Jesus for our example. Christ thus suffered for an example
to his people. Pertinet ad^eaeemplum, quia eadem a nobis omnibus tolerantia
exigitur. Calv. Com. in loc.
(though not the only) end of Christ's sufferings, as St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet.
2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow
his steps. Such were the Actions of Christ, though not all, yet most of them
were exemplary. As he tells his Disciples concerning that act of his, in
washing their Feet, Joh. 13.15. I have given you an example, that ye should do
as I have done unto you. And such also were his Passions, his sufferings being
intended by him for an (...), (which is St. Peter's word there) a Copy for
others to write after (so that word properly signifies) a pattern for us to
imitate and follow.

Which we are to do, Christ to be imitated in the manner of his suffering.
not so much in the matter, as in the manner of his suffering. The Cup which he
drank, we are not able to drink it after him, (so he there tells the sons of
Zebedee, Math. 20.22.) That wherein we are to imitate him, to follow his steps,
is the modus, the manner of his suffer^ng. He suffered not only patiently, but
willingly. Thus did he subject himself to the appointment of his Father. Not as
a Malefactor, who subjecteth his neck to the stroke of the Axe, because cannot
avoid it. But he does it will^ng, the ^rully, resolvedly. Thus does he here
profess to drink this Cup. And so are the Lords people to receive all such
Cups from the hand of their heavenly Father as he shall please to reach forth
unto them, to subject themselves to all such afflictions, trials, sufferings,
as he shall by his Providence lay out for any of them, not only patiently, and
contentedly, but willingly, cheerfully.

A point, A point of general and special concernment.
as of general, so of special use to all and every of the Lords people in
this vale of tears. Some other Truths may be more necessary as to their future
salvation, none more needful, as to their present condition then this. There
are none of us but either at the present have, or for the future must expect to
have some of these Cups, bitter Cups, presented unto us to drink. Ye shall
indeed drink of my Cup, (says our Savior there to them, which accordingly,
(as you have heard) they did.) None of us but must make account in this way to
be made conformable to our Head, to Christ, in suffering with him. Though not
all alike. Some there are who drink deep draughts of this Cup, others only sip
of it, but all must taste it. God is pleased to vouchsafe to some of his people
great freedom this way, in comparison of others, yet no exemption for any. We
must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. There
are none of us here present (I suppose) who have not had our trials in some
kind or other already. Some of us happily have sad pressures lying upon us at
the present; but what bonds may wait for us, what sufferings God has laid out
for any of us for the future, that we know not. It is that which our Savior
tells Peter, Joh. 21.18. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young,
thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would, but when thou shall
be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and
carry thee whither thou would not; which he spoke (as the next verse.
explains it) signifying by what death he should glorify God; viz. by suffering
upon the Cross, which (as Histories tell us) he accordingly did. And thus
fares it with many. In their younger times they enjoy many comfortable days,
a prosperous condition, yet before they go off the stage they have another part
given them to act, seeing much affliction and sorrow. Now, quod cuivis
cuilibet, that which does happen to one, may happen to another. No trial or
affliction which has befallen any of the people of God, or yet any of the Sons
of men (for in these things, as the Preacher tells us, All things come alike to
all, there is one event to the righteous as to the wicked, Eccl. 9.2.) but may
for ought we know be our portion, thy portion, my portion. What befalls
others to day, may befall us to morrow. And therefore pardon me if I shall here
take a little more then usual liberty to dilate and enlarge my meditations
upon so useful and needful a subject as this, the Passive Obedience of a
Christian, it being that which was chiefly in my eye when I first took this
Text in hand.

The Cup which my Father has given me, An exemplary Resolution, to be taken up
by every Christian, willing to suffer what God will have him.
shall I not drink it?] Behold here an exemplary resolution, fit to be taken up
by every Christian concerning whatever Cups God at the present does, or
hereafter may present unto him, whatever trials, afflictions, sufferings he is
or shall be pleased to exercise him with, be it in body, in soul, in Relations,
in Estate, in good Name, in Liberty, in life, whatever they be, still in the
purpose and resolution of his heart to say of all and every of them in like
manner, The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? So
submitting unto his will and pleasure, and that not only patiently, but
willingly. A duty held forth by Pattern.
For this we have a Pattern here in him, whose practice for the most part is a
Rule. And it is no other then what we find in some other of the Saints of God.
This is that which Saint James says of the Prophets, Jam. 5.10. whom he there
propounds fot an ensample of suffering affliction. In particular, the holy man
Job (whom he there in the next verse instanceth in) how patiently, how
willingly did he drink this Cup, submit to the will of God in his many and
great afflictions? When his Wife gave him that pernicious counsel, to make a
speedy riddance of his trouble one way or other, What (says he) shall we
receive good at the hands of God, and not evil? Job 2.10. A resolution not
unlike unto this of our Saviors in the Text. Jobs Cup, which he had tasted and
drunk of already, was a bitter Cup, his sufferings many, and those sharp. In
his Estate, in his Children, in his Body. Behold him bleeding (as I may say) in
every vein already. And what greater trials might be yet behind, he knew not.
Yet whatever for the present they were, or for the future might be, this is his
resolution, he will receive evil at Gods hand as well as good. He had received
blessings from him joyfully, thankfully, and he will with the same hand take
Crosses from him, not only patiently, but willingly. Thus should a Christian be
ad utrumque paratus; ready to take a bitter Cup from Gods hand as well as a
sweet one, Adversity as well as Prosperity, Crosses as Blessings. As he
receives the one joyfully, so the other willingly, both thankfully. By Precept.
And what we have thus held forth by Pattern, we shall find also seconded by
Precept, and that by our Savior himself in that obvious Text, Math. 16.24.
where having given Peter that tart check for the counsel which he gave him to
decline his sufferings, he presently subjoyns as a Lesson for him and all other
his Disciples, to take notice of. If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his Cross and follow me.] If any man will come after me,]
that is, take upon him to be a Disciple of mine, a Professor of the Gospel, or
follow me to Heaven, whither I am going, Let him deny himself,] lay aside all
carnal Interests, all worldly respects, as to any inordinate affection toward
them. And let him take up his Cross.] (...). The phrase is emphaticall;
Attollat crucem suam] i. e. Onere quantumvis duro and gravi in humeros
alacriter sublato, etc. Bez. Gr. Annot. ad loc.
not only bear the Cross when it is laid upon him, but take it up. Not only
suffer what he cannot shift, as the beast bears the burden which is laid
upon it, and it cannot shake off. But willingly and cheerfully submitting to
Gods dispensations, in suffering what he by his Providence shall call him to.
Thus we see the Duty held forth both by Pattern and Precept. Christians must
subject themselves to their heavenly Father in drinking whatever Cups he
presents to them, and that willingly, cheerfully.

Obj. Why, but it may be said, Christ seemingly unwilling to drink this up.
did our Savior so? do we not find him deprecating this Cup, praying against
it, and that earnestly, wishing that it might pass from him? how then did he
drink it willingly? And do we not find him telling Peter in that Text even now
cited, Joh. 21.18. that when he should go to his Martyrdom, another should
carry him whither he would not? And is it not so with the best of Gods Saints,
do not they suffer without, or against their wills?

A. A twofold will, Natural and Spiritual.
A natural, and a spiritual will; or two motions of the same will, the one
from Nature, the other from Grace. Now it is true, the former of these, is
averse to suffering, flies from death, and all other like evils, which are
destructive to it self. But the other in a regenerate person, it overrules
this, carrying the soul contrary to the inclinations of nature, to yield
obedience to the will of God, and that willingly. So it was with our blessed
Savior, in whom we find these two wills, or two motions. A natural motion
inclining him to wish that this Cup might pass from him (as there we have it.)
But then a spiritual motion overruling that natural will of his, bringing it
off to a willing obedience to the will of his heavenly Father. Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will. And so it is with other of the Saints. However
the stream of nature runs one way, yet the wind of the Spirit carries them
another. Nature seeking the preservation of it self, declines sufferings, but
Grace submits to them, willingly.

This stone being thus removed, To suffer is part of a Christians obedience to
God, which must be willing
I might now go on, and show you why Christians are thus to suffer. Great
reason for it. This is part of their Obedience unto God, their suffering work,
which must be performed willingly, without which it deserves not the name of
Obedience. If ye be willing and obedient, (says the Lord to his people) Isa.
1.19.

And it is part of their Conformity to Christ, Active, Part of his conformity
to Christ.
so in his Passive Obedience, suffering as he suffered. But it is not my
purpose to insist upon the Doctrinall part. That which I aim at is the working
of this Duty upon the heart by way of Application.

That I shall direct only two ways; Reprehension, And Exhortation.

1. By way of Reprehension, Reprehension of 3 sorts.
under which fall not a few. Reduce them into three ranks.

Such as despise the Judgments of the Lord;

Such as murmr at them;

Such as faint under them. All which are far from this disposition which here
we meet with in our blessed Savior. To speak a word to each of them severally.

1. despise the Judgments of the Lord: Despisers of Gods Judgments.
As the Israelites are charged to have done by the Judgments of his mouth, his
word, Ezekiel. 20.13. They have despised my Judgments. So do they by the
Judgments of his hand, Of which 4 sorts.
his works of Judgment, they despise them: slight them, under which head come
diverse.

1 Such as put this Cup far from them. Amos speaks, Such as put this Cup far
from them.
6.3. They put far away the evil day. In the midst of their other Cups, whilst
they were drinking Wine in Boles, (as the 6 verse. there has it) quaffing and
carousing, drinking by measure without measure, (as Drinkers of Healths (as
they abusively call them) use to do) this Cup was far removed out of their
sight. Whilst they were rioting and revelling, feasting and sporting, they
little thought of the day of Calamity which was then coming upon them. And so
is it with many. In the time of Prosperity, whilst they have the sweet Cup at
their mouths, they never think of that bitter Cup, which sooner or later they
may, nay must drink of. Never think of the day of Adversity, the day of
Affliction, the day of Death. And so they go on securely in their sins,
promising to themselves security, that they shall not feel of the Judgments of
God. So was it (as with literal, Isa. 47.8. so) with Mystical Babylon, Rev.
18.7. She says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no
sorrow. Being in a prosperous and flourishing condition, she promises to her
self that she should never see a change. But mark what follows in the next
Verse. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, etc. See here what it is that
all secure sinners may expect, such as putting this Cup, the Judgments of God,
far from them, go on in their sinful provocations: certainly God has a Bitter
Cup for them, which sooner or later they shall drink; and that it may be sooner
then they are aware of. Express to this purpose is that known Text, (which I
wish all of this rank may take notice of,) Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Where the Lord
tells his people Israel, that if there should be amongst them a root that
bears Gall and Wormwood, (any wicked and ungodly person, whose sins are as
distastefull unto God, as the bitterest Gall or Wormwood are unto man) And it
come to pass (says the Text) when he hears the words of this Curse, that he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, (one sin to another)
then mark what follows. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the
Lord and his jealousy shall smoke like fire against that man. The Cup of Gods
wrath is not nearer to any than those who thus put it far from them.

2. And others there are not much unlike them, Such as will not see it when it
comes toward them.
who when this bitter Cup is coming toward them, yet they shut their eyes
against it, so as seeing they will not see it. Such the Prophet Isai speaks
of, Isa. 26.11. Lord (says he) when thy hand is lifted up they will not see.
Notwithstanding God was at work, wonderfully declaring and manifesting his
power, as in working miraculous deliverances for his people, so in executing
strange and remarkable Judgments upon his and their enemies, yet they shut
their eyes against it, not regarding what he did. Even so deal many. When Gods
hand is lifted up, and his Judgments are abroad in the earth, this Cup is
walking to and fro on every side of them, yet they shut their eyes against it,
will not take notice of it so as to be at all affected with it. Though it be
coming toward them, yet they hope it shall not come at them, so was it with
those Edomites, whom I spoke of before: Though the Cup of Gods fury went round
among the Nations, so as all their Neighbors had drunk of it, yet they hoped
they should not do the like. Even so is it with many secure sinners. In the
midst of common calamities, they promise to themselves immunity and freedom,
that this Cup shall pass by them. So did the Jews of old, though the Lord
sent his Prophets to them one after another, every one with a Cup in his hand,
(as the Prophet Jeremy there says of himself in that Text forecited, Jer. 25.)
a Cup of wrath and fury, which they held forth unto them, threatening them with
the Judgments of God, yet few of them gave credit to what they said. But what
says the Lord to them for this? You may read it (as often elsewhere, so) Amos
9.10. All the sinners of my people shall die by the Sword, which say, the evil
shall not overtake nor prevent us.] The Sinners of my people, presumptuous
sinners, (such as the greatest part of them were) though God had threatened his
Judgments against that Nation, yet they neither feared, nor cared for them,
they would believe no more then they felt, still they flattered themselves,
that the Judgments threatened either should not come, or not come at them, they
should do well enough. Now as for such, the Lord there tells them what they
should expect, they should be sure to dye by the Sword, whoever escaped his
Judgments they should not. And the like let all secure sinners look for. Such
as make a Covenant with death, and with Hell they are at an agreement, (as the
Prophet Isai sets forth the security of the Rulers of Israel, Isa. 28.15)
saying in their hearts, (as it there follows) when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, it shall not come unto us. Thus do they (as he goes on)
make lies their refuge, and under falsehood do they hide themselves. But let all
such make account that this Covenant of theirs shall be disanulled. So the Lord
there threatens it against those Rulers, verse. 18. Your Covenant with death
shall be disanulled, and your agreement with Hell shall not stand, when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.
Secure sinners shall not escape the Judgments of God. They who when his hand
is lifted up will not see, they shall see and feel. So the Prophet there
threatens them in that Text even now cited, Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is
lifted up they will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed, yea the fire of
thine enemies shall devour them.] The fire of thine enemies, the fierce wrath
of God, wherewith he is wont to proceed against his enemies. When that should
break forth upon them (as it should) then they should see what they would not
see, they should feel the Judgments of God to their cost and smart. But I pass
on.

3. Others of this rank there are, Such as will not, let it down, are not
affected with sufferings.
who notwithstanding God gives this Cup into their hand, and even (as I may
say) puts it to their mouths, yet they will not drink it, they will not let
it down. Whatever afflictions or sufferings God is pleased to inflict upon them
they take them not to heart, they are not affected with them as they ought to
be. Which ordinarily arises from one of these three heads. An evil arising from


1. Sometimes from a kind of natural stupidity, Natural stup^dity.
(as Philosophers call it) a stupid senselessness. When men are like cold Iron,
not sensible of the strokes of Gods hammer; Afflictions make no impressions
upon their spirits. So is it with some. God strikes them (as it were) in every
Vein, yet they bleed not, he follows them with sundry kinds of afflictions
and crosses, visits them in their Estates, in their Relations, in their Bodies,
yet none of these reach unto the Soul, they are not moved thereby.

2. Atheistical profaneness, a profane contempt of God, A heisticall
profaneness.
and of his dealings. Thus do some harden their hearts, and so bear up head
against God himself, against his threatenings, and against his Judgments, as if
they were not worth the taking notice of. No, come what will come, they are
resolved it shall never come near their hearts. And out of this Principle, they
will not let down those bitter Cups, which are given them to drink.

3. false and erroneous Principle. E^oneous Principles.
So is it with some, who conceive it is not for a Christian to be affected or
moved with temporal losses, or crosses. Such was the conceit of the Stoics of
old, who held that it was not for a wise man to be subject to such Passions.
And such a Stoicall Apathy has, in the crowd of other errors, at this day
crept in among some! Christians, and that under the name of Religion. To be
affected with the loss of Estate, of Friends, of nearest and dearest
Relations, Husband, Wife, Children, they look upon it as a thing below them, as
unworthy of and dishonorable to their profession. An error, a gross and
groundless one. Religion does not stop the course of affections, or Passions,
only it moderateth and rectifieth them. We find our blessed Savior weeping
over Lazarus's Sepulcher, Joh. 11.35. To make so light of the hand of God, as
not to be affected with it, it is a kind of sleighting and despising his
Chastisements; which whosoever stand guilty of, upon what pretense soever, deserve
a just Reprehension.

There are yet a fourth sort, Such as cast in up again.
such as drink this Cup, but they do not keep it. Like a queazy stomach, which
having taken in a distastefull potion, presently casts it up again, not
retaining it till it have had the effect for which it was intended. So they,
when afflictions fall upon them, are for the present affected with them, but
they suffer them not to rest upon the heart until the work be done for which
they are sent. A usual case, when God strikes men in any kind, presently they
deal as men who conceive themselves struck with the Plague, or some such other
malignant disease, take something to drive it from the heart, which they do
either by letting in Diabolical suggestions into the Soul, such as Satan is
ready to dart into the hearts of men, for the hindering of the kindly working
of Afflictions; of which kind are those common ones; Seeing it is no better,
it is well it is no worse; in vain to grieve for what they cannot help; hereby
they may hurt, but no way benefit themselves, etc. Or else, by seeking other
ways and means of diverting and taking off their thoughts; perhaps, vain
Company, unseasonable Recreations, sports and pastimes. As Saul, when the Evil
Spiri was upon him, calls for David, that by playing upon his Harp, he might
drive it away, 1 Samuel 16. v. last. At the best, by immerging and plunging
themselves into the affairs and businesses of the world. As Cain did, when
flying from the presence of the Lord, he betook himself to the building of a
City, Genesis 4.17. Now this is also a kind of despising the Chastisement of the
Lord; when men only taste: of the Cup which God gives them, and having sipped
of it cast it away. A thing which many times provokes God against his own
people, causing him to double his strokes upon them, to renew and increase
their sorrows and sufferings. Here is then the first rank of those who come
within the compass of this Reprehension; such as despise the Judgments or
Chastisements of the Lord; either putting this Cup far from them, or when it
comes nigh them, shutting their eyes against it, or when it is put to their
mouth, not drinking it, or having drunk it, cast it up again. Pass we now to
the Second.

A second sort there are who do drink this Cup, loathing, Rep^ners and
Murmurers.
they suffer Affliction, but it is with a great deal of impatience and
discontent, repining and murmuring at it. Such entertainment do Afflictions
ordinarily find when they meet with an evil and unsanctified heart, especially
if they be in any measure sharp and grievous. Presently what murmurings, what
grudgings, what repinings, what secret discontents arise in the soul? A usual
thing I say, with wicked and ungodly persons. If the hand of God lie heavy upon
them, presently their hearts begin to boil and swell within them, as if some
hard measure were offered them. And many times this inward distemper breaks
forth in outward expressions, in gestures, words, actions, whereby either
directly or indirectly they do blaspheme God himself. Thus we read, when the
Angels were pouring out their Vials, men blasphemed the Name of God. So we
find it thrice repeated in that one Chapter, Rev. 16 v. 9.11.21. looking at
him, as having power over those plagues, (as the 9 verse has it) instead of
repenting and giving glory to him, (which they should have done, as it there
follows) they speak evil of him, and his dealings with them.

Yea a spice of this distemper may sometimes (too often) be found even in Gods
own people. An infirmity to which Gods own people are subject.
Not only secret murmurings arising in their hearts, but even sometimes
breaking forth at their lips; Passion venting it self in undutifull and
unbecoming expressions. So it was with the people of Israel, when they came to
the waters of Marah, they presently fell to murmr against Moses, Exodus 15.24.
and so against God in him, (as Moses tells them, Exodus 16.7. and the Lord
himself interprets it, Numb. 14.29.) And the like they did upon other
occasions, as in the want of bread, Exodus 16.2. Thus did they murmr in the
Wilderness. And the like are the best of Gods Saints subject to. If God bring
them to the waters of Marah, bitter waters, giving them some bitter Cup to
drink, exercising them with some sharp afflictious, their gestures, their
speeches, their actions are too ready to bewray the secret discontents and
impatience of their spirits. Those instances of Eliah, Jeremy, Job, Jonah, are
all obvious. All eminent servants of God, and yet how were they surprised with
this distemper? Now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am not better then my
Fathers, (says Eliah in the Wilderness) 1 King. 19.4. Why is my pain
perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will thou be
unto me altogether as a Liar, or as waters that fail? (says Jeremy to his God
in a distempered Passion) Jer. 15.18. And again, O Lord thou have deceived me,
and I was deceived, thou art stronger then I, and have prevailed, I am in
derision daily, every one mocketh me, cap. 20.7. And again v. 14. Cursed be the
day wherein I was born, let not the day wherein my Mother bare me be blessed;
and so he goes on to the end of the Chapter, in a great deal of passionate
language, bewraying a strange distemper that was upon him by reason of the
contempt and treachery, and ill use which he met with. And the like we find in
Job. Though looked upon, and that deservedly, as a pattern of patience, yet we
may hear him venting his Passion in the like language, cap. 3. where from the
3d verse to the 16th, he spends himself in such passionate expressions. Let the
day be darkness wherein I was born, etc. And so Jonah, when his gourd was
withered, and the Sun lay hot upon his head, he breaks forth in Passion, not
sparing to tell God to his face, that he did well to be angry, even unto death.
Jon. 4.9. Strange distempers to be found in sanctified hearts. Is it so that
any of us have found, or at any time shall find any spice hereof in our
selves, (as who can say he is free) take we the reproof to our selves; taking
notice that it was far otherwise with our blessed Savior, our heavenly
pattern. Though his Cup was a bitterer Cup then ever any man upon earth tasted,
yet we find him far from murmuring or repining when he was to drink it.

There are yet a third sort who drink this Cup, faint in the drinking of it.
Such as faint un^^ afflictions.
As the first sort make their sufferings too light, so these make them too
heavy, their spirits drooping and sinking under their burdens. A weakness very
incident even to Gods own people, yea to the best of them. It is that which
Jeremy says of himself, Jer. 8.18. When I would comfort my self against
sorrow, my heart is faint in me. And the like we may hear from the Church in
her Captivity, Lam. 1. last: My sighs are many, and my heart is faint. Such
deliquiums, such despondencies and faintings, the strongest of Saints (as I
said) are subject to. It is that which David says of himself, when he was in
some eminent danger, My soul is bowed down, viz. through fear, Psalm. 57.6. and
elsewhere; being pursued by his implacable enemy King Saul, hunted as a
Partridge in the Mountains, (as himself expresses it) we find him giving up
himself for a lost man; He said in his heart, I shall now perish by the hand of
Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1.

An infirmity arising partly from the weakness of nature, An Infirmity from
whence arising.
which contributes much to these despondencies; but chiefly from the weakness
of grace. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength is small, (says
the Wiseman) Prove. 24.10. thy spiritual strength, it argues Faith to be weak.
This it is which supporteth and bears up the spirit under afflictions,
keeps it from fainting. I had fainted (says David) unless I bad believed to
see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Psalm 27.13. Faith in
God, believing his Promises, and resting upon his power, mercy, truth, it
boyeth up the soul, keeps the head above water. Where Faith fails, no
wonder if the heart faints. And it is often helped forwards by looking upon
afflictions through false Glasses, which represent them greater then they are.
As also by neglecting or refusing means of Consolation and comfort. As it is
said of Rachel (the Benjamit^sh women descended from Rachel,) when her children
were carried into Captivity, she w^pt (says the Text) and would not be
comforted, because they were not, Mat. 2.18. Thus it is sometimes, when God
withdraws one blessing, men overlook all others they enjoy, and will take no
comfort in them. Like Children, who if one of their toys be taken from them,
they presently throw away all the rest. But from what ground soever it arises,
or by what means soever it is procured or promoted, it is a weakness, and that
such a one as deserves a just Reprehension. It was not so with our blessed
Savior. Never was there Cup like this Cup, which he was now to drink, yet
behold here how he bears up under it, betaking himself to his suffering work
with a holy and steadfast resolution. The Cup which my Father has given me,
shall I not drink it? Thus much by way of Reprehension.

From which pass we (in the second place) to that which I principally aim at,
Exhortation, to follow this Pattern.
Exhortation. Where let me set this pattern before you, propounding it for your
imitation, exciting and stirring up all who profess themselves the Disciples
of Jesus Christ that herein they would endeavor to show themselves conformable
to this their Head. Conformity to Christ, is that which God has predestined
all his Elect people to. So the Apostle infoms us, Romans 8.29. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, to
be made like him, and that, as in glory, so in grace. Now as we desire the
former, have we an eye to the latter, see that we imitate Christ in what was
imitable in him, following his steps. So suffering as Christ did.
Which do we, as in his Active, so in his Passive Obedience, so drinking those
Cups which our heavenly Father shall give unto us, as he here did this, which
was given to him; not despising of, not murmuring at, not fainting under
whatever Afflictions and Chastisements God shall please to exercise us with,
but bearing and suffering them patiently, obediently, willingly. Every of which
particulars give me leave to spend a little time upon. The three former whereof
are Negatives, showing us what we are not to do; the three latter Positives,
showing us what we are to do. Begin with the former, the Negatives, Taking
heed of 3 things.
which show us what we are not to do, what to take heed of.

The First whereof is Despising Gods Corrections and Chastisements. Despising
Gods corrections, whether by
This is the counsel which wise Eliphaz gives to his friend Job; Despise not
thou the chastening of the Almighty, Job 5.17. And the same does the wisest of
men give to his Son, Prove. 3.11. (as also the Apostle, taking it from him, does
to all Christians, Heb. 12.5.) My Son despise not the chastening of the Lord.
Despise not.] (...) a (...) fostid^^e, floccifacere.
Altimeas (says the Hebrew,) a word which signifies both loathing and
sleighting, each of which is a kind of despising. And both these let
Christians beware of.

1. Of loathing this Cup, (Maas) is used by Job, cap. 7.16. Loathing of them.
(...) Abominatus sum.
where being weary of his life, he says he loathed it. My soul chooses
strangling, and death rather then my life, I loath it. [Maaseti;] Let not us do
so by the Afflictions and trials wherewith God is pleased to exercise us. This
flesh and blood, nature, is ready to do. Even as a weak stomach loatheth the
Potion which is presented to it to drink, so does nature loath, and (as it
were) turn away the face from the Cup of Affliction which God reaches forth.
But herein let Grace correct, and rectify nature. So reason does sonse in a
wise Patient. When the Potion is first brought to him, it is offensive to his
senses, to his sight, to his smell, and much more to his taste, but being
informed by his Physician how needful and useful it is for him, now he takes
and drinks it off. And thus does the wise Christian by the Cups of Affliction
which his heavenly Father gives him, however nature is averse to them, yet
Grace taking notice, and that from the great Physician God himself, that they
are both needful, and profitable, now it submits. So did our blessed Savior.
However, at his first entering into the Garden, his stomach (as I may say) rose
against his Cup, which he saw coming toward him, he seemed to loath it, the
thought of it set him into a sweat, put him into an Agony, and thereupon he
betook himself to his prayers, praying to his Father once and again, yea a
third time, and that with great earnestness, that if it were possible this Cup
might pass from him, (as we have it in that Chapter forecited, Math. 26.) yet
taking full notice that it was his Fathers will that he should drink it, and of
what concernment it was to his Church, see here how be submits to it readily,
willingly, resolvedly, not enduring to have this Cup kept from his mouth; The
Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? And the like work let
grace have in every of our hearts for the rectifying of nature. Though Nature
be averse to such afflictions as God sees fit for us, let Grace submit. Which
let it do upon this twofold consideration:

The needfulnesse,

And Profitablenesse of them.

1. Their needfulnesse. Afflictions needful.
Now for a season (if need be) ye are made heavy through manifold temptations,
1 Pet. 1.6. (...). God never makes his people heavy but where need is. As a
wise Physician will never minister a churlish potion to his Patient, but where
his necessity requires it. No more does the most wise God dispense any sharp
afflictions to his people, but where he sees they have need of them. This
happily themselves apprehend not, not seeing the danger wherein they are, but
God sees it; and thereupon takes this course with them for the preventing of
some greater evil. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32.

2. Profitable.
And as they are needful for the preventing of evils, so profitable. Such are
sanctified afflictions, they bring forth many blessed fruits. No chastisement
for the present seems to be joyous but grievous, nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby. Heb. 12.11. But of this (God willing) I shall speak more hereafter.
Upon these accounts, let not any of us loath the Cup which our heavenly Father
gives us, so as to refuse the drinking of it, putting it from us, specially by
the use of any indirect and unwarrantable means.

2. And as we are to take heed of loathing, slighting it. Sleighting of them.
So the Apostle (following the Seventy) renders the word in his citing of that
Text of the wisemans, Heb. 12.5. My Son despise not the Ghastening of the Lord.
(...), ne parvi ducas, do not set light by it, (the word coming of (...),
parvus, and (...), cura) do not disregard, and slight it, as a thing not worth
the taking notice of. This do they (as I have shown you) who are not, will not
be affected with the hand of God lying upon them, they shut the door of their
hearts against their afflictions, and will not suffer them to enter there. This
let not any of us do. When God lays his hand upon us, upon what part, in
what kind soever it be, he expects that we should lay it to our hearts. A
Parent is not well pleased with his Child when it laugheth at his correction.
Gods hand ever to be laid to heart.
This beware we of. Is God angry with us, and does he manifest his displeasure
in any tokens of it, see that we take it to heart, so as to humble our selves
under his hand. So did the Church in her Captivity, Lam. 3.19, 20. Remembering
my affliction and my misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; my soul has them still
in remembrance, and is humbled in me. And the like the Apostles, Peter and
James, call for at the hands of all Christians in their afflicted conditions.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, Jam. 4.10. Humble your selves
under the mighty hand of God; 1 Pet. 5.6. This is a thing which God looks
for, to be thus acknowledged in his Judgments, and Chastisements. Not to be
sensible of his hand, not to be humbled under it, is no other but a high
contempt. Which take we heed of. Afflictions are Gods Messengers, all sent by
him, every one having an errand from him to us. Now this is a thing which
Princes will not endure, to have their Messengers (how mean soever) despised,
slighted, shut out of doors, sent away without a hearing. Do not we so deal by
these Messengers, which are sent by God to us, but hear them, hearken to them.
Hear the rod, and who has appointed it, Mic. 6.9. Suffer every affliction to
enter into the heart; taking notice of Gods hand in it, humble our souls under
it.

And let this our humbling be in measure proportionable to our sufferings.
Great Afflictions call for great humblings.
Great afflictions call for great humblings. Thus it is said of Manasseh, When
he was in affliction, he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers,
2 Chronicles. 33.12. Not to humble the soul at all under the hand of God, or no
ways proportionably to the measure of Afflictions, is a despising of them, and
of God in them. Which (I say) let us beware of. Does God knock at the door of
our hearts by any Rod of his, open unto it, suffer it to enter, lay it to heart.

And there let it lie, Gods Messengers not to be sent away without their errand.
till it have had the work for which it was sent. Do not send any of these
Messengers away without what they came for. Take heed of whatever it is that
might hinder the kindly working of these medicinable Cups. Take heed of those
and the like Diabolical suggestions, which I spoke of, which tend to the
choking and stifling of godly sorrow in the soul. Which though some of them
may be truths in themselves, and are capable of some good use that may be made
of them, yet being now unseasonable and tending to such an end, they are
hurtful and pernicious. Take heed also of such avocations as may unseasonably
call the soul aside from the work it has in hand; as of idle Company, vain
Sports and Pastimes, and other unnecessary employments. All which are but as
the Devils Whistle, to call men aside from more savoury courses. It is a
dangerous thing when men have taken a Purge to walk abroad. And no less
dangerous is it to the soul; when it is in a course of Physic, under the hand
of God, to suffer it to wander abroad in such avocations as may hinder the
kindly working of afflictions, take it off from the work of Humiliation. And
therefore as we suffer the Affliction to enter when God will have it, so suffer
it to rest upon the soul, until it be kindly and thoroughly humbled, and
broken in the sense of sin. A dangerous thing it is unseasonably to stop the
course of godly sorrow in the soul occasioned by any afflictions, to hinder the
working of Chastisements upon the heart. By this means we may think to ease our
souls; but alas, all the ease that will be in this way gotten, will be but like
cold water in a burning Fever, which cools for the present, but inflames the
more afterward. The unseasonable casting away of the sense of an affliction
will but make way for more and greater. This being Gods design in sending
afflictions, to humble his people, he will not be crossed in it. Here have you
the first of these Caveats concerning the drinking of this Cup; Take heed of
despising it, whether by loathing or sleighting it. Pass we to the second.

Take heed of Murmuring. Corinthians, Take heed of m^rmuring.
1 Cor. 10.10. Neither murmr ye as some of them also murmured, (viz. the
Israelites in the Wilderness,) and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Murmuring
speeches, or thoughts, how ill do they become the mouth of a Christian?
Especially to murmr against God. To seek revenge upon Instruments is too
much; a thing which David would not hearken to (as you heard) when Abishai
offered his service to him in that way. But to strive, to wrestle with God,
what a Rebellion? Great need have Christians to watch over themselves in this
particular, to watch over their hearts, and to set a watch before thee door of
their lips, that so they may not do, what we find Job acquitted of; Job. 1.
Last; Charge God foolishly; That rebellious thoughts may not arise in their
hearts, or if they do, yet they may not break forth at their lips. To which
end, to prevent the rising of them, or however, Murmurings how to be prevented.
to stifle them in the birth, make we use of two or three Meditations. Look we
upon God, look we upon our selves, look we upon others.

1. Look upwards, look upon God, See God in every affliction.
beholding his hand in every affliction. This once apprehended and believed,
will stop the mouth and quiet the heart. This it was that silenced Aaron, when
Moses told him, that what had befallen his sons was the Lords doing, This is
that which the Lord has said, Then (says the Text) Aaron held his peace. Lev.
10.3. And so was it with David; Who so long as he looked at secondary causes in
his sufferings, he had no rest in himself, His heart was hot within him, and he
spoke with his tongue, (as he tells us) Psalm. 39.3. But coming to take notice of
God, as having the chief hand in ordering of his afflictions, Now (says he) I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it: v. 9. Thus when
the soul comes to see that it has to deal with God, that it is he that
reaches forth the Cup to it, that has an overruling hand in whatever befalls
it, this quiets all. And well it may, if we consider in him, In whom consider
the Absoluteness of his Soveraigntie, the unchangeablenesse of his Purpose,
the Irresistablenesse of his power.

1. Absoluteness of his Sovereignty, He is the Potter, His absolute-soveraingty.
we are the Clay. So the Prophet tells the people of Israel, Jer. 18.6. O house
of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter, says the Lord, As the clay in
the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel. And who are we then
that we shall dare to contest with him, to quarrel his dispensations? It is the
Apostles argument which he makes use of to stop the mouths of all those, who
out of their profane curiosity shall inquire into the reason, and question the
equity of Gods eternal decrees of Election and Reprobation, why he chooses
some to be Vessels of Honor, electing them to Grace and Glory, whilst he
passes by others, appointing them to just condemnation for sin. Nay but O man
(says he) Who art thou that replyest against God, (or disputest with him about
what he has done, or shall do)? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the Clay? Rom,
9.20.21. Such is Man in the hands of God; Who having an absolute Soveraigntie,
and Authority over him, may dispose of him in respect of his eternal condition
according to his own good pleasure, without giving any other reason for it but
his will. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
bardneth. Romans 9.18. Much more then may he do the like as to his temporal
estate. However God is or shall be pleased to deal with thee or me, is it any
otherwise then he may do? Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? Mat. 20.15. May not he dispose of our condition from whom we have our
being?

2. His unchangeable Counsels,
The unchangeablenesse of his purpose His counsels are immutable. (...), The
immutability of his Counsel. Heb. 6.7. My Counsel shall stand (says the Lord)
and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46.10. The council of the Lord stands for
ever, Psalm. 33.11. Surely as I have thought shall it come to pass, and as I
have purposed so shall it stand, Isa. 14.24. Such are all the counsels and
purposes of God, all like himself, unchangeable. What do we then by our
murmurings and repinings against the pleasure of his will, but even dash our
selves against a Rock, which may break us, but we cannot move it? To change or
alter what he has purposed and determined concerning us as a thing which we
cannot do?

3. Consider the Irresistablen^sse of his power, wise man says that against a
King there is no reising up, His irresistible power.
Prove. 30.31. viz in regard of the prevalency of his power. So he elsewhere
explaineth himself, Eccles. 8.4. Where the word of a King is there is power,
and who may say unto him, what do thou? It is not for a Subject to contest
with his Sovereign, who as he has Authority over him, so he is armed with
power to execute his pleasure upon him. Much less then for Man to contest with
his God, whom he cannot stop or hinder in his course. Behold he takes away
(says Job) who can hinder him? who shall say unto him, what do thou? Job.
9.12. Never did man get any thing by striving and struggling with God. W^ be to
him that striveth with his maker, Let the Potsheard strive with the Potsheards
of the earth (says the Prophet) Isai. 45.9. If frail man, who is but like a
Potsheard, a pe^ce of brittle earth, will needs contend, let him cope with his
equal, with man like himself, but take heed of contesting with his maker, how
he enters the lists with him who is infinitely stronger then himself, able to
consume him with the breath of his nostrils. No striving with God. To repine
at, murmr at him, at his dealing with our selves, is no less foolish then
impious, his Sovereignty being absolute, his Decrees immutable, his Power
irresistible.

2ly. God reflect upon our selves. Where consider. Look upon our selves.


1. What we are, How base, how vile, how contemptible creatures in comparison
of that God with whom we have to do. What we are.
Poor worms creeping and crawling upon earth. Man that is a worm, and the son
of man which is a worm, Job. 25.6. And what are we then that we should lift up
a hand, a tongue, a heart against the great God of Heaven and earth, who is
able (as I said) to consume us with a touch of his finger, with the breath of
his mouth?

2ly. What we have deserved. Lay our sins and sufferings together, What we
deserve.
and see how infinitely the one weighteth down the other. All the sufferings
which here we meet with all are but temporal, the punishment due unto the
least sin is eternal: Our Crosses may be many, but our sins more. So as looking
upon our deservings, we shall find that which may well stop our mouths, and
cause us quickly to submit to whatsoever chastisements God shall please to
exercise us with. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him (says the Church) Mic. 7.9. Whatever the affliction be, yet
murmr not at it, taking notice of what the Church acknowledges, Lam. 3.22.
What at Mercies we do still enjoy.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed.

And 3ly. What mercies we do yet enjoy in the midst of all our miseries. Be our
sufferings what they will, yet if we cast up our accounts aright, we shall find
cause of thanksgiving, rather then of repining. It is two usual a thing with
men to have their eyes wholly fixed upon what they want and would have, and that
makes them to overlook what they have. Lord God (says Abraham) what will thou
give me, seeing I go childlesse? Genesis 15.2. And so is it with others. So long
as they want some one mercy which they would have, all others which they enjoy
are as nothing. But this is no other but high ingratitude. Whatever our
condition be, yet if we look about us, we shall see some temporal mercies, or
others, which we have cause to bless God for. However the spiritual blessings
wherewith he has blessed us in Christ (I speak it to believers) these are of
that worth and value that they may well weigh down all our temporal
sufferings. So they did in the Apostles balance, who had duly weighed them; I
reckon (says he) that the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18. Thus looking
upon our selves, what we are, what our deserts, what our enjoyments and hopes
are, we shall see that which may keep down all murmurings.

3ly. Look upon others, Cup be yet we shall find some others whose cups are far
greater and bitterer, whatever our affliction be, Look upon others who deserve
better, but fare worse then our selves
we shall see or hear of some others, who though happily they deserve far better,
yet they fare worse, having an equal, nay a larger share of sufferings then our
selves. What is it that we complain of? Is it a scantnesse in estate, look upon
Lazarus lying at Dives? gate, begging his bread, whilst the dogs being more
compassionate then their Master licked his sores, Luke 16. Is it the loss of a
Child, one or more? Look upon Job, who lost all at once. Is it bodily sickness
and weakness, look upon David, whom we may hear sadly bemoaning his condition
unto God. (as elsewhere, so) Psalm. 38. Thine arrows stick fast in me and thy
hand presses me sore, v. 2. There is no soundness in my flesh because of
thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. v. 3. My
wounds stink and corrupt because of my foolishness, v. 5. My loins are filled
with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh, v. 7. And so
upon others, who are cast upon their beds of languishing, lying it may be under
most exquisite torments, in the mean time wanting many of the creature
comforts, which we enjoy. The like I may say in other cases. Be our condition
what it will, still we shall find some or other, with whom if we compare our
selves, we shall see little cause to repine and murmr. An error it is, and a
usual one, in comparing our selves with others; If it be in spirituals, then
we are ready to look at them who are beneath us; If in temporals, then at those
which are above us, and so the former of these breeds in us contentation,
where there should be a holy impatience, and the latter breeds impatience,
where there should be a holy contentation. Taking notice of this error, in
comparing our selves with others, do it in a clean contrary way. In spirituals
look at those who are above us, better then our selves, that will breed in us a
holy emulation. In temporals, look at those who are beneath us, in worse
condition then our selves, (of which fort still we shall find some or other,)
this will breed in us a holy contentation. Thus stay we our hearts against all
those repining, murmuring thoughts, which might arise in them at the drinking
of this Cup. Which is the second Caveat that I propounded. Take heed of
Murmuring.

And so (in the third place) of Fainting. Take heed of fainting.
A needful Caveat, it being a thing which the best of Gods Saints (as I have
shown you) are subject to, in the drinking of this Cup to faint. This we find
Eliphaz charging upon his friend Job, cap. 4. v. 5. Now it is come upon thee
and thou faintest.] And there was a truth in the Charge. The evil which he
greatly feared was come upon him, (as himself tells us in the Chapter
foregoing, v. 25.) great trouble and affliction was befallen him, and he was
not able to bear it. Notwithstanding he had been a Comforter of others in their
afflictions, (as the Verses here foregoing have it, Cap. 4. v. 3, 4.) Behold
thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands; Thy words
have upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble knees;
yet now that it came to his own turn, now that the Cup was put to his mouth, he
fainted at the drinking of it. [Now it is come unto thee and thou faintest,] it
touches thee, and thou art troubled.] And truly so fares it sometimes with
the best of Saints, though strong men in Christ, such as have been able to
comfort others in their afflictions, yet when they come to act the same part
themselves, (God leaving them to the experience of their own weakness) they
droop, they cannot bear up head and heart, as they should do, they are
inordinately affected, even fainting under their burdens. But this Gods people
are not to give way to, but strive against. My Son (says Solomon in the Text
forecited, Prove. 3.11.) despise not thou the chastisement of the Lord, neither
be weary of his Correction.] Nor faint when thou art rebuked of him, (so the
Apostle cites that Text) Heb. 12.5. Despising, sleighting of chastisements,
and fainting under them, are two Extremes, like Scylla and Charibdis, a Rock
and a Gulf, the one opposite to the other. Now where Satan cannot dash men
against the one, he will endeavor to drive them into the other. Where he
cannot bring them to slight Gods chastisements, he will endeavor to make them
sink under them. Let Christians beware equally of both. Not despising
Corrections, Chastisements, let them not be weary of them, faint under them.
Which two words we find the Apostle putting together, verse. 3. of that
Chapter, Heb. 12. Consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Thus do men,
being wearyed in their bodies, they faint in their spirits. Let it not be so
with Christians under their Afflictions. Though they be heavy, and long, yet
let not them be so weary of them as to faint under them. (...). Though they be
broken in the outward man, in their Bodies, in their Estates, etc. yet let the
Inward man be kept whole. Ne frangantur animo, let them not be broken in their
minds, so as to faint under their burdens. This is the Apostles advise
concerning well-doing, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well-doing, for we
shall reap if we faint not. And make we use of it as to well-suffering. Be not
weary under Gods Corrections, so as to faint, when we are rebuked of him.

To faint under any Trials, To faint under trials, a thing unbeseeming a
Christian.
yea to be inordinately affected with them, it is a thing unbeseeming a
Christian, being dishonorable, and unsuteable to his Profession. What is it? A
loss in Estate, that thus affects him? Why, he professes to have laid up
his best treasure in heaven, where he has a better, and an enduring substance,
(as the Apostle calls heavenly glory, Heb. 10.34.) Is it the loss of some
near or dear Relation, Friend, Child, Parent, Husband, Wife, (a thing which
often sits as near the heart as any other trial whatever?) Why, his
Profession is, to believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection. And therefore, how
is it that he or she should sorrow as others which have no hope? (as the
Apostle says of Christians immoderate mourning for the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.)
And so is it in other cases. Whatever the affliction be, yet to have the heart
not only drencht (which it may be) but drowned in sorrow, so as thereby to be
rendered and made unfit for the duties both of general and particular calling,
(as often it is) it is a thing unsuteable to a Christians profession, and no
small disparagement to Gods Religion. Much it is that Nature, being well
tutoured, is able to do in this way. Histories tell us of Heathens, such as
knew not God, never heard of the name of Christ, what an excellent temper some
of them had brought their Affections and Passions unto, so as not to be
inordinately transported, distempered, by any accidents that could betide them.
And we see it in daily experience, how mere civil men, such as know not what
the work of Grace means, have nothing but Reason to steer their course by, yet
what an evennesse of spirit, what moderation and temper do they often times show
in bea^ing the burdens, the afflictions, which befall them? And shall Nature be
able to bear up the spirit in such cases, and shall not Grace much more do it?
Shall Reason moderate Affections and Passions, and shall not Religion do it?
Great cause have Christians many times to check and shame themselves upon this
account. Alas! with what shaking hands, what trembling hearts, do they often
take those Cups which their heavenly Father holds forth to them? Their hearts
even faint at the thought and apprehension of them before they come at them. So
was it not with our heavenly Pattern here. Here was a bitter Cup coming toward
him, which he had tasted of already, and was now to drink it off. And see with
what a steady hand, what a strong and confident resolution does he receive it?
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? Herein let it be
the endeavor of all those who profess themselves to be his Disciples, to
imitate him, to receive, and drink their Cups without fainting.

Q. How the soul may be kept from fainting under Afflictions.
but how shall they attain unto it? Sometimes, many times, it so falls out
that their burden far exceeds their strength. So it fared with the Apostle
himself, who tells his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.8. that by the trouble which
happened to him in Asia, he was pressed out of measure, beyond strength; (...).
And so falls it out sometimes with other of the Saints; There is a great
disproportion betwixt their burden and their strength, the one great, the other
small. Now how shall a Christian be able to bear up in such a case, so to
fortify and strengthen his spirit, as that he may not faint in the day of
Adversity?

A. A great and difficult work I confess, Some sovereign Cordials prescribed.
yet through the help of Grace attainable. To help you therein, let me
prescribe unto you some Sovereign Cordials, some spiritual Consolations, which
may be, and being taken into the soul will be, very useful for this purpose,
for the supporting and bearing up the spirit under whatever affliction this
poor life of ours upon earth is subject to. These Consolations are many, as
also our Afflictions are. I shall single out some of the choicest. Which I
shall desire you carefully to lay up. Happily at the present you may have no
great need of them, but how soon you may you know not. And therefore lay them
up in the Closet of your hearts. They are not like the Apothecaries Drugs, some
of which being long kept, lose their virtue. The day may come when some one of
them may requite all your care and pains.

In the First place then look at Afflictions themselves. Lo^k at Afflictions
themselves, wherein consider.
The Israelites in the Wilderness were cured of the stinging of the Serpents,
by looking upon the Serpent. And so may a Christian, by looking upon
Afflictions, strengthen his heart against them. The Honey of the Be is a
medicine for the Sting: Afflictions, though never so bitter, yet will afford
somewhat that may serve to allay that bitterness. In them cast we an eye upon
4 or 5 particulars, which may be useful this way.

The Quality, Quantity, Continuance, Commonnesse, Issue of them.
1. Quality of them. Here we shall find, that in themselves they are a Curse.
The Quality of them, as qualified by Christ.
Such are all Afflictions, all fruits and consequents of sin, and punishments
of it, every one being an Appendix to that first Curse, The day thou eatest
thereof thou shall dye the death; surely die, Genesis 2.17. that is, be subject to
manifold evils, as in soul, so in body, tending to death, to the destruction of
both. But by and through Christ their nature is now altered, the Curse is taken
away. That was one, and the chief, of those Ingredients, which was put into
this Cup, which was given to Christ to drink, and which he did drink upon the
Cross. He being there made subject to that accursed death, that he might free
us from the Curse of death, and of all its retinue. Christ has redeemed us
from the Curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. So that what
the Apostle says of Death it self, 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy sting?
We may say the same of whatever afflictions and crosses can befall the children
of God upon earth; their Sting is gone. Surely the bitterness of death is
past, (says Agag, having (as he thought) armed himself against the fear of it,
which is the greatest part of Deaths bitterness,) 1 Samuel 15.32. And the like
may all true Believers say concerning all their Afflictions, and sufferings.
The bitterness of them is past, as to them, the Curse being taken away from
them by Christ, which is indeed the chief part of their bitterness. Even as
Moses altered the quality of those waters of Marah, took away the bitterness
of them, by casting into them that Tree which the Lord had showed him, so has
Christ taken away the bitterness of all the waters of Affliction by the Tree
of his Cross, to which he was designed by his Father. The bitterness of
Afflictions (as I said) was the Curse going along with them, they being in
themselves all tokens of wrath. But now, that bitterness, that Curse is taken
away. So as to true Believers they are no longer tokens of wrath, but rather
Love Tokens. Whom the Lord loves, he corrects, Prove. 3.12. chasteneth, Heb.
12.6. Yea, Pledges of Adoption. So it there follows, Heb. 12.6, 7. He
scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye endure chastenings, God deals
with you as with Sons. Not to know what Chastisements mean, it is no good sign.
If ye be without Chastisement, whereof all (all Gods children) are partakers,
then are ye bastards and not sons, (so it there follows) v. 8. For God to
exercise his Children with afflictions, it is a sign that he owns them for his
Children, and a demonstration of his fatherly love to them, and care of them.
Thus do these Cups which Gods people drink of, they come from the hand of a
Father, not of a Judge, being to them not satisfactory, but castigatory
punishments. Not properly punishments, but Chastisements. Not tokens of wrath,
but Lovetokens.

A useful and comfortable meditation, for the soul of a Believer to feed upon
in the midst of whatever distress. What is it that makes these Cups so bitter
unto the soul? Why, when it looks upon them, as they are in themselves, as
Cups of divine wrath and fury. Now, no wonder if it shake and tremble at the
drinking of them. So long as a man apprehends these Arrows which he feels to
stick fast in him, to be poisoned Arrows, shot at him by the hand of a
revenging God, now no wonder if the soul have no peace, no quiet. But look upon
them as they are changed and altered by Christ, having the Curse taken away,
and as they are tokens and pledges of Adoption, (which being sanctified they
certainly are) the soul being persuaded of this, this will be as a sovereign
Cordial to it, to keep it from fainting.

Q. How Chastisements may be known from Punishments.
that they are so to him? that they are only Chastisements and not Punishments,
and that they are tokens of love, and pledges of Adoption. When as they are
tokens of wrath to some, how shall I know, that they are not so to me?

A.

1. drink this Cup? how do ye suffer these afflictions? Do you quietly,
patiently, By the manner of suffering them.
contentedly submit to the hand of God in them? If so, now hear what the
Apostle says to you in that Text even now cited, Heb. 12.7. If ye endure
chastning, God deals with you as with Sons. (...). Not, if you suffer
afflictions, for so do the worst of men. But if ye endure chastening, receive
Afflictions from the hands of God as Chastisements, kissing the Rod, humbling
your selves under the hand of God, as dutiful Children under the hand of a
Father, now may you conclude these to be tokens of your Adoption, that God
deals not with you as Enemies, but as Children.

2. What work have these afflictions in you? By their effect.
do you find your selves bettered by them? Hereby a sick patient may know that
the Potion, which he has taken was not poysonable, but medicinable; when,
though for a time it wrought churlishly upon him he finds himself the better
for it, he finds nature disburdened of these ill humors, which before
distempered it and feels himself in some measure restored to former health.
And thus may a Christian judge of his afflictions. If they have such a kindly
working upon the soul, as to purge out corruption and to strengthen the
inwardman, so as the soul is bettered by them, made more bumble, more
watchful, more fearful of offending God, more careful of walking before him
in well pleasing, hence may a Christian conclude that these are medicinable
Cups, fatherly chastisements, intended for his good. So does David concerning
his afflictions. Psalm. 119.75. I know Lord (says he) that thy judgments are
right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me, that God had therein a
gracious purpose toward him, and that he intended his good. But how did he
know this? why, by the working of those afflictions upon him, he found himself
bettered by them. Before I was afflicted (says he) I went astray, but now have
I kept thy word, v. 67. And again, v. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes? Thus where afflictions have such a
kindly work upon the soul, where Nocumenta are Documenta, where Chastening and
Teaching go together, this is a good and a sure sign that they are tokens of
Love, and not of Wrath, Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teach out of thy Law! Psalm. 94.12. Do we find this effect in our selves?
Do we find such a kindly operation of our afflictions? Do we find them
stirring up in us filial affections toward God? not a servile and slavish, but
a filial, a childlike fear of his Majesty, a fear to offend, to displease him?
a religious care of walking before him, and approving our selves unto him? with
an utter hatred and detestation of all sin? from hence conclude we our
afflictions to be such, not Punishments, but Chastisements, not tokens of
Wrath, but Love, which being rightly apprehended and believed, will be of great
use to bear up the soul under them.

Here is the first thing considerable in Afflictions, the Quality of them.

2ly. The Quantity
Consider the quantity of them. And here, if rightly looked upon, we shall find
them not great, not so great as they are commonly apprehended. How ever some of
them are heavier then others, yet all light. So Paul looked upon his
sufferings, and the sufferings of the Saints, giving them this Epethite, Our
light affliction. 2. Cor. 4.17. (...), for (...). Levitas afflictionis,
Afflictions of Gods children light.
the lightness of our affliction. Such are the afflictions of Gods children,
Light afflictions.

Q.

A. How said so to be.
Not so, thus they may be, and often are great and heavy, none heavier. But
they may be so called.

1. Comparatively being compared ^^^h.
Comparatively, A Cup (says the text) (...) a drinking vessel, of which though
some be greater then others, yet compared with other vessels, none of them are
great. Thus is it with the afflictions of Gods Saints, which they are exercised
with, however some of them are heavier then others, yet all comparatively
light. Such they are being compared,

1. With that weight of glory, The weight of eternal glory.
which those afflictions (through grace) do work for them. So the Apostle there
explaines his meaning in that 2. Cor 4.17. Our light affliction, etc. works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Being put into the
balance against this, they bear no proportion with it, they are not (...), as
the same Apostle elsewhere tells us. Romans 8.18. I reckon (says he) that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory
which shall be revealed in us.

2. And again, Their deservings.
compare them with our deservings, our sins, here again we shall find them
infinitely outweyed, there being no proportion betwixt them.

3. The sufferings of some others.
And (3ly) Compare them with the sufferings of some other of the Saints of God,
and we shall find them (it may be) but drops to their Cups. Thus, though heavy
in themselves, yet comparatively they may be said to be light.

2. Made light by Grace supporting.
Which also they are made to Gods people by the strength of grace supporting of
them. Even as the Gates of Azzah and Posts belonging to them were to Sampson,
though another would have sunk under the weight of them, yet by the power of
supernatural strength they were made light to him so as he takes them upon his
shouldierr, and carries them up to the top of the mountain, Judge, 16.3. So
have many of Gods Saints done, being strengthened in the inward man by the
spirit of Christ, they have made light of those burdens, which to others would
have been insupportable, I can do all things (says Paul) through Christ that
strengthenest me, Phil. 4.13. (...), I am able for all things, as for Actions,
so for Passions, for sufferings, such as he there spoke of in the verse
foregoing, to be abased, to hunger, to suffer need. And elsewhere, speaking of
the greatest sufferings, Tribulation, Disiress, Persecution, Famine,
Nakedness, Peril, Sword. In all these (says he,) We are more then Conquerors
through him that loved us. Romans 8.35.37. Thus are afflictions, however heavy
in themselves, made light to the people of. God through the power of the spirit
of Christ dwelling in them, and strengthening of them. The consideration
whereof may also serve to bear up their hearts and spirits, so as that they
should not faint under their burdens, which, be they what they will, are
comparatively so light, and by the power of grace can be made light to them.

The 3 thing which I propound to consideration is the Duration, The Duration
which is but short.
the Continuance of them, which, being rightly measured, will be found not to
be long, A Cup (says the Text,) which being but a draught, is soon put over.
And such are the sufferings of Gods people, but of a short continuance. For a
time, a season. Now for a season (if need be) ye are made heavy through
manifold temptations, 1. Pet. 1.6. Their winter does not last all the year
long, their suffering time is but for a season, (...), (says the original,)
Paululum nunc, for a while, a little while, a short season, A night, weeping
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. A night,
nay an hour, The hour is come says onr Savior speaking of his passion, Mark.
14.41. Joh. 17, 1. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation (says Christ
to the Church of Philadelphia) Rev. 3.10. An hour, nay a minute, a moment, His
anger indureth but a moment, Psalm. 30.5. our light affliction which is but for
a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. (...), Thus is the spirit of God in Scripture pleased to
express and set forth the short continuance of the sufferings of Gods Saints.
They are but for a season, a little season, a night, an hour, a moment; At the
most but for the present time, as the Apostle there has it, Romans 8.18. The
sufferings of this present time; (...), the time that now is, or this now
season, meaning this present life, which being compared with eternity, is but a
moment. And herewith let all Gods Saints comfort themselves in their suffering
conditions. Though their sufferings may be great, yet they shall not be long.
Si gravis brevis, Far carriage (we say) makes a light burden heavy, and a
heavy one intolerable. But the burdens of Gods Saints shall not lie long upon
their backs. What though at the present they lie under the pressures and
oppressions of wicked and unreasonable men, either under their hands, or under
their tongues, suffering by them in their estates, good names, liberties,
Persons, yet let them bear up their spirits, taking notice of what the Psalmist
tells them, The rod, (or Scepter) of the wicked (of Tyrannical oppressors) shall
not rest upon the lot of the righteous. Psalm. 125.3. It may be for the present
they feel a thorn in the flesh, conflicting with some satanicall temptation,
which is to their souls as a thorn sticking in their flesh, putting them to a
great deal of smart and trouble, but let not this discourage them, taking
notice of what the Apostle assures them, The God of peace shall shortly tread
down Satan under your feet, Romans 16.20. At the present (it may be) they are
under a cloud a black cloud of spiritual desertion, God, hiding his face from
them, nay writing bitter things against them (as Job says he did against him,
Job. 13.26.) which of all them is the saddest trial. No affliction like unto
this, The spirit of a man can sustain his infirmity (his bodily? infirmity,
which is much born up by a cheerful spirit, specially when there is peace of
conscience with it) but a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. When God
himself seems to turn enemy to a man, withdrawing from him the sense and
feeling of his love, yea letting fall some drops of wrath upon the soul, noe
trial, noe Affliction like unto this. Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia,
Where God is at peace with a man nothing can disquiet him; but where God makes
war against the soul who shall speak peace to it? Yet still let the true
believer bear up, not giving way to despondencie, to fainting of soul. The Sun
is often under a cloud, yet it breaks forth again, and that sometimes
suddenly, unexpectedly, and shines it may be, more clearly then before it was
so clouded, God will not hide his face from his people for ever. It is but for
a while, a little while. For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great
mercy will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a
moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord
thy Redeemer, (so runs that excellent promise made to the Church, which every
true beleiver may apply to himself) Isai, 54. v. 7.8. Thus if Christ do
withdraw himself from the believing soul (as he did from his Spouse in the
Canticles, Cant. 3.) yet seeking after him, it shall find him again (as she
there did, v. 4.) It was but a little that I passed from them ( viz. the
watchmen of whom she enquired for him) but I found him whom my soul loves. His
withdrawings are but for a little while. So he tells his Disciples when he
was to leave them, Joh. 16.16. A little while and ye shall not see me, and
again a little while and ye shall see me. Though he withdrew his Corporal
presence from them, (which he did by his death) yet he would appear to them
again (which he did after his resurrection,) and they should enjoy his
spiritual presence upon earth, and his glorious presence in heaven, whither he
was going. Thus those who are once truly united unto Christ shall never be
quite separated from him. If he estrange himself from them, it is but for a
season. And therefore in these cases let them live by faith, setting that awork
to bear up the soul. Remember that whatever the affliction be, whether outward
or inward, whether temporal, or spiritual, yet it is but temporary. Suppose
it be for weeks, months, years, nay for the whole life time, yet (as I said)
compared with Eternity, it is but a minute, a moment, our life it self is no
more; our affliction then cannot be long. And shall we then faint at the
drinking of this Cup? what, could ye not watch with me one hour? (says our
Savior to his disciples) Matthew. 26.40. And so let me here say, what, can we
not suffer with Christ one hour, one minute, who look to reign with him to all
eternity? what ever our affliction then be, yet hold up head and heart for a
while, a little while. A while and for ever. Above the Moon there are no
clouds, noe changes in heaven. It will not be long ere God shall wipe away all
tears from the eyes of his people, Rev. 7.17. There is the third Consideration,
the short continuance of Afflictions.

Fourthly, The Community.
consider also the community, the commonnesse of them. That will contribute
somewhat to this purpose. Affliction is not our portion alone. This Cup goes
round the Table. Those sufferings which Gods people are here subject to, they
are but humane temptations. So the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 10.13. There
has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man. (...), tentatio
humana, a humane trial. Such are the trials of Gods Saints here, they are no
other then what other of the sons of men are subject to, Man that is born of a
woman is of few days, and full of trouble, Job 14.1. Yea the Sons of God. What
Son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? Heb. 12.7. And upon this account they
may the better be born. So St. Peter tells the believing Jews, to whom he
writes, and he makes use of it as an argument for this very purpose, that
they should not faint under their sufferings for Christ, 1 Pet. 5.9. Knowing
(says he) that the same afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren that are
in the World. The persecutions which they met with they were no new thing, no
other then what others of their Brethren had felt of. So it is, Brethren in the
flesh, Brethren in the spirit, all Brethren in affliction, companions in
tribulation. Not the greatest, not the best exempted from drinking of this Cup.
And shall we then faint at the drinking of it? We see, or hear, how those of
the weaker Sex undergo their pangs and throws in Childe-bearing. Though one
of the bitterest Cups upon earth, yet how contentedly do they pledge their
great Grandmother Eve in it, to whom it was first given to drink? which they do
upon the account of that Law which has made it common to all of that Sex, In
sorrow shall thou bring forth children, Genesis 3.16. And so may we look upon all
other Cups, which God gives us to drink, they are no other but common Cups,
though not common to all individuals, all particular persons (as that is) yet
to all sorts, all ranks and conditions of persons, good and bad, high and low,
rich and poor, Prince and Peasant: Which may serve somewhat to alleviate our
burdens, and mitigate our sorrows. Were it so that our case were singular,
that we could truly say, what the Church in her Captivity makes a Question
of, Lam. 1.12. that there were no sorrow like our sorrow, no Cup like our Cup,
that we had no partners in our sufferings, (which was the case of our blessed
Savior here, his Cup was, (as he here calls it) (...), The Cup, such a Cup
as was never given to any other of the sons of men, his sufferings peculiar to
himself, being more then (...), a humane tentation, wherein he had none to bear
him company, He trod the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none
with him, (says the Prophet) Isa. 63. v. 3. which (however intended) may be
(as by many, most of Expositors, it is) applied to the Passion of Christ, which
was singular and peculiar to him) then might we have the more color for our
despondency. But lo here is Company.

Yea and good Company too. Good company in suffering a comfort.
It is not all Company that will ease or comfort a man in his sufferings. It is
no ease to the damned in Hell, that they have so many partners in their
sufferings, as they have. Nor was it any abatement of our Saviors sufferings,
that he should be crucified (as he was) betwixt two thieves. Such company
rather aggravates, then abates the sorrow of sufferings. But good Company is a
comfort. And such company have all Gods Saints in their sufferings, the same
Afflictions are accomplished in their Brethren. And therefore let none faint at
the drinking of this Cup, which is a common one. Christ himself began it, and
all his Saints have, or must pledge him in it, being conformed to his Image, as
in other things, so in his sufferings.

In the Fifth and last place look at the Issue, The issue and frui^s of
sanctified Afflictions.
the fruit of Afflictions. This it is that bears up the spirit of the
Childe-bearing woman in her travel, even the fruit of the Womb, the Issue
which she expects and looks for; which when she is delivered of (as our
Savior tells his Disciples) she no more remembers the anguish, for joy that a
man is born into the world, Joh. 16.21. And this it was which made our blessed
Savior here so willing to drink this Cup, to have his soul made an offering
for sin, even the assurance which he had of seeing his s^ed, of seeing the
travail of his soul (as the Prophet Isai sets it forth) Isa. 53.10, 11. the
blessed fruit and issue of those his sufferings. And like use let all the Lords
people make of the same consideration, for the bearing up of their spirits in
their sufferings. Being sanctified to them they shall see a blessed Issue of
them, they shall reap precious fruit from them, receive great benefit by them.
Upon this account it is that a sick person continues his course of Physic,
taking Cup after Cup, Potion after Potion, he expects and hopes to receive some
good and benefit by them. Afflictions may be bitter, but being sanctified they
are profitable. Though they have a rough stalk (like the Rose-tree) yet they
bring forth pleasant fruit. To go about to show you all these fruits, would be
a long, if not an endless work. Single out some of the princ^pall. Reduced to
two heads.
Which we may reduce to two heads.

They are either in this life,

Or in the life to come.

In this life Afflictions bring forth the fruit of righteousness. In this life
the frut of Righteousness.
So says the Apostle in that Text before made use of, Heb. 12.11. No
chastening for the present seems to be joyous but grievous, nevertheless
afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which
are exercised thereby. This does Chastisement, (...), such Corrections as
wherewith God as a Father is pleased to exercise his Children for their good,
their amendment, (which that word properly signifies) being sanctified,
influenced by the spirit of Grace; now it brings forth this (...), This
peaceable fruit of righteousness, even that Righteousness which brings
peace to the soul. A blessed Fruit, the fruit of righteousness. Did ever Tree
bring forth better fruit then this? It was the highest commendation that the
Devil could invent to give of that Tree of Knowledge, that the fruit of it
would make those that eat it like unto God himself, they should be as Gods,
viz. in Knowledge, knowing good and evil, Genesis 3.5. What he spoke falsely of
that Tree, is true of this, of sanctified Afflictions, they will make men like
unto God, bringing forth this fruit of righteousness and Holiness, which is a
part, yea a chief part of the Image of God; (as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians.
4.24.)

Q. How Affliction brings forth this fruit.
But how does Affliction bring forth this fruit?

A. Why this it does by purging out Corruption, and strengthening of Grace. Even
as it is with Physic, it first evacuates, and purges out those peccant
humors which annoy the Body; and then by the removal of them it strengthens
the natural operations of it. Even thus does sanctified Affliction work upon
the soul.

1. By purging out corruption.
Purging out Corruption, sinful lusts, whatever is contrary to Righteousness.
Hence it is that we find it compared to Fire, and to the Finingpot. Zach. 13.
last, I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
silver is refined, etc. (says the Lord of the remnant of his people.) The
fire, the Fining-pot refine the Metal, taking away the Dross from the Silver
and Gold. Such are Afflictions to Gods people, they lose nothing by them but
their dross, their corruption. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob
be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin, (says the Prophet
Isai, speaking of Gods Chastisements upon his people the Jews) Isa. 27.9. When
he has tried me (says Job) I shall come forth as Gold, Strengthening Grace.
Job 23.10.

2. Corruption being thus in measure purged out, now Grace comes to be
strengthened. So Paul found it in his own experience. In his sufferings, (as he
tells us) he fainted not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man
(says he) is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Thus did he gather strength in
and from his sufferings. However the outward man, his Body, or the natural
man, was thereby weakened and impaired, yet his inward man, his soul, or the
spiritual man, was thereby confirmed and strengthened. And so fares it with
Gods Saints. Like Palm Trees, (to which we find them compared, Psalm. 92.12.
The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree,) the more they are pressed
down the more they spread, and the higher they grow. That which the Poets
fained concerning their Antaeus, that in his wrestling with Hercules he gained
new strength by every fall, is true in them. Nothing contributes more to their
spiritual strength then their temporal weaknesses. Hereby God does (to use
Paul's word, 2 Timothy 1.6.) (...), stir up that heavenly fire of grace in the
hearts of his people; making use of their Afflictions as his Bellows to blow
up those sparks which otherwise were subject to die. Graces strengthened by
exercise in Affliction.
And very useful they are in this way, for the stirring up, and thereby for
the strengthening of every grace in the soul, by setting them awork, exercising
them.

Thus do they strengthen Faith and confidence in God. Paul tells us, Faith.
that he received the sentence of death in himself to this end, that he might
not trust in himself, but in God, who raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. And St.
Peter tells the Saints to whom he writes, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Now for a season
(says he) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial
of your Faith being much more precious then Gold that perishes, though it be
tried with fire, might be found unto praise, honor and glery, at the appearing
of Jesus Christ. Gold is not more advanced by fire, then faith by sufferings.
These are but as shakings to the Plant, which make it root the better, the
deeper and surer. Thus the Christian being shaken by Afflictions, he takes the
firmer hold of Christ, and is rooted more and more in him.

And as Faith so Patience. Patiene.
The trying of your Faith works patience, (says St. James) Jam. 1.3. Upon
which account in the Verse foregoing, he wills Christians to be so far from
fainting under afflictions, that they should rather account them matter of joy,
of great joy. My Brethren account it all joy ((...)) great joy,) when ye fall
into diverse temptations, viz. in regard of the blessed fruits of them, among
which this is one, Patience.

And as Patience, Experience.
so Experience and Hope, which the Apostle joyneth to the former, Romans 5.3.
where he declares how Christians have matter of rejoicing and glorying, as in
their Crown, so in their Cross. We rejoice (says he) in the hope of the glory
of God; And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also. But wherefore in
them? Why, in regard of the blessed Fruit, which being sanctified they bring
forth; Knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope. The first an immediate, the latter mediate Fruits of such
sufferings.

Such is experience, of which a man gets more many times by one days adversity
then by many years of Prosperity, more experience of God and himself. Such was
the fruit of Jobs afflictions, who when God had delivered him out of them,
makes this acknowledgment unto him. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and ashes. Job 42.5.6. Thus that knowledge of his, both of God and
himself, which before was Notionall, was now made experimental.

And such is Hope, Hope.
which is much confirmed and strengthened by this experience. This I recall to
mind, therefore have I hope, (says the Church, speaking of her Afflictions)
Lam. 3.21.

And the like we may say of Humility. Humility.
Nothing more proper and effectual for the producing and increasing of it,
then Affliction. Remembering mine affliction, and my misery, the Wormwood and
the Gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me, (says
the Church there in the Verses foregoing,) Lam. 3.19, 20. This it was that
brought the Prodigal upon his knees to his Father, his being reduced to
extremities, Luke 15.21. Paul's thorn in the flesh was to him a preservative
against inordinate elevation, keeping him that he should not be exalted above
measure, 2 Cor. 12.7.

And as Afflictions humble the heart, The heart enlarged by Afflictions.
so they also enlarge it. As they humble it before God, so also they enlarge it
towards-him, in seeking of him. In their Affliction they will seek me early,
diligently, Hos. 5. last. When nothing would bring Joab into Absaloms presence,
the setting of his Corn on fire does it, 2 Samuel 14.31. When the heart begins to
be estranged from God, Afflictions bring it home again.

And again, Obedience learnt in this School.
nothing more useful for the teaching Christians that great Lesson, Obedience
unto God their heavenly Father. This Lesson did Christ himself learn in this
School. So the Apostle tells us, Heb. 5.8. Alludit ad Proverbium Graecum, Gro^
Annot. in loc.
He learned Obedience by the things which he suffered. (...) were to him (...)
(as the Greek Proverb has it, to which the Apostle may there seem to allude.)
By this means he came to know by experience what Passive Obedience meant. Yea,
and by his lesser sufferings he was prepared for that last and greatest act of
obedience, his Obedience to death. And the same lesson do Christians sooner
learn in this School, then any other. Before I was afflicted, I went actray,
but now have I kept thy word, (says David there) Psalm. 119.67. These and many
other fruits there are of afflictions in this life, all which come under this
general head, the fruit of Righteousness.

In the life to come take we notice of a double fruit. In the life to come
preventting the greatest evil, and procuring the greatest good.
The former, the preventing of the greatest evil, Eternal condemnation. When
we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. The other, the procuring of the greatest good,
even that (...), which the Apostle speaks of in that forecited Text, 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Such shall the recompense be which
Gods Saints shall meet withal in Heaven for all their sufferings upon earth.
For Affliction they shall have glory, for light Affliction a weight of glory,
for momentany affliction an Eternal weight of glory, infinitely exceeding the
weight of all their sufferings here. And this does their Affliction work for
them. (...), It works, or works out, for us, not as a meritorious cause,
deserving any such thing, but as a means preparing for it, and bringing to it.
Thus are Afflictions useful to both these ends, furthering the work of grace
here, they fit us for glory hereafter. Which, with the Apostle, we may take up
and make use of as an Argument to induce us to bear whatever trials God shall
please here to exercise us with. We have had Fathers of our flesh (says he)
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? Heb. 12.9. Live, the life of
grace here, of which he speaks in the Verse following, [ That we might be
partakers of his holiness,] and the life of Glory hereafter. Which while a
Christian has an eye at, it may well keep his heart from fainting. So was it
with our blessed Savior, of whom the Apostle there tells us, verse. 3. of that
Chapter, that For the joy that was set before him he endured the Cross,
despising the shame. And did Christians more think of the one, they would be
less affected with the other; this would keep their hearts from fainting. This
it is which makes the Husbandman so unwearied in all his hard winter labors,
in ploughing and sowing, etc. even the hope which he has of reaping a crop in
the summer, which shall recompense all; And upon the like account let
Christians do the like by their sufferings, being assured of what the Apostle
tells them, Gal. 6.9. In due season we shall reap if we faint not.

Thus you see a gathering of these fruits (some few among many) which
afflictions being sanctified do yield. All which, with the former
considerations are as meat coming out of the eater, and sweetness coming
forth of the strong (as he said of the honey in the Lions belly, Judge. 14.14.)
useful consolations extracted out of Afflictions themselves, serving to bear
up the heart from fainting under them. I see the work swells in my hand, I
shall be as succinct as I may in that which remains.

In the second place to keep the soul from fainting at the drinking of this Cup
look upwards. In drinking this Cup look upwards.
This was David's course in all his troubles, to look upwards, I will lift up
mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help. Psalm. 121.1. To the Hills,
viz. Sion and Moriah, where was Gods dwelling place, his Sanctuary, a figure of
the heavens. Thither will David look in all his distresses. The like do we, in
all our afflictions, look upwards, heavenwards. The reason why the hearts of
Christians so often fail them in the drinking of this Cup, in suffering
afflictions, is, because they look so much downwards; either poring too much
upon the Cup, the Affliction it self, or upon the hand that reaches it, the
Instruments, and secondary causes, or else looking wholly at Creature succors,
which failing, their hearts also fayl. Would we bear up under our sufferings,
look upwards, heavenwards. There shall we find that which we may cast anchor
upon, which may serve to stay our souls in what condition soever. Where

1. At god our Father.
Look we at God our Father. So does our Savior here, (as I have showen you,)
The Cup which my Father has given me, And the like do we. What ever befalls
us still have an eye at God our heavenly Father, staying our hearts upon him,
and comforting our selves in him. So did David in that great straight wherein
he was at Ziglah, when the Philistines in his absence had sacked and burnt the
City, slain the men Inhabitants, and carried away the women and children for
slaves, among whom were both David's Wives, of which we read 1 Samuel 30. A great
straight was this wherein David now was, having nothing left wherein to comfort
himself. His wives, his chiefest earthly comfort, were gone, and his friends
and followers, whom he might have expected comfort from, they were so incensed
and exasperated against him, looking upon him as the chief cause of all their
loss and misery, that they think and speak of stoning him. Now in this straight
whither does David look? Now (says the sixth verse) he comforted or encouraged
himself in the Lord his God.

Being now like one cast into a deep pit, he had no way to look but upwards,
heavenwards; and thither does he look; fixing his eye upon his God, and
comforting himself in him. Though the enemy had carried away his earthly
comforts, yet they had not carried away his God. And this comfort has a
Christian always left him what ever befalls him. As for other things, estate,
good name, liberty, near and dear Relations, yea and life it self, may be taken
away, but so cannot his God. Were it so that Satan or his instruments could so
deal with a Christian as Rachel did by her Father Laban, Genesis 30. or the
Danites did by Micah, Judge. 18. take away their God from them, then might they
well complain, as Micah there does, v. 24. Ye have taken away my Gods which I
made and what have I more? And what is this that ye say unto me, what ayleth
thee? Then might they well look upon their condition as deplorable, and
altogether uncomfortable. But so long as they have God for their God, well may
they comfort and encourage themselves in him. Such is Habacucks resolution in
that known Text. Heb. 3.17.18. Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat. etc, Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation. Though all creature comforts should fail, yet still he would
not only stay himself upon his God, but rejoice in him. And truly there is that
to be found in God, which (being ascertained that he is our God, our Father,
our God by covenant) is abundantly sufficient to bear up the heart in the midst
of what ever distresses. Not to insist here upon those attributes of his, every
of which is of sovereign use this way, His Power, Wisdom, Mercy, and Truth,
etc. Only take we notice of these four particulars, all relating to our
afflictions.

1. His Cognizance of us. 2. His Presence with us. 3. His Compassion toward
us. 4. His Providence over us, each ministering some Comfort to the soul in its
suffering condition. In whom consider.
A word of each.

1. His Cognizance of us, The knowledge which he has as of our persons, so of
our Conditions, The eyes of the Lord are in every place, His Cognizance of us.
beholding the evil, and the good, Prove. 15.3. Such a general Cognizance has
God of al persons and passages, in all places upon earth. But he has a
special Cognizance of his own people; the eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, Psa. 34.15, Upon them that fear him, Ps. 33.18. he takes special
notice of them, as of their persons so of their concernments. The Lord knows
the way of the righteous, Psa. 1.6. Knows how it is with him, what his
condition is. His eye is upon him, as in prosperity, so in adversity, I know
thy works, and tribulation (says he to the Church of Smyrna,) Rev. 69. God
takes special notice of the sufferings of his people. He sees their tears,
putting them into his Bottle, registring them in his Book (as David says)
Psalm. 56.8. And he hears their sighing and groaning. All our desires are
before him, and our groaning is not hid from him, Ps. 38.9. Be our griefs never
so secret as to others, they are not so to him. The world it may be knows not
where our shoe pincheth us, but our God does. Thou have known my soul in
adversities (says David) Psalm. 31.7. His presence with us.
Others may take notice of the ailements of our Bodies, but God of our souls.

2. His presence with us, God does not stand afar off from his people in their
sufferings, as David's friends did to him. My lovers and my friends stand aloof
from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off, Psalm. 38.11. They would not own
him in his distress. But God, as he takes notice of the afflictions of his
people, so he is nigh unto them. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a
broken heart, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh unto them that call upon him. Psalm.
145.18. Present with them. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble. Psalm. 46.1. And what an encouragement is this? So it was to David,
who upon this ground resolves not to fear whatever evils should encounter him.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil. How so? For thou Lord art with me, Psalm. 23.4. Such a true friend is God
to his people. False friends are like Swallows, which are with us in the
summer, but in winter they are gone. Paul complains when he was to answer for
his life, No man stood with him, but all men for sooke him, 2. Tim. 4.16. I,
but then (says he) the Lord stood with me; v. 15. Thus does God stand by his
people in all their distresses. When thou passest through the waters I will be
with thee, Isai. 43.2.

Q. How God said to stand afar off from his people.
But does not God sometimes stand afar off from his people in their troubles?

A. Yes, in their sense and apprehension he may, not showing himself to them,
hiding himself from them. Of this David complains, Psalm. 10.1. Why stand
thou afar off, O Lord, why hidest thou thy self in times of trouble? God does
not always ways show himself unto his people, yet he is still present with
them. Behold he stands behind our Wall, (says the Church of her
well-beloved) Cant. 2.9. Thus where sense does not apprehend Gods presence, yet
Faith may. In truth God is never far off from his people. Though they see him
not, yet is he with them. The Lord is with you, whilst you are with him, and
if ye seek him, he will be found of you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

3. compassion toward us. Afflictions do not abate Gods affection toward his
people, His Affection toward us.
but rather increase it. The sickness of the Child stirs up bowels of
compassion in the natural Parent. God is never more affectionate toward his
people then when they are in a suffering condition. Now he pitieth them. Like
as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Psalm.
103.13. Now his soul is grieved for them, His soul was grieved for the misery
of Israel, Judge. 10.16. He even sympathizeth with them. In all their
Afflictions he was afflicted, Isa. 63.9. My Bowels are troubled for Ephraim,
Jer. 31.20. Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together,
Hos. 11.8. All Anthropopathies expressions of humane affection, setting forth
the truth and greatness of Gods affection to his people in their distresses,
which be they what they will, yet (as the Apostle assures us) they shall not,
they cannot separate the true Believer from the love of God in Christ, Romans
8.35.39.

4. Providence over us. As God is truly affectionate toward his people in
their afflictions, His Providence over us.
so he expresses that affection by exercising of a gracious Providence toward
and upon them. God is not present with his people in their afflictions as Jobs
Friends are said at their first coming to have been with him; who however they
were much affected with his condition, at their first sight of him, they lifted
up their voice and wept, and they rent every one his Mantle, and sprinkled dust
upon their heads toward heaven, (as we have it) Job 2.12. Yet (as it there
follows in the next Verse) They sat down with him upon the ground seven
days and seven nights, and none spoke a word unto him; not ministering any
comfort unto him. So is it not with God, God active in the sufferings of his
people.
he is not a bare spectator in the sufferings of his people, but active in
them, ready to speak to them and do for them, and that for their comfort.

1. speak to them if they will lend an ear to him, to speak comfortable words,
Ready to speak to them.
to speak peace to them. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will
speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints, (says David) Psalm. 85.8.
Outward peace, when they are fit for it, giving out the word for their
deliverance; however inward peace, quieting their Consciences with the
apprehensions of his love and favor in Christ.

2. And thus speaking to them he doteth for them, Acting for them.
his gracious providence toward them, which he does in diverse acts of it. As

1. Ordering their afflictions, which he does, as for the kind, so for the
measure. Giving to his children no Cups but what he sees fit and proper for
them. And dispensing them (as you have heard) by measure. Proportioning the
Affliction to their strength. God will not lay more upon man then is meet
(says Elihu) that he should enter into judgment with God, have any just cause
to complain of him, Job 34.23. God is faithful (says the Apostle) who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thus he
proportions affliction to the strength of his people.

2. Supporting them under them.
And (secondly) he comfort them in their sufferings. Blessed be God who
comfort us in all our Tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.4. Supplying strength to the
inward man. When Paul was brought before Nero, and all men forsook him, then
(as he tells us) the Lord stood by him, and strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4.17.

3. Turning them to good. Like as the skill of the Physician turns Poisons
into Medicines, Turning then to Good.
making a sovereign Treacle of the venomous Viper. Thus does God bring good out
of evil. Joseph's Brethren thought and wrought evil against him, but God
turned it to good, good to him, and others, Genesis 50.20.

4. And (lastly) giving a seasonable issue and deliverance. Working deliverance.
He will with the temptation make a way to escape, (says the Apostle) 1 Cor.
10.13. (...), he will give an issue, find out an outlet for them one way or
other: When Gods people are beset on every side, yet he can find a door, or a
window to let them out at. As in a literal sense he did for David, when his
house was beset by Saul's Messengers, 1 Samuel 19.12. and so for Paul, when wait
was laid for him at Damascus, 2 Cor. 11. last, they were both let down through
a window, and escaped. So in a Metaphorical sense, be the strait never so
great, yet God has a Window for his people, at which he can, and in his time
will, let them out, working deliverance for them some way or other. Such is the
Providence of God, which he exercises toward and upon his people in their
sufferings; Ordering of them, he supplyeth strength for the bearing of them,
turns them to good, and gives a seasonable Issue out of them. All these,
besides many other, Consolations may the true Believer fetch from the God of
consolation, for the bearing up of his spirit in the midst of whatever
afflictions.

In the next place look we up unto Christ our Savior. In him considering what
he has done, Look unto Christ our Savior. In whom Consider.
what he does for us.

1. What he has done, how (among other things which he has obtained for us by
his death) he has overcome the World for us. What he has done for us,
overcomming the World.
That is the Consolation which he himself gives unto his Disciples, Joh. 16.
last. In the World ye shall have tribulation, but be of good comfort I have
overcome the World. This has Christ done for his Church and people, he has
overcome whatever is in this world which might be hurtful unto them, Sin,
Satan, his Temptations and Instruments, Death, with all its retinue, whatever
might hinder or endanger their salvation, he has conquered all, which he did
for those who believe on him, that they may have the benefit thereof: So that,
as Serpents which have lost their Stings, they may now hiss, but they cannot
hurt. Christ by drinking of this Cup (as you have heard) has taken away the
bitterness of it, the Curse belonging to afflictions, he being made a Curse
for us.

2. What he does. How he sympathizeth with us, and pleads for us.

1. He sympathizeth, and even suffers with us, Head in the natural Body is)
sonsible of all the aylments of his Members. What he does Sympathizing with us.
We have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, Heb. 4.15. (...), cannot sympathize with us in our afflictions and
sufferings, which he takes notice of, and is affected with; (as before was
shown.) Pleading for us.


2. And sympathizing with us he pleads for us. Sitting in heaven at the right
hand of his Father he makes continual intercession for us, He ever lives to
make intercession for those who come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. By which means
he makes peace for them in Heaven, whilst there is war upon earth,
reconciling God to them when he seems to be offended with them. This was his
work when he was upon earth, He made peace through the blood of his Cross, Col.
1.20. impetrating that Reconciliation for his Elect people, which upon their
believing on him is actually applied to them (as the next verse there has it.)
And this work he still carries on being in Heaven, where he makes peace by
his Intercession. A sweet and comfortable meditation, as at all times, so
specially in time of Affliction when God seems to be angry with his people,
frowns upon them, lets fly the showers of his displeasure at them, yet then
let them with Stephen lift up their eyes to to heaven, and there shall they see
this their High Priest the Lord Jesus sitting at the right hand of his Father,
soliciting a peace for them; which being concluded in Heaven, let them not be
inordinately troubled about whatever wars they meet with upon earth.

And in the third place look we at the Holy Ghost our Comforter. Look (...) the
Holy G^^^st our Savior.
So we find him often styled in Scripture, a comforter, the comforter, and this
comforter Gods people have still with them. That is the promise which our
Savior makes to his Disciples, when he was to withdraw his Corporal presence
from them, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father (says he) and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. And this promise will
he make good to all who truly believe on him. When he withdrawes outward
Comforts from them, let them but wait patiently for him, and he will send them
another Comforter, even his Spirit which shall make a supply to them inwardly
of what they want outwardly, that shall refresh and cheer up their hearts and
spirits with inward Consolations in the midst of all their afflictions. And
never so fit a time for this Comforter to come, as when all others Comforters
have left a man. And if this Comforter be with us to support our spirits, and
strengthen our hearts, what is it that should so discourage us as to cause us
to faint under our sufferings?

To these sovereign Consolations I might yet (^x abundanti) add many more; The
Minstery of Angels.
As the Ministry of Angels, who are as Guardians to Gods Saints. Are they not
all ministering spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation? Heb. 1. Last. So they were to our blessed Savior in the
Wilderness, he there wanting food and other accommodations, The Angels came
and ministered unto him. Matthew. 4.11. And so were they to Peter and other of the
Apostles, opening the Prison doors for them, and setting them at liberty, (as
we have the stories recorded) Act. 5.19 and 12.7 And the like offices they are
ready to do to all Gods Saints (many of which questionless they daily do,
though in invisible ways, so as they are not taken notice of) being ever at
hand, ready to step in to them with timely succors in their greatest straits.

To which might be added (what is not to be slighted) the Communion of Saints,
The Communion of Saints.
who as they bear a part with their brethren in their sufferings, drawing with
them in the same Yoke, so they are ready to help them with the benefit of their
prayers. Which being a common stock, every particular believer has a share in
it.

But I will not charge your memories any further, presuming that what has been
already said may be sufficient. Only let me desire you to lay up these
particulars, and keep them in safe custody, that as occasion is you may have
them at hand to make use of. In the drinking of loathsome and distastefull
potions sick persons will have a Rosate, or Manus Christi, some sweet thing or
other to put after them. In like manner when ever God shall please to present
to any of us any of these bitter Cups to drink, presently make we use of some
of these, or the like Consolations, for the sweetning of our mouths, and
strengthening of our hearts, that so we may be kept, as from loathing of them,
so from fainting at them.

And thus have I dispatched what I propounded by way of Caveat, directing you
how you may and ought to shun and avoid those three Rocks, upon which
Christians in their sufferings are in danger of making shipwreck, viz.
Despizing of Gods Chastisements, Murmuring at them, Fainting under them.

What then remains, The positive part of the exhortation.
but that we submit hereunto? suffering the Will of God, and that in such a
manner as was propounded, Patiently, Obediently, Willingly. There is the
Positive part of the Exhortation, which I shall dispatch with what brevity
conveniently may be. Thus did our heavenly Pattern, the Lord Jesus. he submitted
to the will of his Father in drinking of this bitter Cup, and this he did
Patiently, Obediently, Willingly, Christians to suffer as Christ suffered.
And herein follow we his steps, so suffering as he suffered.

1. Patiently. So did he suffer. He was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter,
etc, Isai. 53.7. Patiently.
The sheep being driven by the Butcher goes as quietly to the shambles, or
slaughter house, as to the field or fold, where it was wont to feed, or lodge.
And thus did this Lamb of God, the Lord Jesus here go to his passion, quietly
and patiently, suffering whatever the Officers, or Soldiers, or High Priests,
or any other of the people did unto him. And thus do we suffer what Afflictions
and Trials here we shall meet with, Patiently. A thing which in Scripture we
are frequently put in mind of. Be ye patient Brethren, (says Saint James) Jam.
5.7. Which in the next verse he repeats and inculcates, Beye also patient, v.
8. (...) Longanimi estote. Be long patient, or suffer with long patience (as
the Margin explaines the word.) Be patient in Tribulation (says Paul) Romans
12.12. (...), sustinentes, enduring it. So the same word is elsewhere rendered,
Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, Jam. 1.12. (...), a word
compounded of (...) and (...), properly signyfying to abide, or stand under
some weight or burden, as the Ports does under his load. And thus do we bear
those burdens which God our heavenly Father shall please to lay upon us, stand
and abide under them neither shrinking, nor sinking, neither shrinking from
them, nor sinking under them, both which are comprehended under that word.

1. Not shrinking from their sufferings.
Not shrinking from them, not withdrawing our shoulders. This is one thing
which the Levites in their Confession make acknowledgment of against the Jews,
Neh. 9.29. They withdrew the shoulder. A metaphor taken from the Ox, or Horse,
which withdraws the neck or shoulder from the Yoke or Collar. Thus did they
withdraw from the Law of their God, shrinking from their duty, not yiedling
obedience to him in doing what he commanded. What they did in respect of their
Active, take heed that we do not the like as to our Passive Obedience. What
Yokes God shall please to put upon us, what Burdens he shall lay upon us,
withdraw not our necks, our shouldiers from them, do not go about to put them
from us by the use of any indirect or unwarrantable means. But submit with
Patience, being contented to bear so much, and so long, as God shall think fit
to lay on. Thus see that Patience have her perfect work, (as Saint James
exhortes, Jam. 1.4. (...), holding out to the end. Not shrinking.

2. Not sinking under them.
And not shrinking from them sink not under them, Not giving way to
despondencies and faintings, but in our patience possess we our souls (as our
Savior advises his Disciples, Luke. 21.19. Laboring to take out that Lesson
which the Apostle says he had learned, In whatsoever state we are, therewith
to be contented, Phil. 4.11. So exercising our Patience in bearing of whatever
afflictions God shall please to lay upon us.

To excite and provoke whereunto let me first set before you some paternes,
Paternes of patience.
Paternes of patience which invite us to the imitation of them. Of these we
shall find some.

1. Among bruit Creatures.
Among the bruit Creatures, As in the Lamb and the Sheep (of which I spoke
even now) which are Emblems of Patience. How patiently, how quietly do these
poor innocent creatures submit, not only to the shearers, but to the knife,
parting not only with their fleece, but with their blood, when ever their owner
calls for it? And shall not we do the like to our God? Upon this account, (among
other) it is, that our blessed Savior calls his Disciples by the name of Sheep,
rather then of any other Creature. The Sheep as it is an innocent and harmless,
so a patient Creature, not harming others, but suffering harms from them. And
herein are Christians to be like unto them.

2. Look a little higher, to mere Civil men, Nature in them, Mere Civil men.
noe light but that of Reason to guide themselves by, yet among them how many
are to be found exemplarie in this kind, eminent for their Patience, and that
under great sufferings? Such were Seneca and Socrates, and diverse other among
the Heathen, whom Histories commend unto us upon this account. And such in all
places we may meet with some, who whatever befalls yet possess their souls with
patience, not being inordinately affected with what ever changes. Now what
reason teaches them, shall not Religion teach us, (as I said before?)

3. From them rise a step higher, to Gods Saints. Gods Saints.
Among whom we find some propounded to us for Paternes in this kind. Take my
Brethren the Prophets (says St James) who have spoken in the name of the Lord,
for an Ensample of suffering affliction, and of patience, Jam. 5.10. In
particular, ye have heard of the patience of Job, (says the next verse.) And
such Examples we have heard of, and daily see many, the Martyrs of Christ, and
other Saints of God, who with admirable patience have drunk these bitter Cups,
which have been given to them. Look we on them.

4. Captain of our salvation, Christ himself
the Lord Jesus. So the Apostle directs us, Heb. 12.12. Loaking unto Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him
endured the Cross, etc. And again in the verse following, Consider him that
endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and
faint in your minds; v. 3. Thus did he endure and suffer, Patiently. Which he
did (as for other ends, so) to set us an example, that we should follow his
steps, (as St Peter tells us) 1 Pet. 2.21. Which let it be our endeavor to do.

To promote which work lay we to heart these few Considerations, Consideration
promoting his Duty.
some Moral, others Divine.

1. Morak, such as Reason will furnish us with. Such are those obvious and
usual ones, Moral.
which may be useful in this way.

1. The evil of impatiency. Magnum malum, non posse far malum, The evil of
impaiience. Seneca.
(says the Moralist.) Impatiencie in suffering of evils is a great evil; no
ways easing or helping, but aggravating or increasing our sufferings: what
gets the bird by fluttering or struggling with the snare, or limetwig? or the
fish by striving with the hook? Hereby they are more entangled; the more they
strive the worse they are. And so is the Christian under Affliction, his
condition is made much worse by impatience, by striving and struggling under the
hand of God. Hereby those evils which before were only external, reaching to
the outward man, become Internal, entering through into the soul, Even as the
fish by struggling brings the hook into the bowels, which before was only in
the Jaws. Great is the evil of Impatience.

2. great is the benefit and advantage of patience. Hereby. The benefit of
patience.


1. A heavy burden is made the lighter. Levius fit patientia, etc. Whereas
impatience adds to the burden, patience detracts from it. Both which Reason and
experience will tell us.

2. To which ad, hereby a man comes to possess and enjoy himself, the best
part of himself, his soul. Patience keeps possession of the soul.
In your patience possess ye your souls (says our Savior in that text even
now cited,) Luke. 21.19. (...). Impatience does (as it were) dispossess a man
of his soul, so as he has not the right use of the faculties thereof,
understanding, Judgment, Will, Affections. Patience keeps him in posession of
it, so as whatever other enjoyments he is deprived of, yet still he enjoys,
what is better then all, himself. These are Moral Considerations, such as
reason suggesteth. Of which I give you but a taste.

2. To these add we those of a higher strain, Divine, such as Scripture holds
forth. Which wills us to consider.

1. How patient God is toward us, Divine Considerations.
The Lord is long suffering to us ward. 2 Pet. 3.9. Bearing much from us, G^ds
patience toward us.
Behold I am pressed under you as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves (so
the Lord complains against his people Israel) Jam. 2.13. Such is every sin
unto God, as a sheafe to the Cart, being contrary to his Nature, it is a burden
to him. Yet he bears with us, nay daily loadeth us with his benefits (as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 68.19.) Who load him with our daily provocations. And
shall not we bear a little from him, who bears so much from us?

2. His moderation in correcting.
In case his anger does break forth against us, so as he does correct us, yet
it is not according to our deserts. He has not dealt with us after our sins,
nor rewarded us according to our iniquities, Psalm. 103.10. Be our suffering
what it will, yet it answers not our demerits. Know thou (says Zophar to Job)
that God exacteth of thee less then thine iniquity deserves, Job 11.6. And
thus may it truly be said to every of us. However God is pleased to deal with
us, yet are our sufferings no ways proportionable to our sins. That is the
acknowledgement which Ezra makes in the name of the Jews, Ezra 9.13. Thou our
God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve. However the Judgments
which had been inflicted upon them were great, the Sword, Captivity, and Spoil,
(as the 7 Verse there has it) yet were they no ways answerable to what they
had deserved. And the like must every of us acknowledge, whatever our condition
be, yet our sufferings fall infinitely below our sins. And shall we not then
bear the hand of the Lord which he lays so favorably on us?

3. our profit: His correcting us, for our Profit.
So the Apostle lays it down, assigning this as a difference betwixt Gods
dealing with his Children, and some earthly Parents with theirs, Heb. 12.10.
They verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for
our profit. (...). Now with what patience do Patients submit themselves to the
hand of the Surgeon, to have their Ulcers launced and fearched, yea and if need
be, to have a Member cut off, whilst it is for their good, the saving of their
lives. And shall not we in like manner submit to the hand of our heavenly
Father, whilst whatever he does to us, is for our benefit, for the saving of
our souls?

4. Duty, Patience in Affliction a duty require
which God requires at our hands. Be ye also patient. Jam. 5.8. In patience
possess ye your souls. Luke 21.19. (as we heard before.)

5. And requiring it of us, accepts and approves it in us. I know thy works,
and thy labor, Approved.
and thy patience, (says the Lord to the Church of Ephesus) Rev. 2.2. And the
like to the Church of Thyatira, v. 19. I know thy works and Charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience. As God takes notice of other graces and
duties in his people, so of their Patience; which he knows, and that with a
knowledge of approbation, approving and accepting it (as that word there, and
often elsewhere, signifies.)

6. And accepting it he will reward it, deliverance, Rewarded,
so with an ample reward here, or hereafter. The Cross being patiently born
shall have a Crown set upon the head of it: Upon which account St. James
pronounces the patient man a blessed man. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation, (that indureth it patiently) for when he is tried, he shall receive
the Crown of life. Jam. 1.12. Such is the reward of Patience.

Only see that it be Christian patience. Caution. See that it be true Christian
Patience.
There is a Patience, (as I have shown you) which is either Stoicall, or merely
Moral. Such was the Patience of those Heathens which I spoke of. And such is
the patience of mere Civil men, who bear what they cannot help, upon the
grounds aforesaid, merely out of the Principles of Reason. See we that our
Patience exceed theirs. What our Savior said to the Jews concerning the
Righteousness of she Scribes and Pharisees, Man. 5.20. Except your
righteousness exceed theirs, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. I may say the like concerning the Patience of mere Marall, Civil men:
Except our Patience exceed theirs, it shall never find such acceptance with
God, so as to obtain the promised reward. See we that ours be true Christian
patience.

Q. But wherein does Christian patience exceed theirs?

A. Wherein Christian Patience differs from moral.
Why, as in some other particulars, so principally in these two.

It is Obedientiall,

And Voluntary.

Thus does the true Christian suffer, obediently, and willingly, which the
Morallist does not. And thus see that we suffer, when God calls us to it.
Which are the two other branches of this part of the Exhortation yet behind.
Of which briefly.

Suffering Patiently, Obediently, in obedience unto God. Christians to suffer
Obediently.
So did not those Heathens, which knew not God: No more do mere Civil men, who
regard him not. But thus let us suffer. So did our heavenly pattern here, the
Lord Jesus. What he suffered, it was in obedience to his Father. The Cup which
my Father has given me.] He humbled himself, and became obedient, Phil. 2.8.
He learned obedience by the things which he suffered, H^b. 5.8. This was the
principle which carried him on to, and through that work. And so let it be with
us; whatever we suffer, looking upon it as a Cup coming from the hand of our
heavenly Father, drink it in obedience to him. Thus are Christians to perform
all duties, both to God and Man, As obedient Children; (as St. Peter has it) 1
Pet. 1.14. (...) as Children of Obedience, doing what they do in an
obedientiall way to God their Father. And thus also are they to suffer, so
approving themselves the children of God, as by their Active, so by their
Passive Obedience.

And suffering obediently suffer also willingly. Willingly.
So also did our blessed Savior suffer (as you have heard.) The Cup which my
Father has given me, shall I not drink it? He drinks this his Cup, as
patiently and obediently, so willingly. And so, drink we these Cups, which God
our heavenly Father gives unto us, thus suffer we those afflictions which his
Providence lays out for us, not only patiently and obediently, but willingly.
Herein again true Christian patience differs from that of the mere Moral,
Civil man; whose patience is patience per force, he suffers what he cannot
help. This being the Principle which he goes upon, Feras, non culpes, quod
vitari non potest, Sense.
What you cannot shift, rather hear then quarrel with, (as that great Moralist
has it.) But such patience, how commendable soever it may be with Man, it is
not so with God, who accepts no service but what is willingly performed. That
which St. Peter requires of Ministers in special, that they should do their
work, their Ministerial service, feeding the flock of God, not by constraint,
but willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2. (...) God requires it generally at the hands of all
his; people whatever service we do unto him, do it not by constraint, but
willingly. And so in our sufferings, be we willing to submit to his will. This
is their Reasonable service which St. Paul calls for, Romans 12.1. I beseech you
brethren by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. (...); a service not
like that of the unreasonable creatures under the Law (as Theodoret and
Erasmus, and some other Expositors interpret those words, and that truly,
though not fully.) Those bruit Creatures, Sheep and Oxen, etc. they came to the
Altar, but they were either drawn or driven thither. And there they suffered
the sacrificing Knife to be put to their throats, but they were first tied and
bound. Bind the Sacrifice with Cords even unto the horns of the Altar. Psalm.
118.27. Now in opposition to this, the Christians sacrifice must be a
reasonable service. As his Active, so his Passive Obedience, must be not
constrained and compelled, but willing. Which if it be not, he cannot expect
his reward. If I do these things willingly, I have a reward, (says Paul
speaking of his Ministerial service) but if against my will this dispensation
is committed unto me, what is my reward then? 1 Cor. 9.17, 18. And what he
says of his acting, Two questions resolved.
a Christian may say the like of his suffering, submitting willingly to the
hand of God, he may expect a reward, Whether, Christians may not pray against
sufferings.


Q. But what then (it may be said) may not a Christian pray against these
evils? And may he not use means to be freed and delivered from them?

A.

1. Pray against evils, Temptations, Trials, This they may do.
we may. For this we have our Saviors practice to warrant us, who in the
Garden (as you have heard) thrice put up this Request. O my Father, if it be
possible let this Cup pass from me. Which also he had done before, Joh. 12.27.
Father save me from this hour. And what himself there did, he has taught us to
do the like, putting in this for one of those six Petitions in that his form
and pattern of Prayer which he has left us, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. This a Christian may do, pray against temptations,
Evils, as of Sin, so of punishment, that he may be either kept from them, or
delivered out of them.

But take it with this Proviso, this Caution, Not Absolutely, but conditionally.
It must be not Absolutely, but Conditionally, with submission to the will of
God. So we find it in our Pattern. Christ prays that this Cup might pass
from him, but his request herein is not Absolute but Conditional. If it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me, Math. 26.39. (...). If possible, not
simply and absolutely so, for so all things are possible with God, (which he
elsewhere takes notice of, Matthew. 19.26. Mark 14.36.) but if it were
consistent with Gods decree, Si tua decreta ferunt ut alio modo tuae gloriae
and homirum saluti aeque consulatur. Grot. Annor. ad loc.
and might not be prejudicial to his Glory, or the salvation of his Church and
people (as Grotius well explains it.) Or, if it might stand with the will of
God his Father: So he there explains himself, where to the aforesaid Petition
he subjoyns this Retraction, or rather Limitation, Nevertheless not as I will
but as thou will. Matthew. 26.39. Which he again insists upon, v. 42. O my
Father, if this Cup may not pass from me except I drink it thy will be done.
Thus does he resolve his will into the will of his heavenly Father. And the
like are we to do, However we may desire freedom from these evils which lie
upon us, or threaten us, and may pray against them, yet let it be with
submission of our wills to the will of our heavenly Father. Which in all our
petitions and requests is still either to be expressed, or implied. So much our
Savior teaches us in that form of prayer which he has set us; where he
directs us before we pray for any blessings for our selves, first to desire
that the will of God may be done Thy will be done. This are we to pray for
Absolutely resolving all our requests into it. Which whilst we do we may pray
against Evils incumbent or impendent, felt or feared.

A 2. And so also use means to be preserved, or delivered from them. Law which
says unto us, Whether they may use means for preventing, or removing them.
Thou shall not kill, does therein require us to use means for the preserving
and maintaining of Life and Livelihood, Neither does our Saviors practice here
in the text make any thing to the contrary. This they both may and ought so do.
but this he did as being acquainted with the Council and purpose of God
concerning himself. Being of Counsel with his Father, of his privy Council,
he took notice what was decreed in heaven, and was now to be executed upon
earth. He knew that his bour was come (as St John has it, Job. 13.1. and he
himself tells his Disciples, Matthew. 26.45. Mark, 14.41.) the time precisly
determined by his Father wherein he was to be offered up And thereupon it was
that he resused al means of rescue. And the like might we do, yea ought to do,
were we in like manner acquainted with Gods secret will, as he was. (...)
But this being hidden from us, we must walk by the Rule of his revealed will,
which not only permits and allows, but requires and commands, that we should
make use of means for the diverting or removing of evils present, or imminent.

Only here again take we a Proviso, or two. With these Provisoes.


1. Provided that these means (as I said before) be lawful means Ahaziah in
his sickness, Physicians or Surgeons he pleased, That they be lawful.
but that he should send to Baalz^bub the God of Ekron, to ask Counsel of
that Idol: this was his sin, which proved fatal to him, Therefore thou shall
not come down from that bed on which thou art going up, but shall surely die
(so the Prophet Eliah sends him his doom.) 2. King. 1.2.6. And never let them
look for a better issue, who in cases of sickness, or any other distress
shall consult with Satan, or his Instruments, with witches, or wizards, or make
use of spells or Charms, or any other unwarrantable means.

2. Used lawfully.


1 Not being sought to alone. Asahs sin) In his disease he sought not to the
Lord, Not sought to alone.
but to the Physician, 2. Chron. 16.12. Whilst we use means see that we take
God along with them, who must either bless, or blaste.

2. Nor yet sought to in the first place. Not in the first place.
to seek to him in the first place. And this do we, as in all our undertakings
and businesses, so in seeking deliverance from any evil, make our first
address unto God, begging from him that he would direct to the use of means.

3. trust not in them, Thus David used his sword and his Bow, Not tr^sted in.
but not trusting in them. I will not trust in my Bow, neither shall my sword
save me, Psalm. 44.6. This honor he gave to his God, whom he made his sole
trust, and confidence, (as he often tells us.) Thus look at Means we may, but
neither in the first, nor yet in the last place. Make we God our Alpha, and
Omega, our first and last.

First seeking to him to direct unto means, and then seeking to him to bless
those means. Thus look at means, but not so as to terminate our light in
them. Look through them, look beyond them, resting only upon him whose word of
command must make them effectual to us for good. But of this heretofore.

With these Cautions a Christian may use means for the diverting of evils,
Still Gods will to be submitted to.
and in obedience to God he is to make use of them, when providence offers
them. Yet still so as in the use of them he so submits his will to Gods will,
as to be willing with what he wills.

And thus let every of us endeavor, in imitation of this our blessed Pattern,
to submit to the drinking of whatever Cups shall be given to us, to suffer what
afflictions and trials God shall please to exercise us with, as not despising
of them, so not murmuring at them, nor fainting under them, but submitting to
them, Patiently, Obediently, Willingly.

Here is the General Lesson, which all Christ's Disciples are to learn, and
practice. Which I might now prosecute in particulars, by showing you the
several Cups which God gives to his people, the sundry sorts of Afflictions
wherewith he is pleased to exercise them; As sufferings in their estates by
losses and Crosses; in their good names by reproaches and ignominies; in their
Relations, by parting with near and dear friends, Parents, Husband, Wife,
Children; in their Bodies, by sickness and weakness. As also how they ought to
submit to God in every of these, and upon what grounds they are to do it. But
this I foresee would be a long work. And I conceive that those Generals which
have been already held forth are fitly applicable to every of these, or
whatever other Particular cases. And therefore shall I not enter into that so
large a field.

Only looking into this Cup which our blessed Savior was now to drink, Two
bitter ingredients in our Saviors Cup. His suffering in soul and suffering of
death.
I find in the bottom of it two most bitter Ingredients, which were the two
chiefest parts of his suffering, viz. His suffering in soul, and his suffering
of Death. Other things there were which he also suffered; As that Reproach and
Contempt which was cast upon him. He endured the Contradictions of Sinners.
Heb, 12.3. He was reviled, 1. Pet. 2.23. He was set at naught (as he himself
foretold it) Mark 9.12. (...), slighted, as nothing worth. So he was, as by
the chief Priests and Rulers, so by the vulgar, who preferred Barrabas before
him, Not this man but Barrabas, now Barrabas (says the Text) was a Robber,
Joh, 18.41. Thus was he despised and rejected of men (as the Prophet Isai
foretold it,) Isai. 53.3. Made a scorn and laughing stock, having a scarlet (or
Purple) Robe put upon him, a Rod put into his hand instead of a Scepter, a
Crown of Thorns set upon his head instead of a Crown of Gold, (as the story
sets it forth, Mat. 27. v. 28.29.) all to make him a scorn to the people, who
in defiance spit upon him (as it there follows.) Thus did he suffer in his
Name, And so in his Body, being buffe^ed and caned, (as we find it, Matthew. 26,
67. and 27.30,) as also scourged, v. 26. Now all these were ingredients in this
Cup, parts of his suffering. But the two principals, which made this his Cup so
exceedingly bitter, were these, his suffering in Soul, and his suffering of
death. Yet does he thus submit to both these.

And the like are Christians to do if ever God shall call them to the like
trials. Christians to imitate him in suffering of both.
The latter of which they are all sure to meet with, what man lives and shall
not see death? Psalm. 89.48. And for the former none are sure of being exempted
from it.

Now as to these two particulars, being of so great importance, and having so
just an occasion offered from the Text, give me leave to speak to them
severally. Begin with the former.

Suffering in Soul. Savior suffer, Suffering in Soul.
not only in the outward man, but also in the inward, not only in his Body, but
in his Soul. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, Isai. 53.10.
that is, the whole person of Christ, not bis body only; but his soul also,
which suffered in this his passion. And that not only by way of Sympathy, and
fellow feeling with the Body (as Socinions would have it,) but immediately. As
man afflicted the one, so did God the other. It pleased the Lord to bruise him,
he has put him to grief. (says the Prophet in the text last named,)
Afflicting him as in his Body, so in his Soul, Which he did by inflicting on
him a double Punishment, such as the damned in Hell lie under, a Punishment of
Loss, and a Punishment of Sense. Of Loss hiding and withdrawing himself from
him, as to his sense and feeling. Which he did fully upon the Cross, where
being left under a cloud of spiritual desertion, he cries out in the anguish
of his soul, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Of sense pouring a
vial of wrath into his soul, such as was due unto those sins which he had
undertaken. So as now even The sorrows of Hell compassed him about (as David in
another sense speaks of himself, Psalm. 18.8.) This Cup did he drink upon the
Cross, a Cup of divine wrath. Which he had before tasted of, even here in the
Garden. Where we find him in a strange and unparrallelled agony, sweating as
it were drops of blood, falling to the ground, (as before we heard.) And what
could it be that should thus affect his Body, but the anguish of his soul then
conflicting with the apprehension of that wrath which he was now to feel, the
wrath of God due unto sinners, in whose room he was now to stand as a surety
and Redeemer? Thus were these waters even come into his soul (as David in a
different sense speaks it of himself, Psalm. 69.1.) And that (as I said) in an
Immediate way. Hence is it that he complains unto his Disciples, that his soul
was exceeding sorrowful, Matthew. 26.38 (...), beset and surrounded with grief
and anguish. And St Mark reporting the same story, tells us, that he began to be
sore amazed, and very heavy, Mark. 14.33. (...), Expavescere and gravissime
ang^, to be in great horror, and anguish. Now what could it be that should
thus affect him? surely not barely the apprehension of those Corporal
punishments which he was to suffer. This were a thing very dishonorable to
imagine, that whereas many of the Martyrs have gone triumphing to the stake or
gibbet, going singing to the enduring of far greater torments, more cruel
deaths then this was, that he who was their Leader, the Captain of their
salvation, should fall so far below them in resolution and courage, as thus to
tremble at the thought of his Cross. Surely there was somewhat more in this
Cup, which made it so bitter to him. And what should that be, But his suffering
in soul? And yet see how, having recollected his spirits, he here submits to
the drinking of this Cup, the suffering whatever his Father should please to
inflict upon him. The Cup which my Father has given me shall I not drink it?

And thus are Gods Children to submit to the will of their heavenly Father, if
he shall call them to the tasting of this Cup. The tasting of it (I say) As for
the drinking it off, that they never shall. Christ having drunk off this Cup,
has freed those who are his from drinking in the like way that he did. They
being justified by his blood shall be saved from wrath through him. Romans 5.9.
This Cup is reserved for wicked and ungodly men, who being Children of
disobedience, are also Children of wrath (as the Apostle calls them, Ephesians.
2.23.) having wrath for their Portion, The wrath of God comes upon the
Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. This shall be the portion of their Cup,
which they shall drink, and drink it off, even wringing out the dregs thereof.
But so shall not those that are Christ's. They being Gods Children, and Children
by Grace, the Grace of Adoption, they are freed and delivered from wrath. Yet
not so, but that they also may taste of this Cup, which sometimes some of them
do. Even the best of Saints being subject to spiritual desertions, soul
sufferings; wherein God hiding his face, withholding from them the sweet sense
and feeling of his love and favor, writes bitter things against them, setting
their sins in order before them, and letting some drops of his wrath (as it
were) fall upon their souls, filling them with inward horror and terror. A
bitter Cup, of all Cups the bitterest, of all trials the sharpest. There being
two things principally which make it so.

1. Because it seizes immediately upon the soul, Suffering in soul the
greatest suffering.
upon the spirit. Those wounds in the body which come nearest the heart are
looked upon as most deadly. It seizes upon the spirit.
The Sword reaches unto the Soul, (says Jeremy) Jer. 4.10. It is bitter,
because it reaches unto thine heart, (says the 18. v. there, explaining the
former.) And so does this Trial, it seizes upon the soul, and that
immediately. As Hectic Fevers, and some other diseases in the body, which
seize more immediately upon the spirits, and in that regard are more deadly: So
does this Trial seize immediately upon the soul, and in that respect is the
more grievous and insupportable. It is the soul, the spirit of a man that
bears up his head in all his sufferings, so as if that be wounded and broken,
what shall support it? The spirit of a man will sustein his Infirmity, but a
wounded spirit who can bear, (says that Text forecited,) Prove. 18.14.

2. God himself seems to turn Enemy to a man. In this trial God appears an
enemy.
Whereas in other Affliions he stands by his people, comforting and
strengthening them, taking part with them, or else standing Neuter, in this he
takes up Arms against them, fights against them, and that in a more immediate
way then in other conflicts. And upon this account this Cup must needs be more
bitter then any other Cup.

Yet if God shall please to hold forth this Cup unto his people, Yet to be
submitted to.
it is their duty even herein to submit unto his will and pleasure. Which they
are to do, as not despising it, (which they do, who looking upon this
Affliction of spirit only as some Melancholic Passion, slight it) so not
murmuring at it, nor yet fainting under it.

Q. How this may be done without fainting.
I but how shall a Christian be able to do this to bear up under such a trial
without fainting?

A. A great and a difficult work to do, (I confess) yet through grace
possible. To help you herein if ever God shall call any of you to it let me
briefly propound unto you somewhat to be considered, and somewhat to be
practiced.

1. Consideration seriously meditate upon these three particulars.
Considerations useful to this end.


1. Look upon others who have had experience of the like conflicts. This is not
such a Cup but others have tasted of it before us. has been accomplished in
many of our brethren, Look upon others wh^ have had experience of the like.
in some of the dearest Saints and servants of God. Yea few there be but at
some time or other do taste of this Cup, and some drink deep of it. So did Job,
and David, both which among other their sufferings had experience of this, this
Soul trial of a spiritual desertion, God hiding himself from them, seeming to
have forsaken them, and to be turned against them. So we may hear Job
complaining, Cap. 6. v. 4. The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the
poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me. And again Cap. 13. v. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
hold me for thine Enemy? And v. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me,
and make me to possess the iniquitys of my youth. And the like sad complaints
we may hear from David. My God my God why have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1.
Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled, Psalm. 30.7. Mine Iniquities have
gone over my head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. Psalm. 38.4.
Mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up;
they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore mine heart fails me.
Psalm. 40.12. And we shall find that holy man Homan the Ezrite joining in
consort with them. Psa. 88. Lord, why casts thou off my soul: why hidest thou
thy face from me? v. 14. While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, v. 15.
Thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off. v. 16. Thus were
they exercised, not only in the outward man, but also in the inward, having
sore conflicts in their souls with apprehensions of divine wrath. Now if God
shall bring us into a like condition, look we upon them, and upon the end of
the Lord, (as St James speaks, Jam. 5.11.) the issue of these their
temptations; which was very comfortable, the Sun in due time breaking out from
under those clouds, God lifting up the light of his countenance upon them as
formerly.

But above all look we up (as the Apostle directs us) unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our faith, Specially look upon Christ.
who suffered the like, nay infinitely more of this kind, in the Garden, and
upon the Cross (as you have heard.) Now where a Patient sees his Physician but
taste of his Cup, it is some encouragement to him to drink it. And this has
Christ done for us, nay he has not only tasted of this Cup, but drunk it off.
So then, if God will have us to pledge him; to taste of the like Cup, be not
dishartened and discouraged by it. Taking notice

1. That this is a part of our conformity to Christ. And

2. That Christ having been thus tempted himself, (which he was, how else says
the Apostle, that he was in all points tempted, like, (...), as we are, Heb, 4,
15.) having had experience of this soul-conflict, he knows, both how to pity,
and how to succor those who are thus tempted, (as the same Apostle tells us)
Heb. 2.18.

Obj. Christ had no sins of his own
which we have, So as his condition was different from ours.

A. sins of others, Our sins were made his.
our sins charged upon him, as being our surety, which by this means were made
his own, He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, (says the Apostle)
2. Cor. 5.21. However he knew no sin experimentally, as being guilty of it in
himself, yet he was made sin, viz. by way of imputation, having the sins of all
his elect people put upon his account, in whose room he then stood. He his own
self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, (or to the tree) (...), the
tree of the Cross, What is it that a Christian lives by, not Assurance but
Faith.
as to the guilt of them. But to pass on.

Let a second Consideration be, What it is that a Christian lives by, what it
is that his salvation depends upon. Not Assurance, but Faith. The just shall
live by his faith. Hab. 2.4. Now Assurance and Faith are two different things.
Assurance not being of the Essence of Faith (as by some it has been mistaken,)
Faith being properly a Recumbencie, a Reliance and resting of the soul upon
Christ. This is Faith, true justyfying and saving faith. A believing in Christ
or on him. God so loved the World that be gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, Joh. 3.16. (...), In eum on him.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, Act. 16.31. (...),;
which imports properly such a recumbency, a resting of the soul upon Christ.
Which where it is, though there be not Assurance for the present, yet it is a
true, and a saving Faith. As for Assurance, pertinet ad been esse, non ad esse,
It belongs to the well being, to the perfection of faith, (And upon that
account it is earnestly to be sought after, and much set by) but not to the
being. Sense and feeling may fail, and yet faith hold out. I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not (says Christ to Peter) Luke. 22.32. Not that thy
Assurance might not fail, (which in the best of Gods Saints it is subject to,)
but thy faith; which where once it is truly begun it shall never utterly fail.
In the paroxisme of his passion, Christ's assurance, his sense and feeling were
gone. Why have thou forsaken me? Yet his Faith held, My God, my God.

To these add (in the third place) the unchangeableness of Gods Affection
toward his people, The unchangeablenesse o^ Gods affection.
and of his Covenant with them. His Covenant, (being the Covenant of grace) it
is a Covenant of salt, an Everlasting Covenant. Once their God, and ever their
God, Once their Father and ever their Father; In the midst of this spiritual
desertion yet Christ calls God his Father. The Cup which my Father has given
me. Though God did for a time hide his face from him, yet did not this dissolve
that Relation which was betwixt his Father and him; noe nor yet make any
alteration or change in his Affection toward him. Even then when his wrath
brake forth most hotly upon him, yet his heart was toward him as much as ever.
And the like may all that are Christians be assured of. Having once taken God
for their Father, this is an everlasting Relation, which shall never be
dissolved. However God may represent himself unto them, yet he is still a
Father toward them. Doubtless thou art our Father, Isai 63.16. And such is
his affection to them. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3.
Thus is God unchangeable, we may change as to our apprehensions of him, but he
changes not. I am the Lord, I change not, Mat. 3.6. Even as it is with the Sun
in an Eclipse, the moon interposing it self makes a change of the face of it,
but the Sun it self is not changed, which it soon shows by shining again as
formerly. Even so is it in these spiritual Ecclipses. The light of Gods
countenance, through some dark cloud of temptation intervening, is for a time
intercepted so as we see it not, as (it may be) at sometimes we have done, but
God is still the same. And waiting upon him we shall by comfortable experience
find him so. Here are a few of those Meditations, which (among many other)
being applied to the heart, will be of great use for the bearing it up even
under this greatest of trials.

In the second place by way of Practice, Help^ by way of practice.
because I am not willing to load your memories beyond their bearing.

1. In this case make use of the judgments of others, Make use of the Judgment
of others.
A man is not looked upon as a competent judge in his own case. And so is it
here. In soul conflicts men usually take part with sin and Satan against
themselves. And being parties, they are no competent Judges. And therefore
submit rather to the Judgments of others. Such as have had acquaintance with
our Persons and conditions. Specially herein lend an ear to the Ministers of
Christ; whose office it is under Christ to bind up the broken hearted, Isai
61.1. To speak comfort to the afflicted, Isai. 40.1. To speak a word in season
to him that is weary, Isai 50 3. As Gods interpreters to show unto man his
uprightness, Job. 33.23. To acquaint him with the truth of his condition, as
also with his duty, to show him what state he is in, and what course he is to
take. Thus are they Gods mouth to his people, (as the Lord tells Jeremie,
Jer, 15.19.) And therefore, as at other times, so now specially to be hearkened
to. Thus the Lord sends Saul to Ananias, that by him he might be restored to
his sight, and instructed what he should do, Act. 9.6.12. And in the Chapter
following he wills Cornelius to send for Peter, that he might tell him what
he ought to do; Act. 10.6. Thus in matters of temporal Concernment, men being
in a straight they will not rely upon their own Judgment, but will apply
themselves to their Counselors, whose profession and practice gives them to
be skillful in the Law. And the like let Christians do in their spiritual
conflicts, intrusting themselves, hearken to the Ministers of Christ, such as
they judge to be able and faithful, and submit to their Judgment.

2. live upon former experience, as upon the experience of others, Live upon
former experience.
so of our own, Look back upon former times, and remember what our condition
has been, how it has been with us as to our spiritual estate, what we have
seen and felt of God heretofore. This was David's practice (if that Psalm be
his, which it is supposed to be) Psalm. 77. Being in a most disconsolate
condition, so as his soul refused to be comforted (as he says v. 2.) then
(says he) I considered the days of old, the years of ancient time I call to
remembrance my Songs in the night, v. 5.6. I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most high, I will remember the works of the Lord, Surely I
will remember thy wonders of old, v. 12, 11. Now he calls to mind what God had
done for himself and others, and herewith he stays and comfort himself,
being assured that God was still the same God. And the like do we in the like
case.

3. live upon the promises, Live upon the Promises.
casting our selves upon them, as a shipwrackt man does upon the rast that is
cast out to him. Though for the present we find no comfort in them, or from
them, yet lay hold upon them, casting our souls upon them, living by faith in
them. So did Abraham, the Father of the faithful; Against hope he believed in
(or under) hope, Romans 4.18. (...). When natural causes had left him hopeless
as to any issue of his body, yet grounding his faith upon the promise of God,
he still hoped. And the like let all his Children do. When sense fails live
by Faith, resolving, come what will come. not to let that hold go. That was
Jobs resolution, Though he slay me yet will I trust in him, Job. 13.15. A truly
heroical Resolution, which let all the Lords people take up. However the Lord
shall deal with them yet let them not let go their confidence. Cast not away
your Confidence, Heb. 10.35. If this be gone all is gone. Hope the Christians
sheatanchor.
This is the sheate anchor which Christ is to ride by in whatever storms or
stresses come down upon him. It is the Apostles own similitude in that known
text, Heb, 6.19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, If the Anchor be let slip, or come home, the Ship is exposed to the
hazard of Rocks and Shelves, from which before she was safe. And so is the Soul
of a Christian; if once his Hope, his Faith and confidence in God through Jesus
Christ fail, now it is in eminent danger, which before it was not. And
therefore having once cast this Auchor within the veil, fixed our faith in
heaven, now whatever storms come down upon the outward, or inward man, upon
Body or soul, still ride by it, holding fast this our confidence, and hope unto
the end, (as the Apostle minds us once and again, Heb. 3.6.14.) Thus however
the Lord pleases to deal with us let us only turn unto him, and then hope in
him. Even as the Ship in a stress turns to the Anchor, and rides by it, So do
we in these soul-stresses, Turn to the Lord and trust in him. That is the advice which the Prophet Hosea gives to the people of the Jews, when God had
a Controversy with them, and was turned enemy to them, Hos. 12.6. Turn thou to
thy God (says he) Keep Mercy and Judgment, and wait on thy God continually,
Fide deo tuo, wait on him by faith, trusting in him, And so let it be said to
the distressed soul that labors under this saddest of trials. Only turn thou
to thy God, endeavoring to walk closesly with him, and then wait upon him,
trust in him. That is David's counsel, which out of his own experience he
gives to others, Psalm. 27.13.14. I had fainted, (says he) unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Wait on
the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart, wait I say on
the Lord, Many and sweet are the promises which God has made to those who thus
wait. They that wait upon the Lord (says the Prophet Isai) Shall renew their
strength (through a secret supply of the spirit of grace the inward man shall
be strengthened,) they shall mount up with wings as Eagles (their souls being
carried up aloft above all difficulties and discouragements) they shall run and
not be wearied, they shall walk and not faint. Noe such way to keep the soul
from fainting as this; to wait upon God in all Estates. Which who so do the
same Prophet speaks them blessed. Blessed are they that wait for him, Isai,
30.18. Whilst they wait for their God, he waits that he may be gracious unto
them, (as the former part of that verse has it,) only expecting a seasonable
time to show himself unto them in a way of mercy. And therefore (to close up
this Direction,) however the Lord please to deal with us, though he seem to
withdraw himself from us, yet with patience wait for him, by faith resting upon
the word of promise, staying our souls upon him. That is the advice which the
same Prophet holds forth in that obvious, but excellent Text, Isai. 50.10.
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant,
that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay himself upon his God. And this let the Lords people do, such as
unfeignedly fear God, yiedling obedience to his word, as in all other
distresses so in this, let them trust in the name of the Lord and stay
themselves upon their God, by faith resting upon him, that so their souls may
be kept from fainting. Thus much for the former of these trials,
Soul-suffering. Pass we to the second.

The suffering of death. Ingredient, which we find in the bottom of this Cup,
The Suffering of death.
the last Act in this Tragedy, the last thing that Christ was to suffer, his
pouring forth his soul unto death. A bitter potion. The bitterness of death is
past, (says Agag) 1 Samuel 15.32. The fear of death, which of all other things
he looked upon as most bitter. More bitter then death (says the Preacher of
the wherish woman) Eccles. 7.26. Intimating death of all things, which can
befall the outward man, to be the bitterest. And yet see with what Patience,
with what Resolution our blessed Savior here submits hereunto. This was the
Gup which his Father had given him; He had appointed him to dye, to dye that
painful, shameful, accursed death upon the Cross. And this our Savior was
privy to, having before acquainted his Disciples with it, Mat. 20.18.19. Yet
see how he submits to the will of his Father herein, as Obediently, he was
obedient to the death, Phil. 2.8. So willingly, The Cup which my Father has
given me shall I not drink it? And herein again let all his Disciples follow
his steps, Which Christians are to do Patiently and willingly.
showing themselves in like manner Obedient to, and in death, submitting to the
will of their heavenly Father in drinking this Cup. when he shall give it them,
and that not only Patiently, but Willingly.

A great and a difficult work (my brethren.) A work above the strength of
nature.
A work passing the strength of Nature, which of it self is not able to look
this enemy in the face, noe more then the Isralites were Goliath, who when he
showed himself, and made that challenge of a single combat to whomsoever
should dare to encounter him, it is said that, when Saul and all Israel heard
those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed and greatly afraid, 1 Samuel
17.11. And again, v. 24. And all the men of Israel when they saw the man fled
from him, and were sore afraid. Such an enemy is death, being (as Bildad
calls it) The King of terrors, Job. 18.14. So it is to flesh and blood,
(...), (as the Philosopher says of it,) of all terribles the most terrible.
And great Reason for it, being so unconquerable an enemy, that never was there
any that encountered with it, but have been overcome by it, save only this our
David, the Lord Jesus. And how shall nature ever work the heart to such a
resolution to embrace that which is so destructive to it self? Nature cannot do
it.

Noe, Ye^ above an ordinary measure of g^race.
nor yet an ordinary measure of grace. How have some of the stourest cedars in
Lebanon, been shaken with this gust? Some of the most eminent Saints of God,
how have their hearts even fainted when they have seen this Cup coming toward
them? David a man after Gods own heart, then whom none more daring in battle,
yet in his cold blood he tells us of the sorrows, and terrors of death which
took hold upon him. The sorrows of death compassed me about, Psa. 18.4. The
sorrows of Hell (of the grave) compassed me about. v. 5 My heart is sore pained
within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me, Psalm. 55.4. And so,
Psalm. 116.3. This it was that rung those tears from Hezekiahs eyes. Isai, 38.
Though a holy man, one who (as he appears to God in it, v. 2 of that Chapter)
had walked before him in truth with a perfect heart and had done that which was
good in his sight, Yet when the Prophet comes and presents this Cup to him,
bringing to him that message from the Lord, that he must die and not live: Now
(says the story) Hezekiah turned his face to the wall (as not daring to look
this enemy in the face) and he prayed unto the Lord, v. 2. Yea, (as the next
verse has it) he wept sore. And himself tells us, v. 14. that he chattered like
a crane or swallow. So unwelcome were those tidings unto him. And St Paul,
though inferior to none in holy courage and resolution, which he showed when
he told the Disciples weeping about him, that he was ready not only to be
bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21.13. Yet
being (as he thought) arrested by this sergeant, having (as he says) received
in himself the sentence of death, he declares to his Corinthians, that he was
pressed out of measure, above strength, 2 Cor. 1.8.9. (...), above the strength
of nature, yea even above the strength of that grace which he had, which at the
present (he being suddenly surprised) was hardly able to bear up his spirit
under the apprehension of that eminent danger wherein he was. And if Cedars be
thus pressed, how shall shrubs look to bear up head? Should God now send the
like message to any of us (my Brethren) as there he did to Hezekiah, bidding
us, Set thine House in order for thou shall dye, and not live. Or should we
here see such an hand writing upon the wall as Belshezar once did, giving us to
take notice, that our days are numbered, and our course finished, put the
question now to our own hearts, what entertainment we could give to such a
message, such tidings. Are there not some of us, who would with Hezekiah turn
away our face, and weep at it as sore as ever he did? Nay would it not fare
with some of us as there it did with Belshazar, of whom the story tells us, that
when he saw that handwriting, though he understood not what it meant, yet his
guilty conscience suggesting that it portended no good to him, his countenance
was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins
were loosed, and his knees smote one against the other; Dan. 5.6. How few are
there of us that would so receive the Messengers of such tidings as our blessed
Savior does here these Messengers which were sent to apprehend him, so
submitting to the will of God herein as he did?

But yet know we this to be our Duty; Yet a Christians Duty.
a Lesson which our Lord and Master by his own example has taught us. And
being so, let every of us apply our selves to the learning and taking of it
forth, that we may thus submit to the drinking of this Cup, when ever God shall
give it unto us. Which sooner or later he will do, how soon we know not.

Q. And possible to be done.
I but (you may say,) is this a thing possible to be done? to bring the heart
to such a willing submission hereunto?

A. Though not by Nature.
To this I answer (as before) that to flesh and blood it is not possible.
Nature seeking the preservation of it self cannot readily and willingly embrace
that which is the destruction of it self. Especially if the eye of the Soul
shall be opened to see death, as it is, and to see the Consequents of it, to
look upon it as an inlet into a future Estate.

That which makes mere natural men sometimes so willing to dye is, because
they are blinded with mishapprehensions of it, they look upon it as a period to
their troubles, as an end of all misery. Whereas did they apprehend it (as an
inlet to Eternity, yea to an Eternity of misery, (which to them it is) as an
entry into that dark dungeon where they shall be kept in those everlasting
chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day, it is not possible
that they should look upon it, or think of it without horror and astonishment.
Yet by grace.


But to Grace this is possible. This being one of those ends wherefore Christ
dyed, that through death he might deliver them who through fear of death were
all their life time subject unto bondage (as the Apostle tells us,) Heb. 2.15.
Such is the condition of all the Sons of men by nature, being continually
subject unto death, they are in bondage through the fear of it. But this
privilege Christ has by his death obtained for his Elect, that through grace,
through faith in him, they may be freed and delivered from this bondage, this
fear. Though not from the Natural, yet from the slavish fear of it. As for the
Natural fear of it, that our blessed Savior himself was not free from, noe
more are the best of Saints. Not thus to fear death what is it but Hominem
exuere, to put off humanity? But for the servile, slavish fear of it, that
through grace believers may be freed from. Yea so freed from it, as to receive,
and embrace death, readily, and willingly. This we find some of the Saints to
have done. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace (says old Simeon)
Luke 2.29. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ (says Paul) Phil.
1.23. In this we groan desiring earnestly to be clothed upon with our house
which is from Heaven (says the same Apostle of himself and other believers,) 2
Cor. 5.2. And again, v. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. So then, this is a thing
possible for Christians to attain unto, to be willing to dye when God calls
them to it. Some and many have attained it, and others may if they be not
wanting to themselves.

Nay, A shame to Christians not to be willing to dye.
it is a shame unto those, who professing themselves Christians, do not in
some measure attain hereunto.

1. contrary to their professions. Being contrary to their profession.
Being Christians they profess themselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth,
as the Fathers of old time are said to have done, Heb. 11.13. Now (as it there
follows v. 14.) They which say such things declare plainly, that they seek a
Country that they desire a better Country, that is an heavenly (as the 16
verse explaines it.) Such is the Christians profession. Now then for them to be
unwilling to pass through this Jordan to take possession of this their
heavenly Canaan, it must needs reflect upon their profession, What does the
Christian profess (which he does) to look upon this World as a troublesome and
tempestuous Sea, and upon Heaven as his harbor, which he is continually
bending his course to, and shall he yet be unwilling to leave the one, and put
in for the other, when providence calls him to it?

Such practice does not answer the Christians Profession.

2. A disparagement to Gods Religion.
Neither is it a small disparagement to Gods Religion. What? shall Pagans and
Heathens, who have nothing but false principles to ground their resolution
upon, viz. that there is no life after death; or some airye fances, as that by
dying in an honorable cause, for their Country, or the like, they shall merit
eternal honor to themselves, so living when they are dead; or some vain
dreams, such as those Poetical fictions of the Elysian fields, or of Mahomets
Paradise, an imaginary happiness after death; shall these (I say) upon such
grounds be able to encounter this Enemy, to look death in the face, nay to make
a mock and a scorn of it (as some of them have done?) And shall Christians
tremble at the thoughts of it? What a dishonor is this to Gods Religion? As
also unto Jesus Christ, the Captain of their salvation, whose Soldiers they
profess themselves to be. Which taking notice of, let all those who profess
themselves, the Disciples of Christ labor to work their hearts to such a well
grounded Resolution, that they may be not unwilling to lay down their body, and
yield up their Souls, when God shall call for them.

Q I but (you will say) how shall a Christian attain hereunto? How shall a
Christian attain hereunto.
It is a thing indeed to be much desired, that the heart might be thus settled
and stablished against the fear of death. I, but how shall it be brought to
this frame, this temper? thus to look this last enemy in the face with such an
unapalled countenance, thus to drink this bitter Cup, as our blessed Savior
here did, with such Resolution, such Willingness.

A. A point of great importance, Helps prescrib^d.
well worthy of my pains in speaking, and your attention in hearing. Were it
so that the heart of a Christian were once brought to such a frame, that he
might stand upon such terms with death, as not to be afraid of it, how happy
should he be both in life, and in death? Life would be sweet to him, and death
would not be bitter. To help you therefore, and my self therein, give me leave
to present unto you some brief directions, which may be useful in this way. Of
these we may meet with many, there being no one there more copious then this. I
shall only gleane (as Ruth is said to have done) among the sheaves which others
have gathered, taking up some of those handfuls which they have let fall,
selecting some which are obvious and useful. These for the help of your
memories, I shall (as in the former point) reduce to those two heads of
Contemplation, By way of contemplation and Practice.
and Practice. Begin with the former.


1. Contemplation, Where we shall find many useful truths, Contemplations.
which being wrought upon the heart, Seriously pondered and considered, may
serve as so many Antidotes for the preventing, or expelling of that slavish and
inordinate fear, which hinders this resolution. Of these some are Moral,
others Divine.


1. Moral.
Moral, or Natural Considerations, such as Sense and Reason hold forth. Of
this kind are those two obvious ones, touching the Commonness of death, and the
Inevitableness of it.

1. Commonnesse of it. This is a Common Cup which all our Forefathers have
drunk of; Death a common Cup.
A suffering, which daily experience tells us that all sorts and conditions of
persons are alike subject unto. Be they young or old, rich or poor, Prince, or
Peasant, Wise or simple, How dies the Wiseman? Even as the fool, Eccle. 2.16.
In this no difference. Do not all go to one place? Eccles, 6.6. And shall we see
such crowds going before us, and yet be afraid to follow after them? Have those
who have been before us gone off from the stage of this world, to make room for
us, And shall we be unwilling to do the like for those that are to come after
us.

2. The Inevitableness, unavoidablenesse of it. Al must drink of it.
As this is a common Cup, so all must drink it. As all sorts so all
individuals, every particular person. What man is he that lives and shall not
see death, and shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave, Psa.
89.48. I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for
all living. Job. 30.23. Now (as the Moralist reasons.) Stultum est timere
quod vitari non potest. A vain and foolish thing it is to fear what we cannot
shun.

Whereunto may be added two other of the like kind, viz. The Vanity, and Misery
of Life.


3. The Vanity of this life, Vanity of Vanities says the Preacher, The Vanity
of life.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity, (that is the Tekel which the wisest of men
out of his own experience sets upon the world, and all things in it.) Eccl.
1.2. He had tried all things (as he there tells us,) what ever might promise
any contentment, but he could never find what he sought for. But the contrary.
So he informs us, verse, 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the
Sun, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of Spirit. Not only not giving any
true contentment, but creating a great deal of trouble and disquietment to the
Soul, which is inordinately addicted to them, or afflicted with them. So as
there is nothing which this life affords which being weighed in a right
balance, should make a man so in love with it, as not to be willing to part
with it.

4. The misery of it.
viz. the misery of it. This Job renders as a Reason why he himself was not
desirous to live but rather to dye, I am made (says he) to possess months of
Vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me. Job. 7.3. He found not only
no delight and contentment in his condition, but a great deal of trouble and
misery, which made him even weary of his life, And the like troubles, in some
kind or other are all men here subject to. Man is born to trouble as the sparks
fly upward (says Eliphaz) Job. 5.7. Man that is born of a woman is of few
days, and full of trouble (says Job) Job. 14.1. Few and evil have the days
of the years of my life been (says the Patriarch Jacob) Genesis 47.9. Few in
comparison with many of his forefathers, and evil in regard of the manifold
crosses which he met with. And the like, more or less, must every one make
account to meet with upon earth, even a succession of troubles, like waves of
the Sea, where depth calls unto deep, one Cross following upon the neck of
another. So as the more days the more sorrows. All which serve to wean the
heart from this world, as the infant is from the breast by laying bitter things
upon it.

2. Divine.
But I shall not any longer insist upon these or any other Arguments of the
like nature, The Resolution of a Christian must be built upon better grounds
then these. If God shall please to open the eyes of a natural man to see death
as it is, it is not any, or all of these, or whatever other Arguments Reason
can suggest, that will bear up the soul against the terrors of it. They must be
Cordials of a higher extraction that will strengthen the heart in this last
conflict, divine Considerations, such as the word holds forth. Of these take
a few among many.

1. In the First place, Look upon God, who has appointed and determined.
Let our eye be upon God our Father, whose Cup this is. So was our Saviors
here. The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? And so must
theirs who would drink this Cup as he did, submit unto the stroke of death
patiently and willingly, they must see God in the ordering and disposing of it,
looking upon it as his appointment. Which it is, he having

1. Appointed that men shall die. It is appointed to men once to die, Heb.
9.27. Appointed, viz. That men shall dye.
by God, who as he is the Lord of life, so he is the appointer of death. Having
passed a general law for it, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return,
Genesis 3. Which Law also he executes upon particular persons, bringing them to
death. I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for
all living, Job 30 23. So it is, however secondary Causes concur in bringing
men to their Graves, yet God himself has the principal stroke in it. Death
being his Messenger, sent by him. He has appointed that men shall dye. Which
taking notice of, look we upon it as our duty to submit hereunto when he
calls us to it.

2. As he has appointed that men shall dye, when they shall dye. The time,
when.
Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? viz. how long he shall-live,
Job 7.1. His days are determined, the number of his Months are with thee,
thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass, Job 14.5. So certain are
Gods decrees concerning the time of man's life, that he cannot go beyond the
term limited; the Year, the Month, the Day, the Hour set down. Father the hour
is come, (says our Savior, speaking of the time appointed for his suffering
of death) Joh. 17.1.

3. place. As the time when, so the place where, The place where.
that is also determined by God. Go up into Mount Nebo, and die there, (says
the Lord to Moses) Deuteronomy. 32.50. Our Savior must go up to Jerusalem, and there
suffer many things, and be killed, (so he tells his Disciples, Matthew. 16.21.

4. manner, The manner how.
how men shall dye, what kind of death, whether natural or violent. So it was
determined concerning our Savior, that he should die upon the Cross, be
crucified, which he acquaints his Disciples with, Math. 20.19. And so
concerning Peter, to whom our Savior foretells by what death he should
glorify God, Joh. 21.19. And so is it determined concerning every of the sons
of men, as when and where, so how they shall dye. None of these are left to
Chance and Fortune. Time, place, manner, all appointed by God. Which being
seriously considered and believed, it will be of great use to bring the heart
to a quiet and willing submission to the will of God in suffering what he has
so appointed. Thus look at God.

In the Second place look we upon Jesus Christ, Look upon Jesus.
the Captain of our Salvation, (as the Apostle calls him, Heb. 2.10.) Where
behold we him

1. Drinking of this Cup before us. Suffering death
And shall not we then pledge him? Shall the Captain go before, and shall not
the Soldiers follow after? Malus miles qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur. He is
but an ill Soldier that weeps when he is to march after his General. Shall
our Joshua go before us over this Jordan, and shall not we go after him? It was
a good Resolution in that man, that Scribe, (had he held to it,) who said to
our Savior, Master I will follow thee whithersoever thou go, Mat. 8.19.
Such should be the Resolution of every Christian, to follow Christ when he calls
him, to go after him, though it be to Mount Calvary, or Golgotha, the place of
a skull, (as both those words signify, and the latter of them is expounded
Joh. 19, 17. and Mat. 27.33.) the Caemeterie, or Churchyard, (as we call it.)

2. issues of this his suffering. Conquering it
as St James says of Job; Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen
the end of the Lord, Jam. 5.11. What Issue God was pleased to give him, which
was very joyful and comfortable. So here, looking upon Christ submitting to
his Father in suffering of death, behold we the end of the Lord, the issue of
this his suffering; which was victorious and glorious. Victorious. Even as
David cut off the head of the Philistine with his own sword, so did this our
David, by dying he conquered death; which he manifested in his Resurrection.
Where he brake the bands of death, rising again by his own power, and so became
the first born from the dead (as the Apostle calls him.) Col. 1.18. Now the
first born opens the womb for those that come after him. And so has Christ
opened the grave for all true believers, so as it shall be no more able to hold
them then it was him. Thus was the issue of this his conflict with this his
last enemy victorious. And as victorious so Glorious, we see Jesus, who was
made a little lower then the Angels, for or through, (...), the suffering of
death crowned with glory and honor, He. 2.9. In this way he entered into his
glory, Luke 24.26. Through this dark entry he went into his heavenly palace.
And so shall they who do herein follow his steps, being obedient as he was,
Obedient to the death.

3. Look upon death it self, Not in the glass of the Law but gospel.
and through a right glass. Not that of the Law, but of the Gospel. The glass
of the Law presents the face of it as ghastly and terrible, holding it forth
as a Curse, which in it own nature it is; being the issue and wages of sin, and
the very Gate of Hell. But look we upon it in the glass of the Gospel; that
we shall find representing it unto the believer under another shape, as being
much changed and alterd by Christ. New names put upon Death.
Whereupon it puts new names upon it. Calling it sometimes a sleep, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, Joh. 11.11. Them which sleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. Such is
the grave to the true believer. Not a Prison, but a Bed sor the Body to rest in
for a time. They shall rest in their beds, Isai. 57.2. Elsewhere we find it
called a Departure, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace (says
old Simeon) Luke. Vid-Leigh. Critica Sa^ra.
2.29. (...), dimitti^, thou loosest, dismiss^st me, let me out of Prison.
So the Syriack there renders the word, Now thou openest the Prison. And so we
find it properly used, Act, 5.40. Where it is said that the Council let the
Apostles go, (...), viz. out of prison. Such is this life to the believer, noe
better then a Prison, death is his dismission. A like word is that which we
find used by the Apostle, Phil. 1.23. Where expressing his willingness to dye,
I desire (says he) to be dissolved, or to depart (as the new translation has
it,) (...), to return home. So the same word is used in his proper sense, Luk,
12.36. Where servants are said to wait for their Lord till he return to his
home, (...) Such is this World to gods people, a strange Country, where they
live as strangers and pilgrims, being from home. Ad remigrationem. Beza.
Now death is to them a Remigratio, (as Beza there renders the word,) a
removing, a returning to their own Country, their home. The Soul leaving the
Body, where it lodged for a time, returns to God that gave it. Eccles. 12.7.
Elsewhere the same Apostle calls it the dissolving of a Tabernacle. If our
earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved. 2 Cor. 5.1. Not destroyed. So
is a house when it is pulled down, the materials of it being so broken as they
can never be put together again, But not so a Tabernacle, or Tent, where the
parts are only taken asunder for a time, but afterward put together, and set
up in another place. Such is death, only a dissolution of the parts whereof man
is composed, a severing of the soul and Body for a time, which shall afterward
be reunited. And so St Peter making use of the same Allusion, he calls it a
putting off or laying down of a Tabernacle. 2 Pet. 1.14. Knowing that shortly I
must put off this my Tabernacle, (...), depositio tabernaculi mei, (as the
vulgar Latin renders it properly,) The laying down of my Tabernacle is at
hand. Such is the Body to the Soul, like a Tent to him that carries it about
with him, a burden, which being laid down he is eased. And so is the Soul by
the deposition, the laying down of the Body in death. Which in the next verse
that Apostle there sets forth under another name, calling it his Exodus, after
my decease. v. 15. (...). My Exodus. A word with the sound whereof you have
been well acquainted, it being the Title given to the second book of Moses,
which is so called from the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, which is
there fully described. Such an Exodus is death to the believer, a Translation
of him from an Egypt, an house of bondage, into the Celestial Canaan, the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Thus has death now new names put upon it,
The Gospel representing it after another manner, with another face, then the
Law holds it forth.

And well may it have new names, The nature of death changed by Christ.
when as the Nature of it is so changed, and altered, as by Christ it is. Who
has taken away the maliguity of it, that which was hurtful in it. Having
pulled the sting out of this Serpent. O death where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? so the Apostle triumphs over this conquered Enemy, 1
Cor. 15.55. Bot the sting and strength of it are now gone. The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to God, who has
given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: (so the Apostle there goes
on.) This has Christ done for all that are in him, having made satisfaction
for sin, and fulfilled the Law. So as now though death may threaten, (as the
Serpent having lost the sting may hiss) yet it cannot hurt. And why then should
we fear a conquered enemy? Which is not only disarmed, but lies as it were
dead, before us, l^ke that Philistine when his head was off. In Christi morte
mors obiit. In Christ's death Death died. Being thereby abolished, as the
Apostle has it, 2 Timothy 1.10. Who has abolished death: (...), made it of none
effect. So is natural death, the fear and sting of it being taken away, it is
now as a shadow without a substance. Thus is Death now qualified by Christ, as
to all true Believers. Which being seriously considered, will be of special
use to free them from the inordinate fear of it, and make them not unwilling to
submit to God in the suffering of it. To pass on.

In the Fourth place, thus looking upon death, Look beyond Death.
look beyond it. Even as the timorous Passenger in ferrying over a River, where
the water is rough, by fixing his eye on the bank of the other side, settles
his brain, which otherwise might be troubled: thus let the timorous Christian,
whose nature inclines him to fear death, look beyond it, look to the issues,
the fruits and consequents of it. Here taking notice of two things: The Evils
which it freeth the Believer from, and the Good which it brings him to.

1. The Evils which it freeth him from. Which are of two sorts: The Evils which
it freeth the Believer from.
Temporal, and Spiritual.


1. Temporal, Temporal.
some of them very dolorous and painful; and such are losses and Crosses in
Estate, with Reproaches and Ignominies, and many Vexations and Disquietments,
with wearisome labors and Employments. All these is the life of a Christian
here infested with, this world being to him (as I said) a troublesome Sea. But
Death is the Havens mouth, which lets him into a quiet Harbor, where he is
at rest from all these. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, etc. that
they may rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13. There the wicked cease from
troubling, and there the weary be at rest. There the Prisone^s rest together,
they hear not the voice of the Oppressor. The small and great are there, and
there the servant is free from his Master, (so Job describes the state of the
dead) Job 3.17, 18, 19. Thus does God our heavenly Father make use of this as
his Handkerchief, to wipe away all tears from the eyes of his Children (as we
have it Rev. 7. last.) After death there shall be to them no more death, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, (as that other Text has it,
(...), Ae chylus.
Rev. 21.4.) Death lets out the Christian (as it does all men) from the sense
and fear of all temporal Evils.

2. Spiritual Evils, Spiritual.
giving a Quietus est, as to the Body, so to the Soul. Freeing him

1. Sin. He that is dead is freed from sin, Romans From sin.
6.7. So it is indeed with a mortified soul, a regenerate person that is
spiritually dead, dead to sin, (which the Apostle there chiefly aymeth at) he
is freed from it, viz. from the guilt and power of it. But this is but a
partial freedom, which is completed and perfected in and by natural death,
by which the Believer obtains a perfect freedom. Being hereby so freed from
sin as in this life he cannot be.

Freed from the committing of it,

From the inbeing of it,

From the beholding of it. From the committing of it.


1. From the committing of it; which while he is here, he is not, cannot be.
However (as the Apostle has it in the verse there foregoing, Romans 6.6.) the
old man being crucified with Christ, the Body of sin is so far destroyed, that
henceforth the regenerate person does not serve sin, he having thus suffered in
the flesh, cease from sin, (as St. Peter has it) 1 Pet. 4.1. Corruption
being in measure mortified he does not now sin as before he did, so as to make
a custom and practice of it, yet through weakness he does commit some acts of
sin, and that daily. There is not a just man upon earth that does good and
sins not, Eccl. 7.20. But Death gives the Believer a perfect discharge so
as thenceforth he sins no more. He that has entered into his rest (says the
Apostle) he also has ceased from his own works, as God did from his, Heb.
4.10. God upon the seventh day kept a Sabbath, resting from his works of
Creation, such as he had wrought upon the six days before. So does the
Believer, in death he enters into his rest, that Eternal Sabbatisme, where
he cease from his own works, such works as he here wrought in the flesh,
specially from the works of the flesh, sinful works, Opera nostra vocantur
labores and curas vocationis nostrae, tum opera carnis, and noturae vitiosae,
peccatae, quae vere sunt nestra, quia a nobis fiunt, nec probantur Dec, etc.
Pareus Com. ad loc.
which (as Pareus there notes upon it) may most properly be called a man's own
works, inasmuch as he does them of himself, without any approbation or
allowance from God. From these works the Godly man after death wholly cease.
Which the wicked man does not, who being in Hell cease not to blaspheme God:
Like as the followers of the Beast are said to do upon the pouring out of the
Vials, They blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains, etc. Rev.
16.9, 11, 21. so do the damned in hell, because of their torments they
blaspheme God, and commit other sins, such as that their state is capable of.
Which whether they be formally and properly sins in them not lying under a Law,
as here they did, I shall not dispute, but Materially I am sure they are, being
the same sinful acts which here they committed. But from such acts shall the
believer now cease, so as never more to commit any sin. Noe nor yet to be in
any possibility of committing it. Such a state does death bring Gods Children
to, a state in this respect far more happy then that wherein our first Parents
were in Paradise. There they were free from sin, but not from a possibility of
sinning, which the event showed. But Gods Saints by death are freed from this,
being hereby put into an impeccable state, and so confirmed as that they shall
never more have any will, or inclination to that which is evil. Thus are they
freed from the acting, the Committing of sin.

2. From the inbeing of it.
And so (Secondly) from the Inbeing, the Indwelling of it. So it is that the
best of Saints, while they are here they have sin dwelling in them. It is no
more I that do it (says Paul) but sin that dwells in me. Romans 7.17. (...);
thereby meaning, Innolita illa pridem peccandi consuetndo. Grot. Annot. ad loc.
not that Habit, and Custom of sin which is in an unregenerate person, (as
Grotius expounds it) but that Natural Corruption, which still cleaves to the
Regenerate. This he found still dwelling in him. And so it will in the most
sanctyfied soul upon earth. And there dwelling, it will also be warring,
seeming sometimes to Conquer. So also that Apostle there out of his own
experience complains, v. 23. I find another Law in my members, warring against
the Law of my mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin, which is
in my members. Such a conflict there is, and will be in the best of Saints,
Corruption striving against Grace. Yea and sometimes prevailing against it,
Even as a strong tide carries the ship against the stroke of the Rowers. Which
cannot but create a great deal of trouble to the Soul. So it did to that
blessed Apostle, who upon this account looked upon himself as a miserable man,
crying out in the next verse (verse 24.) O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the Body of this death? That Body of sin (as he elswere calls
it, Romans 6.6.) which he found living in him, was to him a Body of death, making
his life miserable to him. So would it be to a Childbearing woman to have the
Child lie dead within her, rotting and putrefying in her womb, whereof,
notwithstanding all endeavors used, she cannot be delivered. Or to a living
man to be tied to a dead karkesse. Even so is it with a regenerate person,
whilst he is here, the living and the dead are tied together, Grace and
Gorruption. And so tied together, as nothing can part them, but death. Like as
it was with that fretting leprosy, (of which we read, Lev. 14.45.) which
having eaten into the Walls, there was no cure for it, but by pulling down the
house. Even so is it with this Leprosy of sin, having seized upon the soul,
and eaten into all the powers and faculties of Soul and Body, there is no way
to be freed from it but by death. And this will do it. The house being pulled
down the Leprosy ceased. And so does sin in death. The dissolution of the
Body, is the Absolution of the Soul, freeing it from this impetuous inmate,
which otherwise will not out, whatever warnings are given it. The death of
nature is the death of sin, making that true, Filia devoravit matrem. The
daughter devours the Mother. Sin which at the first brought forth death, is
destroyed by it.

And were there no other Argument, Noe perfect freedom from sin but by death.
how should this work upon the soul of a Christian, to make him not averse to
the drinking of this Cup? it being the only Remedy for the perfect cure of this
Malady. We see how it is in bodily diseases, having been long and painful, and
all means having been tried for cure, but proving ineffectuall, this
continual conflict makes the sick man weary of his life, so long for death,
and to be glad when he can find the grave, (as Job describes his condition,
Job. 3.21, 22.) And such is sin to the Soul an inveterate, an uncurable malady,
being an hereditary disease, which man brought into the world with him, and use
what means he may, yet he cannot be freed from it; a continual Affliction.
And so it will be, so long as life it self continues. How willing then should
this make a Christian to embrace death? So did this Consideration work upon the
Apostle, who upon this account cries out, (as even now you heard,) O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me? As if he had said, O that I were out of
this miserable mortal life, during which, do what I can, sin will still dwell
in me, and from the molestation whereof I cannot be freed but by death. So long
as a Christian carries this mortal Body about with him, he shall never be
freed from this Body of sin. O how willing should this make us to lay down the
one, that we might be rid of the other? Which the believe shall be by death.
Hereby he shall be freed, as from the acting, so from the indwelling of sin.

3. From the be^^lding of it.
Yea (in the third place) from the Beholding of it. As he shall henceforth have
no more experimenatll knowledge of it in himself, so he shall be no longer a be
holder of it in others. Which is no small eye sore to a sanctyfied soul. So it
was to righteous Lot, of whom St. Peter tells us. 2 Pet. 2.7. That being a just
person he was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, viz. Of those
wicked Sodomites; among whom he lived. So the next verse explaines it. For that
righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing vexed his Soul from
day to day with their unlawful deeds. To see God so highly dishoured, his
Laws so shamefully violated, as by all kinds of abominations they were, this
was a continual corrasive, and heartbreaking unto him. And so was it to
David, who was in like manner affected with the sins of the times wherein he
lived, as he sets it forth, Psalm. 119. v. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine
eyes because they keep not thy Law. And again, verse 158. I beheld the
transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word. And it cannot
be otherwise with a gracious spirit, to see the Abominations of the times and
places wherein he lives, to hear the name of his God blasphemed, to see his
Ordinances profaned, his worship slighted, his messengers scorned, his truths
affronted, his ways evil spoken of, etc. this cannot but affect it. This it
was that made David cry out in his Banishment as he does, Psalm. 120.5. Woe is
me that I sojourn in Mesheck, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, that is,
amongst a savage and barbarous people, who had no knowledge, nor fear of God,
whose lives and conversations were wicked and abominable. And truly such is
this world in a great measure, wherein a Christian shall meet with two many of
this rank. The consideration whereof should make him the more willing to leave
it, to embrace Death when it comes; which is Gods Fan, whereby he severeth his
Wheat from the Worlds Chafe, the precious from the vile, his own people from
others, so as they shall no longer be in danger of being seduced by evil
doers, or yet be infested by them. The Goats being separated from the Sheep,
they shall be no longer an annoyance to them, as here by the stinch of their
unclean and filthy conversation they were. In that New Jerusalem, into which
Death lets all true Believers, there shall in no wise enter any thing that
defiles, neither whatever works abomination, Rev. 21. last. Thus does Death
free them from this worst of Evils, sin, both from the committing, and inbeing,
and beholding of it.

To which may be added, Temptations and molestations of Satan. Death freeth the
Believer from Satanicall temptations.
Which in this life the best of Saints are subject to. Paul complains of the
buffetings of Satan, which himself felt, 2 Cor. 12.7. And who but has
experience of his assaults some way or other? He being an unwearied Adversary,
making it his work to go to and fro in the earth, and to walk up and down in
it, (as himself gives account of it to God) Job 1.7. As a roaring Lion walking
about, seeking whom he may devour, (as St. Peter has it) 1 Pet. 5.8. So as
none can be secure from his attempts. He that spared not to set upon our
Savior, as he did in the Wilderness, plying him with Temptations one after
another, will not spare to do the like to his Disciples. Simon, Simon, (says
our Savior to Peter) behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift
you as Wheat, Luke 22.31. to shake him and the rest by tempting or troubling
them, seeking by all possible ways and means to subvert and destroy them, in
their bodies, or souls. And the like he does to the best of Saints, having a
special evil eye upon them, being ambitious to cast them down whom he sees
standing He makes it his work either to draw them into evil, or to draw evil
upon them, either to turn them out of the ways of God, or to make them as
rough and troublesome to them as he may. But Death sets the Believer out of his
reach. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, (says Paul
to his Romans,) Romans 16.20. This God does partly in this life, sometimes giving
unto his people great victories over this their enemy, but he will do it fully
in Death. By which they shall be carried in their Souls where Satan comes not.
This Old Serpent being once cast out of heaven, shall never enter there again.

Thirdly, as it freeth them from Satanicall, Also from divine tentations.
so also from divine temptations, such as God is pleased sometimes to exercise
his people with; those Soul-conflicts (of which I spoke before,) where God
hiding his face from his people, and letting in some apprehensions of wrath
into their souls, makes their condition for the present very sad and
uncomfortable. Now from all these shall Death free the Believer. This gust
shall blow away all those dark and gloomy Clouds, which here intercepted the
light of Gods countenance, so as from thenceforth he shall never know what
doubtings or fears mean, but shall enjoy a constant Sunshine of Gods grace and
favor to all Eternity. Thus you see what evils Death freeth the Believer from:
Generally, Universally, from the sense and fear of all Evils, both Temporal
and Spiritual.

And thus freeing them from Evils, Good to them, The great good which Death
brings the Believer to, letting him into Paradise.
or them to it. Letting them into Paradise. This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise, (says our dying Savior to that penitent Thief) Luke 23.43. meaning
the Celestial Paradise, Heaven, whereof the earthly Paradise was a Type and
shadow, so called from those transcendent pleasures, delights and contentments
which are there to be found. Paul being caught up into this Paradise, he heard
(as he tells his Corinthians) unspeakable words, such as himself could not
utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. And so shall the soul ascending thither, see and enjoy
unspeakable things, such as the tongue of man cannot express. Eye has not
seen, ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. What things are
laid up in heaven for them. And these shall Death let the regenerate soul into
the possession of, letting it into life. Mors Janua Vitae. Temporal death is
the door which lets into everlasting life. Of this Tree shall he eat, who
has overcome this his last Enemy. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of
the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. to
partake of eternal life; of those everlasting Joys, to which Death is the
Entry. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, (says the Master, having reckoned
with his good and faithful servant) Matthew. 25.23. Thus does Christ reckon with
all his servants at the day of death, then giving to them according to their
works. This is the Evening, wherein those who have labored in his vineyard
shall every one receive their Penny, Matthew. 20.9. The reward of all the service
which here they have done unto him; a superabundant recompense, infinitely
exceeding whatever they have deserved. Even that (...), that eternal weight of
glory (as the Apostle calls it,) 2 Cor. 4.17. Then shall the Crown be set
upon the heads of all Gods Saints, I have finished my course (says St Paul,)
henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. All true
believers they are Kings, while here upon earth, made so by Christ, who has
obtained that honor and dignity for them. He has made us Kings unto God and
his Father. Rev. 1.6. Spiritual Kings. But they are as yet but Kings, Elect,
heirs apparent to the Crown, having a right to it, but Crowned they cannot be
til death. Now what Prince would be unwilling to hear of his Coronation days?
And such is the day of death to the true believer, his Coronation day. At which
time, being divested of his rags, he shall have a Robe put upon him. A white
Robe, He that overcommeth shall be clothed in white raiment, Rev. 3.4. Thus
was Christ himself clothed in his transfiguration on the Mount, His raiment
was white as the light, Matthew. 17.2. And so shall his Saints be clothed after
their departure hence having white raiment, a garment of glory put upon them.
Then shall they be clothed upon with that their house which is from Heaven,
when once they have laid down this earthly Tabernacle. The consideration
whereof made the blessed Apostle to groan so earnestly (as he said he did) 2
Cor. 5.1, 2. desiring his dissolution upon that account. Then shall they enter
into their Glory. So did our blessed Savior, by suffering of death he entered
into his Glory. Luke 24.26. And so shall all they who follow his steps, imitate
his obedience, death shall be to them, Porta Gloriae, The gate of glory,
letting in the soul to the beholding and enjoying of that glory and happiness,
which now cannot enter into it. Letting it into the presence of God, where it
shall see him, Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God, Matthew.
5.8. And see him as he is (as Saint John tells us) 1 John 3.2. Have a full sight
of him, see him after another manner then here it does. Now we see through a
glass darkly (says the Apostle) but then face to face. 1 Cor. 13.12 Now we
see God only in the glass of his word and works, which do but darkly represent
him. But after death believers shall have a clear and full view of him. The
beholding of God a beatifical vision.
Then shall their Faith be turned into Vision. Which shall be to them (as the
Schools call it) a truly Beatificall vision, making the beholders happy.
Happy, in as much as hereby they shall be transformed into the Image of God,
made like him, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, (says St
John there) 1 John 3.2. This Believers in part are here upon earth. Whilst
they behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord; they are changed into the same
Image from glory to glory (As the Apostle has it) 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding God
in the glass of his word, thereby they come by degrees to be transformed into
his Image, to be made like him in holiness. But when they shall come to see
him face to face, then shall they be made perfectly like unto him, Death brings
the Soul to perfection.
so far as their finite natures are capable of partaking of his infinite
perfections.

Then shall they be perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect. Perfect with a
perfection both of Grace, and Glory.

1. Of Grace, Which is here imperfect. Knowledge, and Love, Of Grace.
and all other graces in the most sanctyfied soul. But upon the dissolution of
the Body, the soul coming into the presence of God it shall attain a full
perfection. A perfection of Knowledge. Now I know in part(says the Apostle)
but then I shall know even as I am known. 1 Cor. 13.12. Of knowledge.
Many things there are which the most knowing men upon earth are ignorant of.
Many mysteries in Nature, which by all their search they cannot find out the
reason of. Much more Celestial Mysteries, concerning God and Jesus Christ. As
the Trinity of Persons, in the unity of Essence. The Hypostaticall union of the
two Natures, The Godhead and Manhood in the person of Christ. Mysteries too
sublime for any of this side heaven to pry into. so as to comprehend, or yet
apprehend them, otherwise then by faith. But these, with whatever else may any
ways conduce to the happiness of the soul to know it shall have a clear
knowledge of after death Seeing God as he is, it shall see all in him, see all
things after another manner then here it does. When that which is perfect is
come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13.10.

And as perfect knowledge, so perfect Love. Love.
Seeing God as he is, it cannot be but the soul must be inflamed with Love to
him.

And so perfect Holiness This Christians are here called upon to endeavor
after. Holiness.
Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, (so the Apostle
exhorts) 2 Cor. 7.1. But this while we are here we shall never attain unto. But
coming to see God, now shall we be like him, holy as he is holy, being
perfectly restored to that Image of God, wherein man at the first was created,
consisting in, Knowledge, Holiness, and Righteousness. Such is the perfection
of Grace, which the soul attaines by this beatificall vision.

2. Glory. Like as silver or gold being set against the Sun, Of glory.
by the beams thereof cast upon it, it becomes radiant and shining. So shall
it be with the soul, by beholding the glory of God it shall it self be made
glorious. Such a glory had Moses put upon his face, when he beheld the glory of
the Lord, having so near a communion with him upon Mount Sina, the skin of his
face did shine (says the story,) so as Aaron and the rest of the Children of
Israel were not able to behold him. Exodus 34.29.30. Such shall be the glory of
the glorified soul, having communion with God in Heaven, and there beholding
his glory, it shall be made glorious. This office does death perform unto the
believer; it lets in his soul into the presence of God, whereby it becomes
perfect with perfection of Grace and Glory.

2. The believer by death brought into the presence of Jesus Christ, to have a
full communion with him.
To this add, It brings him also into the presence of Jesus Christ, from whom
while he is here he is absent. While we are at home in the Body we are absent
from the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.6. But now death brings the soul into his presence, to
have a sweet communion with him. A consideration which made the Apostle not
only averse to death, but desirous of it. I desire to depart and to be with
Christ. Phil. 1.23. This it was that made him so confident and resolute as he
was, not to regard life, or fear death, (as he there tells his Corinthians) 2
Cor. 5 6.8. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. We are confident (I say) and
willing rather to be absent from the Body; and to be present with the Lord,
Which elsewhere he concludes to be far better for him, then to live here. Phil,
1.23. To see Christ, to be with him, to enjoy him, to have a full communion
with him, what happiness shall this be to the soul? And this does death bring
the believer to.

3. Saints and Angels. Also to Communion with Saints and Angels.
With them the believer has Union whilst here upon earth. Ye are come unto
mount Sion (says the Apostle to his believing Heb^ews) and unto the City of
the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the first born which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect. Heb. 12.22, 23. Being true believers they were now made members
of the Mystical body, the Church, whereof the one part is upon earth, the other
in heaven, they had union with Saints and Angels, being united to them by faith
and Love, which all Believers are. But now by death they come to have a full
Communion with them, to see them, to enjoy them, to have converse and society
with them, joining with that heavenly Quire in singing Halelujahs to him that
sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for Ever and Ever. Here is now the
good which death brings the believer to, and puts him in possession of.
The thought whereof being seriously set on upon the soul, it cannot but work it
to a willing receiving and embracing of such a messenger as brings tidings of
so great good unto it. Anticonsiderations, or Objections answered.


I, but (it may be said) though it be thus with the Soul yet in the mean time
what becomes of the poor Body? Though the soul gain by death yet the body
loses.


Though the soul he a gainer by death, yet the Body is a looser by it. Though
that return to God that gave it, yet this goes to the grave, where it is
subject to Corruption. Which makes our Saviors case and ours far different.
As for him, he knew that though his Body, being severed from his Soul, for a
time should lie under the power of death, yet it should not see corruption. So
David had foretold it, Psalm. 16.10. Where personating of Christ (as Peter
expounds it. Act. 2.31.) He foretells what manner of death his should be,
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy one to see
corruption. And this our Savior himself well knew; who foretold his Disciples
how, though he were killed, yet he should rise again the third day. Mat. 16.21.
And upon this account he might be more willing to dye. But it is otherwise with
other of the sons of men. That which Paul says of David, that he saw
Corruption, Act. 13.36. is noe less true of others, Be their Bodies never so
richly embalmed, yet will not that preserve them from putrefaction. So much the
Psalmist wills the great men of the world to take notice of, Psalm. 49.6, 7.
They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches, None of them (says he) can by any means redeem his brother, (and so
not themselves) that he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.
Such is the common fate. None but must expect to have their bodies lie rotting
in the grave, in that land of forgetfulness (as the Psalmist calls it, Psalm.
88.12.) Where as they forget all that was done upon earth, so they are
forgotten by those they leave behind them. Being laid up in the earth, there
the worm feeds sweetly on them, and they shall be no more remembered (as Job
faith of the cruel Oppressors) Job. 24.20. Now this is a thing which flesh
and blood cannot but look upon with great reluctance, the thought whereof may
well make it loath to lay down the body upon such terms.

To return an answer to this and some other Anticonsiderations, or Objections
of like nature,

1. The Soul the kernel, the Body but the shell.
that it suffers after this manner in and by death, yet what of that, so long
as it reaches not unto the Soul? So long as the kernel is safe, what matters
it what becomes of the Shell? So long as the soul, the better part, is a gainer
by death, so great a gainer, (as you have heard,) what matters it what becomes
of the Body, being so vile as it is? That is the Epithet which St. Paul gives
it, Phil. 3.21. Our vile Body. (...), this Body of vileness. Corpus
humilitatis nostrae (says the vulgar Latin) he Body of our humbling. And it is
noe other then it deserves. The Body being no other but a Lump of clay, which
is little worth, and carrying that in it, or about with it, which may serve to
humble the owner of it, and make him not to dote upon it as the greatest part
do. Now being so vile as it is, why should men be so affected with what
befalls it.

2. The bodies of Gods Saints shall be changed
Whilst it lies in the grave it is but a grain of Corn sown in the earth,
(as our Savior makes the comparison, Joh. 12.24. As also the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15.36.) Which though it lie rotting there for a time, yet after a few months it
springs forth. And so shall the Body in due time, it shall arise, and then it
shall come forth after another manner then when it was laid down. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in dishonor, it is raised
in glory, etc. (so the Apostle describes the resurrection of the Bodies of
Gods Saints at the Last day,) 1 Cor. 15.42. etc, Thus shall the Body also be a
gainer by death as well as the Soul.

3. inseparable union that is between Christ and the Believer. The union
betwixt Christ and the Bodies of his Saints
Death may separate his Soul and Body the one from the other, but separate
either from Christ, that it cannot. As it was with Christ himself, when his
Body lay in the grave, it was separated from his Soul, but still the Godhead
was united to both. Such is the union betwixt Christ and the believer, an
indissoluble union, death does not dissolve it. That Body which was a member of
Christ whilst living (which the Bodies of all Gods Saints are, Know ye not
that your bodies are the members of Christ, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6 15) it
still retains the same relation when dead. And being thus united unto Christ
it shall by his power be preserved, and by his virtue raised up again at the
last day. Even as the branches of a tree which seem to be dead in the winter,
yet having union with the root, by a virtue springing from it, they revive in
the spring time. So shall it be with the bodies of Gods Saints. Though they be
uncloathed by death (as the tree is of his leaves by the winters cold,) yet
shall they be clothed upon, having a vest, a Robe of eternal glory also put
upon them; being changed by Christ, and made like unto his glorious body, (as
the Apostle tells us) Col. 3.21. Thus is that first Objection readily answered.

And so may most of the rest which are made use of to this purpose. Of which
let me take notice of those which are most considerable. As for those carnal
ones which sway much with the men of this World, viz, their parting with their
Riches, Carnal allegations not worth the answering.
their Pleasures, their Honors, and such other contentments as this world
affords, which makes them so loath to leave it. I look upon them as not worth
the answering, all these being but shadows, the substance whereof is to be
found in that other world, to which death brings the soul that is weaned from
this. The Considerations which I shall take notice of shall be only, such as
may lay hold upon a sanctyfied soul, all which we shall find the text in hand
meeting with.

Such is that of parting with near and dear Relations, Wife, Children, Friends:
Parting with near and dear Relations, and leaving them in an unsettled condition
Loath I am (may one say) to leave them behind me, specially to leave them in
such a condition as I am like to do, not well knowing how they shall subsist
when I am gone.

But was it not so with our blessed Savior here? So did our blessed Savior
his Disciples and mother.
did he not leave his beloved Disciples, and dear Mother, and left them in a
low and unsettled estate, therein not unlike himself, scarce having a house of
their own to hide their heads in? As for his dear Mother, the story tells us how
when he was hanging upon the Cross, he committed her to the care and custody
of his beloved Disciple, Saint John, Joh. 19.27. not having of his own any
subsistence to leave her. And for his Apostles he well knew in what condition
he was to leave them, even as Sheep among Wolves, (as he told them when he sent
them forth) Matthew. 10.16. in a wretched World, where they should meet with
Tribulation enough, (of which he had forewarned them, Joh. 16. Last.) Yet does
not the thought hereof take him off from this act of obedience to his Father in
being willing to dye when he will have him.

Repl: But he did not leave them Comfortless.
Though he did thus leave his Relations yet he did not leave them comfortless.
That is his promise to his Disciples, when he had told them of his leaving
them; I will not leave you comfortless, Joh. 14.18. (...) (says the Greek.) I
will not leave you Orphans, Noe, he promises that himself would have a care
of them, and that after a time he would come to them; so it there follows, I
will come to you; Which he made good after his Resurrection. And though himself
were gone, yet he sent his Proxy, the Comforter to them according as he
promised them, Joh. 16.7. If I depart I will send him unto you, viz. the
Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who (as he assures them) should abide with them for
ever, Joh. 14.16. performing all needful offices unto them, (as the 26 verse
there has it.) But so cannot we do (may some say) to our Relations, if we be
gone all is gone with them.

What, all gone, Is your God gone too? your God he will be theirs. God a
Comforter to the Widow and Fatherless.
I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7. And being so, a God in
Covenant with them, he both can, and will take care of them. Many are the
promises and assurances which we meet with in Scripture to this purpose. The
Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the fatherless and Widows? Psalm.
146.9. A father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widow is God in his holy
habitation, Psalm. 68.5. Leave thy Fatherless children, I will preserve them
alive, and let thy Widows trust in me, Jer. 49.11. In thee the fatherless
finds Mercy, Hos. 14.3. Thus when Father and Mother forsake their Children
(as in death they do,) now as ( David speaks it of himself, Psalm. 27.10.) The
Lord takes them up; exercising a special providence over such. This will he
do, being left a God in Covenant with them. And therefore no just ground why
this consideration should so far prevail with any that are in Covenant with
God, as to make them unwilling to dye upon this account, which too often they
are. In this obey God, and then trust in him.

As for that other part of this Allegation p^rting with friends, and the loss
of their society, Friends upon earth not to be compared with those, in heaven.
it cannot sway much. Alas, what are thy friends upon earth which thou art to
leave, in comparison of thy friends in heaven whom thou art to go to; viz God,
and Jesus Christ, his blessed Saints and Angels, with whom thou shall now have
an everlasting Communion? Besides, thy friends and thou are not by this means
for ever parted. It is but for a time, a little time. Though thou shall not
return to them (as David said of his Child, 2 Samuel 12.23.) yet they shall come
to thee, meeting where you shall never part.

But (says another) I am not unwilling to dye upon any such account, Dying
without issue to continue the name.
but rather the contrary. I have no issue to leave behind me, which might
succeed in my place, inherit my estate, or continue my name. This was the thing
which was conceived to have wrought so upon that good King Hezekiah, that made
the message which the Prophet brought him concerning his death so unwelcome
unto him, so as he wept when he heard it (of which we heard before,) this he
did as having yet no issue to succeed him, to bear his name, and sit upon his
throne after him. And the like consideration often times after the like manner
works upon others.

But was not this also the case of our blessed Savior here? The case of our
blessed Savior
When as he was now to leave the world, being a single person, he had no issue
of his Body? none to succeed him, to bear his name, his natural name, after
him. True indeed, as for his spiritual name he left enough to bear that, viz.
his Apostles, and Ministers, whose office it is to bear the name of Christ, (as
he tells Ananias that Paul should do, Act. 9.15.) By preaching and publishing
of his Gospel. But as for his natu^al name, that dyed with him, he leaving
neither Child, nor yet Brother, to succeed him. Yet was this consideration of
no avail with him. Notwithstanding this he knew that his name should be
continued upon earth, and withal that he should have a better name in heaven,
even that name above every name (as it is called, The good name of Gods Saints
living when they are dead.
Phil. 2.9.) And the like may all Gods Saints assure themselves of. Having by
their Godly and examplary life and conversation got them a good name whilst
they were alive, that shall be to them a precious ointment (as the Preacher
makes the comparison, Eccl. 7.1.) preserving and perfuming their memories when
they are dead. Such is the name of Jesus Christ, Thy name is as ointment poured
forth, (says the Spouse of her well-beloved) Cant. 1.3. And such shall the
names of his Saints be. When the name of the wicked shall rot (rot above ground
as their bodies do under it, they having left nothing but a stinking savor
behind them) the memory of the just shall be blessed, Prove. 10.7.

But however, They have in heaven a name better then of Sons and Daughters.
though they be forgotten upon earth, yet they shall have a name in Heaven. Yea
and that a name above every name, above whatever name upon earth. A name better
then of Sons and Daughters, an everlasting name that shall not be cut off (as
the Lord promises his people) Isai. 56.5. As for the name of Sons and
Daughters, a name by issue continued, it often fails, seldom lasts to many
generations. But the name of Gods people is an everlasting name, being a name
written in heaven. As for those names which are written in the earth, (which
the names of worldlings are) they are written in the dust, and so shall perish.
But so shall not the names of Gods Saints which are written in heaven, written
in the book of life. Having then assurance of such a name, let not them be over
ambitious of any other.

I, but says another, Being in the flower of age.
as yet I am in the flower of my age, having lived but a little while upon
earth, so as to me death seems untimely.

A. The case of our Savior.
And was it not thus also with thy blessed Savior? was not he cut off in the
flower of his age? about the thirty third or thirty fourth year of his life?
And yet does not he look upon his death as untimely, now that the hour
appointed by his Father was come. Though thy time be not come, yet if Gods be,
do not think it untimely.

I, Desire of doing more service to God.
and upon that account I desire a longer date of days.

And might not thy Savior have done so too? So might Christ have done.
he is not unwilling to leave off.

Repl: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, He knew that his
work was finished.
(says he) Joh. 17.4. And upon that account was he so willing to be gone. But
so cannot I say.

A. So is ours when God calls us from it.
the work which he has given thee to do is finished; though not the work which
thou would do to him. And therefore be not averse to his call. He who
sets thee to do his work, knows how long it is fit for thee to be at it.
And if he call thee off by that time thou have wrought a few hours in his
vineyard, and gives thee thy penny, thou have no cause to repine at it, or be
unwilling with it.

I, The bitterness of Death.
my death may be. As for death it self, considering the miseries of life, and
the gain that would come thereby, I am not unwilling with it. But the
bitterness of it, which I fear, deters me from embracing it.

And was not thy Saviors such? Cup a bitter Cup, Christ's death a bitter death.
his death a painful, yea a shameful and accursed death? And this he knew
that it would be. And yet behold him not unwilling to drink it, to submit to it.

But as for thee thou know not what thy death may be. Happily it may be
easy and gentle. However, The pains of death misapprehended.
not so bitter as thou apprehendest it. Few there be but endure more and
greater pains in their life, then they shall do at their death. Neither is it
properly death it self which is so painful, but the forerunners of it. But
suppose it bitter, yet shall this deter thee from the drinking of this Cup,
which is so profitable unto thee?

I, Fear of soul Conflicts in death.
I must expect that Satan will be then busy.

And was it not so with thy Savior The prince of this world comes, The Case
of our Savior.
(says he foretelling his death) Joh. 14.30. What conflicts had he; as in the
Garden here, so upon the Cross? And did not the powers of Hell then surround,
and assault him? Now is your hour and the power of darkness, (says he to the
Jews) Luke. 22.53.

Repl: I, He had strength which others want.
but my strength is weakness.

A. Be it so, power made perfect in weakness, (as the Apostle tells thee? 2
Cor. He is able ^o strengthen others.
12.9.?) He that was able to bear up himself in these conflicts, is he not able
to do the like for thee? Thou being his, one of his members, his Spirit is
thine, in thee and with thee, and will be ready to succor and strengthen thee
in this combat. Remember what Paul said of himself, When all forsook me, the
Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, 2 Timothy 4.17. He that prayed for Peter,
has done the like for thee, that thy faith shall not fail.

I, Assurance, assurance of Gods love and favor to me, Want of assurance of
Gods Love and favor.
how then can I willingly submit to death? Not being assured how it stands
with me in reference to my future state and condition.

Of all arguments I confess this is the strongest. The case of our Savior in
the Garden, and upon the Cross.
Did not he in his Passion, as also before it, lie under a spiritual desertion,
God his Father for a time hiding his face from him, and seeming to have
forsaken him? Yet in obedience to him he submits to what his will was. And the
like do thou. However it stands with thee as to Assurance; yet, acting thy
faith, trusting in the mercies of God through the merits of this thy Savior,
show thy self obedient to the will of thy heavenly father, even obedient to the
death.

But in the mean time labor for Assurance. Directions by way of practice.
Let that be the first of those directions by way of Practice, which (having
met with those Anticonsiderations, opposing the former Motives,) I shall now
come to propound unto you.

In the first place, Labor for Assurance.
but be willing to submit thereunto when God shall give this Cup to us, labor
for Assurance.

1. God is our Father, This it was which sweetened this bitter Cup to our
blessed Savior here, That God is our Father by Regeneration and Adoption.
that it was given him by his Father. The Cup which my Father has given me.
And this it was which made him so willing to set upon this journey, to walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, because he was to go to his Father
(as he tells his Apostles, Joh. 14.12. and elsewhere.) O let every of us labor
to make sure to our selves this blessed Relation that God is our Father. And
that (as before was said) not only by Creation, (which he is to all his
Creatures) but by Regeneration and Adoption, that he has begotten us again
unto a lively Hope (which St. Peter says all true believers are, 1 Pet. 1.3.)
and that he has Adopted us into the dignity of his Children. Both which we may
rest assured of, when we find our selves made partakers of that divine nature,
of which St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1.4. transformed into the Image of God, made
like unto him in those divine qualities of Holiness, and Righteousness,
wherein (as the Apostle tells us) his Image does chiefly consist, Ephesians. 4.24.
And made partakers of that Spirit of Adoption, (whereof the same Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.15.) Whereby we cry Abba Father. Owning God for our Father,
and that not in word only but in deed, and in truth. As by making our addresses
unto him upon all occasions, flying to him as Children to their Father, so by
yielding unto him all such respects as are due to a Father, loving him as a
Father, fearing him as a Father, honoring him as a Father, trusting in him and
depending upon him as a Father, and in all things obeying him as a Father.
Being thus affected toward him now may we lay claim to this Relation, being
assured that God is our Father. Which whilst we are, what is it that should
make us afraid of death? Which is but our Fathers Messenger, sent by him to
bring us into his presence. So our blessed Savior looked upon it, who speaking
of his death calls it as you heard) a going to his Father. And may we but once
come so to look upon it, that death is our Fathers Messenger, Not a Sergeant to
arrest us at the suit of an offended God, and to bring us before him as a
severe Judge, to be sentenced by him, and to receive according to our demerits.
(Such is death to all wicked and ungodly men, and so no wonder if the
apprehension of it be terrible unto them, as the Officer is to the guilty
Malefactor.) But a messenger, our Fathers messenger (such as Joab was to
Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.) to bring us to our Fathers house, into his presence, to
see him and to be with him to all eternity, this would make it not unwelcome to
us. Every of us then labor to make this sure to our selves that we have such
an interest in God, that he is our Father.

2. That Christ is our Savior.
that he is our Savior, never resting till we have got him in our arms. This
when Simeon had done in a literal sense, then he cries out, Now Lord let
thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2.29. And the like do we in a spiritual
sense, receive we the Lord Jesus being held forth unto us in the promise of the
Gospel, and take hold upon him, clasping and embracing him in the arms of our
faith, receiving him as our Savior, and Lord. As our Savior, believing on him
for the pardon and remission of all our sins. As our Lord, yielding up our
selves to be guided and governed by him, by his word and Spirit. Which whilst
we do, now shall we have no just cause to fear this Enemy, which is by this
Captain of our Salvation, conquered, and disarmed, so as now it cannot hurt any
of those that are his. O then let every of us make sure our interest in him.
Upon which depends all our hope and comfort, both in life and death. Christ
being once ours, now we may hear the Apostle telling us, that all things are
ours, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things, among which he reckons Life and Death, with
things present, and things to come. All ours, so is Life, even temporal life,
so as it shall be continued to us whilst it is expedient. And so is Death,
which when it comes shall not be hurtful, but advantageous, and beneficial. To
me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil. 1.21. So are things present,
the concernments of this present life, as Crosses, so Comforts, both serving
for our good. And things to come, Eternal glory and happiness. Which whilst a
Christian is assured of, why should not he be as willing to dye as live?

3. seal of the Spirit. Look out for the seal of the Spirit.
Thus are Assurances made among men, by setting seals to writings, to bonds and
bills and other conveyances. And such Assurance labor we for, to get the
promises sealed unto us, and that by this seal, the seal of the Spirit, which
the Apostle calls the earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. An earnest
confirms the bargain, and assures the payment of the whole sum. And so does
the earnest of the Spirit, (as he elsewhere calls it, 2 Cor. 1.22.) the work
of Regeneration and Sanctification begun in the soul, this is as Gods seal,
which confirms his promises to his people, and gives them assurance of their
heavenly inheritance. Which being assured off, what should make them unwilling
to depart hence, when God calls for them? Having now another house to receive
them, when they are turned out of this, and that infinitely better, as the
Apostle tells them, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. Now what man would be unwilling to leave a poor ruinous Cottage,
which he holds only at the pleasure of the Landlord, being subject to be
turned out of it every day, when as he may have posession of a Royal palace,
whereof also he shall have the fee-simple estate? And such is that heavenly
house, that celestial glory and happiness, which Christ having purchased for
those that are his, is gone before to take posession of, and to prepare for
them; ( I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14.2.) it infinitely excels
all earthly glory, far more then the most princely palace does the meanest
cottage. O labor we but to make sure this our Inheritance in that other world,
this will make us not unwilling to leave this. Here is a first Direction. Seek
after Assurance, that we have an interest in God, and Jesus Christ, and so a
right to eternal life.

And being thus assured of Life, Prepare for death. Prepare for death by dying
daily.
So did the blessed Apostle, who tells his Corinthians, that he dyed daily, 1
Cor. 15.31. I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord,
I dye daily. Apprehending death continually hanging over his head, he was daily
preparing for it. And the like do we, that we may be willing to dye once, when
God calls us to it, dye daily.

Q. But how shall we do this?

A. Take the answer in three or four particulars.

1. sin. This the Apostle tells us Christ once did for us. To sin.
In that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once. Romans 6.10. This he did not for
himself, (for he knew no sin) but for us, for the expiating of our sins, the
taking away the guilt of them. And what he did once, do we daily, daily dye to
sin for the taking away the power of it in our selves. A work which will not be
done at once, (as that of our Savior was.) True, the Apostle speaking of
believers, says, they are dead to sin, Romans 6.2.11. in as much as they are not
now under the power of it, as sometimes they were. But this is but an imperfect
work, not done at once. Though sin has received its mortal wound in them, yet
it is still alive. Though they be dead to it, yet it lives in them. And
therefore they must make this their daily, their continual work, to be dying to
it, mortifying the body of sin, that it may dye before them. The life of sin is
the life of death. So long as a man lives in any one sin, he will never be
willing to dye. And therefore set we upon the mortification of all our sinful
Lusts. Specially our beloved Lusts, those which have been most near and dear to
us, most strong and prevalent in us. Never resting until we find our hearts
brought to an utter abhorrence, and detestation of them, and of all other
sinful ways and courses, so as we can say with the Psalmist, that we hate
every false way. Psa. 119.104. Thus Sin being dead, death will not be so
terrible. As we get ground of the one, we shall get strength against the other.

Secondly, Dye daily to the world, To the world.
So did the Apostle, who tells us of himself that he was crucified to the
world, and the world to him, Gal. 6.14. He had as little affection to the world
as the world had to him, he was dead to that, and that to him. And it is the
counsel which he gives to others, 1 Cor. 7.31. that they should so use this
world, as not abusing it. Not doting upon any thing here below, whether riches,
o^ pleasures, or honors. Not setting the heart upon them, If riches increase
set not your hearts upon them, Psalm. 62.10. And so for the rest. Not being
inordinately affected with any contentments which this world can afford, but
looking overly upon them, so using them as if they used them not. So run those
foregoing directions of the Apostle there, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. This I say
brethren, the time is short, It remains that both they that have wives be as
though they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not, and they
that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though they
possessed not. And this let every of us strive to do, to bring and keep our
hearts in such a temper as that we may not be inordinately affected with any
thing here below, whether Crosses or Comforts. Not but that a Christian may be
affected with both. He may both Weep, and Rejoice, and that upon the account of
temporal concernments. But see that it be not in an inordinate manner. And so
may he buy and sell, seek and endeavor to get an estate in the world, to
purchase and possess houses and lands. But take we heed we do not make them our
chief possession. It is a good distinction, which Augustine makes use of,
betwixt Vti and Frui, Using and enjoying. Which let all of us learn, that so we
may not be guilty of what he charge as a great impiety, viz. Vti fruendis, or
frui utendis, only to make use of what we ought to enjoy, or to enjoy what we
ought only to make use of. As only to make use of heaven and heavenly things,
by thinking or speaking of them sometime, which we ought to make our enjoyment;
or to make the things of this world our enjoyment, which we ought only to make
use of; and that so using them as if we used them not. Thus labor we so take
of our hearts, that they may sit loose to the world. Which till a man do, he
will never be willing to leave it. Surely this is it which makes the men of
this world so unwilling to hear of death, much more to see it, their hearts are
glewed and fastened to the world, to the profits, or pleasures, or honors of
it; Some thing or other there is to which they are wedded. And no wonder then
that this Apparatour, Death, which brings to them a Bil of divorce, should be
so unwelcome a messenger. Get we our hearts then weaned and taken of from all
these, so as we may leave this world before it leaves us, leave it in
Affection before we leave it in Person. Which having done death will not be
unwelcome.

Q. But how shall we get our hearts thus weaned from the world? How to get the
heart weaned from the world


A. Briefly, 1. By a serious consideration of the vanity of it, even all things
upon earth. The mutability, uncertainty, with the vacuity and emptiness of
them, Consider the vanity of earth
how they are such things as a man can have to assurance of enjoying them, and
whilst enjoyed, cannot afford any true contentment to the soul, but oftimes
breeding worms in it, cares and fears vexations and disquietments. All which
the wisest of men by his own experience found, as he sets it forth at large in
that his Book of Retractions, Ecclesiastes.

2. Consider the transcendency of those Riches, The happiness of heaven.
Honors, and Pleasures which are to be found in that other world, in Heaven.
Which being put into the balance against these of this world, do infinitely
outweigh them. Those being (as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 10.34.) A better
and an enduring substance, whereas these are only vain and vanishing shadows.
Look we rightly, seriously and steadfastly upon the one, our eyes will be so
dazzled with the splendour and brightness of them that they will never after be
much taken with the glimmering of the other.

3. Have no unnecessary society or familiarity with the men of this world, the
worlds minions and Favorites, men who mind nothing but earthly things. But
associate and acquaint our selves with such as are in their affections got
above the earth, and have learned to contemn and make light of all things in it.

4. Single out the particulars which our hearts are most taken with, and
fastest linked to, and make it our daily work to wean our souls from them. But
I hasten toward a conclusion. Thus dye to the world daily.

And thirdly, Dye daily as to the Death of nature. Which do we, Dye daily the
death of nature


1. By inuring our selves to a quiet and patient bearing and suffering of
lighter afflictions and Crosses. Submitting to lesser Crosses which are as
petty deaths.
Every of which is a kind of petty death; all of them deaths retinue
forerunners of it and making way for it. Now inure we our selves to a quiet
submission to the will of God in drinking of these lesser Cups, in suffering of
these lesser trials with patience and holy contentation, this will make us the
more ready and willing to submit to this last stroke when it comes, to suffer
death it self. The new Cart in the Fable, which never bare any burden before,
it made a noise at the first load whereas the old one, having been accustomed
thereunto, was silent. The soul which never inurd it self to bear the Cross,
to suffer lighter Afflictions with patience in obedience to God, will hardly be
brought quietly to submit to his will in this last act. It is good (says the
Church for a man, that he bare the yoke in his youth, he sits alone and
keeps silence, because he has born it upon him. Lam. 3.27. By being inured
to the patient bearing of lighter afflictions, he quietly submits to greater
when they come and so to death it self.

2. Seriously and frequently meditate of death.
And (Secondly) often acting this part with our selves in private, before we
come to do it upon the public stage. Dying daily by a frequent and serious
meditation of death. Setting it continually before our eyes, often thinking of
our latter end. Which is a great piece of true Christian wisdom. O that they
were wise that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end
(says the Lord of his people Israel,) Deuteronomy. 32.29. Consider that we must dye.
And here, do not put far off from us this evil day. Do not look upon death, as
they do who look through the Optic glass, at the wrong end, whereby things
near at hand seem at a great distance from them. Do not thus look upon death as
a thing afar of, but near hand. A practice of great use, (as to other ends, so)
to make death familiar, and consepuently not so dreadful. It is the
forgetfulness of death (says one) that makes life sinful and death terrible.
And therefore, as he had his deaths head every meal set upon his Table, and the
guize of mourners is to wear them in their rings, so do we often set death
before us, frequently and seriously thinking of it. And looking upon it as near
hand, so living every day as if it were our last day. Continually standing upon
our guard; waiting all the days of our appointed time till our change shall
come (as Job says he would do, Job 14.14.) By this means, having been made
account of, and looked for before it comes, it will not be so terrible when it
comes. Thus prepare for death, by dying daily.

And then (in the third place) work while our day lasts. Work whilst our day
lasts.
So did our blessed Savior, I must work the works of him that sent me, while
it is day, Joh. 9.4. And the like do we, whilst the day of life lasts, be we
working the works of God, that so we may have finished our work before the
night of death comes. The labourer having wrought hard in the day, and
finished his work, this makes the night welcome to him, and his rest sweet and
comfortable. And so will the night of death be to the soul that has been
working for God, it will now be to it a quiet rest. This made our blessed
Savior so willing now to dye, he had finished his Fathers work, I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do,
Joh. 17.4. And this made the Apostle so confident, as not to fear his
departure, when he apprehended it at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4.7. He had been faithful to
his Lord and M^ster, in doing the work which he had committed unto him; And
thence he concludes that he should now receive his Crown, that Crown of
righteousness (as he there calls it,) an ample reward, which the righteous God
would give him for all his service. Whereupon he is not unwilling to think of
his departure. O that every of us may endeavor thus to approve our selves to
God, and Jesus Christ, thus to work his work whilst our day lasts. Then when
the evening of death comes, we shall be sure to have our Penny. Which being
assured of, it will make us not unwilling to go to receive it.

4. Be frequent in casting up our accounts, Be frequent in casting up our
accounts.
betwixt God and our souls. The day of death is the reckoning day, wherein
every one must give up his account unto God. Give an account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward (says the Master' in the
parable to his Servant) Luke 16.2. In this life we are all Gods Stewards, being
betrusted by him with many Talents, which we are to improve for him. And hereof
at the day of death we must give an account to him. O that the thought of that
day may not be terible to us, make up our account aforehand. And this do we
often. They who are frequent in casting up their accounts are not unwilling to
be called to a general reckoning, which they who have bin remiss and careless
herein would be. Surely this is one thing which makes men so unwilling to hear
of death when it comes, they have then all their accounts to cast up. Take
heed it be not so with us. Be we strict and constant observers of our own
hearts and lives. Often calling our selves to an account, making it our daily
work. Every night reflecting upon the day past, call we to mind (according to
that trite direction, (...), etc.) wherein we have transgressed, what evil we
have committed, what good we have done, or left undone. So making even betwixt
God and our souls, by suing forth our discharge in the name, and upon the
account of Jesus Christ. This exercise, being conscientiously performed, it
will be of special use to make this great reckoning day not unwelcome to us,
when it shall come.

5. Lay up a stock in heaven.
and to leave this world, send somewhat before us into that other world. Laying
up a stock in heaven.

1. our selves. That is our Saviors counsel, For our selves a flock of good
works.
Matthew. 6.2. Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven. This do we by doing
of good works; as works of Piety, so of Charity. Sell that you have and give
alms, provide for your selves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the
heavens that fails not, (says that parallel Text) Luke 12 33. A man that
has his chief estate in another Country, which he has made over by bills of
exchange, or put into the banck there, he will not be unwilling upon a just
occasion to follow it. Now such are acts of charity and mercy, being done for
Gods sake, they are as so many bills of exchange made over for heaven, a stock
put into the banck, where he who has so put it out, shall at his coming thither
receive it again with abundant increase. He that has pity on the poor lends
to the Lord, and that which he has given he will pay him again, Prove. 19.17.
O, that rich men, to whom God has given abundance of this worlds goods, and
whose care it is to make the best improvement of what they have, would but take
this Course thus to make themselves friends of their Mammon, (as our Savior
advises them. Luke 16.9) that so when they fail (when they dye;) they may
receive them into everlasting habitations. This would make them not so
unwilling to dye, as for the most part they are, and that upon this account,
because they must leave what they have in this world, and have no stock laid
up in another.

2. For others a stock of prayers
And thus laying up a stock in heaven for our selves, do the like also for
others, laying up a Stock, a Stock of prayer for them. Which whilst we do for
all Gods people whom we leave behind us, do it in a special manner for our near
and dear Relations. So did our heavenly pattern here, The Lord Jesus, whom, in
the Chapter before the text, we find upon his knees, putting up a devout prayer
unto God his Father, as for his Church in general so for his Apostles in
special, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me, Joh. 17.9. And the like let them do who are to leave near and
dear Relations behind them, Wives, Husbands, Children, kindred, friends, lay up
a stock of prayers for them in Heaven, whereof they may reap the benefit, when
themselves have left them. This will make them the less unwilling to leave
those whom they have thus provided for.

In the sixth place, Set the house in order.
now set we our houses in order upon earth. That is the Counsel and charge
which the Lord gives to Hezekiah, when he sent him those tidings, that he must
dye, he bids him set his house in order, Isai. 38.2. Set thine house in order
for thou must dye and not live. A thing of great use, as in reference to the
living, who shall be left behind, so also to him who is to depart hence, who
having thus settled his temporal concernments in this world, will be more ready
for his removal into another, when God shall call him to it. And therefore let
not this be neglected by those who have ought to dispose of. Let them be
careful to make their Wills and Testaments before hand. So also did this our
heavenly pattern, the Lord Jesus, who at his last Supper, having ordered other
things before, he then finished his Will and Testament, setting his Seal to it.
Of such use was that Sacrament then and there instituted, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, being as a seal set by Christ to his Testament, for the
confirming of all his former grants, and assuring of whatever he had promised.
Now what he did as to Spirituals, let those who would be ready to dye when God
will have them, do as to Temporals. Settling them aforehand. Not putting off
this work (as too many do) to the death bed; which as it is attended with many
other inconveniences, so it often proves no small disquietment to the spirit of
the dying person, making him loath to leave this world in so unsettled a
condition, as through this his former neglect in reference to his own
relations, and concernments, he is like to do. Set thy house in order.

Which being done, commit the Soul unto God? Commit the soul to God.
Which that we may do quietly and comfortably in death, (as our blessed Savior
did who breathed out his Soul in those words, Father into thy hands I commend
my spirit, Luke 23.46.) do we it before, do it in Life. So did David, Psalm.
31.4. Into thy hands I commit my spirit. So did the Apostle who making a
confession of his faith to his Son Timothy, 2 Timothy, 1.12. there tells him, I know
(says he) whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed to him against that day. His precious soul, this
was his (...), his Depositum, that which he had committed to the custody of God
and Jesus Christ. And the like do we that we may be willing to depart hence,
(as he was) commit we our souls unto God aforehand. Which do we, first by
Faith, believing on him (which the Apostle there says he did) casting our
selves into the arms of his free grace and mercy through Jesus Christ. Then by
obedience, committing the keeping of our souls unto him in well doing, as unto
a faithful Creator (as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 4. last.) indevouring
carefully and conscientiously to walk before him in all wel-pleasing all the
days of our life. So doing, now as we shall have comfort in life, so when
death comes we shall have no cause to be afraid of it.

And thus have I now (through a gracious assistance) preached this doctrine
unto you, which I look upon as the hardest lesson in Christ's school. Now what
remains but that we all beg it of our great Lord and Master, that he would so
effectually teach it us, that as occasion is, we may practice what we have
heard, showing our selves conformable to this our heavenly Pattern, as in his
Active so in his Passive Obedience; being obedient to our heavenly Father as in
doing, so in suffering his Will, even Obedient to death. For which let us now
pray.

FINIS.

