A BRIEFE-ANSWERE, TO THE LATE-RESOLVES Of the Commons Assembled in Parliament,
Concerning Ministers, their Preaching and Praying.

AMOS. 2.12.14.15. Ye Commanded the Prophets, saying; Prophecy not.

Therefore the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty
save his Life.

He that handles the Bow shall not stand, neither shall he that rides the
Horse escape.

AMOS. 3.8. The Lord has spoken who can but Prophesy?

2 TIMOTHY 4.2.3. Preach the Word, Improve, Rebuke. For the time will come when
they will not suffer wholesome Doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall
after their own Lusts, get them an heap of Teachers.

LONDON, Printed 1649.

The Praeface.
THOUGH the wildness of th^se three Resolves (which (...) their own dr^sse do^
sufficiently discover the distempered humors of the Resolvers, and the
distracted ^taines of the Person or Persons that propounded the Questions; or
[to speak: the proper language of the ^east Rev. 13.1.4.] put them to the
Vo^^) be apparent to th^se ingen^ous Spirits who are able to disc^rne or
estimate the weight of sound or solid Demonstrations, and so might have saved
me, or any other the labor, to o^^vate them for ^s, and discover their
Diametricall-Opposition i^ the Law of God, and the practice of his Servants
(...) Yet because the iniquity of our degenerated Age, and the Frenzy of the
inter^^^ed ignorant Vulgar is such, as makes them apt to grant all for Lawful
and Just, which they Resolve and Publish, because of their present Height and
Greatness: Therefore I concluded that I was bound in Conscience to give
Testimony to the Tr^th [from which (...) Authority whatsoever, much less that
which is usurped, should make ^s swerve] which encouraged me to undertake the
Task; so to un-deceive the deceived; bring into the way of Truth those that
have erred or been seduced, and stay all others from entering those dangerous
paths, into which by these Resolves, they may else [in the simplicity of their
hearts] ^e misled; which if it effect; I have gained the end of my Desires, and
the Purchaser of this short Answer will be no lo^ser by the Bargain.

The Resolves of the Commons, etc.
THOUGH the Face be Resolved, yet the Body is a Law: For it consists of those
two parts which constitute it such; Precept and Penalty. The Precept of it is
three fold; the Penalty One and the same. This Piece labors to enervate the
power of the Precepts, by discovering the groundless foundation of the Law,
and proving it invalid, not binding. This performed, I will not, none need to
be afraid of their Bug-beare, Penalty.

That Law is not binding, which is not Constituted by a lawfull-Authority.

The Commons (assembled in Parliament) alo^e, are no lawfull-Authority.

Therefore this Law ( called Resolves) Constituted by the Commons (assembled in
Parliament) alone, is not binding.

That the House of Commons, alone, (though as they are at present we may deny
them to be any House at all, but a Ezech. 2, ^
Rebellious-House, is no lawful Authority, may appear clearly unto all
unbiased Judgments, if they take notice of these Reasons.

The Commons, alone, are no Parliament; and therefore no lawful Authority
without the King and Lords.

For First, by, and in the very primitive Constitution of our English
Parliaments, it was most unanimously agreed by the kingdoms and Peoples
general and uncompelled consent, that our Parliament should be constituted and
made up, not of Knights and Burgesses only, elected by Freeholders H. 6. c. 7.
^0. H. 6. c. 2.^. H. 6. c. 15 ^romp^on Ja^isdict. p. 1.2. ^. cook 4. In^^t. c.
1.
and Burgesses (not by the generalite of the vulgar People, who do now claim
and usurp this right of Election, as these Resolvers do of Law-giving) but
likewise of the King, the Cook In^it. c. 1. u. 1. ^. ^^dus tenendi
Parliamentum ^^ompton Ju^isdict. of ^ourts Tit. ^arliament. At. Seldens ^it
honor par. ^.6.5.
Supreme Member (for by his Writs the Parliament were to be summoned) and of
the Lords, Peers, Barons and great Officers of the Realm; who also ought of
right, and for the perfect Constitution and making up of a Parliament, to Sit,
Vote, make Laws, and give Judgment. And all our Law-bookes 33. H. 6.6.9. E.
3.7. (...). Parl. 4.^. H. 7.18. ^. H. 7.14. ^remptons Ju^^sdict. p. 9. judge
Huttons ^^gument of (...). Hembdens ^^se p. 32.33.
do Resolve, that without this threefold concurrent assent, there is not,
neither can there be any binding Law made.

Therefore this Law made by the Commons, alone, without the concurrent assent
of the other two Members, is not binding.

2. That the Commons, alone, are no Parliament; but that the King and Lords
with them, make up a complete Parliament, is apparent by Hutton's Argument of
Mr. Hampden's Case, pa. 32. 33. Judge by the practice in all Empires and
Kingdoms of the World, as is clear by these Texts of Scripture. 1 Chro. 1.2.
Chapter 28.1.2. etc. Chapter 29 6.24. 2 Chapter 5.3.5. 2 Chapter 23.2.3.20.21. Chapter 30.2.3.6.12.
Chapter 34.29. Chapter 25.7.8. Nehe. 9.38. Chapter 10, 29. Esther 1.13, 22. Dan. 3.2.3. 2
Chapter 29.30. Chapter 32.3. Ezra. 9.1. C. 10.8. 1 Sa. 5.8. Chapter 29, 3.10. Psa. 68.27.
Pro. 8, 15.16. Isa. 19.11.12.13. J^r. 17.25. Chapter 26.11.16. Chapter 36.12.14. C.
37.14.15. C. 38.4.25.27. Dan. 6.1.6.7. Jonah 3.7. Psalm 2.2. Isa. 1.23.26.

That in all Empires and Kingdoms in the World, their Princes, Nobles, Lords
and great Officers of State have been accounted necessary for the Constituting
their complete Parliaments, and General Counsels of State is clear (I say)
by these texts of Scripture, compared together; and by all Historians and
Politicians testimonies; and in this Kingdom many hundred years before the
Conquest, as modus tenendi Parliamentum, Epos. To his Report. In^^^^es on
Lit^^ton. p. 110. (...) Instud^es. c. ^.
Sir Ed. Cook, and Mr. Seldens ^^cles of honor ^er 2 c 5. ^ere this is
a^^ndantly ma^^fested. ^el^^anni Con^^. ^om. 1.^ truth trium ^^^ng over falls
and, Antiqui^^ over Novel^^^ p. 36 etc. ^^e Free-hol^^rs grand In^^est. P. ^ 20.
others write, and our Historians Record. Therefore whatsoever the one do,
without the assent of the other two, is not binding; because, without the
Presence of all three, one alone is not a complete Parliament, neither is the
Authority of one alone Lawful, This Law then, made by the Commons, alone, is
not Binding.

3. The Commons, alone, are no Parliament, and therefore no lawful Authority,
without the King and Lords; because they cannot prove themselves to be a
Parliament, alone, and so to have lawful Authority to impose binding-Lawes, by
any Law of God, either in the old or new Testament, for they both contradict
it. By no Law or Statute of this Kingdom or Nation, which absolutely disclaim
it, and enact the contrary. By no Pr^scription, Custom or Usage; which are all
against it: No, nor by the original Law of Nature: For the Law of Nature (as
Aristo^. pol. l. 1. Bodin* de Rep. l ^. c 2.3.4.5. Dr. Field of the Church, l.
1 c. 1.2.
Bolititians an^ Divines assert, and the Scripture manifests) gives every
Father a Magisteriall and Legislative power over his Children, Progeny, Family;
now the Steward cannot have any lawful Authority, without him, to impose Laws
on the rest of the Family, without his consent, as is generally acknowledged.
Therefore the Commons (being but the Stewards of this great Family of England,
of which the King is the Father: He that has but common sense will conclude)
can be no Parliament, alone, without him; nor can they have any lawful
Authority to impose any binding-Law upon the rest of the Family, that is, the
rest of their fellow Subjects without his assent.

This Law then of the Commons, alone, is not Binding.

4 That the Commons, alone, are no Parliament, and therefore no
lawfull-Authority; but that the King and Lords are requisite to make up a
complete Parliament, is confirmed by Prescription and Custom, from the very
first beginning of Parliaments in this Kingdom, till this present, there being
no one president to be found in History, or Record of any Parliament held in
this Island without a King Personally present (or representatively by a
Protector, Custos Regni or Commissioners) and Lords or Peers: as Ingulph,
Beda, Hecter Boethius, and Speed among our Historians; Anti^^uitates Ecclesiae
Britanicae, Spelmanni Concilia Tom. 1. Sir Edward Cook in his Preface to the
9. Report, and Institut. 4. c. 1. Mr. Seldens titles of honuours, part 2. c. 5.
Truth triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Noveltie, p. 56.90. and Mr
Lambert in his Arohaion, do all bear witness.

Six Com. of England. (...). 61
Thomas Smith, Ho^^^shed Vol. 1. c 6. p. 173.
Ralph Hollinshed, Cambden B^^ta. p. 177.
Mr. Cambden; Powel in his Attorneys Academy, and diverse others unanimously
conclude: That the Parliament consists of the King, Lords, and Cominons; which
three represent the Body of all England, which make but one Assembly or Court
called the Parliament; and is of all other, the highest and greatest Authority,
and has the most high and absolute power of the Realm. Mr. Crompton in his
Jurisdicton of Cou^ts, fol. 1. affirms; That it neither is nor can be any
Parliament without the King and Lords. This Court (says he) is the highest
Court of England, which the King, Lords and Commons do all jointly make up:
and then Resolves against these desperate Resolvers; That no Law can be made
to bind the Subjects without all their concurrent Assent.

The Commons alone therefore, are no Parliament; and consequently have no
Lawful Authority: This Law then of the present Commons, is not binding. Thus
have we proved by the known Laws of the Land; That the Commons alone have no
Lawful Authority, to Constitute any Law; and that therefore, this Law is not
binding.

This promised; Next (because it concerns Ministers) let us see, whether it
be binding by the Law of God, or according to the Rule of his Word.

That Law which does Command any thing which the Word of God does Forbid; or
Forbid any thing which the Word of God does Command, is not binding: But this
Law does both Command that which is Forbiden, and Forbid that which is
Commanded in the Word of God: Therefore this Law does not bind.

That this Law, termed the Resolves, does Forbid that which is Commanded in the
Word of God, and Command that which is Forbidden. Thus I Prove.

The first Precept is this. If any Minister [that is no Minister] shall etc.
This Precept Forbids Ministers to Preach or Pray against their Proceedings. Now
the Ministers Consciences are fully satisfied; that some of their Proceedings
[they being as is proved, no Lawful Authority] are against the Law of the
Land, and consequently against the Law of God [for the known Laws of this
Land, are all grounded upon the Law of God:] As the cutting off the late King's
Head, the abolishing Monarchy and erecting a populer Government of themselves
and creatures; with diverse other infringements of the Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom, just rights of the Crown, and Liberty and Propriety of the
Subjects; those several Orders, and Ordinances, Protestations, Covenants and
Oaths which they have first thrust upon and forced the People unto, and then
not only broken them themselves, but also compelled or corrupted others to
commit the same impiety, for which the Land mournes; yea all their courses is
evil, and their foot is not right; Jer 23.10.
and therefore to be both Prayed and Preached against by the Ministers, or
dispensers of the Word of God, which Commands them so to do. Ezech. 33.7.8.
Isai. 18 1.2. Ezeck. 2.3.4 etc. 2. Tim. 4.2.


And Gods Word does Command this; because God would have it known; that,
though the Power of Lawmakers were unquestionable (which of these Resolvers is
not;) yet, that the consideration and determination, whether such Laws as they
prescribe, be agreeable to or against Gods Law, belongs to the Minister, as is
evident. Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.10.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment etc. And thou shall come
unto the Priests of the Levites, and unto the Judge who shall give Sentence
(...) the Priests shall Counsel him by the law of God.
that shall be in those days and ask, and they shall show thee the sentence
of Judgment. And thou shall do according to all that they inform thee.
According to the Law which they shall teach thee etc. Compare their Resolves
with this part of Scripture, and tell me whether they do not in the first
Precept Forbid that which this Commands.

So likewise in the Prophet Malachy, the word of God says thus, And ye shall
know that I have sent this Commandment unto you, Mal^. 1.4.8
That my Covenant which I made with Levi might stand, to put the Law of Truth
in his Mouth, That his Lips should preserve Knowledge, and that the People
should seek the Law at his Mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of Isai.
58.1.2
Host, These Lips, God's word commands them to open; and to speak with this
Mouth. That Law then, which Forbids these lips to open, and this Mouth to
speak; does Forbid that which the Word of God Command.

But this first Precept, does seal up the one and stop the other, Silenceing
the Ministers. [a Crime so inexpiable in the Bishops.]

Therefore this Law, in respect of this first Precept, is not binding.

Which I shall prove not binding also, in respect of their second Precept; for,
that both forbid, that which St. Paul commands, 1. Tim. 2.^.2.
and commands in these words [otherwise then as the Enemies to this
Common-Wealth] that which God himself forbids. Exodus 21.28. and Eccles. 10.20.


Therefore this Law, in respect of this second Precept, also is not binding.

Now to prove that it is not binding, in respect of the last; I desire you to
read; Isaiah 58. and Zechariah ^
and compare them with their proceedings, and days of Public Humiliation, or
Fasts. Now God expressly forbids the keeping, or observing such a Fast. Isai.
58.4.5.
But this third Precept commands the keeping and observing their Fasts though
it be apparent they are the same. Judge therefore, whether this Law be
binding or no, in respect of this third and last Precept.

The Angel of God commanded Acts 5.20.
the Apostles to Preach; which they did. verse. 21.
The Council and the Elders of Israel sent a Captain with Officers, who
apprehended them and set them before the Council. verse. 26. (...).
They by their Speaker said: Did not we straightly command you, that ye
should not Teach in this Name: and yet behold ye have filled Jerusalem with
your Doctrine; and yea would bring this man's blood upon verse. 2^.
us.

Here were Resolves, of a grand Council, forbidding that which God had
Commanded; Therefore the Apostles looked upon their commands as not binding
[though a Lawful Authority:] And therefore return this short Answer; We
ought rather to obey God then verse. 29.
Man.

That Primitive-Christian-Persecuting-Councell, has our
Orthodox-Protestant-Tormenting house of Commons imitated in their proceedings
with the Ministers of this Age; Therefore their answer to these their Resolves,
may be the same with theirs; We ought to obey God rather then Men; though
they should with that Council, a^ the hearing thereof, burst with anger and
Consult to slay verse. 53.
them.

I should in Charity advise them to take Gamaliels Council in that Chapter;
Act. 5.
of which I make this transition.

Ye men of England, who call your selves the Commons Assembled in Parliament,
take heed to your selves what ye intend to do touching these men, the
Ministers of Gods verse. 35.
word. Refrain your selves from them and let them alone, least you be found
fighters against God. verse. 39.
For though you should beat them, and command their silence; yet you shall
find, that they will depart from your Council, rejoicing that they are counted
worthy to suffer from you, for declaring their Consciences; yea mauger all your
proud threats, they will preach daily in the Temple, Psalm. 141.6.
without ceasing, against your ungodly procedings and in opposition to your
Resolver putting on the Resolution of holy David, pray against your wicked and
Rebellious practizes. Nay (...) by God himself in the person of Ezechiel they
will not fear you, nor be afraid of (...) ^^^^ugh Rebels and Thrones Ezekiel.
2.^.^.6.
be among them, and they remain with Scorpions: They will not fear your
words, nor be afaid of your looks for they know you are a Rebellious House
and you shall know there has been Prophets amongst you.

But whatsoever the Ministers say: as for these desperate Resolvers, we may
truly say of them what God said there of that stiff hearted and Rebellious
Nation: Surely they will not hear, Ezekiel. 2.5.
neither indeed will they cease for they are a Rebellious House; which appears
by these their Anti- Mona^chy Resolves.

In all ages it has been the treasonable and destructive design of those who
by popular insinuation, tre^cherous Policy, bloody practizes, or powerful
Ambition, have post^sled themselves of another Right, to cut off all means
and hinder all discourse by which their unjust usurpation may be detected, or
it may be known whose the Right of succession is.

Thus Jer^^^am having by Rebellion got the Kingdom of Israel into his
possession by an irreligious policy prevents their return to their former
allegiance, and subjection to their lawful 1 Kings. 1.172 28.
King.

Thus also Athaliah 2 Kings 11. ^.
after the Death of the King, having got possession of the Throne, to confirm
that her usurped reign, she destroys as many of the seed Royal as she
could get into her power, that so the Kingdom might not return to any of
them, to whom did pertain the Right of Succession. And a^ther her v. 4.
7 years is usurped Reign, when the H^lie of the slain King was by Jehoiada
crowned and proclaimed v. 11.
King, she cries out Treason, Treason ^ Kings 11.14.
: As it because by shedding Royal blood she had got the power into her hand,
it must therefore be treason in all that did promote the Title and Interest of
the Heir apparent.

No doubt she had made such a Law, as our present bloody usurpers have to
secure her own Established Government and prevent the Sucession of the
Rightful King. (The treasonable design of these King murdering Resolvers.)

But Jehoiada the Priest or Minister, notwithstanding that command published by
her own Authority, (knowing her Government had it is foundation in blood [as
th^^ Established by our Resolvers also hath] and that such command did oppose
the command of the word of God), promotes the Ti^tle and Interest of the slain
Kings (...), takes an oath of Allegiance to him, v. 4.
and sets a guard about him for his v. 9.
security.

By which le^ i^ apparent that the forbidding Ministers to make mention of the
son^^ of our late murdered King, and the promoving his Title and Interest
[although declared against and taken away by their Authority] does not ^ind;
and therefore I will not fear to disobey it.

Nay further since I read that, after Jehoiada by the aid of his loyal
subjects had made him King, crowned him and given him the Testimomy, both he
and they (...) their hands for joy and prayed GOD SAVE THE KING; I will not
fear for all their second Resolve, to pray for the same success of our King*
Not doubting (...) that God will shortly send us such a joyful time also
where, in the Church and streets, we may openly say. God save CHARLES the
second Of England etc. King, Defender of the Faith etc.

Vivet, Vincat, floreat CAROLUS Secundus.
FINIS.

