Calendar-Reformation. OR, AN HUMBLE ADDRESS To the Right Honorable the LORDS
and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Touching Days and Months, that they may
be taught to speak such a language as may become the mouth of a Christian.

By I. B.

Exodus 23. 13. Make no mention of the name of other Gods, neither let it be
heard out of thy mouth. Melius de ore Christiano ritus loquendi Ecclesiasticus
procedit, quam Peganicus. August. Enarrat. Psalm. 93. in T^ulum. LONDON: Printed
by Francis Neile. 1648.

CALENDAR-REFORMATION: OR, An humble Address to the Right Honorable the LORDS
and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, Touching Days and Months, that they may
be taught to speak such a language as may become the mouth of a Christian.
Right Honorable, and ever honored Peers and Patriots:
AMongst other passages in Your late solemn Covenant (which I wish may be
engraven upon the tables of Your hearts, and had in everlasting remembrance)
you have engaged your selves and the Kingdom to a serious endeavor of an utter
extirpation of what ever may truly be called Superstition. In pursuance hereof,
it cannot be denied, somewhat has already been done. Organs and Copes, with
some other utensils and Ceremonies have been taken away from Cathedral, and
Parochial worship. Crosses, Images, and Pictures in walls and windows have
been defaced, and demolished (amongst which not a few innocent pieces have
suffered by ignorant hands). What has herein been done by your Order, I
quarrel not. I rather wish that the like zeal were showed in and upon some
other particulars. And amongst other, that whilst the walls and windows in our
Oratories are not suffered to wear ought that looks like a Romish dress;
the days in our weeks, and months in our years might not be permitted to
wear a Paganish Liverie.

That they do so (at least some of them) it is so notorious, as needs no
evidence. Amongst the former, who but takes notice of the two first bearing
the names of those two chief celestial Planets the Sun and the Moon, to whose
special adoration they were idolatrously d^dicated, and so called Sunday,
Monday, i. e. Sunsday, Moonsday. For the rest of them, however some small
inconsiderable difference there is about their immediate originals, yet so much
is concluded at all hands, that in their first imposition they were Paganish
and Idolatrous Tuisday so called from Verst^gans Antiquities, ca. 3.
Tuisco, the chief Idol among the Germans. Wednesday from Woden, or Wooden, a
Saxon Idol, which they honored as their Versteg. ibid.
Mars (says one), as their Camb. Brit. de Saxonibus.
Mercury (says another). Thursday from Versteg. ibid.
Thor, or Cambd. Brit. de Danis.
Thur, the Idol of the Danes, and Suedians. Friday from Friga, or Frea, a Saxon
Idol, the same with Cambd.
Venus (say some); an Verstegan.
Herm^phrodite (say others), representing both sexes, both a God, and a
Goddess. Saturday from the Roman Saturnus (so the vulgar), or rather from the
Saxon Verstegan.
Seater, another Idol in high veneration amongst them. To these goodly deities
were the days of the week dedicated. And under this barbarous dedication do
they to this day lie: each carrying the image and superscription of some
Heathenish Idol.

In like manner, the Months of the year, how do diverse of them yet wear the
like Recognizance? Januarie so called from the two faced dietie Janus. Ad^ian
Iunius Nomenclat.
February from Februm, to purge the souls of the dead by prayers or sacrifices,
or from Februus, Pluto the God of Hell, to whom in that Month they were wont
to sacrifice. March from Mars, the God of war. May from Maya, Mercuries mother.
June from the Goddess Juno. July from Julius Caesar; August from Augustus.
Thus did Paganism impose these names; And we as if we were their children not
only by propagation, but Religion, do still retain them.

And this it is (right Honorable) which I here take the boldness to represent
unto You, who only have the power to redress this long continued evil.
Neither am I the first that have taken up this complaint. I find one (no
Puritan I am sure) a Roman Catholic, and otherwise superstitious enough, who
complaining how the five ordinary days in the week (as they call them) had
among the vulgar Laics obtained their old Paganish names, he makes this
observation upon it. History of Times, translated out of Pedro Mexio etc. l. 6.
c. 6.
A matter questionless much to be moaned, and whereat we may blush with shame,
because no more care was had in former times to give other Christian names to
all those days, to the end that all memory of the Gentiles Gods might be lost
amongst us. So he. And therein he has said no more then that great and
orthodox Father Augustine had done before him, who in his Enarration upon that
93. (in our Bibles 94.) Psalm, descanting upon that superstitious and erroneous
title, prefixed by some unknown Expositor, Lyra ad loc.
and so taken up by Jerome, and others after him, Psalmus ipsi David quarta
Sabbati, A Psalm of David to be sung upon the fourth day after the Sabbath, he
passes his censure upon the practice of many Christians in his time, who
complying with Pagans in their language, were wont to call that day by the
Heathen name, Diem Mercurii, Mercuries day, Aug. Enarr. in Ps. 93. in Titul.
or as we call it Wednesday. Sed nolumus ut dicunt (says he) atque utinam
corrigantur ut non dicant. This I would not have them speak, and would to God
they were corrected that they might not so speak. Melius de ore Christiano
ritus loquendi Ecclesiasticus procedit, (so he goes on) In a Christians mouth
Ecclesiastical language sounds far better then Paganish. So that devout and
judicious African.

Neither does he herein speak of himself. What he therein wishes, it is no
more then what Scripture it self requires. Those Texts are obvious; may they
be but seriously considered. That of God by Moses, Exodus 23. 12. Make ye no
mention of the names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
That other of Joshuah to the people a little before his death: Josh. 23. 7.
where he inculcates the same precept before delivered to them by Moses. See
(says he) that ye come not among these Nations (these Idolatrous Nations, to
have any familiarity with them) neither make mention of the name of their
Gods. Both express Prohibitions, and that not Leviticall, but Moral; and so
reaching us, as well as them.

And do they so? what then remains, but that being rightly informed of the
sense and meaning thereof, we should yield a ready and conscientious obedience
to what is therein required?

As touching the former, viz: the sense and meaning of this Precept, Cajetan in
Exodus ^3. 13.
Expositors will tell us how it has been mistaken on both hands. On the right
hand by Jews, who from hence interdict their Disciples so much as to pronounce
any of the names of the Gentile Gods. On the left hand by others, who restrain
this Prohibition only to the Religious art of swearing. So the vulgar Latin
renders it. Per nomen externorum Deorum non jurabitis. You shall not swear by
the names of strange Gods. Calv. ad loc.
And herein that translation is followed by some orthodox Commentators. But
both these must go for extremes. The former is too large and general. Dr.
Willet ad loc.
Should all mention of the names of those Idols be here forbidden, how should
the Prophets of God have declaimed, and inveighed against them? The latter too
strait. The word in the original being of a larger extent, (...), Non
memorabiti^, i. e. ye shall not so make mention of them, as to revive, or
continue the memory of them.

Waving and declining both these, we shall find the truth to lie in the midst
between them. Cajet. Simler adloc.
The names of Idols must not be mentioned, viz: Mentione honesta, and
honorabili; with a favorable, and honorable mention. Mentioned they may be,
by way of Historical narration. Mentioned they ought to be, by way of
Detestation, and dislike. Not so by way of approbation, and allowance. In this
sense Paul forbids the naming of those base and sordid lusts, uncleanness,
covetousness; (...), Let it not be once named: Ephesians. 5. 3. viz: with the
least kind of seeming approbation; not without abhorrencie, and detestation.
And in this sense says David concerning Idoluters, Psalm. 16. 4. I will not
take up their names into my lips. He would neither do as they did, nor yet
honor them so much as to name them. And such a nomination it is which the Lord
here prohibits. The names of the Idol Gods must not be mentioned, so as that
thereby an honorable memory of them should be kept alive. This the Lord would
have his people by all means to endeavor the abolition of. And to that end he
required them where ever they came to destroy all the Monuments of Idolatry:
I, as much as might be to extinguish the very names of the Idols. The command
is express and full. Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3. Ye shall utterly destroy all the places
wherein the Nations which ye shall possess served their Gods upon the high
Mountains, and Hills, and under every green tree. And you shall overthrow their
altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and you shall
hew down the graven Images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of
that place.] This God ordered them to do. And this accordingly they did. To
that end changing the names of Idolatrous places where they came. So Expositors
generally give the sense of that place, Numb. 32. 38. Isa. 64. 1.
where it is said of Nebo, and Baal-meon, that their names were changed; viz:
because they were Idolatrous names, importing Idolatrous Nations. Thus did they.

And this president of theirs, grounded upon so clear a precept, do I here
hold forth unto you (right Honorable and Illustrious Senators) as a pattern
for your imitation. You see what names Days and Months amongst us carry; and
how they are enforced therein to do homage to strange Gods, to heathenish and
abominable Idols: So as Christians speaking of the one, are hereafter a sort
necessitated to mention the other. Whether this mention be such as is there
prohibited, this only is the question. But this I shall freely leave to your
own impartial decision. Surely, if an honorable mention, and such a mention
as in it self tends to the keeping and continuing of an honorable memory of
those Idols; then it is. In it self (I say). I know it is not so in the
intention of the speakers: Who either do not understand what they herein say;
(as the vulgar,) or if they do, yet they do in their hearts abominate the
giving of the least respect to any of these dunghill dieties. But whether ex
natura rei, in the nature of the thing it self, and in the continued familiar
application of these Idolatrous names to Months and Days, which were at first
called upon them in way of honor to those Paganish Idols, there be not
somewhat more then becomes a Christian; at least (I speak tenderly) an (...), a
species mali, ^Thes. 5. 22.
an Appearance of evil, which the Apostle wills all Christians by all means
to abstain from, this it is which I freely leave at your Bar, Humbly begging
that in case there shall be found any weight in this charge (as I question not
but there will be enough to sway the Balance) that then some effectual course
may be assayed by your wisdoms for the freeing of these Captives from this
their Paganish servitude, and the consciences of tender Christians at least
from a seeming scruple.

In the way of this motion I cannot but force many Remoraes to stop the course
of it: many pleas, and allegations to render it fruitless. Such as they are I
shall not refuse to join issue with them.

Obj: 1. The first that steppeth forth is the Antiquity of this kind of
language, which now through long continuance pleads an unalterable Custom.

Ans: 1. Custom? so it does, and that of too long continuance. More then time
that it should be reformed. 2. But what is humane Custom without, and against
divine Law. Consuetudo sine veritate, quid est nisi vetustas erroris. Custom
without truth, what is it but a moldy rotten error, fit for nothing but the
dunghill. 3. This plea has been pleaded at your Bar in some other cases (as
viz, in the case of Episcopacie, which lays claim to a Semper and Vbique for
1500 years,) and yet ejected. 4: But how ancient so ever this Custom has
been, yet sure we are, Ab initio non fuit fic; from the beginning it was not so.

Obj: 2. But this Custom pleads universalitie, having prevailed in all places
of the world.

An: 1. Not so. Aug. ubi supra.
Augustine in his time could say, Non in omnibus gentibus ista dicuntur. All
Nations do not speak after this manner. Multae gentes aliae atque alia aliter
vocant. Many Countries give other names to their Days, and Months. And at
this day this Barbarous language is not to be heard amongst the Churches in New
England. But suppose it, that this piece of Paganismehad overspread the whole
Christian world, yet were this no plea for the toleration of it, more then it
is for suffering of weeds because they have overrun the whole garden.

Obj: 3. But this is not Tanti, it is not so great an evil, but that it may
still be tolerated.

Ans. 1. In the matters of God nothing is to be accounted small or light. 2. If
small, surely God would not have been so earnest about it. 3. If light, the
sooner and easier removed, and taken away.

Obj. 4. But does not St. Luke make mention of (...) Acts 17: 19. Areopagus, i
e Genev. (...) non est idem quod pagus Latin, sed collis, autrupes, locus ve
immens. Lorinus ad loc
Mars-street, or rather Mars-hill (as our New Translation in the 22 verse
explaines it,) the place where the Athenians held their chief Court and Senate,
bearing the name of Mars the Pagan God of war? And does not the same pen
describe the ship wherein Paul sailed by the sign which it bare, viz: the
(...), Castor and Pollux, the Paganish Gods of the Sea? Act. 28. 11.

Ans. 1. True, thus the Evangelist writes, not having any othernames whereby
to describe that place, that ship; which we either have, or may have for days
and months: 2. He makes use of these names only in an Historical, and
Civil way.

Repl: And so do we, and no otherways.

Ans. Truth is, this is all that can be pleaded in way of excuse for this
continued practice; but what weight there is in it, let it be seriously and
sadly considered.

1. The same plea might the Israelites have taken up and made use of, for the
continuing of Idolatrous names to the places where they came, viz, what ever
the intention of the imposer was, to them they were only of Historical and
Civil use. Yet God injoyneth them to take them away, to Destroy the names of
those Idols: Engl: N: Annot. in Deuteronomy. 12. 3.
Deuteronomy: 12. 31. viz: by forbearing to name them, as Exodus: 23. 13. and putting
other names in their stead, (which accordingly sometimes they did) as Numb: 32.
38.

2. The like plea lay against Augustine when he took upon him to tax and
censure the same custom in his time, desiring the Reformation of it.
Christians then made use of those Paganish names only in an Historical and
Civil way. Yet he thought he had good reason, and just ground to do what he
did in corecting that Error.

3. But (thirdly) are these names indeed so as is pretended and alleged,
merely Historical and Civil.

1. Since we are in the first imposition of them they were not so. Then they
carried with them a Religious respect, being imposed by way of honor to those
Idols to which they were dedicated. And is not our continued and constant
practice in the use of the same names, after the same manner, the same Act with
theirs? Repl: True, but the Intention differs. Ans. So might Naamans, in case
we shall suppose what some and the most conceive, that he did after his
cleansing go into the house of Rimmon, 2 Kin. 18. 5.*
and there bow down with his Master, what his Master did in a religious respect
to the Idol, he might do only in a Civil respect to his master, who then leaned
upon his hand, as he was wont to do in other places, 2 King 7. 2.
upon all occasions: Yet being the same Act, who will plead it to be allowable?

2. The daily use of these names in this way seems to be more then barely
Historical or Civil; viz, an Honorable mention of them. So we look upon that
name which is given to the first day of the week, when it is called the Lords
Day, not as merely Historical, only minding us of what was acted upon that
day, viz. the resurrection of our Lord, but as also carrying with it an
Honorable respect unto him to whom that day is dedicated. And is it not so
with the names of the Apostles, and other Saints and Martyrs, which have been
called upon other days? These we look upon as having some what more then
barely an Historical and Civil respect in them, at least as Honorable
memorials of those persons to whose memory those days were dedicated. And why
not the like in these other days, which for the like end had these names at
first imposed upon them?

3. However this customarie practice seems to be in it self a proper means
for the continuing and perpetuating the respective memory of these Barbarous
and abominable Idols, whose very names God would have destroyed, and
themselves not to be mentioned or remembered by Christians without abhorrencie
and detestation.

Obj. 5. But age has worn out the sense and meaning of these Idolatrous
names, so as people in using them do not understand what they say.

Ans. 1. It some do not, others do. 2. Those which do not, should be taught to
do it. 3. Ignorance in speaking excuses no more then Ignorance in acting. Luke
23 34.
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Some Oaths and Execrations
are used by some who know not what they say: yet not excusable.

Obj. 6. But the Reformation hereof, would be looked upon as a precise
noveltie, without any precedent.

Ans. 1. Precise, so God in matters of this nature would have his people to be.
In all things that I have said unto you be ye circumspect, (wary, precise, so
Paul presses it, (...), Walk circumspectly, punctually, precisely, Ephesians: 5.
15.) and make no mention of the names of other Gods. Exodus 23. 13: 2. For the
Noveltie of it, it is but nine days wonder, not to be regarded by those who
stand in the ways, and see, and ask for the old way, where is the good way,
that they may walk therein. Ie^: 6. 16. 3. For President, it cannot truly be
said to be without. To let pass that of yesterday in New England, Antiquity
will tell us of a famous Reformation in this particular made by an ancient
Bishop of Rome, and that (as it is said) at the instance of Constantine the
great the first Christian Emperor. Pope Sylvester the first of that name
(says my Author) laboring to extirpate the memory of vain and false Gods,
History of ancient Times. l. 6. c. 6.
ordained that the days of the week, which before did bear name of the Gods
of the Gentiles, and Idolaters, should be otherwise altered and ^^^^^ed. For
whereas our Sabbath day bears the name of the Sun, Monday of the Moon,
Tuesday of Mars, Wednsday of Merourie, etc. they were divided to the number of
Feriae, or holidays, and called the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and
sixth feria, after the same manner as the Hebrews had distinguished their days
by the names of Sabbaths: etc. So he. Thus was this Reformation then
undertaken. And for a time it took place and prevailed, as appears by the
language of the Ancients. And to this day it yet obteineth amongst the
Ecclesiastics of the Church of Rome, who in matters Ecclesiastical still
observe the same style; secundia feria, tertia feria, so: post dominicam; the
second, third, fourth day, viz, from the Lords day. And if this language be
fittest in divine (as at all hands it is confessed,) why not in Civil matters
also?

Obj. 7. But there are greater matters in hand then this.

Ans. 1. There are so. And would to God they did not stick there. O let not
that hand prove a mortua manus! May we see them either once done, or in earnest
in doing! 2. But while those (...), the neightier things of the Law, or Gospel,
are in the eye, let not lighter things be cast behind the back. These things
ought you to have done, and not to leave the other undon. Mat: 23. 23. 3. But
whether the taking away of Idolatrous monuments be so slight a matter, let
Scripture be judge. Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3. and aliis. 4. Nay whether in the business of
Reformation these should not be looked at in the first place. Aynsworth Expos*
in Den. 12. v. 3.
In the beginning of true Religion (says one) is Repentance from dead works,
Heb: 6. 1. So in constituting of Gods true worship and service, it is a fit
method to begin with the abolishing of Idolatrous Monuments. For what agreement
has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6. 16. This is Moses's (or rather
Gods) method, (says the same Author writing upon that 12th. of Deuteronomy. verse 3.)
And this has hitherto been your method. Your work of Reformation has begun at
the same end, in taking away some, (at least supposed) Relics of Superstition.
And why may not Idolatrous dedication of days and months come in the number?
The Christian dedication of some days to the memory of Apostles, Saints, and
Martyrs, you have already by your Authority made null. And why should all the
rest be left undone, an Heathenish dedication to the memory and honor of
abominable Idols?

Thus have I ( thrice noble and Illustrious Senators) freely and plainly
represented unto you this so just a greivance. And what now remains but that I
should herein bespeak your zeal for God? Which that I may set an edge upon, I
shall only set before you what God himself sets before his people by way of
Evangelicall promise. Zach. 13. 2. It shall come to pass in that day, says
the Lord of hosts, that I will out off the names of the Idols of the Land. Hos.
2. 16. I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, aad they shall be
no more remembered by their name. This has God promised to do for his Church,
under the Gospel, and this he will do. May you have the honor and happiness
to be isntrumental in promoting this design in this Kingdom. Which in the
specified particular you may effect with as great facility as your
Remembrancer moove it. It is but your Fiat; who will contradict, or oppose it?
Not any who either have, or pretend to tender consciences. Having so express a
precept to aw them, they dare not. Not others, having such precedents, a
Prelate and a Prince, both so great, and so good, to go before them, they will
not.

Qu. But what names shall be given to the one, and the other?

Ans. Here I shall not take the boldness to prescribe. What names you please,
so they be Innocent. But what fitter can there be, then what Scripture it self
puts into our mouths? The first, second, third day, or month. This was the
language both of the old Testament, and new. And why should any be curious in
seeking for any other? True it is, the first day of the week (so called
before, (...), Matthew. 28. 1. Mar. 16. 2. 9.) it has obtained a peculiar
denomination; Dies dominica, The Lords day; so styled (not without a divine
approbation) from the Resurrection of Christ upon that day. Let this Queen,
this Lady, and Mistress, this chief of days retain her own style. In the
mean time, if the other days as handmaids in reference to her, bear only
these simple notes of distinction (as before they did in reference to the
Sabbath) it will be an honor to her, and no injury to them. In like manner
for Months. What need they say other names then their numer all distinctions?
These content some of them. September the seventh Month, October the eight,
November the ninth, December the tenth. And why not the rest?

Obj. But the Jews and others names for their months?

Ans. Dr. Willet in Exodus c. 12. q 4. etc. 13. q 4.
True, they had so, at least for some of them. And that not only after their
return from Captivity (as Paulus* Bugensis, Pererius, Calvin, and our Goodwin
would have it,) but before also. Goodwin: Moses and Aaron. li. 3. cap. 1.
In their return from Babylon (as it is hard to come out of Babylon, and not
to retain something of Babylon) they brought diverse Chald^e or Persian names
along with them, by which afterward they called their Months.

These we shall meet with in the books written after the captivity, Canonical,
and Apocriphal. But besides these they had other Hebrew names, some of which we
are sure were in use before. English New Annotat. in 1 King. 6. 1.
Of them our English new Annot: reckons up 6: viz, Abib their first Month,
answearing to part of our March and April; at which time they began their
year about the Spring Equinoctial, as we do ours. Exodus: 12. 2. and 13. 4.
Their second, Zif: 1. King. 6. 1. Their seventh Ethanim. 1 King. 8. 2. Their
eight, Bull, 1 King. 6. 38: Their ninth Chisle^, Zach: 1. 1. Nehe: 1. 1. Their
eleventh Sebat, Zach: 1. 7. Hebrew names all, (says the Note, though others
question some of them.) Vid. Dr. willet ubi supra.
And these we may look upon not merely as Appellatives (as the aforesaid
Authors would have it) describing and setting forth the properties of those
several seasons, but as proper names given to those Months for distinctions
sake. Now if it shall be thought expedient to give the like names to Months
amongst us, Thamuz mensis quartus, a Tammuz Idolo spurcissimo, cui eo mense
festum celebrebatur. Ezekiel. 8. 14. Vid. Iun. ad loc.
so they may be as inoffensive in their signification, as those names were, I
shall be far from quarrelling it. Those Hebrew names I mean. As for the other,
there are some of them that stand too like some of ours, seeming to carry with
them an Idolatrous tang. But for the Hebrew names, we shall find them Innocent:
All taken from some natural properties in those Months: as Abib, which
signifies Spica, or arista virens, a green ear of Corn, Levi: 2. 14. Spica
tenera, Buxtorf. lexi^.
because in that Month with them their Barlie began to be eared, Exodus: 9. 31.
So Zif, signifying Brightness or Beauty; because then their plants were in
their chief splendor, and began to be beautified with buds and blossoms.
Ethanim, Ripeness or strength, Buxtorf. ibid.
because fruits were then brought to their full maturitie. Bull, fading, because
then began the fall of the leaf. New Annotat. ubi supra.
Chislen, variable, or tempostuous; So is the weather in that Month. Sebat, a
dry stick, or staff, because such are the trees in that Month, sear and
dry. Such were those names, each yielding a natural reason for its
imposition. Now shall the like names be imposed upon Months (and Days too)
with us, they shall never set an edge upon my teeth in the pronunciation of
them.

But this Circumstance, together with the substance of the Motion it self, I
shall humbly leave at the door of your great Synedrion. Where if amongst the
crowd of many other Motions and Petitions of like nature it chance to be
smothered, and dye, yet shall I have what to me will be an abundant recompense
for my paper, ink, and time; Liberavi animam; In discharging of my duty to God
and you; I have freed my own soul, and shall pray for Yours, resting

Your unworthy Remembrancer content to be of no name; so as Months and Days
may be freed from Idolatrous names.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.
March 10th. 1647.

