THE False-Teacher TRIED and CAST.

A subject useful at all times, and but too seasonable for the present.

By John Brinsley Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Thomas Newberry, in Cornhil near to the Royal
Exchange. 1658.

To all the truly well-affected and well-meaning Souls in the Town of Great
Yarmouth, who are not willing to be deceived in matters of greatest concernment.
(Dearly beloved in the Lord)
PAssing along through this Chapter (as I have done the former) in a week
days Exercise, I fell with this Text; wherein meeting with a subject but two
seasonable for the present times, (and I wish I might not say for this place),
I have not unwillingly given way to somewhat more then usual inlargements. And
what the Lord has so given in to me, I now present unto you. Wherein you have
only another stroke given to the same nail that was sometimes since fastened
by a The false Apostle tried and discovered by Mr. William Bridge.
master of the neighboring Assembly. The Lord grant that it may so enter, and
stick in your hearts, as that there may not be any door there left open, to let
in them whom you are forbiden to receive into your 2 John. 10.
Houses. Of this sort some, and too many have crept in already among you. And
if like liberty be still indulged, I may (without any Prophetical spirit) tell
you, you must expect yet more, and those more dangerous. What your duty in
reference to them is, you have here held forth. The Lord make you truly and
conscientiously wise in the discharge of it. To whose grace commending you, I
rest,

One desirous to watch for your souls. John Brinsley.
Yarmouth Aug. 10.1657.
THE FALSE-TEACHER Tried and Cast.
Revel. 2.2. And thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not,
and have found them liars.


IN this, Division of the Context.
and the following verse, we have the commendation which the Son of man, the
Lord Jesus, gives of and to the Angel (the Minister or Ministers) of the
Church of Ephesus: which commendation we have here first propounded, then
expounded. Propounded in the former part of this verse: 1. In a general way, [I
know thy works,] then in particular, instancing in some of those works which he
took such special notice of; which were three, his Labor, his Patience, his
Zeal; showed in not bearing with those that were evil. Then expounded in the
sequel: Explanat singuli, quasi retro v^stigia legens, Pare. in Text.
where he again touches upon each of these three particulars; Only in a
reirograde way, inverting the order, according to the custom of the Hebrews,
(which we often meet with in Scripture) beginning first with the last; 1.
Showing how and wherein this Angel had expressed his zeal in not bearing with
those which were evil, viz. in his proceeding against false Apostles, false
teachers, whom upon the Trial he had found to be liars. [And thou have tried
them, etc.] Secondly, What his patience was, and wherein he had showed it, viz.
In bearing much from those whom he could not bear with, [ And have born, and
have patience, verse 3.] Thirdly, What his labor was, even an unwearied
endeavor of doing service to God and his Church, [And for my name sake have
labored, and have not fainted,] It is the first of these I have now to deal
with.

And have tried.] Wherein we have two things declared,

1. Parts of the Text. whom and what.
What evil ones those were which this Angel was so zealous against, could not
bear, And

2. What he did to them. What evil ones; the false Apostles [Them which say
they are Apostles, and are not] What he did to them. He tried and convicted
them. [Thou have tried them and found them liars.] Upon these look we severally
by way of Explication.

1. The persons dealt with.
The Persons whom this Angel could not bear. [Them which say they are Apostles,
but are not.] Such there were some, and those not a few, in those
proto-primitive and Apostolical times. Strange that there should be so, yet so
there were. As in the times of the Prophets there were false Prophets, (...),
so in the times of the Apostles there were false Apostes, (...), it is the
Apostles word. 2 Cor. 11.13. For such are false Apostles.]

Ques. And what were these false Apostles?

Answ. What true Apostles were, False Apostle what.
we know; such as were immediately sent by Christ to preach the Gospel to the
whole world. Of this sort were the twelve, who received their Commission from
their Lord and Master Christ, whilst he was with them upon earth; to whom
afterward was added Matthias, who was substituted in the room of Judas. And
such was Paul, who received the like immediate Commission from Christ himself
being in heaven. These were true Apostles, who being thus called, answered
their calling by preaching of the true Gospel. And from hence we may learn what
those false Apostles were: Which were of two sorts (as the false prophets also
were, and as Tyrants are said to be, False apostles of two sorts.
Titulo and Exercitio,) Some in respect of their calling only, others in
respect of their Doctrine also.

First, 1. In respect of their Calling.
Some in respect of their calling, such as said they were Apostles, but were
not. Such as pretended to an immediate Commission from Christ, that they were
immediately called and sent by him as the true Apostles were, when as they were
not so in truth. Such were those whom Saint Paul there speaks of in that Text
last cited, Pseudoapostolos istos voc at non, ut ego quidem opinor, quod salsam
aliquam doctrinam sparsissent, etc. Bez. Gr. Annot. in Loc.
2 Cor. 11.13. False Apostles: so called (as Beza and others conceive of it)
not in regard of any false Doctrine which as yet they had preached, but in
regard of their false-Title, the false claim which they made to that Office.
They pretended themselves to be Apostles. And the more to win upon the belief
of the people, they carried themselves like Apostles, transforming themselves
into the Apostles of Christ (as it there follows;) imitating them both in
Doctrine and life, which they did as (...) (as they are there described)
deceitful workers, out of a by and sinister respect, not seeking Christ, but
themselves; not his glory, or the salvation of his people, but their own
temporal advantage. Even as Satan the prince of darkness, is sometimes
transformed into an angel of light, (as the Apostle there goes on verse. 14.)
suggesting things which seem to savor of piety and zeal and holiness, as if
the motion proceeded from a holy and blessed angel, whereas he intends
nothing less, but under that pretense to deceive poor simple souls. So did
those false apostles. They pretended themselves to be the Apostles of Christ,
and they held forth his Doctrine, so imitating and personating the true
apostles (as the Devil did Samuel, 1 Samuel 28.) but as they were false in the
former, so in the later; Not being what they would be thought, they did not
intend what they pretended to. And upon this account were they called false
Apostles.

2. Others there were who, 2 In respect of their Doctrine
as falsely pretending to the like calling, under the name of Apostles they were
broachers of Lies, Errors, Heresies, dangerous and pernicious Doctrines. Such
false teachers there were many in the Apostles times Such were those whom they
in their Synodall Letter written from Jerusalem gave warning to the Churches
of, Act. 15.24. We have heard that certain which went out from us have troubled
you with words, subverting your souls, etc. Some who pretended themselves to be
Apostles, or at least to have been sent forth by the Apostles, with a
Commission to preach, they brought doctrine contrary to theirs, doctrines
destroying the very foundation of the Gospel, and so tending to subvert the
faith of believers, crying up the Law; (the ceremonial law) as being still in
force. And such false Teachers there were some in this Church of Ephesus. Such
false teachers in Paul's time in the Church of Ephesus.
So much we may collect from that which Paul writes to Timothy, 1 Epistle
1.3. where he desires him to abide at Ephesus, to the end that he might charge
some that they preach no other Doctrine. No doctrine contrary to, or diverse
from that which Paul himself, and other of the Apostles had preached, which it
seems there were some that then did.

And as there were some such false teachers then in that Church, More foretold
to follow
so the same Apostle foretells it that there should come more, and those more
dangerous after his departure. So he tells the Elders of that Church, whom he
wishes to be so much the more cautelous and circumspect upon that account,
Acts 20.28. etc. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, etc. For I know, this, that after my
departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock; (as
bloody persecutors, so Heretical Teachers, who by their false doctrines should
make a prey of the souls of men;) also of your own selves shall men arise
speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them, such as should be
broachers of false and heretical doctrines, out of an ambition to make
themselves singular and popular.

And what he foretold, Which accordingly came to pass.
afterward came accordingly to pass. In the days of this our Apostle and
Evangelist Saint John (who survived the rest of the Apostles) there were diverse
such false teachers who troubled these Churches of Asia with their heretical
doctrines. So much we may take notice of from what he says, 1 Epistle 4.1.
Many false prophets are gone out into the world. And again, Epist. 2. verse 7.
Many deceivers have entered into the world. Such were those famous (infamous)
Heretics, Ebion and Corinthus, and some others, who whilst they cried up
themselves the Apostles of Christ, they were sworn enemies to him, crying down
his Divinity, his Godhead (as the Socinians (their offspring) at this day
do.) Against whom Saint John purposely set himself as in the beginning of his
Gospel, so in the first and second Epistles. And most probably some such were
these whom our Text speaks of. They said they were Apostles, pretending
themselves to be sent by Christ; But such they were not, no true Apostles,
whether for their Calling or Doctrine. In both upon due trial they were found
Liars.

And were there such in those times whilst the true Apostles themselves were
yet living, No wonder that there are such in after ages. Quod si haec cum fuit
Ecc esiae Christianae conditio, superstitibus adhuc ipsis veris Apostolis, quis
miretur nostri temporis successionem Aposto icam jactantes, qui ne Christiani
quidem sint? Bez. Gr. Anno. in Text.
what wonder then that there should be such in after ages? what wonder that
there should be one pretending to Apostolical authority, to be Peter's
successor, which the Pope does? what wonder that there should be some others
who pretend to an immediate call from God, to be sent by him, and to have
received Revelations from him, who thereupon take upon them to broach new
Doctrines, diverse from, nay contrary to that which is held forth in the word?
which let it not trouble those who behold it. If there were such in the
Apostles times, who were able to look through such pretenders, to see their
inside (as Peter did by Simon Magus, when he told him, I perceive that thou art
in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, Acts 8.23.) who were able of
their own knowledge to convince them, how much more now? But I pass on.

Having seen who, What this Angel did to them; where His undertaking, the issue
of it.
and what these false Apostles were, come we now in the next place to see what
this Angel did to them. He Tried them, and found them Liars: wherein we have
two things. His undertaking and the Issue of it. His undertaking [Thou have
tried them.] The Issue of that Trial [And have found them Liars.] of these
severally, beginning with the first, the undertaking of this Angel.

Thou have tried them.] transfodio, His undertaking, he Tried them.
transadigo, to pierce through, it properly signifies an exact scrutin and
trial of a thing. Like as when a thing is pierced through, it is tried what is
within, whether it be sound or no. And such a trial it was that this Angel made
of these Teachers. Not taking their word, not trusting their outside, he made a
through trial of them. Exploraris (says Beza;) thou have proved them, by making
a diligent search concerning them.

thus are all such Teachers to be tried; Teachers to be Tried.
mark it this is the Doctrine I am now to prosecute. Such as pretending to a
Call from God, shall bring any new Doctrines, contrary to, or diverse from that
which the word holds forth, and the Church has received, they are to undergo
an exact scrutinie, to be thoroughly tried. For this we shall need no other
warrant then that known Text of Saint John, which is express and full, 1 John
4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God, or
no.] Every spirit, that is, every Doctor, or Doctrine. Every Teacher that shall
pretend to the Spirit; or every Doctrine which shall be held forth under the
name of a Revelation, as received by inspiration from Gods Spirit. These are
not presently to be received, believed, but to be tried, proved. This is that
which the Apostle requires concerning those who pretending to a gift of
Prophecy should stand up to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.29. Let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. Such as pretended to a
gift of Prophecy (which in those times was not rare) they were to be heard by
the Church, but not presently believed, but they must be tried by those who had
the gift of discerning spirits, the other true Prophets, whether they had such
a gift as they pretended to, and whether that which was spoken by them were by
the motion of the spirit of God, or whether it were a fancy of their own
brain, a humane or Diabolical delusion.

Yea, Generally, all Teachers.
thus are all Teachers, and all Doctrines to be tried. That Rule and direction
of the Apostle is general, 1 These. 5.21. Proving all things. (...), All things,
All Teachers, all Doctrines and opinions, by whomsoever held forth. This is one
of the things for which those Beraeans are commended, being called (...) more
noble then some other Christians, Acts 17.11. for that, when they heard the
Apostle Saint Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, the chief teacher of his
time, Preach, they brought his Doctrine to the Test, trying and examining
whether those things which were spoken and delivered by him were so, whether
they were consonant and agreeable to the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets,
that Doctrine which they had already received. Now if true Apostles were thus
to be tried, how much more false ones, those who have nothing to prove them so,
but their word. This Paul had. He had the signs of an Apostle (as he tells his
Corinthians,) 2 Cor. 12.12. Among other, those wonders and mighty deeds which
he there speaks of, his miraculous works, some of which are recorded in that
Chapter foregoing Acts 16. for which (no question) he was then famous through
the Churches, and yet they try his Doctrine, and for so doing are commended.
Especially suspicious ones.
How much more then are they to be tried, who have nothing but their word, to
gain credit to their calling and Doctrine? As for their works, it may be they
are such as justly render them suspicious. And being such, great Reason that
the Churches of Christ should be jealous of them, and so, try them before they
trust them.

Great Reason for it (I say,) considering the Danger first of, then In being
deceived.

1. The danger of being deceived by false Teachers, which are
The danger of being deceived, which credulous and simple souls are very
subject to by such Teachers False Teachers which

1. Many for their Number.
Are many. This is the Reason which Saint John gives why he would have those
to whom he writes to make this Trial, 1 John 4.1. (a Text forecited,) Try the
spirits, etc. why? Because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.
Where there are many deceivers, many cheaters, many Trepanners (as now they
call some of that crew) walking abroad, men had need to try before they trust.
And such is the condition of the world in respect of false Teachers, (spiritual
Trepanners.) However some ages are fuller of them then other, yet in all ages
there are many.

2. Subtle for their nature.
And (secondly) as they are many for their number, so they are very crafty and
subtle for their nature: It was Satan's practice at the first, when he went
about to deceive the woman, he made use of the Serpent, speaking in and by that
creature which (as the Text says,) was more subtle then any beast of the
field, Genesis 3.1. Such was and is that Creature, being naturally smooth and
gliding, winding and insinuating, and crafty, etc. And hereupon Satan, who
himself is called the old Serpent, Revel. 12.9. he makes choice of that
creature to convey his first Temptation and poisonous suggestion by. And in a
like way does he deceive her posterity, still making use of Serpents, subtle
heads, sharp wits, smooth tongues, insinuating spirits, for the conveying of
the poison of heretical and damnable doctrines by them. So as simple souls,
being over-credulous (as that their mother was) they are apt to be deceived by
them, by their subtlety, (of which the Apostle (making use also of this
allusion) speaks, 2 Cor. 11.3.)

Innocence. Deceiving by their Lives, which sometimes are seemingly pious.
Such was the Serpent at the first, (as all the other creatures were) innocent
and harmless. And such false teachers oftimes seem to be; very innocent in
their lives, exemplarie for their strictness. Such were the Scribes and
Pharisees, in our Saviors time, whited Sepulchers, (as he calls them Mat.
23.27.) And such were those false prophets whom he describes Mat. 7.15. they
were such as came in sheep clothing, seemingly most innocent creatures. And
such were those false Apostles whom Saint Paul gives warning to his Colossians
of, very strict (no question) themselves in those observances which they taught
and pressed upon others, of which the Apostle says that they had in them a
show of humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the
satisfying of the flesh, Col. 2.23. They were very temperate, very abstemious.
And such were diverse of the same stamp in after ages. Among whom one Sect was
known and distinguished by the name of Encratitae; (...). vide Danaeum in
August. de Haeresibus cap. 15.
so called from their extraordinary continence and abstinence, which was such
as that they absteined not only from unlawful lusts, but also from Marriage,
and from eating any kind of flesh, as also wine, not so much as allowing it in
the Lords Supper, (in regard of the great abuse of the creature) but using
water instead of it; yet holding forth foul and heretical Doctrines. And such
false Teachers often are, (as many Monks and Friars at this day,) eminent for
strictness in their lives, and conversations.

And as their Lives, 4 By their doctrins, some of which are sound, and useful
and their errors plausible.
so their Doctrines, many of them (it may be) are true and Orthodox, yea pious
and very useful, which they Preach and press, making use of them as Coy-Ducks,
to bring in their Errors after them. And for their Errors, happily they are
very plausible and taking, specious at the first hearing; having (as the
Apostle there says, Col. 2.) (...) a show of wisdom, yea of Piety, and
Holiness. Thus did these false Apostles spoken of by Saint Paul, transform
themselves into the Apostles of Christ; the ministers of Satan transform
themselves into the Ministers of righteousness, 2 Col. 11.13, 15. And thus do
false Teachers sometimes transform themselves into true; acting their parts,
putting on the habits, and speaking with the tongues of the true servants, the
faithful Ministers of Christ. Being (as I said) Innocent, (if not Exemplarie)
in their lives, holding forth plausible Errors, and those mixed with many sweet
and precious truths; which are like wine, or some other pleasant liquor,
wherewith poison being mixed, it is taken and swallowed down without suspicion:
upon this Account then Teachers are to be tried. There being so many false
Teachers, and many of them so subtle, great is the danger of being deceived.

2. in being deceived. The danger in being deceived by them.
As it is in drinking of poison, there is great danger to the Body, so there is
in receiving and drinking in heretical doctrines, which are no other but poison
to the soul: what the Psalmist, Heresy the Poison of Aspes.
(and from him the Apostle) says of wicked men in general, Psalm. 140.3. Romans
3.13. It may well be applied to Heretical Teachers in particular, The poison of
aspes is under their lips. The poison of the Aspe (or viper) is secretly
instilled, without any great sense or pain, yet desperately mortal to the
person that is bitten, or stung by it, who being thereby cast into a dead
sleep, he never waketh more: And truly such is the nature of false and
heretical doctrine, it is secretly and insensibly instilled into the soul; but
oftentimes proves mortal to it, casting the soul into a dead sleep from which
it never wakes, till it come in hell. So desperate oftimes is the conditions of
poor deluded souls. Like as the Apostle says of the Seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13. so
it proves often true in the seduced, They wax worse and worse, going on from
one error to another, from a lesser to a greater, from Schism to Heresy. A
truth sadly experimented in many instances in this Nation of late times. How
many seemingly, and hopefully well meaning souls have there been, who by
hearkening to such Teachers, false Teachers, have been so impoisoned with their
Doctrines, as that now they are swollen thereby, so swollen with spiritual
pride (the worst of prides) as that they refuse and scorn the advice of
whatsoever soul-Physians, the true Ministers of Christ, so as unless God
undertake them in a more then ordinary way, there is little hope of their
recovery? Such, and so great is the danger in being deceived by such Teachers.

So our first parent, The serpents deceiving our first parent how dangerous to
her, and her posterity.
our great Grandmother Eve found it by sad experience. Being deceived by Satan
speaking in the Serpent, she was in the transgression (as the Apostle has it)
1 Timothy 2.14. Thereby she became guilty of that first transgression, which, had
not infinite mercy stepped in, had brought everlasting ruin upon her, and all
her Posterity. And how fatal has this proved to many others, their harkening
to Satan speaking in and by unsuspected instruments? we know what happened to
King Ahab, whilst he hearkened to his false prophets, following the Counsel
which they gave him, bidding him to go up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper, an
arrow strikes him between the joints of his harness, giving him a mortal wound
(as you have the story, 1 King. 22.32.) And what happened to his Body, how
often has it happened unto the souls of many? who by hearkening unto false
teachers have met with, some Errors, some Heresy, some dangerous and damnable
Doctrine; which has been as an Arrow, piercing their hearts, giving them a
deadly wound, and upon this account again great Reason that Teachers should be
tried, before they be trusted.

To these some other might be added. Christians believing without trying make
themselves the servants of men.
To receive and believe teachers upon their word; to receive their Persons and
believe their Doctrine without examination and trial, is to make men the
servants of men; which Christians ought not to be, ye are bought with a price
(says the Apostle,) be not ye the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Christians
being bought with a price, redeemed with the precious blood of Jesus Christ (as
Saint Peter explaines it, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.) and so made his servants, his
freemen, they are not to mancipate and inslave themselves to any other what
ever; specially to inslave their souls and consciences, so as to suffer any man
whatever to have the command over them. This is that which Saint Paul so
smartly reproves his Corinthians for, 2 Cor. 11.20. Ye suffer if a man bring
you into bondage. This did the false Apostles, their new teachers, tyrannizing
over their consciences, by imposing upon them their Ceremonial observances. And
this they suffered, submitted to, though contrary to their Gospel liberty.
Such was their esteem of those new Teachers, that they readily received their
Doctrines, and conformed to their injunctions, though diverse from, and
contrary to that which they had received. But this Christians ought not to do;
Being Christ's freemen, they are not to inslave themselves to any, so as to
yield an absolute credence to their Doctrines, and dictates. This is an honor
which is peculiar only unto Jesus Christ, who being an absolute Lord over his
people, justly challenges their absolute dependence upon him, and obedience to
him; so as to receive his word without Trial. Not so any other; who, (be what
they will, yet are subject to miscarry. Let God be true, and every man a Liar
(says the Apostle) Romans 3.4. A Liar, and that both passively and actively;
subject to be deceived himself, and so to deceive others. Such are the best of
men being left to themselves, farther then as they are assisted and directed by
the spirit of truth. Only Jefus Christ he is the truth (as he says of himself
John 14.6.) And being so, he is (...) to be believed on his word. Not so any
other whether Man or Angel. Not that we have dominion over your Faith (says
the Apostle) 2 Cor. 1.24. They are not to be received but upon trial. They who
said they were apostles, were yet tried by this angel of the Church, who is
here commended by his Lord and master for so doing. [ I know thy works, etc.
Thou have tried them which say they are apostles, etc.] Thus have you the
doctrinal confirmation and Illustration: That which remains is Application.

1. Too great credulty taxed.
Where (in the first place by way of reprehension) I might take a just occasion
to tax and censure the too great credulity that is to be found among many
Christians in this Nation at this day; who if any come unto them, pretending to
gifts and calling, they presently receive him, hearken to him, believe him,
giving intertainment to his person and doctrine, not trying, not examining the
one, or the other; By which means they become guilty of that, which the
Apostle cautions his Ephesians against, Ephesians. 4.14. Children-like, they are
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine: yea some of
them carried (like as those swine were, into which the devils entered, of which
the story tells us that they ran violently down a steep place into the sea,
Mat. 8.32.) into most pernicious, dangerous and damnable errors. And how should
it be otherwise? They who will trust without trial must make account at one
time or other to be deceived. Which that none of you may be.

2. Christians exhorted to try Teachers.
By way of exhortation (in the second place) let me desire you to propound this
Angel as a pattern for your imitation. See that you try before you trust. This
will you do in matters of civil concernment. How much more then in spirituals,
in things which concern the welfare of your souls, your eternal salvation?
Herein you cannot be too wary. And therefore take heed what Teachers you
hearken to: Yea, though happily they be of great name and note, much cried up by
many, what ever their parts and gifts be; yea, what ever their life and
conversation be, yet do not so far make your selves servants to any of them, as
to pin your faith upon their sleeve; be not over credulous, especially if
they be such as these in the Text, such as pretending to an extraordinary
calling, shall hold forth new doctrines, such as the Church of God has not
been acquainted with. Now be jealous of them, fearing (what you have just
cause to do) that they are not what they pretend to be. They say they are
Apostles, but are not, Therefore bring them to the trial.

A thing which Christ himself commends. A thing commended.
So he does in this angel here, among whose good works he reckons up this for
one, his trial of such; Thou have tried them which say they are apostles and
are not.] This tended to his praise. Now this is one of the things which the
Apostle wills Christians to have an eye unto, Phil. 4.8. If there be any
virtue, any praise, (any thing truly praiseworthy from men, much more if
commended by God) think on these things, so think of them as to do them. Now
were there no other Argument, this alone should be sufficient to induce
Christians to this practice, doing this in a conscientious way, with a respect
to the honor of Jesus Christ (which questionless this Angel here did) for the
asserting and vindicating of his name and truth, whatever they meet with from
men, they shall have his approbation and commendation.

But (secondly, Commanded.
) this is not only commended but also commanded. Those forenamed Texts are
express, being not only counsels but precepts. Try the spirits, whether they
be of God; Prove all things. So as this is not only a Liberty, but a duty, a
thing not only expedient but requisite, not only what may be done, but must
be done. Teachers, especially if suspicious, they must be tried.

Quest. But who shall try them? and How shall they try them? Two useful
questions; Take the resolution of each.

1. Who shall be the tryers of these teachers? Who are to try them.


Answ. 1 To this I answer, First, Generally all Christians. Generally all
Christians.
To them are those forenamed exhortations directed of trying of spirits, and
proving all things. General Lessons for all Christians, who, being spiritual,
are made judges of all things. So 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges all
things,] (...), the spiritual man; not the Pope, to whom some of his Parasites
apply that Text. Nor yet only the Clergy, (as they have been called) the
Ministers of the Gospel, to whom custom in former ages has appropriated that
Title, calling them spiritual persons in way of distinction from the (so
called) Laity. But every Christian, who is enlightened and regenerated by the
spirit of God. He is this spiritual man, who judges all things, understanding
and discerning the truth of God, so much as concerns his own salvation. And
being thus qualified, he not only may, but ought to exercise this his
judgment upon those (whoever they are) that bring doctrines contrary to, or
diverse from that truth, trying them. This are private Christians to do
according to those abilities, that measure of the spirit of discerning which
God has given them. But,

Secondly, Ministers of Christ after a more special manner to do. Specially the
Angels of the Churches, the ministers of Christ.
As it is in trying of gold, if any pieces be suspicious, every one, before he
receives them, will try them for himself, having his scales for that purpose;
but the Goldsmiths does this after a more exact manner, having not only his
scales for the weight, but his touchstone for the metal. Thus though all
Christians are to try suspicious teachers and doctrines, yet the Ministers of
Christ are to do it after a special manner, Ministers Tryers by office.
they being tyrers by Office. Such were the Apostles in their times, Such were
the Apostles and Evangelists.
who exercised this power upon diverse, trying and discovering them to be what
in truth they were, nothing less then what they pretended. So did Simon Peter,
upon Simon Magus, the father of Heretics (as he is called) a broacher and
maintainer of diverse blasphemous and damnable Heresies; Peter tries and
discovers him to be what in truth he was, not what he gave out himself to be,
and was by many taken for, as you have the story, Acts 8.21.23. And the like
did Paul to Hymeneus and Alexander, whom (as he says) he delivered to Satan,
that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. last: proceeding against them
by Ecclesiastical censures for the Heresy which they held forth, in denying
the Resurrection of the dead; to whom Philetus also (as it seems) was joined,
whom upon the same account he takes notice of, 2 Timothy 2.18, 19. And what
himself did, he wills his Evangelist Timothy also to do the like. If a man
teach otherwise (says he to him, 1 Timothy 6.3.) (...) preaching other doctrine
then that which the Church had already received from Christ and his Apostles)
and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the doctrine which is according to godliness, from such (says he) withdraw
thy self; have no communion with them, whether Ecclesiastical or Fraternal, but
look upon them, (as they are) as contagious persons, not fit for Christian
society. And the like he requires from Titus, A man that is an Heretic, after
the first and second admonition reject, Tit. 3.10. Thus did Paul set himself
against the whole generation of false teachers, willing all the Ministers of
Christ in a special manner to do the like.

This did our Apostle and Evangelist Saint John, whose zeal against that
infamous Heretic Cerinthus is famous, with whom he would not so much as enter
into the Bath, least the houses should fall on his head; Vide Danaeum in
August: de Here Is. Chap. 8.
and at whom he is conceived to strike (as elsewhere, in his Gospel, in his
first chapter so) in those two places of his first Epistle, 1 John. 2.22. and
4.3. And the like did this angel here in the Text, the minister or ministers of
this Church of Ephesus. To him (or them) it is that this commendation is here
given, for dealing with these false apostles. Not but that the Church also
might concur herein, but he was the leader, having (as the first, so) the chief
hand in it. And therefore is it that it is here attributed to him, to the angel
of the Church of Ephesus write, I know thy works, thou have tried them, etc.

And the like did the faithful ministers of Christ in after ages, The Ancient
fathers Zealous in this way.
many of which are famous for their zeal and activity in this way. As Justine
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine; all tryers of false Apostles,
strenuously and zealously opposing themselves against the false Teachers of
their times. And the like work is incumbent upon all the Ministers of Christ, A
work incumbent upon all true ministers; who
who being by their Office shepherds, they are to take, and give notice of such
wolves as come in sheeps clothing, plucking off their disguises, unmasking,
and discovering them to the sheep, making them known to the people, that so
they may not be deceived by them. Should be tryers of false Teachers.
Being ministers their place requires that they should be tryers.

1. 1 Able to do it.
Such as are in measure able to do this, to try Teachers, and their doctrines.
Men endued with knowledge, and that in a more then ordinary manner, so as they
may be able not only to exhort, but to convince. So the Apostle expressly
requires it in a Bishop, a Gospel Minister, a Presbyter (who in scripture
language is ever meant by that name) a Bishop (says he) must be one that is
able by sound doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers, Tit.
1.9. both to hold forth true doctrine himself, and to discover errors in
others, to try them. Such ones the Ministers of Christ should be; which where
in measure they are not (as it is the lot of too many places in this Nation at
this day) their flocks, the people committed to their charge, must needs be
exposed to the greater hazard.

2. pares operi, in measure able to do this, Active in it.
so they are to do it, laying forth their abilities in making this trial as
occasion is offered; looking out, as the watchman does discover the enemy;
from what quarter, or under what disguise soever he comes, so giving due and
seasonable notice thereof to the people. This (most probably) did this angel
here in the Text, and for so doing he is commended. And herein let him be a
pattern to all the apostles of the Churches, the Ministers of Christ, whom he
has set as watchmen over his Church for this end. Son of man I have made thee
a watchman to the house of Israel (says the Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel)
Ezech. 3.17. Now the watchman, as he is to take notice of those which come into
the City, so, (if suspicious persons,) he is to examine them. And so are the
Ministers of Christ to take notice in a special manner what teachers they are
that thrust themselves in upon the people committed to their charge, and being
suspicious (which all they are, who as the Apostle says of the seducers of his
time 2 Timothy 3.6.) creep into houses, making it their first design to work upon
the weaker sex, to lead captive silly women, (...) mulierculas, simple women
which are apt to be misled, instilling their new doctrines first into them, as
the old Serpent did his, first into the woman, hoping afterward to have the
like success that he had, to draw their husbands after them: they are to try
them, to try their Calling and doctrine, that so they may be known to the
people. Thus have you the former of these queries resolved: who they are that
are to make this trial. All Christians in general, the Ministers of Christ in
special. The second follows.

How is this Trial to be made?

A point of large discourse, How false Teachers are to be Tried.
opening a wide field to him that would follow it. But this task I find happily
taken off of my hands, this work being already largely and fully done in a
Sermon Preached not long since, The false Apostle tried and discovered by Wid.
Bridge.
though not in this very place, yet not far from it, even under the same roof,
and upon this very Text, by a Reverend Brother, who has also given an account
of it to the world. So as I might wholly spare that labor. But it being a
point of concernment, and which needs inculcating in regard of the times
whereinto we are fallen, (and I wish I might not say the place wherein we
live,) I shall for this once (in a good sense) actum agere, spend a little time
in putting of you in remembrance of what happily you may be too apt to forget.

By their Calling, Doctrine, Life.
The Trial of false Teachers is to be made principally in, and by three things,
their Calling, Doctrine, Life. By these three the true ministers of Christ are
known, when their Calling is warrantable, their Doctrine Orthodox, their lives
approveable. Now rectum est index sui and obliqui; that which declares a true
Minister discovers a false. And so do these three, where they are not to be
found.

Calling. Their Calling.
If that be false, they cannot be true. This is the Character which is given of
false Prophets Jer. 23.21. I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran. True
Prophets, and so true Ministers, have a mission and commission from God, being
sent, and authorized by him: which they who are not, cannot perform what too
many pretend to do; Preach the word. How shall they preach except they be sent?
Romans 10.15.

Q. How Tried.
But how shall it be known whether they be rightly called, or no? A question of
great concernment, specially in these times, wherein the calling of the true
Ministers of Christ is so much scrupled and questioned.

A. Calling of Teachery, Ex. traordinary, Ordinary.
For answer hereunto take we notice of a twofold calling: Extraornarie and
Ordinary. Extraordinary and Immediate, ordinary and Mediate. In the former way
the prophets and Apostles were so called. So Paul describes and asserts his
Apostolical calling, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by men,]
not by any humane anthoritie or suffrage, not having any man for either Author,
or Instrument in that his calling, but he received it immediately from Christ,
as the twelve Apostles did. In the latter way the ordinary Ministers of Christ
are called. Being, though not of, yet by men; receiving their Authotie from
Christ, but conveyed to them through the hands of men (ordinarily) imposed and
laid upon them. So it was in the Apostles time, as that charge given by Paul
to Timothy does clearly evidence it, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no
man; that is, admit no man into the ministry without due consideration of his
fitness for that work, that one Ceremony (Imposition of hands) being, by a
Synecdoche, put for the whole action of Ordination. And so it has been
continued generally through the Churches of Christ unto this day.

Now then would we try a false teacher? make trial of the calling which he
pretends unto, whether Extraordinary or ordinary. Extraordinary Calling
attended with Extraordinary Gifts,


Extraordinary. Such a calling many since the Apostles times have laid claim
to, pretending an immediate call from God, the like to that which the Apostles
had; of which kind: there are not a few creeping abroad in the world at this
day. Now how shall they be tried? why, by their Gifts. An Extraordinary
calling is attended with extraordinary gifts. So was the Apostles calling, it
was attended with the gift of tongues, Illiterate men speaking the most learned
Languages: And with the gift of working miracles. Thus Paul asserts and
vindicates the truth of his Apostleship 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly (says he,
speaking to his Corinthians, among whom (happily) there were some that
questioned his calling) the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all
patience, in signs and wonders and mighty deeds] miraculous works, by which he
might be certainly known to be no less an Apostle then any of the twelve. So
then, shall any pretend to such a call, an immediate and extraordinary calling?
make inquiry for their Gifts, their Works. This was the Jews inquiry
concerning Christ when they saw him take upon him that authority which he did,
to alter customs of long continuance, to reform and rectify what the
Sanhedrim, the great Counsel, and the rest of the Priests tolerated, What sign
show thou unto us (say they) seeing thou do these things? John 2.18.
Hence they conclude, surely he held himself to be a Prophet, and thereupon they
require him to give some sign of it, to evidence that his extraordinary
calling by some extraordinary works. Thus were the Prophets of God ordinarily
wont to evidence the truth of their calling. The case of John Baptist ex
traordinary.
Ordinarily (I say) though not always: For we read of John the Baptist, to
whom our Savior gives Testimony, that he was a Prophet, yea more then a
prophet, Mat. 11.9. that is, an excellent and extraordinary Prophet, being the
Herald of Christ (as the next verse sets him forth) yet he wrought no
miracles: So says that Text, John 10.41. John did no miracle. But thus
ordinarily it was. That John being a Prophet, should not work miracles, the
Jews looked upon it as an unwonted thing. This the other prophets before him
usually had done; Yea, and John himself, however he wrought no such miraculous
works, as casting out of devils, raising the dead, restoring sight to the
blind; Yet he did that which was equivalent; he foretold many things, all
which accordingly came to pass. So the Jews there take notice of it in the
words following, All things that John spoke of this man (of Christ) were true;
the event verified all his predictions. Now let those who pretend to the like
vocation, to an extraordinary calling, to be the Messengers of God, of Christ,
sent by him in an immediate way, let them show some such evidences,
extraordinary gifts. Otherwise without any breach of charity, they may be
suspected, nay concluded to be, what these pretended Apostles, here were found
to be, no other but Liars. This for the extraordinary calling.

2. 2. Ordinary calling trial.
For the Ordinary, such as pretend to it, let them be examined and tried by
their qualification and separation. 1 By due qualification.


1. For their qualification, whether they be endued with Ministerial abilities
and gifts. Thus it is, those whom God calls to an Office, he furnishes them
with suitable abilities for the discharge of it. Thus calling Saul to be King,
it is said, He gave him another heart, 1 Samuel 10.9. endowing him with heroical
gifts and parts fit for the Government of his Kingdom: And thus sending Moses
to Pharaoh, he promises to be with his mouth, and to teach him what he should
say, to make him fluent and eloquent, who naturally was slow and stammering (as
he there says of himself) Exodus 4.10, 11. And Isay, being called to be a
Prophet, has his lips touched with a living coal from the Altar, a figure of
the gift of the Holy Ghost fitting him for that service, Isay 6.7. And thus the
Apostles, though before (as I said) illiterate fishermen, yet being called to
that Office, they were endued with gifts suitable thereunto. And so is it with
all ordinary Ministers and Teachers. If called of God, they are also gifted by
him: Though not all alike. There being diversities of gifts (as the Apostle
tells us) 1 Cor. 12.4. Diversities both for kind and measure; and that of
Ministerial Gifts. To one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit (as the eighth verse there has it) so
as one excels in Doctrine, another in Application; the former more properly
the Doctors, the latter the Pastors work (as Diodate there expounds it) Yet so
as every one has a ministerial gift fitting him for the work to which he is
called. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal
(says the verse there foregoing ( verse. 7.). To every one that is called to
any public service in the Church there is some gift given, whereby the
Holy Ghost shows it self in him, rendering him in some kind useful and
serviceble for the good and benefit of the comunity: where there is no such
gift to be found, let not such a one be looked upon as a Minister of Christ,
sent by him. Here is the first thing to be enquired for in a Teacher, a
Ministerial Qualification.

2. 2 A warrantable separation.
The 2d. is a warrantable separation, a seting a part to the work. Thus was
Paul separated, (...) (as he says of himself) Romans 1.1. Paul a servant of
Jesus Christ called to be an Apostle, separated unto the gospel of God. So he
was Intentionally in Gods destination and appointment from his mothers womb,
(as he tells his Galatians, chap. 1.15.), yea from Eternity in Godseverlasting
Predestination, designing him for the service; but actually set a part
thereunto by the command of the Holy Ghost, at what time he was sent to preach
the gospel unto the Gentiles, of which we read, Act. 13.2. As they ministered
unto the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said; separate me Barnabas and Saul
unto the work whereunto I have called them. Which in what way it was done the
next verse declares [And when they had fasted and prayed, Ordinarily done by
Imposition of hands
and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. Such was the manner of
Primitive Ordination, which the Church of God in after ages has observed: by
fasting, and prayer, and Imposition of hands, to set a part the Ministers of
Christ unto the service of the Church, the work of the Gospel, which office
being thus conferred upon on them they were thenceforth to attend to it,
Setting them apart to the work of the Ministry.
to make it their, (...) their work; Having a ministry, they were to wait on
their ministering. Romans 12.7. thus it has been, and thus it should be.

Not but that extraordinary cases admit of extraordinary courses. In some cases
how dispensed with.
Where there want fitting (I mean Ministerial) hands to be imposed, that
Ceremony may be omitted. And, necesitie requiring it, some other service may be
joined with this. Thus Paul says that he upon such an account sometime
labored with his own hands, exercised a Handicraft, as he tells his
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.12. But in an ordinary course thus it should not be. The
Ministers of Christ are to be set a part to the work of their Ministry in a
solemn manner; And being thus set apart, they are (as I said) to make it their
work: which who so are not, or do not, they give too just occasion for others
to scruple and question the truth of their calling. Services pro. to Ministers
not to be undertaken by others.


Specially when any being not so called shall take upon them in an ordinary to
way to intermeddle with such services as are properly and peculiarly
Ministeral, to dispense such Ordinances as are committed only to them, as viz.
not only to preach the Word, but to administer the Sacraments, (which it
seems some, and too many in these desolate times that I say not in this
place) adventure upon) this too plainly shows and declares them to be what
they are, such as say they are Apostles, but are not, pretenders to a calling
which they have not. And thus I have done with the first of these three heads,
wherein the Probation and Trial of false teachers consists; the first thing
wherein, and whereby they may, and are to be tried, their calling; pass we to
the second.

Doctrine. Their Doctrine.
This is the way which Saint John propounds for the trial of those false
Teachers of his time, 1 John. 4.1, 2. Try the spirits says he whether they be
of God, for many false prophets are gone out into the world. But how should
they try them? why, by their Doctrine. So it follows. Hereby know ye the
spirit of God, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God; and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is not of God. If their Doctrine be false they cannot be
true. False as to fundamentals, the principles of Christian Religion, denying,
perverting them. This is that which St. Peter says of those false teachers
which he fortelleth should come into the Church 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be
false teachers among you, who privilie shall bring in damnable Heresies. (...),
Heresies of destruction, wicked opinions and Doctrines, destructive to the
souls of men, Such Teachers, who broach or hold forth such opinions are most
properly called false-teachers; who are to be tried by their Doctrine.

Quest. Q. How tried?
But the Question here runs on. How shall their doctrine be tried?

Answ. A. By the scriptures, the Churches touchstone.
To this the Answer is obvious (it is so among Protestants) Only by the word,
the written word, the Scriptures. This is the (...) Lydius Papis, the Churches
touchstone, whereby she is to try Doctrines, and consequently teachers, for
this express is that known Text of the Prophet Isai, Chap. 8. verse. 20. to the
law and to the testimony, that is, to Gods word, the Scriptures, which is his
testimony, testifying of him, declaring his mind and will. Hereunto must they
repair who would not be deceived by false teachers, bringing their Doctrines to
this tonch-stone, trying them by this. If they speak not according to this word
(so it follows) it is because there is no light in them] If they; if any, be
they who they will, never such pretenders to Illumination, yet shall they speak
otherwise then according to the word, holding forth any doctrine that is not
consonant and agreeable thereunto, they are no other but Impostors; this is an
evident sign that their pretended light is no other but darkness. This is that
which Christians are to give heed to above what enter pretended Inspirations,
or Revelation. When Dives in the parable begged it of father Abraham, that he
would send Lazarus to his fathers house, that he might testify unto his
breethren, what the state of the damned was, what the torments of Hell were,
which were prepared for such as they were, what says he to him? you have it
Luke 16.29. Abraham says unto him, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them] intimating that the testimony of the word is to be preferred before
all other testimonies. They may be false, but this is undoubtedly true. Thy
word is truth, Joh. 17.17. And therefore to this let Christians repair,
bringing the Doctrines of their teachers to this test. This was the Touchstone
which those Noble Bereans made use of in trying of Paul's doctrine. How ever,
looking upon him as a man sent of God, they received the word from his mouth
with readiness of mind, yet they searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so, Act. 17.11. whether consonant and agreeable to the written
word. Like course are Christians to take, specially when they meet with new
doctrines, new to them, they are now to lay them to this rule. Thus do
tradesmen in trying of weights and measures, they bring them to the standard.
If they find them either more or less then that, they look upon them as not
warrantable. And so is it with doctrines, if not exactly consonant and
agreeable to the written word, which God has left as a standard for his Church
to try them by, if either more or less, if any addition to the word, or
substraction from it, if contrary to it, or diverse from it, they are to be
looked upon as false, and he that teaches them as a false teacher.

Object. But it may be said, Scriptures obscure to pri vate, and unlearned
Christians.
How shall private Christians thus try them? It may be they are unlearned, weak
and simple, and not so able to judge the scriptures; about the sense whereof it
is not always agreed among learned men, the greatest Clerks sometimes
differing in the exposition of them. And how then shall they be able to judge
of them, so as to try doctrines by them?

Answ. 1. To this it is answered, 1. Fundamentals clearly held forth.
That as for fundamental truths, necessary to be known and believed, they are
plainly held forth, written as with a sunbeam; So plainly set forth as that a
weak eye may see them.

Obj. How is it that all do not see them.
But if so, how then is it that some who are quick sighted do not? How is it
that some who are learned conceived diversely of them? They cannot see what
others suppose they do. As Papists, and Socinians, they cannot see those
doctrines which others conceive to be clearly heldforth in the word,

Ans. Not through any obscurity in the word, But
To this it may be answered, this is not through any obscurity or darkness in
the word. But

beam in the eye, There may be a beam in the eye.
which will not let it see what otherwise in it self is clear. Such a beam
there is in the Papists eye, who being prejudiced against such and such truths
of God, as their great Apostle the Pope will not give his allowance to, to whom
they have inslaved their judgments, they cannot (or rather will not) see them,
though never so clearly held forth in the Word. And so may it be with some
others, who having the beam of some sinful lust or other in their eye, which
they are willing to part with, they cannot see that which others do, because
they are loath, not willing to see it.

make use of false lights; False lights made use of.
not judging of it by its own light (which they ought to do) but by their own
light. Either by the light of fancy which is the Quakers light, which he calls
the Light within him. Or by the light of Reason, which is the Socinians light,
which whilst he is wholly guided by, no wonder he cannot see what is above
reason; mysterious doctrines, to be apprehended by faith, not comprehended by
reason. Now they who shall make use of no other light but this dim one, no
wonder if they cannot see what otherwise is clearly and plainly heldforth in
the word.

God in his just judgment blinding the eye.
God in his just judgment sometimes hides that from the eyes of some, which
through an ordinary work of that spirit he reveals unto others. To you it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom, but to them it is not given, Mat.
13.11. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, John. 12.40. This for
fundamentals.

other truths of God which are not so clear, Private Christians to crave the
help of others specially their Ministers.
here private Christians are to crave the help of others, such as have more
discerning spirits then themselves. In special of the Ministers of Christ, who
are (as I said) Tryers by office; specially their own Ministers. To them in
dubious cases they are to repair, receiving the law from the mouths.

Not that I would have them see with their eyes; The people not to see with
with their Ministers eyes.
So Romanists (Some of them) would have it, who cry up their implicit faith,
willing and requiring private Christians to believe what the Pope and his
Ministers believe, allowing them no other judgment concerning the doctrines of
their teachers. Ad hoc quidem respondent, ex mente D. Joha nis Omnes fideles
probare spiritus number ex Deo sint, diun illis credunt qui spirituum havent
discretionem. Estius Com in loc.
So Estius tells us that some of them expound that forecited text of Saint John,
1 Ep. 4.1. where he gives that general direction to all, to, Try the spirits;
This (say they) are private persons to do, not by themselves, but by others,
by those who have the spirit of discerning, whom in this case they are to
believe. For as it is in the natural body, the eye only sees, though not
only for it self, but for the whole Body. So is it in the Church (say they.)
Here those that have the spirit of discerning, the Pope and his Ministers, they
are to judge of Doctrines, which they do, not only for themselves, but for
others, who by submitting to their judgments, may be said to try the spirits,
viz. in, and by them. This Doctrine (as Estius dares not avouch it) we
renounce. Not only allowing but requiring (what the Scripture does) that every
one should see for himself, with his own eyes. The just shall live by his
faith, Hab. 2.4. not by the faith of his Minister, or yet of the Church.

But though they may not see with their eyes, Yet may make use of their light.
yet they may make use of their light; As the wise men did of the Star to bring
them to the place where Christ was. Such use both may and ought private
Christians to make of their Ministers, who are as stars in the right hand of
Christ, Rev. 1. make use of their light, their guidance, their direction. That
so by the help thereof they may come to see that in the word, which otherwise
may be dark and obscure to them. Thus then let Christians set upon the Trial of
Doctrines, and so of their Teachers by them. Directions in this Trial. 1 Seek
humble and meek spirits.


Only here, that they may not miscarry, let them (first) seek humble and meek
spirits: not thinking of themselves above that which they ought to think, but
thinking soberly (as the Apostle requires them) Romans 12.3. Nor yet being of
captious and quarrelling spirits, seeking advantages against their Ministers.
So did the Prophet Jeremies familiars to him, they watched for his haltings,
Ier. 20.10. And so dealt the Scribes and Tharisees by our Savior, as St. Luke
tells us, Luke 11. last, They laid wait for him, seeking to catch something out
of his mouth, that they might accuse him. This is a thing which does not become
Christians, who ought to be like unto their pattern; Christ himself, who bids
them, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. And being
such, they may now expect that God will reveal himself, and his truth to them.
I will dwell with him that is of an humble spirit says the Lord) Isa. 57.15.
being ready, as to support and comfort, so to teach and instruct them. The meek
will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.9.

2. Beware of mistakes.
let them also be tender and wary; wary lest they mistake the Doctrines which
they hear, mistake either words or sense. Both these ways we find our Savior
mistaken. In his words by Peter, and other his disciples, John 21.22. where
when Peter had propounded that curious inquiry concerning John, And what shall
this man do? what should become of him? our Savior answers him, If I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Here they mistake him,
conceiving him to have spoken positively, that John should not die, which went
for current among the Brethren; Yet (as the Text has it) Jesus said not not
unto him, He shall not die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? And so in his sense and meaning by the Jews, who hearing what he
said to them, Destroy this Temple, and in three dares I will raise it up again,
they understood him in a literal sense, as speaking of the material Temple,
whereas he spoke figuratively, meaning that mystical Temple, the Temple of his
Body, as we have it, John 2.19, 20, 21. Thus are the Ministers of Christ,
though speaking never so warily, subject to be mistaken by their unwary
auditors, which therefore they who will make a true trial of them must be
wary of. Specially of willing ones.


Much more of willing and wilful mistakes, of perverting their words, or
meaning. A thing which the Prophet Jeremiah charge upon some of his hearers,
Jer. 23.36. Ye have perverted the words of the living God. This they had done
by misconstruing, and making an ill use of what he, and other of the Prophets
said unto them from the Lord. This let Christians beware of. As also of
ignorant and rash censures, of speaking evil of the things they understand not,
which Saint Peter charge upon some in his time, 2 Pet. (...) from God.
2.12. And being thus prepared, and distosed, then in the last place,

seek a true understanding and sound judgment from God; begging that for
themselves which Paul does for his Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.7. that God would give
unto them the spirit of wisdom and Revelation. A thing which he is ready to
bestow upon them who with honest and humble hearts seek it. Ask and it shall be
given you (says our Savior) Luke 11.9. And what shall be given them? why the
holy Spirit. So the thirteenth verse explains it; If ye being evil know how to
give good things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give his spirit to them that ask him? Even that spirit of wisdom. If any man
lack wisdom (says Saint James chap. 1. verse 5.) spiritual wisdom, Let him ask
of God, which gives to all men liberally, such a portion as he sees fitting
and convenient for them. This for the second Head; The Trial of Teachers by
their Doctrine.

lives. Their lives.
As they are to be tried by their Tongues, so by their hands, as by their
words, so by their works. So it is with true Teachers, their works testify of
them. So says our Savior of himself, John 10.25. The works that I do in my
Fathers Name they bear witness of me, showing him to be what he was, one sent
of God. And so they did of his Apostles. Truly the signs of an Apostle have
been wrought among you in all patience (says Paul to his Corinthians, 2 Cor.
10.12.) meaning his patience and constancy in his sufferings for Christ. He
demeaned himself like an Apostle. So on the other hand false Teachers may be
tried by their works, their practices. Ye shall know them by their fruits
(says our Savior speaking of false prophets) Mat. 7.16. their works, their
practices, which being exactly scanned, and narrowly pried into, will for the
most part be found unsuitable to their profession. The Wolf will be found
under the sheeps-skin; Which in falsteachers often are not approveable.
under fair pretenses a foul disposition, showing it self in some unwarrantable
practice, or other. So was it with the false Apostles, and other falfe Teachers
in the Apostles times. So Saint Paul describes them in his Epistle to Timothy.
Thus speaking of that pair of Blasphemous Heretics, Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19. he says that having put away a good conscience they made shipwreck
of faith. First they let loose the reins to licentiousness, and then they made
shipwreck of the doctrine of faith, being drowned in Errors and Heresies. And
truly so is it, where the latter of these is let go, the former is seldom
retained. False Teachers (pretend what they will) are seldom truly
conscientious. And so again, chap. 4. verse 2. speaking of seducing spirits,
that should come in the latter times, false Teachers spreading their Errors
under a pretense of being inspired by the spirit of God, he describes them to
be such as should speak lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared
with a hot iron. Conscientiam habentes inustam notis criminum quibus quibus
sibi sunt conscii,
Putting on a vail of seeming sanctity to cover their blasphemous Heresies
with, but having branded consciences (as Grotius expounds it) being stigmatized
with the marks of some foul and enormous crimes, which they indulge and allow
themselves in; like Rogues who are burnt in the hand or shoulder, or some other
part of the body, whereby they may be known for such as they are; Or
consciences cauterized (which word exactly answers the word in the Original,
being derived from it, (...), seared, made insensible of their own dangerous
condition, and of the righteous judgments of God, and so going on in some
wicked course or other. And so fares it oft-times with such Teachers; They are
no less erroneous in their lives then Doctrines. Some particulars instanced in.
To instance in some particulars.

1. False-teachers ordinarily proud.
Ordinarily they are proud: So the same Apostle describes those same false
teachers, chap. 6. verse 3. of the same Epistle, If any man teach otherwise
(says he) etc. He is proud, (...), puffed up, swollen with a tympanie of
spiritual pride. And truly so is it; seldom shall we meet with a false Teacher
but is sick of this disease, swollen up with a high conceit of himself, of his
own parts and gifts, which makes him decline the common road, finding out some
new way, broaching some new Doctrine, that he may have the honor of the
invention; and so be thought to be somebody (as Gamaliel says of Theudas, Act.
5.36.)

2. Often covetous.
And as Proud so also oft-times Covetous. So it there follows in the next
verse of that chapter, ver. 5. Supposing that gain is godliness. This do false
teachers oft-times, they make this their last end, making their teaching an Art
of lucre, and making the Gospel which is the doctrine of godliness, subservient
to those base ends. So the same Apostle in his other Epistle sets them forth, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Where in the four or five first verses, we have a large
description of them, many of their qualities pointed at, and this among the
rest, this know, (says he to Timothy) that in the last days perilous times
shall come, ((...) hard, troublesome, difficult and dangerous times, and that in
regard of the spiritual state of the Church,) for men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, and so he goes on,
instancing in diverse particulars, But who are they whom the Apostle thus
brandeth? why the sixth verse will tell us; Of this sort are they which creep
into houses, and lead captive silly women; False teachers, who oftimes are
justly chargeable with both these, of being proud and covetous.

3. Not seldom Luxurious.
Yea, and (in the third place) Luxurious. So Saint Peter describes them, 2
Pet. 2. where foretelling the same that Paul there did, that there should be
false teachers in the Church which should privily bring in damnable Heresies,
verse 1. he shows what ones they should be; And many (says he) shall follow
their pernicious ways, verse 2. (...), Exitia, their perditions, Vid. Beza Gr.
Annot ad loc.
or destructions, or (as diverse other copies read it) (...), Luxurias, (as the
vulgar Latin renders it) their luxuries, their lascivious ways and courses,
which were pernicious ways. To which also in the next words he joins their
covetousness; And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you, verse 3. Under a feigned kind of speech, framed to a show
of more then ordinary Piety, and Charity, and Meekness, they shall endeavor
to lay hold of your estates with the ruin of your souls, (as Diodate explains
it.) Such may false Teachers oft-times be found, proud, covetous, luxurious.
So they are there set forth more fully, verse 10. where he gives this further
Character of those whom he spoke of; They are such (says he) as walked after
the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, and despise government, presumtuous are
they, self-willed, etc. And again, verse 14. Having eyes full of adultery, and
that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have
exercised with covetous practices, etc. Thus Saint Peter, with whom Saint Jude
also concurs, describing them after the very self same manner, by the same
Characters, as we shall find it, verse 4. and 10. of his Epistle.

And such as they described them, Vtrumque, ambitiosum hominem, and prorsus
corporis uoluptatibus deditum fuisse, demonstrant ipsius errores. Danaeus in
August de Haeres. cap. 8.
such the after ages found them. Such was that forenamed Cerinthus, a most
ambitious and voluptuous person, as (besides the Records which are left of him)
is justly collected from some of his Errors; in special that Millenarie
opinion of his, the thousand years reign of the Saints after the Resurrection,
wherein they should (as he apprehended) enjoy all kind of carnal and sensual
pleasures, whereof he was the first broacher. And such were those
Nicolaitanes, whom the Greek Scholiast conceives Saint Peter to have an eye at
in that Text forecited, 2 Pet. 2.2. and whom our Evangelist Saint John makes
mention of by name, verse 6. of this chap. Rev. 2. they were an impure
generation, whose deeds were deservedly hated both of God and men. And of the
same kind were the Gnostics, whom some look upon as a branch of the same
stock, the offspring of those Nicolaitanes (if not the same) A proud
generation. Gnostici propter excellentiam scientiae sic se appellatos esse, vel
appellari debuisse gloriantur eum sint superiobus omnibus vaniores atque
turpiores. Aug. de Haeres.
So much their very name which they gave to themselves imports, Gnostici,
Gnostics, so called propter excellentiam scientiae (as Augustine gives the
reason of it) for the eminency of their knowledge, wherein they thought
themselves to excel all others; But not more proud then vile, being given up to
all kind of filthiness; from whence they had another name given them, which
far better agreed to the^ then the former, being called Borboritae, quasi
coenosi (as the same father interprets it) sc. propter nimiam turpitudinem, for
their wallowing like swine in the mire of all kind of filthiness, (as Saint
Peter also describes some of the Apostates of his time, 2 Pet. 2. last, where
we have that word (...).) And such were diverse others of those ancient
Heretics in, and near unto those primitive times, as the writings of the
Fathers set them forth; such as whose lives did sufficiently proclaim them to
be what in truth they were, nothing less then what they gave out themselves to
be. And I might show the like in some of the ringleaders of Sects and Heresies
of latter times. But I suppose even your own observation and experience may
furnish you with but too many instances in this kind, of men pretending to
more light then others, who thereupon have taken upon them to mint new
doctrines, and to lay out new ways, yet their practices have plainly shown
that they were out of Gods way, walking in darkness.

I shall proceed no further. You see how, and in what way such teachers as
these in the Text are to be tried. What then remains but that, as occasion is
offered, meeting with such teachers, you put them upon the trial, trying them
by their Calling, Doctrine, Life; which doing, questionless you shall find
what the angel of this Church is here said to have done, you shall find them
Liars.

The issue of this trial.
wherein we have the Issue and success of this undertaking. The angel of this
Church making trial of these pretended Apostles, he found them liars. Of which
very briefly.

Lyars] (...), False apostles called liars. Perkins Exposition in Text.
a broad and a foul word, yet not found fault with, but approved by Christ,
being here given to these False Apostles. From whence Mr. Perkins observes not
amiss; that

Though Railing and taunting cannot beseem any, Obs. Broad Language warantably
given by Magistrates and ministers to some offenders.
yet Magistrates and Ministers in their places may give out severe speeches
against offenders, in token of detestation of their sins, and not offend. For
this he instanceth in John the Baptist, who called the Scribes and Pharisees, a
Generation of Vipers, Mat. 3.6. And so in our Savior, who called Herod a Fox,
Luke 13.32. And in Paul, who writing to his backsliding Galathians, puts the
Fool upon them, Gal. 3.1. And so the same Apostle, having to deal with Elimas
the sorcerer, a great and dangerous seducer, he being filled with the Holy
Ghost (says the Text) set his eyes upon him, and said, O full of all subtilty
and mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, etc.
Act. 3.9, 10. And thus it is here said of this Angel, (the Minister, or
Ministers of this Church of Ephesus) having tried these false Apostles, he
found them Liars. Found liars, how.


Found them] Even as an Inquest or Jury that passes upon a Malefactor, is said
to find him guilty, judging and declaring him so. So did this Angel here find
these False Apostles; having brought them to the trial, upon good evidence he
found them Liars, judging and pronouncing them so to be. So the Prophets both
Isay and Jeremie call those Wizards and Diviners, who in their predictions
promised a long continuance, and flourishing state to the Babylonian Monarchy.
That frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, (says Isay chapter 44.25.) A sword
is upon the Liars (says Jeremy, chapter 50.36.) And such this Angel here found
these false Apostles, Liars; such as not only spoke that which was false in it
self, but spoke it knowingly with a mind to deceive.

Such properly are Liars. Liars properly who.
Not every one that speaks an untruth, which true and honest men may do
unawares, unwittingly, against their wills, who thereupon do not deserve this
brand, to be called Liars. But when any shall do it knowingly and willingly,
animo fallendi, with a purpose to deceive. So did these false Apostles here in
the Text, They said they were Apostles, which they were not, and which they
knew they were not; and they did it purposely to deceive the people, thereby to
insinuate themselves into their affections, to gain respect to their persons,
and entertainment to their false doctrines, which they held forth. Lying a foul
crime.


A foul crime; Such is Lying. So the spirit of God looked upon it, whilst it
reckons those who are habitually and customarily such, among that cursed
crew, those abominable ones; Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters,
and all Liars, so you have them put together, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. and the
same doom passed upon them as upon the other, viz. that they shall have their
part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.

Which (not to dwell upon it) let it make all who hear it wary; Aplication.
Take heed of it.
lest upon the trial they should be found in this number, Liars in any kind.
Diverse kinds of Liars, and Lying we meet with (...) Scripture. Three kinds of
Lies. and Lying.
Three most observable.

Civil Lie; such as is used too often in bargaining, A civil Lie.
in Contracts; and other affairs of this life; which some distinguish into a
Jocose, and a serious Lie, a merry, and a very Lie, a Lie in Jest, and a Lie in
earnest; The latter of which they sub-divide into a Noxious and Officious Lie;
which last they give allowance to. An officious Lie; which is made in favor of
others, for their help or benefit. But even this Lie, however it has a mask
put upon the face of it, carrying a show of honesty and Charity, An officious
Lie not to be allowed.
because it is beneficial to our neighbor, without any wrong or detriment (it
may be) to any, yet indeed and in truth it is no more allowable then the
former: Being against the Commandment of God, which forbids a lie to be told
in what cafe soever. Surely if a man may not tell a lie, or talk deceitfully
for God (which Job sharply reproves in his friends, Job 13.7.) much less then
may he tell a Lie for his neighbor. Truth is a precious this (...) weighing
down what ever can (...) in the balance against it. Whereupon the Wise man
forbids to part with it, upon any terms. Buy the truth, but sell it not,
Prove. 23.23. O take heed Christians! that none of you who profess your selves
to be of the truth, (as Saint John speaks of sincere Christians, 1 John
3.19.) the true children of that God who is the God of truth, the true
disciples of Christ, who styles himself the Truth, John 14.6. be found liars in
this kind. Knowing that you must be tried; though happily not by man here,
whom you may deceive, yet by God hereafter, who cannot be deceived. Whose
judgment being according to truth (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.2.) he will
certainly then find out those that are Liars.

Hypocritical lie. An hypocritical lie.
A counrerfeit profession of Religion; when men have only that (...), that
outward form of godliness (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Timothy 3.5.) When faith
and repentance and other Graces are dissembled. Of this lying speaks Saint
John, 1 Epist. 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, (profess union and communion with God and Jesus Christ, and yet go
on in sinful ways and courses) we lie. Such liars were Judas and Demas,
Ananias and Saphira. Such were the Scribes and Pharisees, whom our Savior
fitly compares to painted Tombs, upon this account denouncing a woe against
them, Mat. 23.27, 28. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, for ye are
like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed are beautiful outwardly, but within
are full of dead men's bones, and all uncleanness. Even so ye outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. And such
are all Hypocrites, who profess and appear to be what they are not, having
fair faces, but foul hearts, liars all. Now take heed again that none of you be
found in this number, knowing and remembering that there will come a day of
Trial. Such shall that last day be; when all must appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, to receive according to that which they have done in the body,
whether it be good or evil, (as the Apostle tells us in the second Epistle to
the Corinthians, the fifth chapter, verse 10.) Now that day will be a day of
Revelation, the Revelation of the righteous judgment of God (as the same
Apostle calls it in his Epistle to the Romans, chapter 2. verse 5.) Then shall
all maskes and disguizes be pulled off, and all shall appear to be what in
truth they were; All standing naked before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ. O take
heed that none of you then be found Liars! Which if you shall be, O what
shame and confusion will then cover your faces? Then must you look for no other
but the Liars portion, to be shut out with Dogs (as the Text has it in the
Revelations chapter 22. verse 15.) to have your part in that Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone.

Heretical Lie, An heretical Lie.
a falsehood in matter of Christian Doctrine; when some Doctrine is held forth
contrary to the Word. Of this lie speaks Saint John in his first Epistle,
chapter 2. verse 21. No lie is of the Truth; calling the Teachers or
maintainers thereof, Liars. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is
the Christ (so it follows in verse 22.) Now take heed also that none of you
be found amongst these liars. These Liars to be avoided.


To which end avoid those that are so, and found to be so. This will men do by
those who are found to be Cheaters, setting forth false wares to sale, or
minting of false and counterfeit Coin, not of the right stamp or metal, all
will take heed of them, no man will trust them. And so deal you by False
Teachers. Many of which of late times have been Tried by the Angels of the
Churches, the true and faithful Ministers of Christ in this Nation, (whom (as
I said) Christ has made Tryers by Office) and they have been found by them
liars, (so declared and proved by their Preaching and Writing) no better then
Cheaters, holding forth false, dangerous and pernicious Doctrines. As you love
your souls, take heed of them, trust them not, Avoid them. That is Paul's
earnest obtestation to his Romans (as before you heard) in that his Epistle,
Romans 16. verse 17. And let it now be mine to you, serving as a closure to what
I shall say upon this Text and this subject. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark
them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to (or besides, for that sense
the word will well bear; (...), praeter doctrinam (as the vulgar Latin renders
it) besides) the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: (...), shun
all voluntary and intimate society with them. Hoc argumentum facitut credam non
fuisse tunc conventus communes aut Presbyterium Romae Alioqui voluisset tales
excommunicari. Grot. Annot. in loc.
This (as Grotius conceives of it) was all that those believing Romans were
then in a capacity of doing, not being as yet formed into an Original Church,
so as to have any Presbytery, or any Church Government among them; which had
they had, surely (says he) Paul would have given them some other directions,
willed them to have dealt otherwise by them: viz. to have Excommunicated them,
according as they deserved. But however it was with them, sure we are (what we
have just cause to lament and complain of to God and man) so it is generally
with the Churches of Christ in this Nation at this day, The only remedy in
these loose times.
which have no Government set up among them, no authorized Presbyteries, only
acting, what any of them do, in a precarious way; by reason whereof those False
Teachers which abound every where, cannot be proceeded against, as otherwise
they should be, in a public way, struck with the thunderbolt of
Excommunication, and delivered to Satan (as Paul says he dealt by Hymeneus
and Alexander, in his first Epistle to Timothy, chapter 1. and the last verse)
that they might learn not to blaspheme: What then remains, but that in a
private way they be shunned and avoided? Vbisine tali reregimine est ecclesia
nihil a iud possunt singuli quam declinare familiarem convictum cum iis qui non
ex regula Christi vivunt Grot. ubi supra.
And this let me leave with you; Shall such come amongst you? own them not,
receive them not, not into your houses. For this, that of this our Evangelist
Saint Iohu is express in that forecited Text, in his second Epistle, chapter
10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed. To which he subjoyneth an Argument
or Reason in the next words; For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of
his evil deeds, verse 11. And if you may not receive them into your houses;
surely by a Parity of Reason, you may not go to theirs, not repair to their
meetings, which how pernicious it has proved to some, and not a few, of late
times, I shall not need to tell you.

Object. But it will be said, What? Christians not to frequent the meetings of
false teachers, nor to be familiar with them.
have nothing to do with them? how then shall we try them? If we may not go
to their houses, to their meeting* (...) shall we try their Doctrines? And if
we may not receive them into our houses, so as to converse and be familiar
with them, how shall we try their Practice, their Life and Conversation?

Answ. Vertigo, or The turning sickness of soul unsetlednesse. Printed 1655. The
false Apostle tried and discovered, Printed 1656.
To this I suppose you now expect that I should return an Answer; but having my
self heretofore done it in this place, treating upon that Text in the
thirteenth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verse 9. and finding it again
since done by that Reverend Brother forementioned in his Treatise upon this
Text which I have now handled; both which I presume are, or may be in your
hands, I shall now forbear that labor, commending what has been spoken to
your practice; and your selves to him who is of power to establish you; to whom
be Honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

