A BRIEF: CLEAR, And Methodicall View of the several particulars contained
in The Late INSTRUCTIONS WHICH Passed both Houses, the 28th day of May, 1647.
for determining the Accounts of the SOLDIERY. WHEREIN Every person that
claims Arreares, is directed what course to take, to make good the same,
according to the said INSTRVCTIONS.

Ordered to be Printed and published.

Will: Freman, Will: Potter.


Printed in the Year, 1647.

A BRIEF CLEAR Methodicall View of the several particulars contained IN The
late INSTRUCTIONS which passed both Houses the 28 of May, 1647. For determining
the Accounts of the Soldiery.
TOuching the Certificates, of such as claim Arreares (which is the general
subject of the said Instructions) there are 5. things considerable therein. Viz.

1 The matter of them. 2 The Evidence required to make them good. 3 The
deductions to be made out of them for free quarter. 4 The Allowance of pay to
be made upon them. 5 The Places where they are to be transmitted or dispatched.
For the Matter of them observe.

1 That a Certificate for an Officer is to express how long he actually served
with a Regiament Troop or Company under his command, what number of persons the
same did consist of, by what commission, under whose command, and in what
quality he served, what he received in money, and what in horse, arms, or
other goods: To find which in the former printed Ordinance, vide Sect. 1.

2 For a private Soldier, It is to show how many weeks he is in arreare,
whether he left the Troop or Company without discharge, and whether he
received any Horse, or Arms for the use of the State, and what became thereof.
vide Sect. 16.

For the Evidence to make them good consider,

1 That Governors are to have their Accounts determined upon their Oaths, as
well for what they have disbursted for the use of the State, as for their
Service. vide Sect. 6.

2 The warrants of the Earl of Essex, Committee of Safety, Earl of
Manchesters etc. If granted to Officers are to pass, deducting only for free
quarter, vide, Sect. 4

3 Such (as for any sum) have given a discharge in full, are to receive no
more for that Service. vide, Sect. 5.

4 All other Accounts whether stated by Authority, or not, to be regulated
according to these Instructions following. Sect. 17. viz.

First for Officers.
1 They are to give in an acknowledgement under their own hands of what they
have received, and that to the full, or else to forfite the double of what more
shall be made to appear, any time within two years after. Sect. 7.

2. Commission Officers are not to be allowed pay for any horse more then
appears upon muster. Sect. 8.

3. All Officers are to produce a Certificate for their service according to
muster.

1. Such as have served under any Committee, under the hands of three of that
Committee. Sect. 1. viz.

2. Such as belong to the grand Armies, according to their qualities, viz.

1. If Captains or above that degree; They are to procure the hands and seals
of the two superior Officers that are surviving of that Regiment. Sect 2.

2. If under that degree and their Captain living, they are to procure their
Captains hand and seal, with the said two superior Officers. Sect. 2.

Secondly, for private Soldiers.
1. They are to bring in a Certificate under the hands and seals of his
Officer. Sect. 16. Query; What officer, or whethe more (...) not here meant.


2. To make it appear that he did not leave the Troop or company without
lawful discharge. Sect. 16.

3. Whether he received any horse or Arms for the use of the State: And what
became thereof. Sect. 16.

Thirdly, the persons that shall certify in the behalf of others are.
1. To make it appear to the Committee employed herein, that they have not
been cashiered. Sect. 3.

2. To send in their hands, scales and qualities to the said Committee. Sect. 3.

3. To certify with such caution, as they may take their oaths of the truth
thereof, if required. Sect. 1.

The third general head is concerning the deduction of Free Quarter; wherein
consider,
1. That such Commission Officers, as make it appear they have discharged
their Quarters are to have nothing deducted. Sect. 15.

2. Such Officers who have served in any Garrison for which there has been
any particular establishment made, to have nothing deducted for Free Quarter,
but are to produce a Certificate under the hand and seal of the supreme Civil
Officer of the Town, that he has paid his Quarters. Sect. 19.

3. For all others according to the particulars following, Sect. 10. to 15. viz.

To abate for Free Quarter from all. Officers of Horse. one third part of their
pay. Officers of Dragoones. one third part of their pay. Officers of Foot in
Common one fourth part of their pay. Officers of Train one fourth part of
their pay. Sergeants of Foot. 4. s. per week. Corparalls or Drums. 3. s. per
week. private Horse 8. s. per week. Soldiers Foot 3. s. per week.


The fourth General Head is touching the allowance of their pay, wherein
consider,
1. Such as have served in any Garrison, for which there has been particular
establishments made, are to be paid according to the allowance of that
establishment, Sect. 19.

2. All others (except the persons following) to be paid according to the
establishment of the Earl of Essex his Army, Sect. 20. And no part thereof to
be respited. Sect. 9.

3. Colonel Saundersons Reformadoes, to abate one third part of their pay for
Free Quarter, the rest to be allowed according to the agreement made with
them. Sect. 18.

4. The persons following to have only one third part of a Conformadoes pay of
the same quality, viz. such as have had a Regiment Troop, or Company under
their command, which did not exceed the number hereafter expressed. Sect. 18.

In a Regiment or Troop. of Horse 150. All Officers included. Regiment or
Troop. of Foot 300. All Officers included. Regiment or Troop. of Horse 25.
All Officers included. Regiment or Troop. of Dragoones 25. All Officers
included. Company of Foot 40. All Officers included.


The fifth General Head is touching the places where the said Certificates are
to be transmitted or dispatched.
1. The Certificates of Officers that served in any Garrison or County are to
be sent to the Sub-Committee of that County (appointed by the Committee for the
Accounts of the Kingdom.) And from them to the Committee appointed for this
fervice: and by them being dispatched to the said Sub-Committee a gain, and so
to the officers or persons therein concerned. Sect. 1.

2. Private Soldiers to have their business dispatched (and to receive
satisfaction from the Committees of Counties or Armies where they served. Sect.
16.

This done, what remains in arreare shall be accounted as a just debt from
the State. Sect. 21.

William Freman. William Potter.


FINIS.

