A brief Warning Concerning the Just Judgment of God; And his eternal
justice, against the unjust and wicked design of the Soldiers of England, who
have deprived of life, and murdered Their King.

Anno 1649.

IT has been signified at large (according to the power and truth of the
living word of God) unto the Army now on foot in England; by letters unto
their General Fairfax, and the General Council of the Army, that they, to
wit, the Soldiers, are in their unjust design, and false judgment deeper
subjected unto the Devil, then those, over whom they have by force and
violence set up themselves as Judges, without and against God.

And since the Inhabitants of those three Kingdoms, are altogether, because
of the great sins, abominations, perjuries, shedding of blood, and wicked
Oaths, (which have taken deep roots therein from a great while since) guilty
of the outward punishments and plagues, wherewith God has now a time hitherto
visited other nations also: Therefore the blood which has been shed for this
cause, and from this root of sins and abominations, (being the fruits
thereof) can with no right nor justice be cast upon one only man, as the
Soldiers there in England, according to their presumtuousnes do pretend, and
upon such false grounds have traitorously taken away the life of their King,
the very Devil having lifted up himself for a judge, for to kindle by this
means the fire more fiercely, in the whole Country and Kingdom.

For when God intends to punish a Country or Kingdom, for the abundance of
sins, and transgressions, committed therein; then he gives, or permits
them such superiors, by whom the punishments may break out, or be introduced:
But at last he can change them a^^o, according unto his Divine Council, and
remedy the destruction according to his justice.

Because now for this reason there is a singular judgment at the door over
the Nations of this present world in general; therefore the Soldiers there
should have served God according to his justice, and taken into serious
consideration within their consciences, this present and last time.

But the Devil has broke out by means of them, intending totally to
overthrow that which God has decreed in his eternal only wise Council,
concerning the execution of his judgment. For those men that do not hear
with the internal ears of the spirit, or of faith, nor have desired to do
according to the Council, or will of God, they are under the power of the
Prince of darkness, by whom their hearts, with their bodies, souls, and
spirits are thoroughly blinded.

Given at CLEVE the principal City of the Duchy of that name, belonging unto
the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh. Anno 1649.
By a Servant, or Warrior of the Lord, who has for a long time, in the behalf
of the supreme Judge, with patience, a long time waited upon those in England.

