A REVIEVV OF THE Seditious Pamphlet lately published in HOLLAND by Dr
Brambell, pretended Bishop of Londonderry; ENTITLED, His fair Warning against
the SCOTS DISCIPLINE.

In which, His malicious and most lying Reports, to the great scandal of that
Government, are fully and clearly refuted.

As also, The Solemn League and Covenant of the three Nations justified and
maintained.

By Robert Baylie, Minister at Glasgow, and one of the Commissioners from the
Church of Scotland, attending the KING at the Hague.

Printed at Delph by Mich. Stait, dwelling at the Turf-Market. 1649.

For the Right Honorable the Noble and Potent Lord, John Earl of Cassils,
Lord Kennedy, etc. one of His Majesty's Privy-Counsell, and Lord Justice
general of Scotland.
Right Honorable,
MY long experience of your Lordships sincere zeal to the truth of God, and
affection to the liberties of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, against all
enemies whomsoever, has emboldened me to offer by your Lordships hand to the
view of the public, my following answer to a very bitter enemy of that Church
and Kingdom, for their adherence to the sacred truth of God, and their own
just Libert es.

At my first sight of his Book, and many days thereafte^, The Authors reasons
of his writing.
I had no purpose at all to meddle with him: your Lordship knows how
unprovided men of my present condition must be, either with leisure, or
accommodations, or a mind suitable for writing of Books. Also Doctor Bramble
was so well known on the other side of the Sea, the justice of the Parliament
of England and Scotland having unanimously condemned him to stand upon the
higgest pinnacle of infamy, among the first of the unpardonable incendiaries,
and in the head of the most pernicious instruments of the late miseries in
Britain and Ireland: and the evident falsehood of his calumnies were so clearly
confuted long ago in printed Answers to the Infamous Authors whence he had
borrowed them. I saw lastly the man's spirit so extreme saucy, and his pen so
waspish and full of gall, that I judged him unworthy of any answer. But
understanding his malicious boldness to put his Book in the hand of His
Majesty, of the Prince of Orange, and all the eminent Personages of this place,
who can read English; yea to send it abroad unto all the Universities of these
Provinces, with very high and insinuating commendations, from the prime
favorers of the Episcopal cause: hearing also the threats of that faction to
put this their excellent and unanswerable piece, both in Dutch, French, and
Latin; that in the whole neighboring World the reputation of the Scots might
thereby be wounded, killed, and buried, without hope of recovery; I found it
necessary, at the desire of diverse friends, to send this my review after it,
hoping that all who shall be pleased to be at the pains of comparing the Reply
with the challenge, may be induced to pronounce him not only a rash, untimous,
malicious, but also a very false accuser. This much justice do I expect from
every judicious and equitable comparer of our wrytes, upon the hazard of their
censure to fall upon my side. The Prelate are unable by reason to defend
Episcopacy.


His invectives against us are chiefly for three things, our Discipline, our
Covenant, our alleged unkindnes to our late Sovereign. My apology for the
first, is, that in discipline we maintain no considerable conclusion, but what
is avowed by all the Reformed Churches, especially our Brethren of Holland and
France, as by the approbatory suffrages of the Universitie^ of Leyden, Utrecht
and others, to the theorems whereupon our adversary does build his chief
accusations, may appear. If our practice had aberred from the common rule, the
crookedness of the one ought not to prejudge the straitness of the other:
though what our adversary alleges of these aberrations is nothing, but his
own calumnious imputations: the chief quarrel is our rule it self, which all
the Reformed harmoniously defend with us, to be according to Scripture; and the
Episcopal declinations, to be beside and against the line of the word, yea
Antichristian.

If our Prelates had found the humor of disputing this maine cause to stir in
their veins, why did they not vent it in replies to Didoclavius, and Gersome
Bucerus, who for long thirty years have stood unanswered? or if fresher meats
had more pleased their taste, why did not their stomachs venture on Salmasius or
Blondels books against Episcopacy? If verbal debates had liked them better
than writing, why had none of them the courage to accept the conference, with
that incomparably most learned of all Knights now living, or in any bygone age
Sir Claud Somayis, who by a person of honor about the King did signify his
readiness to prove before His Majesty, against any one, or all his Prelaticall
Divines, that their Episcopacy had no warrant at all in the word of God, or any
good reason?

Their strongest Arguments are tricks of Court.
But our friends are much wiser then to be at the trouble and hazard of any such
exercise; the artifices of the Court are their old trade, they know better how
to watch the seasons, and to distribute amongst themselves the hours of the
Kings opportunities, when privately without contradiction they may instill in
his tender mind their corrupt principles, and instruct him in his cabine, how
safe it is for his conscience, and how much for his honor, rather to ruin
himself, his Family, and all his Kingdoms, with his own hands, then to desert
the holy Church, that is, the Bishops and their followers; then to join with
the rebellious Covenanters, enemies to God, to his Father, to Monarchy that the
embracing of the barbarous Irish, the pardoning of all their monstrous murders,
the rewarding of their expected merits with a free liberty of Popery, and
access to all places of the highest trust, though contrary to all the Laws
which England and Ireland has known this hundred years; all this without and
before any Parliament, must be very consistent, with conscience, honor, and
all good reason. Yea to bind up the soul of the most sweet and ingenuous of
Princes, in the chains of their slavery for ever, they have fallen upon a most
rare trick, which hardly the inventions of all their Predecessors can
parallel. They rest not satisfied, that for the upholding of their ambition and
greed, The Bishops unlucky foot is visible in (...).
they did harden our late Sovereign to his very last in their Errors, and
without compassion did drive him on to his fatal praecipice; unless they make
him continue after his death to cry loud every day in the ears of his Son in
his later will and testament, to follow him in that same way of ruin; rather
than to give over to serve the lusts of the Prelaticall Clergy. They have
gathered together His Majesty's last papers, and out of them have made a Book,
whereupon their best pens have dropped the greatest eloqution, reason and
devotion was among them, by way of essays; as it were to frame the heart of
the Son by the fingers of the dying Father to piety, wisdom, patience, and
every virtue; but ever and anon to let fall so much of their own ungracious
dew, as may irrigat the seeds of their prelaticall Errors and Church interest;
so far as to charge him to presevere in the maintenance of Episcopal
government upon all hazards, without the change of any thing except a little
p. 278. and to assure that all Covenanters are of a faction engaged into a
Religious rebellion, who may never be trusted till they have repented of their
Covenant: and that till then never less loyalty justice or humanity may be
expected from any, then from them; that if he stand in need of them he is
undone, for they will devour him as the Serpent does the dove.

These and the like pernicious maxims framed by an Episcopal hand, of purpose
to separate for ever the King from all his covenanted subjects, how far they
were from the heart, language and writings of our late Sovereign, all who were
aquainted with his carriage and most intime affections at New Castle in the Isle
of Wight, and thereafter, can testify. But it is reason when the Prelates do
frame an Image of a King that they should have liberty to place their own
image in its forehead, as the statuary of old did his, in the Boss of Pallas
targe, with such artifice that all her worshipers were necessitat to worship
him, and that no hand was able to destroy the one without the dissolution and
breaking in pieces of the other; yet our Prelates would know, that in this age
their be many excellent Engyneers, whose witty practicks transcend the most
skillful experiments of our Ancestors: and whatever may be the ignorance or
weakness of men, we trust the breath of our Lords mouth will not fail to blow
out the Bishop from the Kings arms, without any detriment at all to royalty.
Always the wicked and impious cunning of these craftmen is much to be blamed
who dare be bold to insert and engrave themselfes so deeply in the images of
the Gods as the one cannot be intended to be picked out of the other more then
the Aple from the eye, unles the subsistence of both be But in hazard.

The other matter of his railing against us is the solemn league and covenant;
The only crime of the Covenant, is that it extirpate prelacy.
when this nimble and quick enough Doctor comes aflicted with all the reasons
the whole University of Oxford can afford him, to demonstrat it as he ptofesses
in his last Chapter, to be wicked, false, void, and what not; we find his most
demonstrative proofs to be so poor and silly that they infer nothing of his
conclusion. To this day no man has showed any error in the matter of that
covenant; as for our, framing and taking of it, our adversaries drove us
thereunto, with a great deal of necessity, and now being in it, neither their
fraud nor force may bring us from it again; for we fear the oath of God.
After much deliberation we found that covenant the sovereign means to join
and keep together the whole orthodox party in the three Kingdoms, for the
defense of their Religion and liberties, which a popish, prelaticall and
malignant faction with all their might were overturning, who still to this day
are going on in the same design, without any visible change, in the most of
their former principles. And why should any who loves the King hate this
covenant, which is the straytestry the world can devise, to knit all to him and
his posterity, if so be his Majesty might be pleased to enter therein? but by
all means such a mischief must be averted, for so the root of Episcopacy would
quickly wither without any hope of repullulation; an evil far greater in the
thoughts of them who now manage the conscience of the Court, then the
extirpation of Monarchy, the eversion of all the three Kingdoms, or any other
earthly misery.

The Bishops are most justly cast out of England.
As for the third subject of the Warners fury against us, our unkindnes to the
late King, if any truth were in this false challenge, no other creature on
earth could be supposed the true cause thereof, but our unhappy Prelates: all
our grievances both of Church and Sat, first and last, came principally from
them: had they never been authors of any more mischief, then what they
occasioned to our late Sovereign, his person, family and Dominions this last
dozen of years, there is abundant reason of burying that their praeter and
Antiscripturall order in the grave of perpetual infamy. But the truth is,
beside more ancient quarrels, since the days of our fathers the Albigenses,
this limb of Antichrist has ever been witnessed against; Wicklise, Huss, and
their followers were zealous in this charge, till Luther and his disciples got
it flung out of all the reformed world, except England; where the violence of
the ill-advised princes did keep it up for the perpetual trouble of that land,
till now at last it has well near kicked down to the ground there both Church
and Kingdom. The Scots were never injurious to their King.
As for the point in hand, we deny all unkindnes to our King whereof any
reasonable complaint can be framed against us. Our first contests stand
justified this day by King and Parliament in both Kingdoms. When his Majesty
was so ill advised as to bring down upon our borders an English army for to
punish our refusing of a world of novations in our Religion contrary to the
laws of God and of our country, what could our land do less then lie down in
their arms upon Dunce law for their just and necess^ry defense? when it was in
their power with ease to have dissipat the opposite army, they show themselves
most ready upon very easy conditions to go home in peace, and gladly would
have rested there, had not the furious Bishops moved his Majesty without all
provocation, to break the first peace and make for a second invasion of
Scotland, only to second their unreasonable rage: was it not then necessary for
the Scots to arm again? when they had defeat the Episcopal Army and taken
New Castle, though they found nothing considerable to stand in their way to
London, yet they were content to lie still in Northumberland, and upon very
mean terms to return the second time in peace. For all this the Prelates could
not give it over, but raised a new Army and filled England with fire and sword,
yea well near subdued the Parliament and their followers, and did almost
accomplish their first designs upon the whole Isle. The Sco^^ then with most
earnest and pitiful entreaties were called upon by their Brethren of England
for help, where unwilling that their brethren should perish in their sight,
and a bridge should be made over their carcasses for a third war upon
Scotland, when after long trial they had found all their intercessions with
the King for a modern and reasonable accommodation slighted and rejected, they
suffered themselves to be persuaded to enter covenant with their oppressed and
fainting brethren, for the mantainance of the common cause of Religion and
liberty, but with express Articles for the preservation of royalty in all its
just rights in his Majesty and his posterity; what unkindnes was here in the
Scots to their King?

When by Gods blessing on the Scots help the opposite faction was fully
subdued, his Majesty left Oxford with a purpose for London, The Scots selling
of the King is a most false calumny.
but by the severity of the ordinances against his receivers, he diverted
toward Linn, to ship for Holland or France; where by the way fearing a
discovery and surprise, he was necessitate to cast himself upon the Scots army
at New-wark; upon his promise to give satisfaction to the propositions of both
Kingdoms, he was received there and came with them to New Castle: here his old
oaths to adhaere unto Episcopacy hindered him to give the expected satisfaction.
At that time the prime leaders of the English army were seeking with all
earnestnes occasion to fall upon the Scots, much out of heart and reputation by
James Grahame and his Irishes incursions, most unhappy for the Kings affairs:
Scotland at that time was so full of divisions, that if the King had gone
thither they were in an evident hazard of a present war both within among
themselfs, and without from England: our friends in the English Parliament whom
we did, and had reason to trust, assured us that our taking the King with us to
Scotland, was the keeping of the Sectarian Army on foot, for the wrack of the
King, of Scotland, of the Presbyterian party in England; as the sending of his
Majesty to one of his houses near London, upon the faith of the Parliament of
England, was the only way to get the Sectaryes disarmed, the King and the
people settled in a peace, upon such terms as should be satisfactory both to
the King and the Scots and all the well-affected in England. This being the true
case, was it any, either unjustice, unkindnes or imprudence in the Scots to
leave the King with his Parliment of England? was this a selling of him to his
enemies? the monys the Scots received at their departure out of England had no
relation at all to the King, they were scarce the sixth part of the arreares
due to them for bygon service; they were but the one half of the sum capitulat
for, not only without any reference to the King, but by an act of the English
Parliament excluding expressly from that Treaty of the armies departure all
consideration of the disposal of the Kings person. The unexpected evils that
followed in the Armies rebellion in their seasing on London, destroying the
Parliament, murdering the King, no mortal eye could have forseen. The Scots
were ever ready to the utmost of their power to have prevented all these
mischiefs with the hazard of what was dearest to them; notwithstanding of all
the hard measure they had often received both from the King and the most of
their friends in England. That they did not in time and unanimously stur to
purpose for these ends, they are to answer it to God, who were the true
Authors; the innocence of the Church is cleared in the following treatise.
Among the many causes of these miseries the prime fountain was the venom of
Episcopal principles which some serpents constantly did infuse by their
speeches and letters in the cares and heart of the King ^o keep him off from
giving that satisfaction to his good subjects which they found most necessary
and due; the very same cause which ties up this day the hands of covenanters
from redressing all present misorders could they have the King to join with
them in their covenant, to quit his unhappy Bishops, to lay aside his formal
and dead Liturgy, to cast himself upon the counsels of his Parliaments it
were easy to prophecy what quickly would become of all his enemies: but so
long as Episcopal and malignant agents compasses him about (though all that
comes near may see him as lovely, hopeful, and promising a prince for all
natural endowements as this day breaths in Europe, or for a long time has
swayed a Scepter in Britain) yet while such unlucky birds nest in his Cabin,
and men so ungraciously principled do daily besiege him, what can his good
people do but sit down with mournful eyes and bleeding hearts, till the Lord
amend these otherwise remediles and insuperable evils? but I hold here lest I
transgress to far the bounds of an Epistle

The ^eason off ^he dedication.
I count it an advantage to have you Lordship my judge in what here and in my
following treatise, I speak of Religion, the liberties of our country and the
Royal Family: I know none fitter then your Lordship, both to discern and
decerne in all these matters. Me thinks I may say it without flattery (which I
never much loved either; in my self or others) that among all our Nobles for
constancy in a zealous profession, for exemplary practice in public and private
duties, the mercy of God has given to your Lordship a reputation second to
none. And for a rigid adhaerence to the Rights and Privileges of your Country,
according to that ancient disposition of your Noble Family, noted in our
Historians, especially that Prince of them George Buchanan, the Tutor of your
Grandfather, I know none in our Land who will pretend to go before you; and
for the affairs of the King, your interest of blood in the Royal Family is so
well known, that it would be a strange impudency in me, if in your audience I
durst be bold wittingly to give finistrous information. Praying to God that
what in the candid ingenuity and true zeal of my spirit, I present under your
Lordships patrociny unto the eye of the World, for the vindication of my mother
Church and Country, from the Sicophantick accusations of a Stigmatized
incendiary, may produce the intended effects.

I rest your Lordships in all Christian duty, R. B. G.
Hague this 28 May/7 June. 1649.
CHAP. I.
The Prelaticall faction continue resolute, that the King and all His People
shall perish, rather then the Prelates, not restored to former places of Power,
for to set up Popery, Profanity, and Tyranny, in all the three Kingdoms.

WHile the Commissioners of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, The
unseasonablenesse of D. Brambles writing.
were on their way make their first addresses to his Majesty, for to condole
his most lamentable afflictions, and to make offer of their best affections and
services for his comfort, in this time of his great distress; it was the
wisdom and charity of the Prelaticall party, to send out Doctor Bramble, to
meet them with his Fair Warning. For what else? but to discourage them in in
the very entry from tendering their propositions, and before they were ever
heard, to stop his Majesty's ears with grievous prejudice, against all that
possibly they could speak; though the world sees that the only apparent
fountain of hope upon earth, for the recovery of the woefully confounded
affairs of the King, is in the hands of that Anti-prelaticall Nation: but it
is the hope of these who love the welfare of the KING and the people, of the
Churches and Kingdoms of Britain, that the hand of God which has broken all
the former devices of the Prelates, shall crush this their engine also.

Our warner undertaketh to oppugn the Scots discipline in a way of his own,
none of the most rational, The irationall way of the Warners writing.
He does not so much as pretend to state a question, nor in his whole Book to
bring against any main position of his opposites, either Scripture, Father or
reason, nor so much as assay to answer any one of their arguments against
Episcopacy; only he culs out some of their by-tenets, belonging little or
nothing to the main questions, and from them takes occasion to gather together
in a heap all the calumnies which of old, or of late their known enemies out of
the forge of their malice and fraud, did obtrude on the credulity of simple
people: also some decorted passages from the books of their friends, to bring
the way of that Church into detestation without any just reason.

The most of his stuff is borrowed and ^ong ago confuted.
These practices in our Warner are the less pardonable, that though he knows the
chief of his allegations, to be but borrowed from his late much beloved
Comrades Master Corbet in his Lysimachus Nicanor, and Master Maxwel in his
Issachart Burden, yet he was neither deterred by the strange punishments, which
God from heaven inflicted visibly on both these Calumniators of their Mother
Church, nor was pleased in his repeating of their calumnious arguments, to
releeve any of them from the exceptions under the which they stand publicly
confuted, I suppose to his own distinct knowledge, I know certainly, to the
open view of thousands in Scotland, England and Ireland; but it makes for the
Warners design to dissemble here in Holland, that ever he heard of such Books
as Lysimachus Nicanor, and Issachars Burden, much less of Master Baylies
Answer to both, Printed some years ago at London, Edenburg and Amsterdam,
without a rejoinder from any of that faction to this day.

The contumelions bitterness of the Warners spirit.
However let our Warner be heard. In the very first page of his first chapter,
we may taste the sweetness of his meek Spirit: at the very entry, he concludes
but without any pretense to an argument there or else where, the discipline of
the Church of Scotland to be their own invention, whereon they dote, the Diana,
which themselves have canonized, their own dreams, the counterfeit image which
they feign has fallen down from Jupiter, which they so much adore, the very
quintessence of refined Popery, not only most injurious to the civil
Magistrate, most oppressive to the Subject, most pernicious to both; but also
incensistent with all forms of civil Government, destructive to all sorts of
Policy, a rack to the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall on a
people. So much truth and soberness does the Warner breath out in his very
first page.

Though he had no regard at all to the clear passages of Holy Scripture,
whereupon the Scots do build their Anti-Episcopall tenets; nor any reference to
the harmony of the reformed Churches, which unanimously join with the Scots in
the main of their Discipline, especially in that which the Doctor hates most
therein, the rejection of Episcopacy: yet methinks some little respect might
have appeared in the man to the Authority of the Magistrate, and civil Laws,
which are much more ingeminated by this worthy Divine over all his book, then
the holy Scriptures.

Can be so soon forget that the whole discipline of the Church of Scotland, as
it is there taught and practiced, The Warner stricks at the Scots Discipline
through the Kings sides.
is established by Acts of Parliament, and has all the strength which the King
and State can give to a civil Law? the Warner may well be grieved, but hardly
can he be ignorant, that the Kings Majesty at this day does not at all question
the justice of these sanctions: what ever therefore be the Doctors thoughts,
yet so long as he pretends to keep upon his face the mask of loyalty, he must
be content to eat his former words, yea, to burn his whole book: otherwise he
lays against his own professions, a slander upon the King, and His Royal
Father, of great ignorance, or huge injustice, the one having established, the
other offering to establish by their civil laws, a Church Discipline for the
whole Nation of Scotland, which truly is the quintessence of Popery, pernicious
and destructive to all forms of civil Government, and the heaviest pressures
that can fall upon a people.

All the cause of of this choler which the Warner is pleased to speak out, is
the attempt of the Scots, In the thresshold he stumbles on the Kings conscience.
to obtrude their Discipline upon the King, contrary to the dictats of his own
conscience, and to compel foreign Churches to embrace the same. Ans. Is it
not presumption in our warner, so soon to tell the world in print what are the
dictats of the Kings conscience, as yet he is not his Majesty's confessor, and
if the Clerk of the Closet had whispered somewhat in his care, what he heard in
secret, he ought not to have proclaimed it without a warrant; but we do
altogether mistrust his reports of the Kings conscience: for who will believe
him, that a knowing and a just King will ever be content, to command and impose
on a whole Nation by his laws, a discipline contrary to the dictats of his own
conscience. This great stumble upon the Kings conscience in the first page,
must be an ominous cespitation on the threshold.

The other imputation has no just ground: The Scots never offered to impose
any thing upon England.
the Scots did never meddle, to impose upon foreign Churches, there is
question of none, but the English; and the Scots were never so presumptuous, as
to impose any thing of theirs upon that Church. It was the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, convocat by the Parliament of England, which after long
deliberation, and much debate, unanimously concluded the Presbyterian.
Discipline in all the parts thereof, to be agreeable to the word of God: it was
the two Houses of the Parliament of England without a contrary voice, who did
ordain the abolition of Episcopacy, and the setting up of Presbyteries and the
^ynods in England and Ireland. Can here the Scots be said to compel the
English to dance after their pipe, when their own Assembly of Divines begins
the song, when the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament of England
concur without a disordering opinion, when the King himself for perfecting
the harmony offers, to add his voice for three whole years together?

In the remainder of the Chapter the warner lays upon the Scots three other
crimes: First, That they count it Erastianisme to put the Government of the
Church in the hand of the Magistate. A^s. The Doctors knowledge is greater then
to be ignorant, that all these go under the name of tne Erastians, The elder
prelates of England were Erastians, and more, but the younger are as much
anti-Erastian as the most rigid of the Presbytery.
who walking in Erastus ways of flattering the Magistrate, to the prejudice of
the just rights of the Church, run yet out beyond Erastus personal tenets; I
doubt if that man went so far as the Doctor here and elsewhere, to make all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but a part of the Magistrates civil power, which
for its Execution, the supreme Governors of any state may derive out of the
fountain of their supremacy to what ever hands civil or ecclesiastic
themselves think fit to commit it. Let the Doctor add to this much knowledge,
but a little ingenuity, and he shall confess, that his brethren the latter
Bishops, who claim: Episcopacy by Divine Right, are all as much against this
Erastian Cesaro-papisme, as any Presbyterian in Scotland. The Elder Bishops
indeed of England and all the Laws there for Episcopacy seem to be point blank
according to the Erastian errors: for they make the Crown and Royal Supremacy
the original, root and fountain whence all the iscipline of the Church did
flow: as before the days of Henry the Eight it did out of the Popes headship of
the Church ^under Christ. However let the Doctor ingeniously speak out his
sense, and I am deceived, if he shall not acknowledge, that how gross an
Erastian so ever himself and the eldest Bishops of England might have been, yet
that long ago, the most of his prelaticall friends have become as much
opposite to Erastianisme, as the most rigid of the Presbyterians.

The other crime he lays to the charge of the The Scots first and greatest
crime is irreconciliablenesse with Rome.
Scots is, that they admit no latitude in Religion, but will have every opinion
a fundamental Article of Faith, and are averse from the reconcialition of the
Protestant Churches. Ans. If the Warner had found it seasonable to vent a
little more of his true sense in this point, he had charged this great crime
far more home upon the head of the Scots: for indeed, though they were ever far
from denying the true degrees of importance, which do clearly appear among the
multitude of Christian truths, yet the great quarrel here of the Warner and his
friends against them, is, that they spoiled the Canterburian design of
reconciling the Protestant Churches, not among themselves, but with the Church
of Rome. When these good men were with all earnestness proclaiming the greatest
controversies of Papists and Protestants to be upon no fundamentals, but only
disputable opinions, wherein belief on either side was safe enough, and when
they found that the Papists did stand punctually to the Tenets of the Church of
Rome, and were obstinately unwilling to come over to England, their great
labor was, that the English, and the rest of the Protestants, casting aside
their needless belief of problematick truths, in piety, charity and zeal, to
make up the breach, and take away the schism, should be at all the pains to
make the journey to Rome. While this design is far advanced, and furiously
driven on in all the three Kingdoms, and by none more in Ireland then the
Bishop of Derry, behold, the rude and plain Blue-caps step in to the play, and
mar all the Game: By no art, by no terror can these be gotten along to such a
reconciliation. This was the first and greatest crime of the Scots, which the
Doctor here glances at, but is so wise and modest a man as not to bring it
above board.

The last charge of the chapter is, that the Scots The Scots were ever
anti-episcopal.
keep not still that respect to the Bishops of England, which they were wont of
old in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign. Ans. In that Letter cited by the
Warner from the general Assembly of Scotland, 1566. Sess. 3. there is no word
of approbation to the Office of Episcopacy; they speak to the Bishops of
England in no other quality or relation, but as Ministers of the word, the
highest style they give them, is, Reverend Pastors and Brethren; the tenor of
the whole Epistle is a grave and brotherly admonition to beware of that fatal
concomitant of the most moderate Episcopacy, the troubling of the best and most
zealous servants of Christ for idle and fruitless Ceremonies. How great a
reverence the Church of Scotland at that time carried to Prelacy, may be seen
in their Supplication to the secret Council of Scotland, in that same Assembly
the very day and Session wherein they writ the Letter in hand to the Bishops of
England. The Arch-bishp of S. Andrews being then usurping jurisdiction over the
Ministry by some warrant from the State, the Assembly was grieved, not only
with the Popery of that Bishop, but with his ancient jurisdiction, which in all
Bishops, popish and protestant, is one and the same: That jurisdiction was the
only matter of their present complaint; and in relation thereto, they assure
the Council in distinct terms, that they would never be more subject unto that
usurped Tyranny, then they would be to the Devil himself. So reverend an
opinion had the Church of Scotland at that time of Episcopal Jurisdiction.

The Prelates lately were found in the act of introducing Popery into the
Church, and Tyranny into the Kingdom.
But suppone that some fourscore years ago, the Scots, before they had tasted
the fruits of Protestant Bishops, had judged them tolerable in England; yet
since that time, by the long tract of mischiefs which constantly have
accompanied the order of Prelacy, they have been put upon a more accurate
inspection of its nature, and have found it not only a needless, but a
noxious and poisonous weed, necessary to be plucked up by the root, and cast
over the hedge. Beside all its former malefices, it has been deprehended of
late in the very act of everting the foundations, both of Religion and
Government, of bringing in Popery and Tyranny in the Churches and States of all
the three Kingdoms, ( Canterburian self-conviction, cap. 1.)

And for these crimes it was condemned, killed, and buried in Scotland, by the
unanimous consent of King, Church and Kingdom; when England thereafter both in
their Assembly and Parliament, without a discording voice, had found it
necessary to root out that unhappy plant, as long ago with great wisdom it had
been cast out of all the rest of the reformed Churches; had not the Scots all
the reason in the world to applaud such pious, just and necessary resolutions
of their English Brethren, though the Warner should call it the greatest crime?

CHAP. II.
The Presbyterians assert positively the Magistrates right to convocate Synods,
to confirm their acts, to reform the Churches within their Dominions.

IN the second Chapter the Warner charges the Scots Presbytery with the
overthrowing the Magistrates right in convocating of Synods. When he comes to
prove this, No controversy in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, about
the convocating of Synods.
he forgets his challenge, and digresses from it to the Magistrates power of
choosing Elders and making Ecclesiastic Laws, avowing that these things are
done in Scotland by Ecclesiastic persons alone, without consent of the King or
his Council. Ans. It seems, our Warner is very ignorant of the way of the Scots
Discipline: the ordinary and set meetings of all Assemblies both National and
provincial since the first reformation are determined by Acts of Parliament,
with the Kings consent; so betwixt the King and the Church of Scotland, there
is no question for the convocating of ordinary Assemblies: for extraordinary,
no man in Scotland did ever controvert the Kings power, to call them when and
where he pleased: as for the inherent power of the Church to meet for
discipline, as well as for worship, the warner falls on it hereafter, we must
therefore pass it in this place.

What he means to speak of the Kings power in choosing Elders or making
Ecclesiastic Laws, himself knows: The Warners Erastian and Tyrannick
principles hated by the King.
his Majesty in Scotland did never require any such privilege as the election
of Elders, or Commissioners to Parliament, or members of any incorporation,
civil or ecclesaistick, where the Laws did not expressly provide the nomination
to be in the Crown. The making of Ecclesiastic Laws in England as well as in
as in Scotland, was ever with the Kings good contentment, referred to
Ecclesiast^^k Assemblies: but the Warner seems to be in the mind of those his
companions, who put the power of preaching, of administering the Sacraments and
Discipline, in the supreme Magistrate alone, and derives it out of him as the
Head of the Church, to what Members he thinks expedient to communicate it: also
that the Legislative Power, as well in Ecclesiastic as civil Affairs, is the
property of the King alone. That the Parliaments and general Assemblies are but
his arbitrary Councels, the one for matters of State, the other for matters of
the Church, with whom or without whom he makes Acts of Parliament and
Church-cannons, according to his good pleasure, that all the Offices of the
Kingdom both of Church and State are from him, as he gives a commission to whom
he will to be a Sheriff or Justice of Peace, so he sends out whom he pleases
to preach and celebrate Sacraments by virtue of his Regal mission The Warner
and his Erastian friends may well extend the Royal Supremacy to this
largeness, but no King of Scotland was ever willing to accept of such a power
though by erroneous flatterers, sometime obtruded upon ^^m, (se Canterburian
self conviction, cap. ult.)

The Warners ignorant and false report of the S^^ts proceedings.
The warner will not leave this matter in general, he discends to instance a
number of particular encroachments of the Scots Presbyters upon the Royal
authority: we must dispense in all his discourse with a small piccadillo in
reasoning, he must be permitted to lay all the faults of the Presbyterians in
Scotland upon the back of the Presbytery it self, and if the faylings of
Officers were natural to, and inseparable from their Office: mis-kennning this
little mote of unconsequentiall argumenting, we will go through his particular
charges. The first is, that King James anno 1579 required the general
Assembly, to make no alteration in the Church-policy, till the next Parliament,
but they contemning their Kings command, determined positively all their
discipline without delay, and questioned the Archbishop of S. Andrews for
voting in Parliament according to the undoubted Laws of the land, yea 20
Presbyters did hold the general Assembly at Aberdeen after it was discharged
by the King. Ans. The Warner possibly may know, yet certainly he does not care
what he writes in these things to which he is a mere stranger: the authentic
Registers of the Church of Scotland convinces him here of falsehood. Bishops
were abolished and Presb teries set up in Scotlan^ with King James consent.
His Majesty did write from Stirling to the General Assembly at Edenburg 1579.
that they should cease from concluding any thing in the discipline of the
Church, during the time of his minority; upon this desire the Assembly did
abstain from all conclusions, only they named a Committee to go to Striveling
for conference with his Majesty upon that Subject. What follows thereupon?
I. Immediately a Parliament is called in October 1579, and in the first Act
declares and grants jurisdiction unto the Kirk, which consists in the true
preaching of the word of Jesus Christ, correction of manners, and
administration of the true Sacraments, and declares that there is no other face
of Kirk, nor other face of Religion then is presently by the favor of God
established within this realm, and that there be no other jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical acknowledged within this Kingdom then that which is within the
samen Kirk, or that which flows therefrom concerning the premises. II. In
April 1580 Proclamation was made ex deliberatione Dominorum Consilii in name of
the King, charging all Superintendents and Commissioners and Ministers serving
at Kirks. To note the names of all the Subjects as well men as women suspected to
be Papists or -- and to admonnish them -- to give Confession of their faith
acording to the form approved by the Parliament, and to submit unto the
discipline of the true Kirk within a reasonable space --: and if they fail --
that the Superintendents or Commissioners present a role or catalogue of their
names unto the King and Lords of secret Counsel where they shall be for the
time between and the 15 day of July next to come, to the end that the acts of
Parliament made against such persons may be execute. III. The short confession
was drawn up at the Kings command, which was first subscribed by his royal
hand, and an act of Secret Counsel commanding all subjects to subscribe the
same; as it is to be seen by the Act printed with the Confession, wherein
Hierarchy is abjured, that is (as has been since declared by National
assemblies and Parliaments both called and held by the King) Episcopacy is
abjured. IV. In the assemblies 1580 and 1581, that Confession of faith and the
second book of discipline (after debating many praeceding years) were approved
(except one chapter de diaconatu) by the Assembly, the Kings Commissioners
being always present, nor find we anything opposed them by him: yea then at
his Majesty's special direction about fifty classical Presbyteries were set
over Scotland which remain unto this day; was there here any attempt of the
royal authority?

About that time some noble men had got the revenues of the Bishop-ricks for
their private use; and because they could not enjoy them by any legal right,
therefore for eluding the Law, they did effectuate that some Ministers should
have the title of this or that Bishopric; and the revenues were gathered in
the name of this titulare or tulchan Bishop, albeit he had but little part: e.
g. Robert Montgomery Minister at Sterline was called Archbishop of Glasgow:
and so it can be instanced in other Bishop-ricks and Abbacies. Now this kind of
praelats pretended no right to any part of the Episcopal office, either in
ordination or jurisdiction: when some of these men began to creep in to vote
for the Church in Parliament, without any Law of the State, without any
commission from the Church, the General assembly discharged them, being
Ministers, to practice any more such illegal insolences with this ordinance of
the Church; after a little debate, King James at that time did show his good
satisfaction.

The innocence of the much maligned assembly of Aberdeen.
But the Warner here jumps over no less then twenty seven years time from the
assembly at Edingburgh 1579. to that at Aberdeen 1605. then was King James by
the English Bishops persuasion resolved to put down the general assemblies of
Scotland, contrary to the Laws and constant practice of that Church, from the
first reformation to that day. The act of Parliament did bear that once at
least a year the assembly should meet, and after their business was ended they
should name time and place for the next assembly. When they had met in the year
1602, they were moved to adjurn without doing any thing for two whole years to
1604, when then they were conveened at the time and place agreed to by his
Majesty, they were content upon his Majesty's desire without doing any thing
to adjourn to the next year 1605, at Aberdeen; when that diet came, his
Majesty's Commissioner offered him a Letter: To the end they might be an
Assembly and so in a Capacity to receive his Majesty's Letter, with the
Commissioners good pleasure they sat down, they named their Moderator and
Clark, they received and read the Kings letter commanding them to rise, which
they obeyed without any further action at all but naming a diet for the next
meeting according to the constant practice of Scotland; hereupon by the
pernicious counsel of the Archbishop Banckroft at London, the King was stirred
up to bring sore troubles upon a number of gracious Ministers. This is the
whole matter which to the Warner here is so tragic an insolence, that never
any Parliament durst attempt the like. See more of this in the Historical
vindication.

Christmas and other superstitious festivals abolished in Scotland, both by
Church and State.
The next instance of our Presbiteryes usurpation upon the Magistrate, is their
abolition (before any statute of Parliament thereupon) of the Church festivals
in their first book of discipline. Ans. Consider the griveousness of this
crime; in the intervall of Parliaments, the great Council of Scotland in the
minority of the Prince entrusted by Parliament to rule the Kingdom, did charge
the Church to give them in write their judgment about matters Ecclesiastical:
in obedience to this charge the Church did present the council with a write
named since the first book of discipline a which the Lords of council did
approve, subscribe and ratify by an Act of State: a part of the first head in
that write was that Christmas, Epiphany, Purification, and other fond feasts of
the Virgin Mary, as not warrented by the holy Scriptures, should be laid aside.
Was it any encroachment upon the Magistrate for the Church to give this advice
to the privy council when earnestly they did crave it? the people of Scotland
ever since have showed their ready obedience to that direction of the Church
founded upon Scripture, and backed from the beginning with an injunction of the
State.

His third instance of the Church of Scotlands usurpation upon the Magistrate,
is, The friends of Episcopacy thryves not in Scotland.
their abolition of Episcopacy in the assembly, 1580, when the Law made it
treason to impugn the Authority of Bishops, being the third estate of the
Kingdom. Ans. The Warner seems to have no more knowledge of the affairs of
Scotland, then of Japan or Utopia; the Law he speaks of was not in being some
years after 1580, however all the general assemblies of Scotland, are
authorized by Act of Parliament, to determine finally without an appeal in all
Eclesiastick affairs: in the named assembly Lundie the Kings Commissioner did
sit and consent in his Majesty's name to that act of abolition, as in the next
assembly 1581, the Kings Commissioner Caprinton did erect in his Majesty's name
the Presbyteries in all the Land; it is true, three years thereafter a wicked
Courtier Captain James Stuart, in a shadow of a close and not summoned
Parliament, did procure an act to abolish Presbytery and erect Bishops; but
for this and all other crimes that evil man was quickly rewarded by God before
the world, in a terrible destruction: these acts of this Parliament the very
^^^t year were disclaimed by the King, the Bishops were put down and the
Presbytery was set up again, and never more removed to this day.

The Warners digression to the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland, to the acts
of the Church and State for their restitution, is but to show his ignorance in
the Scots story: what ever be the Episcopal boasting of other Nations, yet it
is evident that from the first entrance of Christian Religion into Scotland,
Presbyters alone without Bishops for some hundred years did govern the Church:
and after the reformation there was no Bishop in that Land, but in tittle and
benefice till the year 1610; when Bancroft did consecrate three Scots
Ministers, all of them men of evil report; whom that violent Commissioner the
Earl of Dunbar in the corrupt and null assembly of Glasgow, got authorized in
some part of a Bishops office; which part only and no more was ratified in a
posterior Parliament. Superintendents are nowhere the same with Bishops, much
less in Scotland, where for a time only til the Churches were planted, they
were used as ambulatory Commissioners, and visitors to preach the word, and
administer the Sacraments for the supply of vacant and unsettled congregations.

The second book of discipline why not at all ratified in Parliament.
The fourth instance is the Churches obtruding the second book of discipline,
without the ratification of the State. Ans. For the Ecclesiastic enjoining of
a general assemblies decrees, a particular ratification of Parliament is
unnecess^ry; general acts of Pa^liament commanding obedience to the acts of the
Church, are a sufficient warrant from the State; beside, that second book of
discipline was much debated with the King, and at last in the General assembly
1590, his consent was obtained unto it: for in that assembly where unanimously
the subscription of the second book of discipline by all the ministers of the
Kingdom was decryed, his Majesty some time in person and always by the
Chancellor his Commissioner was present, and in the act for subscription. Sess.
10 Augusti 8. it is expressly said that not only all the Ministers, but also all
the Commissioners present did consent, among which Commissioners the chancellor,
his Majesty's Commissioner was chief. But neither the King nor the Church could
get it to pass the Parliament in regard of the opposition, which some
Statesmen did make unto these parts thereof, which touched on their own
interest of unjust advantage; this was the only stick.

The Warners hypocrisy, calling that a crime, which himself counts a virtue.
The next instance of the Churches encroachment is their usurpation of all the
old rents of the clergy, as the Churches patrimony, and their decerning in an
assembly that nothing in the next Parliament should pass before the Church
were fully restored to her rents. Ans. Consider here the Warners hypocrisy and
unjustice; he challenges the Presbyterians for that which no Prelate in the
world did ever esteem a fault, a mere declaration of their judgment, that the
Church had a just right to such rents, as by Law and long possession were
theirs, and not taken away from them by any lawful means. What if here they
had gone on with the most of the prelatical party to advance that right to a
jus divinum? what if they had put themselves by a command from Court, into the
possession of that right, without a process, as diverse of the Warners friends
were begun lately to do in all the three Kingdoms? But all that he can here
challenge the Scots for, is a mere declaration of their simple right, with a
supplication to the Regent his Grace, that he would endeavor in the next
Parliament, to procure a ninth part of the Churches patrimony, for the
maintenance of the ministry, and the poor of the Country: for all the rent that
the Churches then could obtain, or did petition, was but a third of the Thirds
of the Benefices or Tithes. That ever any Assembly in Scotland did make any
other address to the Parliament for stipends, then by way of humble
supplication, it is a great untruth.

The last instance is, the erecting of Presbyteries through all the Kingdom, by
an Act of the Church alone. Answ. I have shown already the untruth of this
Allegation; the proof here brought for it, is grounded only upon an ambiguous
word, which the Warners ignorance in the Scottish Discipline and Presbytery
(though the main subject of his Book) permits him not to understand. The
Presbyteries were set up by the King after the Assembly 1580; but the second
Book of Discipline, of which alone the citation speaks, how-ever enjoined by
many Assemblies, yet it could never be gotten ratified in any parliament, only
because of those parts of it which did speak for the patrimony of the Church,
and oppugn the right of patronage.

How well the Warner has proved the Presbyterian practices to be injurious to
the Magistrate, we have considered; The Warner a gross Erastian.
possibly he will be more happy in his next undertaking, in his demonstrations
that their doctrinal principles do trample on the Magistrates Supremacy and
Laws. Their first principle he takes out of the second book of Discipline,
Chap. 7. That no Magistrate, nor any but Ecclesiastic persons may vote in
Synods. Ans. Though I find nothing of this in the place cited, yet there is
nothing in it that crosses either the Laws, or the Kings Supremacy: for
according to the Acts of Parliament of Scotland both old and late, and the
constant practice of that Church, the only members of Presbyteries are
Ministers and ruling Elders. Is it the Warners mind to vent here his
super-Erastianism, that all Ecclesiastic Assemblies, Classical, Provincial,
National, are but the arbitrary courts of the Magistrate, for to advise him in
the execution of his inherent power about matters Ecclesiastical; and for this
cause, that it is in his arbitrament to give a decisive voice in all Church
Assembles to whom and how many soever he will? Though this may be the Warners
mind, as it has been some of his friends; yet the most of the prelatical
party will not maintain him herein. How-ever, such principles are contrary to
the Laws of Scotland, to the professions also and practices of all the Princes
and Magistrates that ever have lived there.

Prelaticall principles impossibilitate all solid peace, betwixt the King and
his Kingdoms.
But the Warner here may possibly glance at another principle of his good
friends, who have been willing lately to vent before all Britain in print,
their elevating the supremacy of Sovereigns so far above Laws, that whatever
people have obtained to be established by never so many Assemblies and
Parliaments, and confirmed with never so many great seals of ratification, and
peaceably enjoyed by never so long a possession; yet it is nothing but
commendable wisdom and justice for the same Prince who made the first
Concessions, or any of his successors, whenever they find themselves strong
enough, to cancel all, and make void what ever Parliaments, Assemblies, Royal
ratifications, and the longest possession, made foolish people believe to be
most firm and unquestionable. To this purpose, Bishop Maxwel (from whom much of
this Warning is borrowed) does speak in his Sacro-Sancta regum Majestas.
Though this had bin the Cabin-divinity of our Prelates, yet what can be their
intentions in speaking of it out in these times of confusion, themselves must
declare: for the clear consequent of such doctrine seems to be a necessity
either of such Warners perpetual banishment from the Courts and ears of
Sovereigns, or else that subjects be kept up for ever in a strong jealousy,
and fear that they can never be secure of their Liberties, though never so well
ratified by Laws and promises of Princes any longer then the sword and power
remains in their own hand to preserve what they have obtained. Such Warners, so
long as they are possessed with such maxims of state, are clear everters of
the first fundations of trust betwixt Sovereign and Subjects, they take away
any possibility of any solid peace of any confident settlement in any troubled
State, before both parties be totally ruined, or one become so strong that they
need no more to fear the others malecontentment in any time to come.

Our second challenged principle is that we teach the whole power of
convocating assemblies to be in the Church. Erastian Prelates evert the legal
foundations of all Government.
Ans. The Warners citations prove not that we maintain any such assertion; our
doctrine and constant practice has been to ascribe to the King a power of
calling Synods, when and wheresoever he thought fit; but that which the Warner
seems to point at is, our tenet of an intrinsicall power in the Church to meet,
as for the Word and Sacraments, so for discipline; in this all who are
Christians, old and late, the Prelaticall and Popish party as well as others,
go along with us to maintain in doctrine and practice a necessity even in times
of persecution, that the Church must meet for the worship of God and execution
of Ecclesiastic discipline among their own Members. In this the doctrine and
practice of the Scots is according to their settled laws, uncontroverted by his
Majesty. If the Warner will maintain, that in reason and conscience all the
Churches of the world are obliged to dissolve and never more to meet when an
erroneous Magistrate by his Tyrannous Edict commands them to do so, let him
call up Erastus from the dead to be disciplined in this new doctrine of the
Prelates impious loyalty.

The third Principle is that the judgment of true and false doctrine, The
final determination of all Ecclesiastic causes by the Laws of Scotland, is in
the general Assembly.
of suspension and deprivation of Ministers belongs to the Church. Ans. If
this be a great heresy, it is to be charged as much upon the State as upon the
Church, for the Acts of Parliament give all this power to the Church, neither
did the Laws of England or of any Christian State, Popish or Protestant, refuse
to the Church the determination of such Eccclesiastick causes; some indeed do
debate upon the power of appeals from the Church; but in Scotland, by the Law,
as no appeal in things civil goes higher then the Parliament, so in matters
Ecclesiastic none goes above the General Assembly. Complaints indeed may go
to the King and Parliament for redress of any wrong has been done in
Ecclesiastic Courts, who being Custodes Religionis may by their coercive power
command Ecclesiastic Courts to rectify any wrong done by them contary to
Scripture, or if they persist take order with them. But that two or three
P^aelates should become a Court of delegates, to receive appeals from a general
assembly, neither Law nor practice in Scotland did ever admit, nor does the
word of God or any Equity require it. In the Scots assemblies no causes are
agitat but such as the Parliament has agreed to be Ecclesiastic and of the
Churches cognizance: no process about any Church rent was ever cognosced upon
in Scotland but in a civil Court: its very false that ever any Church censure,
much less the highest of excommunication did fall upon any for robbing the
Church of its patrimony.

The divine right of discipline, is the tenet of the most of Praelats.
Our fourth challenged principle is that we maintain Ecclesiastic jurisdiction
by a divine right. Ans. Is this a huge crime? is there divine right in the
world, either Papist or Protestant, except a few praelatical Erastians, but
they do so? If the Warner will profess (as it seems he must) the contradiction
of that which he ascribes to us, his avowed tenet must be that all
Ecclesiastic power flows from the Magistrate, that the Magistrate himself may
execute all Church censures, that all the Officers appointed by Christ for the
government of his Church, may be laid aside, and such a kind of governors be
put in their place, as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint: that the
spiritual sword and Keys of heaven belong to the Magistrate by virtue of his
supremacy, as well as the temporal sword and Keys of his earthly Kingdom: our
difference herefrom the Warner will not (I hope) be found the greatest heresy.

All the power of the Church in Scotland is legal, and with the Magistrates
consent.
Our last challenged principle is, that we will have all our power against the
Magistrate, that is, although he dissent. Ans. It is an evil commentary that
all must be against the Magistrate, which is done against his consent: but in
Scotland there is no such case: for all jurisdiction which the Church there
does enjoy, they have it with the consent of the Magistrate: all is ratified to
them by such acts of Parliament as his Maj^stie does not at all controvert.
Concerning that odious case the Warner intimates, whither in time of
persecution, when the Magistrate classheth with the Church, any Ecclesiastic
discipline be then to be exercised; himself can better answer it then we, who
with the ancient Christians do think that on all hazards (even of life) the
Church may not be dissolved, but meet in dens and in the caves and in the
wilderness for the word and Sacraments and keeping it self pure by the divine
ordinance of Discipline.

Having cleared all the pernicious practices and all the wicked D^ctrines,
which the Warner lays upon us, The Prelates rather then to lay aside their own
interest, will keep the King and his people in misery for ever.
I think it needless to insist upon these defenses which he in his abundant
charity brings for us; but in his own way, that he may with the greater
advantage impugn them: only I touch one passage whereupon he makes injurious
exclamations: that which Mr. Gilespie in his theoremes writes; when the
Magistrate abuses his power unto Tyranny and makes havoc of all, it is lawful
to resist him by some extraordinary ways and means, which are not ordinarily
to be allowed: see the principles from which all our miseries and the loss of
our Gracious Master has flowed. Ans. We must here yield to the Warner the
great equity and necessity that every doctrine of a Presbyter, should be
charged on the Presbytery it self, and that any Presbyter teaching the
lawfulness of a Parliaments defensive arms is tantamont to the Churches taking
of arms against the King. These small inconsequences we must permit the Warner
to swallow down without a stick; however we do deny that the maxim in hand was
the fountain of any of our miseries, or the cause at all of the loss of our
late Sovereign: Did ever his Majesty or any of his advised Counselors declare
it simply unlawful for a Parliament, to take arms for defense in some
extraordinary cases, however the unhappiness of the Canterburian Praelats did
put his Majesty upon these courses, which did begin and promote all our
misery; and to the very last these men were so wicked as to refuse the loosing
of the bands which their hands had tied about his misinformed conscience, yea
to this day they will not give their consent, that his Majesty, who now is,
should lay aside Episcopacy, were it for the gaining of the peaceable
possession of all his three Kingdoms, but are urgers of him night and day to
adhere to their errors, upon the hazard of all the miseries that may come on
his person, on his family, and all his people; yet few of them to this day
durst be so bold as to print with this Warner, the unlawfulness of a
Parliaments arms against the Tyranny of a Prince in any imaginable case, how
extraordinary soever.

CHAP. III.
The Laws and customs of Scotland admit of no appeal from the general
assembly.

IN this Chapter the challenge is, that there are no appeals from the general
Assembly to the King, as in England from the Bishops Courts to the King in
Chauncery, Appeals in Scotland from a general Assem^ly were no less
irrational then illegal.
where a Commission uses to be given to delegats who discuss the appeals. Ans.
The warner considers not the difference of the Government of the Church of
Scotland, from that which was in England; what the Parliament is in the State,
that the general assembly is in the Church of Scotland: both are the highest
Courts in their own kind. There is no appeal any where in moderate Monarchies
to the Kings person, but to the King in certain legal Courts, as the Warner
here confesses the appeal from Bishops lies not to the King in his person, but
to the King in his Court of Chancery. As no man in Scotland is permitted to
appeal in a civil cause from the Lords of Session, much less from the
Parliament; so no man in an ecclesiastic cause is permitted by the very civil
Law of Scotland, to appeal from the general Assembly. According to the Scots
order and practice, the King in person, or else by his high Commissioner, sits
as usually in the general Assembly, as in Parliament. But though it were not
so, yet an appeal from a general Assembly, to be discussed in a court of
Delegats, were unbeseeming and unreasonable; the one court consisting of above
two hundred, all chosen men, the best and most able of the Kingdom; the other
but of two or three, often of very small either abilities or integrity, who yet
may be more fit to discern in an Ecclesiastic cause, then a single Bishop or
his Official, the ordinary Trustee in all acts of Jurisdiction for the whole
Dioces. But the Scots way of managing Ecclesiastic causes is a great deal more
just, safe and Satisfactory to any rational man, then that old Popish order of
the English, where all the spiritual Jurisdiction of the whole Dioces was in
the hand of one mercenary Official, without all relief from his Sentence,
except by an appeal, as of old to the Pope and his Delegats, so thereafter to
the King, though never to be cognosced upon by himself; but as it was of old by
two or three Delegats, the weakest of all Courts, often for the quality, and
ever for the number of the Judges.

The Churches ^^st severity a^^inst Mont^^mery and A^^mson was ^proven by ^^e
King and ^^e parties ^^mselves.
Two Instances are brought by the Warner, to prove the Church of Scotlands
stopping of appeals from the general Assembly to the King, the cases of
Montgomery and Adamson: if the causes and events of the named cases had been
well known to the Warner, as he made this chapter disproportionably short, so
readily be might have deleted it altogether. But these men were infamous not
only in their Ministerial charges, but in their life and conversation; both
became so insolent, that contrary to the established order of the Church and
Kingdom, being suborned by wicked Statesmen, who in that day of darkness had
well near brought ruin both to King and Country, would needs take upon them
the Office of Archbishops. While the Assembly was in Process with them for
their manifold and high misdeameanors, the King was moved by them and their
evil Patrons, to show his high displeasure against the Assemblies of the
Church; they for his Maj^sties satisfaction sent their Commissioners and had
many conferences; whereby the pride and contempt of these Prelates did so
increase, that at last they drew the sentence of Excommunication upon their own
heads: the King after some time did acknowledge the equity of the Church
proceedings, and professed his contentment therewith: both these unhappy men
were brought to a humble confession of their crimes, and such signs of
repentance, that both after a renunciation of their titulary Bishoprics were
readmitted to the function of the Ministry, which they had deserted. Never any
other before or after in Scotland did appeal from the general Assembly to the
King; the late Excommunicate Prelate in their declinator against the Assembly
of Glasgow, did not appeal as (I remember) to the King, but to another General
Assembly to be constitute, according to their own Popish and Tyrannical
principles.

CHAP. IV.
Faulty Ministers in Scotland are less exempted from punishment, then any
other men.

THe Warner in his fourth Chapter, The pride of Prelates lately, but never the
Presbytery did exempt their fellows from punishment for their civil faults.
offers to prove that the Scottish Discipline does exempt Ministers from
punishment for any treason or sedition they can act in their Pulpits. Answ.
This challenge is like the rest, very false. The rules of the Church Discipline
in Scotland obliges Churchmen to be subject to punishment, not only for every
fault for which any other man is liable to censure, but ordains them to be
punished for sundry things, which in other men are not at all questionable; and
whatever is consu^able in any, they appoint it to be much more so in a
Minister. It is very untru^, that the Pulpits in Scotland are Sanctuaries for
any crime, much less for the grievous crimes of sedition and treason. Let the
Warner remember, how short a time it is, since an Episcopal Chair or a
Canonical Co^t did privilege in England and Ireland from all censure either
of Church or State great numbers, who were notoriously known to be guilty of
the foulest crimes. Was ever the War^^^^ companion Bishop Aderton challenged
for his Sodomy, so long as their common Patron of Canterbury did rule the
Court? did the Warner never hear of a Prelate very sibb to D^ctor Bramble, who
to this day was never called to any account for flagrant scandals of such
crimes as in Scotland are punishable by the Gallows? the Warner does not well
to insist upon the Scots Clergy, exempting themselves from civil punishments;
no where in the world are Churchmen more free of crimes deserving civil
Cognizance then in Scotland: and if the ears and eyes of the World may be
trusted, the Popish Clergy this day in Italy and Spain are not so
challengeable, as the Prela^icall Divines in England and Ireland lately were
for many gross^ misdemeanors.

The Warner is injurious to the Ministers of Holland.
But why does the Warners anger run out so far as to the Preachers in Holland?
is it because he knows the Church D scipline in Holland to be really the same
with that he oppugnes in the Scots, and that all the Reformed Churches do join
cordially with Scotland in their rejection of Episcopacy? is this a ground for
him to slander our Brethren of Holland? Is it charity for him a stranger to
publish to the World in print, that the Ministers in Holland are seditious
Orators, and that they saucily control the Magistrates in their Pulpits? Their
crime seems to be, that for the love of Christ their Master, they are zealous
in their doctrine, to press upon the Magistrate as well as upon the people the
true practice of piety, the sanctification of the Sabbath day, the suppression
of heresy and schism, and repentance for the sins of the time and place wherein
they live. I his is a crime, whereof few of the Warners friends were wont to be
guilty of: their shameful silence and flattery was one of the great causes of
all the sins and calamities that have wracked the three Kingdoms: the stream of
their Sermons while they enjoyed the Pulpit, was to encourage to superstition
and contempt of piety, to sing asleep by their ungracious way all that gave ear
unto them. The man is impatient to see the Pastors of Holland or any where, to
walk in another path then his own, and for this cause would stir up their
Magistrates against them: as it was his and his Brethrens custom to stir up the
Magistrates of Britain and Ireland to imprison, banish, and heavily vex the
most zealous servants of God, only for their opposition to the Prelates
profanity and errors. The Warner (I hope) has not yet forgotten, how Doctor
Bramble and his neighbor Lesty of Down did cast out of the Ministry, and made
flee our of the Kingdom, men most eminent for zeal, piety and learning, who in
a short time had done more good in the house of God, then all the Bishops that
ever were in Ireland, I mean Mr. Blair, Mr. Levington, Mr. Hamilton, Mr.
Cuningham, and others.

The Warner needed not to have marked as a singularity of Geneva, that there
all the Ecclesiastics, qua tales, are punishable by the Magistrates for civil
crimes; for we know none of the reformed Churches, who were ever following Rome
in exempting the Clergy from saecular jurisdiction, except it were the
Canterburian Praelates: who indeed did scare the most of Magistrates from
meddling with a canonical coat though defiled with drunkenness, adultery,
scolding, fighting, and other evils, which were too common of late to that
order.

But how does he prove, The pretended declaration of King James, was Bishop
Adamsons lying libel.
that the Scots Ministers exempt themselves from civil jurisdiction? first
(says he) by the declaration of King James 1584. Ans. That declaration was not
from King James, as himself did testify the year thereafter under his hand,
but from Mr. Patrike Adamson, who did acknowledge it to be his own upon his
death bed, and professed his repentance for the lies and slanders, wherewith
against his conscience he had fraughted that infamous libell.

His second proof is from the second book of discipline Chapter II, Though
always in England yet never in Scotland had Commissaries any jurisdiction over
Ministers.
It is absurd that Commissaries having no function in the Church, should be
judges to Ministers to depose them from their charges. Ans. Though in England
the Commissary and official was the ordinary judge to depose and excommunicate
all the Ministers of the diocese, yet by the Laws of Scotland no Commissaries
had ever any jurisdiction over Ministers. But though the officials jurisdiction
together with their Lords the Bishops were abolished, yet does it follow from
this, that no other jurisdiction remains whereby Ministers might be punished
either by Church or State, according to their demerits? is not this strongly
reasoned by the Warner?

His third proof is the cause of James Gibson, James Gibson was never absolved
by the Church from his Process.
who had railed in Pulpit against the King, and was only suspended; yea,
thereaft^r was absolved from that fault. Ans. Upon the complaint of the
Chancellor the alleged words were condemned by the general Assembly: but
before the man's guiltiness of these words could be tried, he did absent
himself; for which absence, he was presently suspended from his Ministry: in
the next Assembly he did appear and cleared the reason of his absence to have
been just fear, and no contumacy; this he made appear to the Assemblies
satisfaction, but before his process could be brought to any issue, he fled
away to England, where he died a fugitive, never restored to his charge though
no trial of his fault was perfected.

Mr. Blacks appe^^ from the Council cleared.
The fourth proof is Mr. Black his case: hereupon the Warner makes a long and
odious narration. If we interrogate him about his ground of all these Stories,
he can produce no warrant but Spotswoods unprinted Book: this is no an h^^tick
R^gist^r whereupon any understanding man can rely; the Writer was a p^ofest
enemy, to his death, of the Scottish Discipline, he spent his life upon a Story
for the d^sgrace of the Presbytery and the honor of Bishops: no man who is
acquainted with the life or death of that Author, will build his belief upon
his words. This whole narration is abundantly confuted in the historical
Vindication, when the Warner is pleased to repeat the Challenge from Issachars
burden, he ought to have replied something after three years advisement to the
printed Answer.

The matter (as our Registers bear) was shortly thus: In the year 1596. the
Popish and Malignant Faction in King JAMES his Court grew so strong, that the
countenance of the King toward the Church was much changed, and over all the
Land great fears did daily increase, of the overthrow of the Church Discipline
established by Law. The Ministers in their Pulpits gave free warning thereof:
among others, Mr. Black of S. Andrews, a most gracious and faithful pastor,
did apply his doctrine to the sins of the time; some of his Enemies delated him
at Court for words injurious to the King and Queen: the words he did deny and
all his honest hearers did absolve him by their testimony from these calumnies:
of himself he was most willing to be tried to the uttermost before all the
world, but his Brethren finding the libelled calumnies to be only a pretense,
and the true intention of the Courtiers therein was to stop the mouths of
Ministers, that the crying sins of the times should no more be reproved in
pulpits, they advised him to decline the judgment of the council, and appeal
to the general Assembly, as the competent Judge according to the word of God
and the Laws of Scotland, in the cause of doctrine; for the first instance they
did never question, but if any thing truly seditious had been preached by a
Minister, that he for this might be called before the civil Magistrate, and
accordingly punished; but that every Minister for the application of his
doctrine according to the rules of Scripture to the sins of his hearers for
their reclaiming, should be brought before a civil court at the first instance,
they thought it unreasonable, and desired the King in the next Assembly might
cognosce upon the equity of such a proceeding. The Ministers had many a
conference with his Majesty upon that subject; often the mat er was brought
very near to an amicable conclusion, but because the Ministers refused to
subscibe a band for so great a silence as the Court required against his
Majesty's countenancing of treacherous Papists, and favoring the enemies of
Religion, a severe Sentence was pronounced not only against Master Black, but
also all the Ministers of Edinburgh.

In the mean time, The Tumult of the seventeenth day of December was harmless,
and no Minister guilty of it.
malcontented Statesmen did add oil to the flame, and at the very instant,
while the Ministers and their friends are offering a Petition to his Majesty,
they suborn a villane to cry in one part of the Streets, That the Ministers are
slain, and in another part of the Streets, That the King was killed: whereupon
the People rush all out to the Streets in their Arms, and for half an hour at
most, were in a tumult, upon mere ignorance what the fray might be, but without
the hurt of any one man; so soon as it was found that both the King and
Ministers were safe, the people went all peaceably to their houses. This is the
very truth of that innocent commotion, whereupon the Warner here and his
fellows elsewhere make all their Tragedies. None of the Ministry were the
Authors or approvers thereof, though diverse of them suffered sore troubles for
it.

CHAP. V.
No Presbyterian ever intended to Excommunicate any Supreme Magistrate.

THe Warner in his fifth Chapter, The Prelates ordinarily, but the Presbytery
never were for rash Excommunications.
charges the Scots for subjecting the King to the censure of Excommunication,
and bringing upon Princes all the miseries which the Popes Excommunications of
o^d were wont to bring upon Anathematised Emperors. Ans. It does not become
the Warner and his fellows to object to any, the abuse of the dreadful
sentence of Excommunication; no Church in the world was ever more guilty of
that fault then the Prelates of England and Ireland; did they ever censure their
own Officials for the pronouncing of that terrible sentence most profanly
against any they would, had it been for the non-payment of the smallest sums of
money? As for the Scots, their doctrine and practice in the point of
Excommunication is as considerate as any other Church in the world, that
censure in Scotland is most rare and only in the case of obstinacy in a great
sin; what ever be their doctrine in general with all other Christians and as I
think with the P elaticall party themselves, that the object of Christian
doctrine Sacraments and Discipline is one and the same, and that no member of
Christ, no son of the Church, may plead a highness above admonitions and Church
Censures: yet I know they never thought it expedient so much as to intend any
Process of C^u^^h a^^^^dversion against their Sovereign. To the worlds end I
hope they shall not have again greater grievances and truer causes of
^^ritation from their Princes, th n they have had already. It may be
confidently believed, that they who upon so pregnant occasions d^d never so
much as intend the beginning of a Process against their King, can never be
sup^osed in danger of any such proceeding for time to come. The Prelates
flatter Princes to their ruin.
However, we love not the abused ground of the Warners flattering of Princes to
their own great hur; is it so indeed, that all the sins of the Princes are only
against God, that all Kings are not only above all Laws of Church and State,
but when they fall into the greatest crimes, that the worst of men have ever
committed, that even then their sins must not be against any man or against any
Law? such Episcopal Doctrine spurs on Princes to these unhappy precipices, and
oppressed people unto these outrages that both fall into inextricable
calamities.

CHAP. VI.
It grieves the Prelates that Presbyterians are faithful Watchmen, to admonish
Princes of their duty.

The Scots Ministers Preaching for Justice, was just and necessary.
THE sixth Chapter is spent on an other crime of Presbytery; it makes the
Presbyters cry to the Magistrate for Justice upon capital Offenders. Ans. What
has Presbytery to do with this matter, were it never so great an offense? will
the Warner have all the faults of the Prelaticall Faction, flow from the
fountain of Episcopacy? this unconsequentiall reasoning will not be permitted
to men below the degrees of Doctors. But was it a very great crime indeed for
Ministers to plead the cause of the fatherless and widows; yea, the cause of
God their Maker and to preach unto Magistrates, that according to Scriptures
murderers, ought to die, and the Land be purged from the stain of innocent
blood? when the shameful impunity of murder made Scotland by deadly feuds, in
time of peace a field of war and blood, was it not time for the faithful
servants of God to exhort the King to execute justice, and to declare the
danger of most frequent pardons drawn from his hand, often against his heart,
by the opportunity and deceitful information of powerful solicitors, to the
great offense of God against the whole Land, to the unexpressible grief and
wrong of the suffering party, to the opening also of a new floodgate of more
blood, which by a legal revenge in time easily might have been stopped? Too
much pity in sparing the wilful shedders of innocent blood ordinarily proves a
great cruelty, not only toward the disconsolate oppressed, who cry to the
vicegerents of God the avenger, for justice in vain, but also toward the soul
of him who is spared, and the life of many more who are friends either to the
oppressor, or oppressed.

As for the named case of Huntly let the world judge, Huntleys notorious crimes.
whether the Ministers had reason often to give Warning against that wicked man
and his accomplices. Beside, his apostasy, and after-seeming repentance, his
frequent relapses into avowed Popery, in Eighty eight he banded with the King
of Spain, to overthrow the religion and government of the whole Island, and
after pardon, from time to time did renew his treasonable plots for the ruin
of Britain: he did commit many murders, he did invade under the nose of the
King, the house of his Cousin the Earl of Murray, and most cruelly murdered
that gallant Nobleman, he appeared with displayed Banner against the King in
person, he killed thereafter many hundreds of the Kings good people, when these
multiplied outrages did cry up to the God of heaven, was it not time for the
men of God to cry to the Judges of the earth to do their duty, according to
the warrant of many Scriptures? What a dangerous humor of flattery is this in
our Prelates, not only to lull a sleep a Prince in a most sinful neglect of
his charge, but also to cry out upon others more faithful then themselves, for
assaying to break off their slumber, Never any question in Scotland betwixt the
King and the Church, for Tithes and Patronages.
by their wholesome and seasonable admonitions from the Word of God?

The next challenge of the Scots Presbyters is, that they spoil the King of
his Tithes, first Fruits, Patronage, and Dependence of his Subjects. Ans. The
Warner understands not what he writes, The Kings Majesty in Scotland, never
had, never craved any First fruits: The Church never spoiled the King of any
Tithes, some other men indeed, by the wickedness most of Prelates and their
followers, did cozen both the King, and the Church, of many Tithes: but his
Majesty and the Church had never any controversy in Scotland about the Tithes:
for the King, so far as concerned himsef, was ever willing, that the Church
should enjoy that, which the very Act of Parliament acknowledges to be her
patrimony. Nor for the patronages had the Church any plea with the King: the
Church declared often their mind of the iniquity of patronages, wherein they
never had from the King any considerable opposition, but from the Nobility and
Gentry, the opposition was so great, that for peace sake, the Church was
content to let patronages alone, till God should make a Parliament lay to
heart, what was incumbent for gracious men to do, for liberating Congregations
from their slavery of having Ministers intruded upon them, by the violence of
Patrons. Which now at last (blessed be God) according to our mind is performed.
As for the dependence of any vassalls upon the King, it was never questioned by
any Presbyterian in S otla d.

K. James avowes himself a hat^^ of E^^stian^sm.
What is added in the rest of the Chapter, is but a repetition of that which
went before, to wit, the Presbyters denying to the King, the spiritual
Government of the Church, and the power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven:
such an usurpation upon the Church, King James declared under his hand (as at
length may be se^n in the Historical vindication) to be a sin against the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which puts in the hand of the Magistrate the power
of Preaching, and celebrating the Sacraments: a power which since that time no
Magistrate in Britain did assume, and if any would have claimed it, none would
have more opposed, then the most zealous Patrons of Episcopacy. The injurious
invectives which the Warner builds upon this his Erastian assertion, we pass
them as Castles in their air, which must fall and evanish for want of a
foundation. Only before I leave this Chapter, let the Warner take a good
Sentence out of the mouth of that wise Prince King James, to testify yet
farther his mind against Erastianisme. His Majesty in the year 1617 having
come in progress to visit his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and being present in
person at a public disputation in Theology in the University of St. Andrews,
whereof also many, both Nobles, and Churchmen of both Kingdoms were auditors;
when one of those that acted a part in the disputation, had affirmed, and went
about to maintain this Assertion, that the King had power to depose Ministers
from their Ministerial function. The King himself, as abhorring such flattery,
cried out with a loud voice, Ego possum deponere Ministri caput, sed non possum
deponere ejus officium.

CHAP. VII.
The Presbytery does not draw from the Magistrate any part of his power, by the
cheat of any relation.

IN the seventh Chapter, The Presbytery cognosceth only upon scandals, and that
in fewer civil things then Bishops courts were wont to meddle with.
the Warner would cause men believe many more of the Presbyteries usurpations
upon the Civil Magistrate. The first is, that all offenses whatsoever, are
cognoscible in the Consistory upon the case of scandal. Ans. First, the
Presbytery makes no offense at all to come before the Consistory, but Scandal
alone. Secondly, these civil offenses (the scandal whereof comes before the
Presbytery) are but very few, and a great deal fewer then the Bishops Official
takes notice of in his Consistorial Court. That capital crimes past over by
the Magistrate, should be censured by the Church, no society of Christians who
have any discipline, did ever call in question. When the sword of the
Magistrate has spared a Murderer, an Adulterer, a Blasphemer; will any
ingenuous, either Prelaticall, or Popish Divine, admit of such to the holy
Table, without signs of Repentance?

The Warners second usurpation is but a branch of the first, that the
Presbytery draws directly before it self the cognizance of fraud in bargaining,
false measures, oppression, and in the case of Ministers, bribing, usury,
fighting, perjury, etc. Ans. Is it then the Warners mind, that the notorious
slander of such gross sins does not deserve so much, as an Ecclesiastical
rebuke? Shall such persons without admonition be admitted to the holy
Communion? Secondly, the named cases of fraud in bargaining, false measures,
oppression, come so rarely before our Church-judicatories, that though this
thirty years I have been much conversant in Presbyteries, yet did I never see,
nor do I remember that ever I heard any of these three cases brought before
any Church Assembly. In the person of Ministers, I grant, these faults, which
the Canons of the Church, in all times and places, make the causes of
deprivation, are cognosced upon in Presbyteries, but with the good liking (I am
sure) of all both Papists and Prelates, who themselves are free of such vices.
And why did not the Warner put in among the causes of Church-mens deprivation
from Office and Benefice, Adultery, gluttony, and Drunkenness? Are these in
his, etc. which he will not have cognoscible by the Church in the persons of
Bishops and Doctors?

The Warners third challenge amounts to an high crime, that Presbyterian
Ministers are bold to preach upon these Scriptures which speak of the
Magistrates duty in his Office, or dare offer to resolve from Scripture any
doubt, which perplexeth the conscience of Magistrates or People, of Husband or
Wife, of Master or Servant, in the discharge of their Christian duty one to
another. What ever has bin the negligence of the Bishop of Derry, yet I am
sure, all the preaching Prelates and Doctors of England, pretended a great care
to go about these uncontroverted parts of their Ministerial Function, and yet
without meddling with the Mysteries of State, or the depths of any man's
particular vocation; much less with the judgment of jurisdiction in Political
or Aeconomical causes.

The Ch^rc^es p^oceedings in the late engagement, ^leered from mist^kes.
As for the Churches declaration against the Late engagement; did it not well
become them to signify their judgment in so great a case of conscience,
especially when the Parliament did propone it to them for resolution, and when
they found a conjunction driven on with a clearly Malignant Party, contrary to
solemn oaths and covenants, unto the evident hazard of Religion, and them who
had been most eminent instruments of its preservation; was it not the Churches
duty to give warning against that sin, and to exhort the ringleaders therein
to repentance?

But our Warner must needs insist upon that unhappy engagement, and fasten
great blame upon the Church for giving any advice about it. Ans. Must it be
Jesuitisme, and a drawing of all the civil affairs to the Churches bar in
ordine ad Spiritualia, for an Assembly to give their advice in a most eminent
and important case of conscience, when earnestly called upon in a multitude of
supplications from the most of the Congregations under their charge; yea when
required by the States of the Kingdom in several express messages for that
end? It seems, its our Warners conclusion, if the Magistrate would draw all the
Churches in his jurisdiction to a most unlawful war, for the advancement of the
greatest impiety and unjustice possible, wherein nothing could be expected by
all who were engaged therein, but the curse of God; if in this case a doubting
Soldier should desire the Assemblies counsel for the state of his soul, or if
the Magistrate would put the Church to declare what were lawful or unlawful
according to the Word of God, that it were necessary here for the servants of
God to be altogether silent, because indeed war is so civil a business, that
nothing in it concerns the soul, and nothing about it may be cleared by any
light from the Word of God.

The truth is, the Church in their public papers to the Parliament, declared
oftener then once, that they were not against, but for an engagement, if so that
Christian and friendly treaties could not have obtained reason, and all the
good people in Scotland were willing enough to have hazarded their lives and
estates, for vindicating the wrongs do^e, not by the Kingdom of England, but by
the Sectarian Party there, against God, the King, Covenant, and both Kingdoms:
but to the great grief of their hearts, their hands were bound, and they forced
to sit still, and by the over great cunning of some, the erroneous
mis-perswasions of others, and the rash precipitancy of it, that engagement was
so spoiled in the stating and mannaging, that the most religious, with peace of
conscience could not go along, nor encourage any other to take part therein.
The Warner touches on three of their reasons: but who will look upon their
public declarations, shall find many more, which with all faithfulness were
then propounded by the Church, for the rectifying of that action, which as it
stood in the state and management, was clearly foretold to be exceeding like to
destroy the King, and his friends of all sorts, in all the three Kingdoms. The
irrepairable losses and unutterable calamities which quickly did follow at the
heels, the mis-belief and contempt of the Lords servants, and the great danger
Religion is now brought unto in all these Kingdoms, has, I suppose, long ago
brought grief enough to the heart of them, whose unadvised rashness, and
intemperate fervor did contribute most for the spoiling of that design.

The first desire about that engagement which the Warner gives to us, concerns
the security of Religion. In all the debate of that matter, it was agreed
(without question) upon all hands, that the Sectarian Party deserved punishment
for their wicked attempts upon the Kings person, contrary to the directions of
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and that the King ought to be rescued out of
their hands, and brought to one of his Houses for perfecting the Treaty of
Peace, which often had been begun: but here was the question; Whether the
Parliament and Army of Scotland ought to declare their resolutions to bring his
Majesty to London with honor, freedom, and safety, before he did promise any
security for establishing Religion; The Parliaments of both Kingdoms in all
their former Treaties, had ever pressed upon the King a number of Propositions
to be signed by his Majesty, before at all he came to London: was it then any
fault in the Church of Scotland, to desire the granting but of one of these
propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, before the King were brought
(by the new hazard of the lives and estates of all the Scottish Nation) to sit
in his Parliament in that honor and freedom which himself did desire? There was
no complaint, when many of thirty propositions were pressed, to be signed by
his Majesty, for satisfaction and security to his people, after so great and
long desolations: how then is an outcry made, when all other propositions are
postponed, and only one for Religion is stuck upon, and that not before his
Majesty's rescue and deliverance from the hands of the Sectaries, but only
before his bringing to London, in honor, freedom, and safety? This demand, to
the Warner is a crime, and may be so to all of his belief, who takes it for a
high unjustice, to restrain in any King the absolute power by any condition:
for they do maintain, that the administration of al things, both of Church and
State, does reside so freely and absolutely in the mere will of a Sovereign,
that no case at any time can fall out, which ought to bound that absoluteness
with any limitation.

The second particular the Warner pitches upon, is the Kings negative voice;
behold how criminous we were in the point; When some (most needlessly) would
needs bring into debate the Kings negative voice in the Parliament of England,
as one of the royal Prerogatives to be maintained by our engagement: it was
said, that all discourse of that kind might be laid aside, as impertinent for
us: if any debate should chance to fall upon it, the proper place of it was, in
a free Parliament of England; that our Laws did not admit of a negative voice
to the King in a Parliament of Scotland; and to press it now as a Prerogative
of all Kings, (besides the reflection it might have upon the rights of our
Kingdom,) it might put in the hand of the King a power to deny all, and every
one of these things, which the Parliaments of both Kingdoms had found necessary
for the settling the peace in all the three Dominions. We marvel not, that the
Warner here should tax us of a great error, seeing it is the belief of his
faction, that every King has not only a negative, but an absolute affirmative
voice in all their Parliaments, as if they were nothing but their arbitrary
counsels for to persuade by their reasons, but not to conclude nor impede any
thing by their Votes; the whole and entire power of making or refusing Laws
being in the Prince alone, and no part of it in the Parliament.

The Warners third challenge against us about the engagement, is, as if the
Church had taken upon it to nominate the Officers of the Army; and upon this he
makes his invectives. Answ. The Church was far from seeking power to nominate
any one Officer: but the matter was thus; When the State did require of them,
what in their judgment would give satisfaction to the people, and what would
encourage them to go along in the engagement? one and the last part of their
answer was, that they conceived, if a War shall be found necessary, much of the
peoples encouragement would depend upon the qualification of the Commanders, to
whom the managing of that great trust should be committed: for after the right
stating of the War, the next would be the carrying on of it by such men who had
given constant proof of their integrity. To put all the power of the Kingdom in
their hand, whose bypast miscariages had given just occasion to suspect their
designs and firmness to the interest of God before their own or any other
man's, would fill the hearts of the people with jealousies and fears, and how
wholesome an advice this was, experience has now too clearly demonstrated.

To make the world know our further resolutions to meddle with civil affairs,
the Warner is pleased to bring out against us above 80 years old stories, and
all the stuff which our malicious enemy, Spotswood can furnish to him: from
this good Author he alleges that our Church discharged Merchants to traffic
with Spain, and commanded the Change of the market-dayes in Edinburgh. Ans.
Both these calumnies are taken off at length in the Historical Vindication.
After the Spanish Invasion in the year 88, many in Scotland kept correspondence
with Spain, for treacherous designs: the Inquisitors did seduce some, and
persecute others of our Merchants in their traffic, the Church did deal with
his Majesty to intercede with the Spanish King, for more liberty to our
Country men in their trading: and in the mean time, while an answer was
returned from Madril, they advertized the people to be wary, how they hazarded
their souls for any worldly gain which they could find about the Inquisitors
feet.

The Church me^led not with the Monday Mar^et, bu^ by way of supplication in
Parliament.
As for the Market days, I grant, it was a great grief to the Church, to see the
Sabbath day profaned by handy labor and journeying, by occasion of the
Munday-markets, in the most of the great Towns: for remedy hereof, many
supplications have been made by the Assembly to the Parliament: but so long as
our Bishops sat there, these petitions of the Church were always eluded: for
the Prelates labor in the whole Island was to have the sunday no Sabbath, and
to procure by their Doctrine and example, the profanation of that day, by all
sorts of plays, to the end people might be brought back to their old
licentiousness and ignorance, by which the Episcopal Kingdom was advanced. It
was visible in Scotland, that the most eminent Bishops were usual players on
the Sabbath, even in time of divine Service. And so soon as they were cast out
of the Parliament, the Churches supplications were granted, and acts obtained
for the careful sanctification of the Lords day, and removing of the Markets
in all the Land from the Monday, to other days of the week.

The Church once for safty of the infant Kings life, with the concurrence of
the cret Counsel, did call an extraordinary meeting.
The Warners next challenge of our usurpation is, the Assembly at Edinburgh,
1567 their ratifying of Acts of Parliament, and summoning of all the Country
to appear at the next Assembly. Ans. If the Warner had known the History of
that time, he would have chosen rathet to have omitted this challenge, then to
have proclaimed to the world the great rottenness of his own heart; At that
time the condition of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland was lamentable, the
Queen was declared for Popery, King James his Father was cruelly, without any
cause, murdered by the Earl of Bothwel; King James himself in his infancy was
very near to have been destroyed by the murderer of his Father, there was no
other way conceivable of safety for Religion, for the Infant King, for the
Kingdom, but that the Protestants should join together for the defense of King
James against these Popish murderers. For this end, the general Assembly did
crave conference of the secret Counsel: and they with mutual advice did call
for a meeting of the whole Protestant Party: which did convene at the time
appointed most frequently, in an extraordinary and mixed assembly of all the
considerable persons of the Religion, Earls, Lords, Barons, Gentlemen,
Burgesses, and Ministers, and subscribed a bond for the revenge of King Henry's
death, and the defense of King James his life: This mixed and extraordinary
Assembly made it one of the chief Articles in their bond to defend these Acts
of the Parliament 1560. concerning Religion, and to endeavor the ratification
of them in the next ensuing Parliament. As for the Assemblies letter to their
Brethren for so frequent a meetting at the next extraordinary Assembly, it had
the Authority of the secret Counsel; it was in a time of the greatest
necessity, when the Religion and liberties of the land were in evident hazard
from the potent and wicked counsels of the Popish Party, both at home and
abroad; when the life of the young King was daily in visible danger, from the
hands of them who had murdered his Father, and ravished his Mother. Less
could not have been done in such a juncture of time by men of wisdom and
courage, who had any love to their Religion, King, and Country: but the
resolution of our Prelates is to the contrary, when a most wicked villain had
obtained the connivance of a Queen to kill her husband, and to make way for the
killing of her Son in his Cradle, and after these murders to draw a Nation and
Church from the true Religion, established by Law, into Popery; and a free
Kingdom to an illegal Tyranny; in this case there may be no meeting, either of
Church, or State, to provide remedies against such extraordinary mischiefs.
Believe it the Scots were never of this opinion.

What is subjoyned to the next Paragraph of our Churches presumption to abolish
Acts of Parliament; By the laws and customs of Scotland the assembly procedes
the Parliament in the ^fo^mation of Ecclesiastical abuses.
is but a repetition of what is spoken before. Not only the laws of Scotland,
but equity and necessity refers the ordinary Reformation of errors and abuses
in Religion to the Ecclesiastical Assemblies: what they find wrong in the
Church, though ratified by acts of Parliament, they rectify it from the word
of God, and thereafter by Petition obtaines their rectification to be ratified
in a following Parliament, and all former Acts to the contrary to be annulled.
This is the ordinary Method of proceeding in Scotland, and (as I take it) in
all other States and Kingdoms. Were Christians of old hindered to leave
Paganism and embrace the Gospel, till the Emperial Laws for Paganism, and
against Christianity were revoked? did the Ecumenical and National Synods of
the Ancients stay their reformation of heresies and corruptions in Religion,
till the laws of State (which did countenance these errors) were cancelled? Was
not Popery in Germany, France, and Britain, so firmly established, as Civil
Laws could do it? It seems, the Warner here does join with his brother
Issachar, to proclaim all our Reformers in Britain, France, and Germany, to be
Rebels, for daring by their preachings and Assemblies to change these things,
which by Acts of Parliaments had been approved, before new Parliaments had
allowed of their reformation. Nevertheless, this plea is foolishly intended
against us, for the Ministers protestation against the Acts of Parliament 1584,
establishing (in that hour of darkness) iniquity by a Law, and against the
Acts of the Assembly of Glasgow, declaring the unlawfulness of Bishops and
Ceremonies; which some Parliaments upon Episcopal misinformation had approved:
both these actions of the Church were according to former Laws, and were
ratified afterward by Acts of Parliament yet standing in force, which for the
Warner (a private man, and a stranger) to challenge, is to contemn much more
grossly the Law, then they do, whom here he is accusing of that crime.

The Church part in the road of Ruthven cle^red.
By the next Story the Warner will gain nothing, when the true case of it is
known. In K. James' minority, one Capt. James Stuart did so far prevail upon
the tender and unexperienced years of the Prince, as to steal his countenance
unto Acts of the greatest oppression; so far that James Hamelton, Earl of Arran
(the next to the King in blood, in his health a most gallant Prince, and a most
zealous Professor of the true Religion) in time of his sickness, when he was
not capable to commit any crime against the State, was notwithstanding spoiled
of all his livelihood and liberty: his Lands and honor, with the dignity of
high Chancellor of Scotland, were conferred on that very wicked Tyrant Captain
James, a number of the best affected and prime nobility impatient of such
unheard of oppressions, with mere boasts and no violence at the road of
Ruthven, chased away that unhappy Chancellor from the Kings person, this his
Majesty for the time, professed to take in so good part, that under his hand he
did allow it for good service, in his letters to the most of the Neighbor
Princes: he dealt also with the secret Counsel, and the chief Judicatories of
the Land, and obtained from them the approbation of that act of the Lord as
convenient and laudable, pormising likewise to ratify it in the next ensuing
Parliament. When the Lords for their more abundant clearing required the
Assembles declaration thereupon, the Ministers declined to meddle at all with
the case; but the Kings Majesty sent his Commissioners to the Assembly,
entreating them withal earnestness to declare their good liking of that
action, which he assured them was for his good, and the good both of Church and
Kingdom: for their obedience to the Kings importunity, they are here railed
upon by the wise Warner. It is true, Cap. James shortly after crept in again
into Court, and obtained a severe revenge against the authors of that action,
before a Parliament could sit to approve it, but within a few months the same
Lords, with some more did at Striveling, chase again that evil man from the
Court: whither he never more returned, and this their action was ratified in
the next Parliament, and so stands to this day unquestioned by any, but such as
the Warner, either out of ignorance or malice.

I am weary to follow the Warner in all his wanderings; The interest of the
general assembly of Scotland, in the reformation of England.
at the next leap he jumps from the 1584 to the 1648, skipping over in a moment
64 years. The Articles of Stiveling mentions that the promoving of the work of
Reformation in England and Ireland, be referred to the general Assembly, upon
this our friend does discharge a flood of his choler: all the matter of his
impatience here, is, That Scotland when by fraud they had been long allured,
and at last by open violence invaded by the English Prelates, that they might
take on the yoke of all their corruptiones, they were contented at the earnest
desire of both the houses of Parliament, and all the well-affected in England,
to assist their Brethren, to purge out the leaven of Episcopacy, and the
Service Book, with all the rest of the old corruptions of the Engish and Irish
Churches; with the mannaging of this so great and good an Ecclesiastique work,
the Parliament of Scotland did entrust the general assembly. No marvail that
Dr. Bramble a zealous lover of all the Arminianisme, Popery, and Tyranny, of
which his great Patron Dr. Lade stands convicted yet without an answer to have
been bringing in upon the three nations, should be angry at the discoverers and
disappointers of that most pious work, as they wont to style it.

What here the Warner repeats, it is answered before, as for the 2 Stories in
his conclusion, The violent apprehen^^^ of Mass Priests in their act of
Idolatry r^proved by the Warner.
which he takes out of his false Author Spots-wood, adding his own large
amplifications; I conceive, there needs no more to be said to the first, but
that some of John Knocks zealous hearers, understanding of a Mass Priest at
their very side, committing Idolatry contrary to the Laws, did with violence
break in upon him, and sease upon his person and Masse-cloathes, that they
might present him to the ordinary Magistrate to receive justice according to
the Law; This act the Warner will have to be a huge Rebellion, not only in the
actors, but also in John Knocks, who was not so much as present thereat.

What first he speaks of the Assemblies convocating the people in arms to be
present at the trial of the Popish Lords, and their avowing of that their deed
to the King in his face, we must be pardoned to mistrust the Warner herein upon
his bare word, without the relief of some witness, and that a more faithful
one, then his Brother in evil, Mr. Spots-wood, whom yet here he does not
profess to cite. Against these Popish Lords after their many treasons and
bloody murders of the Lieges, the King himself at last was forced to arm the
people; but that the general Assembly did call any unto Arms, we require the
Warners proof, that we may give it an answer.

CHAP. VIII.
The chief of the Prelates agree with the Presbyterians about the Divine right
of Church-iscipline.

THe Warners challenge in this Chapter is, That we maintain our discipline by
a Iure divino, and for this he spews out upon us a Sea of such Rhetoric, as
much better beseemed Mercurius Aulicus, then either a Warner, or a Prelate. In
this challenge he is as unhappy as in the rest, it is for a matter wherein the
most of his own Brethren (though our Adversaries) yet fully agree with us, that
the discipline of the Church is truly by divine right, and that Jesus Christ
holds out in Scripture the substantials of that Government, whereby he will
have his house to be ruled to the worlds end; leaving the circumstantials to be
determined by the Judicatories of the Church, according to the general rules,
which are clear also in the word for matters of that nature. In this, neither
Papists, nor the learned of the Prelates find any fault with us; yet our
Warner must spend a whole Chapter upon it.

It is true as we observed before the elder Prelates of England in Edwards and
Elizabeth's days, as the Erastians now, did maintain, The Warner and his
prelatical Erastian brethren are obliged by their own principles to advise the
King to lay aside Episcopacy and set up the Presbytery in all his dominions.
that no particular Government of the Church was jure divino, and if this be
the Warners mind, it were ingenuity in him to speak i^ out loud, and to
endeavor to persuade his friends about the King, of the truth of this tenet, he
was never employed about a better and more seasonable service: for if the
Discipline of the Church be but humano jure, then Episcopacy is kept up upon no
conscience, conscience being bottomed only upon a divine Right, so Episcopacy
wanting that bottom may well be laid aside at this time by the King for any
thing that concerns conscience, since no Command of God nor Warrant from
Scripture ties him to keep it up. This truly seems to be the main ground
whereupon the whole discourse of this Chapter is builded. Is it tolerable that
such truths should be concealed by our Warners against their conscience, when
the speaking of them out might be so advantageous to the King and all his
Kingdoms; however we with all the reformed Churches do believe in our heart the
divine Right of Synods and Presbyteries, and for no possible inconvenient can
be forced to deny or pass from this part of truth, yet the Warner here joins
with the elder Prelates, who, till Dr Banckrofts advancement to the sea of
Canterbury, did unanimously deny Episcopacy to be of divine Right, and by
consequent affirmed it to be moveable, and so lawful to be laid aside by
Princes, when so ever they found it expedient for their affairs to be quite off
it; why does not the Warner and his Brethren speak plainly their thoughts in
his Majesty's ears? Why do they longer dissemble their conscience, only for the
satisfaction of their ambition, greed and revenge? Sundry of the Prelatical
Divines come yet further to join fully with Erastus, in denying not only
Episcopacy, and all other particular forms of Church Government to be of Divine
Institution, but in avowing that no Government in the Church at all is to be
imagined, but such as is a part of the civil power of the Magistrate. The
Warner in the Chapter, and in diverse other parts of his Book, seems to agree
with this judgment; and upon this ground, if he had ingenuity, he would offer
his helping hand to unty the bonds of the Kings conscience, if here it were
straitened, by demonstrating from this his principle, that very safely without
any offense to God, and nothing doubting for conscience sake, his Majesty might
lay aside Episcopacy, and set up the Presbytery so fully as is required in all
his Dominions, though not upon a divine Right, which the Presbyterians believe,
yet upon Erastus royal Right, which the Warner here and elsewhere avouches.

What the Warner puts here again upon the Presbytery, the usurpation of the
temporal Sword in what indirect relation soever, The prelatical party were
lately bent for Popery.
its probation in the former Chapter was found so weak and naughty, that the
repetition of it is for no use; only we mark that the Warner will have the
Presbytery to be an absolute papacy, for no other purpose but to vent his
desire of revenge against the Presbyterians, who gave in a challenge against
the Prelates, especially the late Canterburians, among whom Doctor Bramble was
one of some note, to which none of them have returned to this hour an Answer;
that their principles unavoidably did bring back the Pope. For a Patriarch over
all the Western Churches, and among all the Patriarchs of the whole Catholic
Church a primacy in the Roman, flows clearly out of the fountain of Episcopacy,
according to the avowed Doctrine of the English Prelates, who yet are more
liberal to the Pope in granting him, beside his spiritual super-inspection of
the whole Catholic Church, all his temporal Jurisdictions also in the
patrimony of St. Peter, and all his other fair principalities within and
without Italy. There is no Ceremony in Rome that these men stick upon: for of
all the superstitious and idolatrous Ceremonies of Rome, their Images, and
Altars, and Adorations before them are incomparably the worst; yet the Warners
friends without any Recantation we have heard of, avow them all, even an
Adoration of and to the Altar it self. As for the Doctrines of Rome, what
points are worse then these which that party have avowed in express terms, a
corporal presence of Christ's Body upon the Altar, the Tridentine Justification,
Free Will, final Apostasy of the Saints: when no other thing can be answered to
this our sore challenge, it is good to put us off with a Squib, that the
Presbytery is as absolute Papacy as ever was in Rome.

The Presbyterian Position which the Warner here offers, not to dispute, but to
laugh at, That Christ, as King of his Church, according to his royal Office and
Scepter, has appointed the Office-bearers and Laws of his House, is accorded
to by the most and sharpest of our Adversaries, whether English or Romish, as
their own tenet: howbeit such foolish consequences, that all acts of Synods
must be Christ's Laws, etc. neither they nor we do acknowledge.

His declamations against the novelty of the Presbytery in the ordinary style
of the Jesuits against Protestants, The Prelates profess now a willingness to
abolish at least three parts of the former Episcopacy.
and of the pagan Philosophers against the Christians of old, who will regard?
our plea for the Presbytery is, that it is Scriptural; if so, it is ancient
enough; if not, let it be abolished. But it were good, that here also the
Warner and his friends would be ingenuous, to speak out their minds of
Episcopacy. Why have they all so long deceived the King, in assuring him that
English Episcopacy was well warranted both by Scripture and antiquity? Be it so
(which yet is very false) that something of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter
had any footing in Scripture, yet can they be so impudent, as to affirm, that
an English Bishop in his very flesh and blood, in his substantial limbs, was
ever known in the world till the Pope was become Antichrist? A Bishop by virtue
of his office a Lord in Parliament, voycing in all Acts of State, and
exercising the place of a high Treasurer, of a Chancellor, or whatever civil
charge the favor of a Prince did put upon him; a Bishop with sole power of
ordination and jurisdiction, without any Presbytery; a Bishop exercising no
jurisdiction himself in any part of his diocese, but devolving the excise of
that power wholly upon his Officials and Commissaries: a Bishop ordaining
Presbyters himself alone, or with the fashional assistance of any two
Presbyters, who chance to be near; a Bishop the only pastor of the whole
diocese, and yet not bound to feed any flock, either by Word, or Sacrament, or
Government, but having a free liberty to devolve all that service upon others,
and himself to wait at Court so many years as he shall think fit. This is our
English Bishop not only in practice but in Law, and so was he defended by the
great disputants for Prelacy in England. The portion of Episcopa^y, whi^ yet is
stu to, cannot be kept upon any principle either of honor or conscience.


But now let the Warner speak out, if any such Bishop can more be defehded, or
was ever known in Scripture, or seen in any Christian Church for 800 years and
above, after the death of Christ. I take it indeed to be Conscience, that
forces now at last the best of our Court-Divines to divest their Bishop of all
civil employment in Parliament, Court, or Kingdom, in denying his solitariness
in ordination, in removing his official and Commissary courts, in taking away
all his arches, Arch-Bishop^, Archdeacons, Dean and Chapter, etc. in erecting
Presbyteries for all ordinations and spiritual jurisdiction. It is good that
conscience moves our adversaries at last to come thus far toward us; But why
will they not yet come nearer, to acknowledge that by these their too lately
recanted errors they did too long trouble the world; and that the little which
yet they desire to keep of a Bishop, is nothing less then that English Bishop,
but a new creature of their own devising never known in England, which his
Majesty in no honor is obliged to maintain for any respect either to the Laws
or Customs of England, and least of all, for Conscience?

The smallest portion of the most moderate Episcopacy is contrary to Scripture
While the Warner with such confidence avows, that no text of Scripture can be
alleged against Episcopacy, which may not with more reason be applied against
the Presbytery; behold I offer him here some few, casting them in a couple of
arguments, which according to his great promises, I wish he would answer at his
leisure.

First, I do reason from Ephesians. 4.11. all the officers that Christ has
appointed in his Church, for the Ministry of the Word, are either Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, pastors or Doctors: but Bishops are none of these five:
Ergo, they are none of the officers appointed by Christ for the Ministry of the
Word. The major is not wont to be questioned: the minor thus I prove; Bishops
are not Apostles, Evangelists, nor prophets: for its confessed, all these were
extraordinary and temporary Officers: but Bishops (say you) are ordinary and
perpetual: our adversaries pitch upon the fourth, alleging the Episcopal
office to be pastoral; but I prove the Bishop no Pastor thus; no Pastor is
superior to other Pastors in any spiritual power: but according to our
adversary, a Bishop is superior to all the Pastors of his Diocese in the power
of ordination and jurisdiction. Ergo, The doubt here is only of the major,
which I prove Argumento a paribus: no Apostle is superior to an Apostle, nor an
Evangelist to an Evangelist, nor Prophet to a Prophet, nor a Doctor to a
Doctor, in any spiritual power according to Scripture. Ergo, no pastor to a
pastor. Again, I reason from 1 Timothy 4.14. Mat. 18.15. 1 Cor. 5.4, 12, 13. What
takes the power of ordination and jurisdiction from Bishops, destroys Bishops:
as the removal of the soul kills the man, and the denial of the form takes away
the subject; so the power of ordination and jurisdiction, the essential form,
whereby the Bishop is constitute and distinguished from the Presbyter and every
other Church officer, being removed from him, he must perish: but the quoted
places take away clearly these powers from the Bishop: for the first puts the
power of ordination in the Presbytery, and a Bishop is not a Presbytery; the
second puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church; and the third in a company
of men which meet together: but the Bishop is not the Church nor a company of
men met together: for these be many, and he is but one person.

When the Doctors learning has satified us in these two, he shall receive more
Scriptural arguments against Episcopacy. The Prelates unable to answer their
opposites.
But why do we expect answers from these men, when after so long time (for all
their boasts of learning and their visible leisure) none of their party has had
the courage, to offer one word of answer to the Scriptures and Fathers, which
in great plenty Mr Parker and Mr Didoclave of old, and of late that miracle of
learning most noble Somais, and that Magazin of antiquity Mr Blondel have
printed against them?

What in the end of the Chapter the Warner adds of our trouble at King James
his fifty and five questions, ^^96. and of our yielding the bucklers without
any opposition till the late unhappy troubles, we answer that in this as every
where else the Warner proclaims his great and certain knowledge of our
Ecclesiastic story: the troubles of the Scots Divines at that time were very
small, for the matter of these questions, all which they did answer so roundly,
that there was no more speech of them thereafter by the propounders: but the
manner and time of these questions did indeed perplex good men, to see Erastian
and Prelatical counselors so far to prevail with our King, as to make him by
captious questions carp at these parts of Church Discipline, which by Statutes
of Parliament and Acts of Assemblies were fully established.

Our Church at that time was far from yielding to Episcopacy; Prelacy was ever
grievous to Scotland.
great trouble indeed by some wicked Statesmen was then brought upon the
persons of the most able and faithful Ministers, but our Land was so far from
receiving of Bishops at that time, that the question was not so much as
proposed to them for many years thereafter, it was in Ann. 1606. that the
English Prelates did move the King by great violence to cast many of the best
and most learned Preachers of Scotland out of their charges, and in An. 1610.
that a kind of Episcopacy was set up in the corrupt Assembly of Glasgow; under
which the Church of Scotland did heavily groan, till the year 1637. when their
burdens was so much increased by the English Prelatical Tax-masters, that all
was shaken off together, and divine Justice did so closely follow at the heels,
that oppressing Prelacy of England, as to the great joy of the long oppressed
Scots, that evil root and all its branches was cast out of Britain, where we
trust, no shadow of it shall ever again be seen.

CHAP. IX.
The Commonwealth is no monster, when God is made Sovereign, and the commands
of men are subordinated to the clear will of God.

HAving cleared the vanity of these calumnious challenges, wherewith the Warner
did animate the King and all Magistrates against the Presbyterians, let us try
if his skill be any greater, to inflame the people against it. He would make
the world believe that the Presbyterians are great transubstantiators of whole
Commonwealths into beasts, and Metamorphosers of whole Kingdoms of men into
Serpents with two heads; how great and monstrous a ^erpent must the Presbytery
be, when she is the mother of a Dragon with two heads? But it is good, that she
has nothing to do with the procreation of the Dragon with seven heads, the
great Antichrist, the Pope of Rome: this honor must be left to Episcopacy; the
Presbytery must not pretend to any share in it.

There is no Lordship, but a mere service and ministry in the Pastors of the
Church.
The Warners ground for his pretty similitude is, that the Presbyterians make
two Soveraignties in every Christian state, whose commands are contrary. Ans.
All the evil lies in the contrariety of the commands: as for the double
Sovereignty, there is no show of truth in it: for the Presbyterians cannot be
gui^ty of co-ordinating two Soveraignties in one State, though the Prelates may
well be guilty of that fault; since they with their Masters of Romae maintain a
true Hierarchy, a Spiritual Lordship, a domination and principality in their
Bishops above all the Members of the Church, but the Presbyterians know no
(...), no dominion, no Sovereignty in Church Officers, but a mere ministry
under Christ. As for the contrariety of commands, its true: Christ's Ministers
must publish all the commands of their Sovereign Lord, whereunto no command of
any temporal Prince needs or ought to be contrary; but if it fall out to be so,
it is not the Presbytery; but the holy Scriptures which command rather to obey
God then man. Dare the Warner here oppose the Presbyterians? dare he maintain a
subordination of the Church to the State in such a fashion, that the clear
commands of God, published by the Church, ought to give place to the contrary
commands of the State? If the Warner must needs invert and contradict Christ
his ruling of this case, let him go on to preach doctrine pointblank contrary to
the Apostles, that it is better to obey men then God. It falls out as rarely in
Scotland, as any where in the world, that the Church and State run contrary
ways; but if it so happen, the common rules of humane direction toward right
and wrong judgment must be followed: if a man find either the Church* or the
State, or both, command what he knows to be wrong (for neither the one nor the
other has any infallibility) there is no doubt, but either or both may be
disobeyed, yet with this difference, that for disobedience to the Churches most
just commands, a man cannot fall under the smallest temporal inconvenience
without the States good pleasure, but for his disobedience to the most unjust
commands of the State, he must suffer what ever punishment the law does
inflict, without any relief from the Church.

Two instances are brought by the Warner, of the Church and States contrary
commands: the first the King commanded Edinburgh to feast the French
Ambassadors, but the Church commanded Edinburgh to fast that day when the King
desired them to feast. Ans. Here were no so contrary commands, but both were
obeyed, the people did keep the humiliation, and some of the Magistrates that
same day did give the banquet to the French Ambassadors as the King commanded;
that for this any Church censure was intended against them, it is a malicious
calumny, according to the author of this fable his own confession, as at length
may be seen in the unloading of Issachars burden.

As for his second instance, The Warner is full of calumnious untruths.
the difference of the Church and State about the late engagement, we have
spoken to it in the former Chapter at length: the furthest the Church went, was
by humble petitions and remonstrances to set before the Parliament the great
danger, which that engagement (as it was stated and managed) did portend to
Religion, the Kings person and whole Kingdom, when contrary to their wholesome
advices the engagement went on, they meddled not to oppose the act of State,
further then to declare their judgment of its unlawfulness, according to the
duty of faithful watchmen, Ezekiel. 33. It is very false that the Church have
chased any man out of the Country, or excommunicated any for following that
engagement, or have put any man to sackcloath for it, unto this day. Neither
did ever any man call the freedom of the late Parliament in question, how
unsatisfied soever many were with its proceedings.

When the Warner heaps up so many untruths in a few lines, in things done but
yesterday before the eyes of thousand, we shall not wonder of his venturing to
lie confidently in things past long before any now living were born: but there
are a generation of men who are bold to speak what makes for their end, upon
the hope that few will be at the pains, to bring back what has flown from
their teeth to the touchstone of any solid trial.

CHAP. X.
The nature of the Presbytery is very concordant with Parliament.

IN the 10 Chapter the Warner undertakes to show the antipathy of Presbyteries
to Parliaments; albeit there be no greater harmony possible betwixt any two
bodies, then betwixt a general Assembly and Parliament, a Presbytery and an
inferior Civil Court, if either the constitution, or end, or daily practice of
these judicatories be looked upon: but the Prelatical learning is of so high a
flight, that it dares undertake to prove any conclusion, yet these men are not
the first, that have offered to force men to believe upon unanswerable
arguments, though contrary to common sense and reason, that snow is black, the
fire cold, and the light dark.

The eight desires of the Church about the engagement were just and necessa^y.
For the proof of his conclusion, he brings back yet again the late engagement:
how often shall this insipide Colwort be set upon our table? Will the Warner
never be filled with this unsavory dish? The first crime that here the Warner
marks in our Church against the late Parliament in the matter of the engagement
is, their paper of the eight desires: upon this he vapoureth out all his good
pleasure, not willing to know that all ^hese desires were drawn from the Church
by the Parliaments own messages, and that wel-neer all these desires were
counted by the Parliament it self to be very just and necessary: Especially
these two which the wise Warner pitches upon, as most absurd, for the first a
security to religion from the King, upon oath under his hand and seal: here the
question among us was not for the thing it self, but only about the time, the
order, and some part of the matter of that security. And for the second, the
quallification of the persons to be employed, that all should be such who had
given no just cause of Jealousy; no man did question, but all who were to have
the managing of that war should be free of all just causes of Jealousy, which
could be made appear not to half a dozen of Ministers, but to any competent
judicatory according to the laws of the Kingdom. The Warner has not been
careful to inform himself, where the knot of the difference lay, and so gives
out his own groundless conjectures, for true Historical narrations, which he
might easily have helped by a more attentive reading of our public
Declarations.

The second fault he finds with our Church is, that they proclaim in print
their dis-satisfaction with that engagement, It is one of the liberties of the
Church of Scotland to publish declarations.
as favorable to the malignant Party, etc. Ans. The Warner knows not that it
is one of the liberties of the Church of Scotland, established by law and long
custom, to keep the people by public Declarations in their duty to God, when
men are like to draw them away to sin, according to that of Esaias 8. v. 12, 13.
What in great humility, piety, and wisdom was spoken to the world in the
declaration of the Church concerning that undertaking, was visible enough for
the time to any, who were not peremptory to follow their own ways: and the
lamentable event since has opened the eyes of many, who before would not see,
to acknowledge their former erors: but if God should speak never so loud from
heaven, the Warner and his Party will stop their ears: for they are men of such
gallant Spirits, as scorn to submit either to God or men, but in a Roman
constancy they will be ever the same, though their counsels and ways be found
never so palpably pernicious.

The third thing the Warner lays to the charge of our Church is, The leavy was
never off red to be stopped by the Church.
that they retarded the leavies. Ans. In this also the Warner shows his
ignorance or malice: for how sore soever the leavy (as then stated and
managed) was against the hearts of the Church, yet their opposition to it, was
so cold-rife and small, that no complaint needs be made of any retardment from
them. So soon as the Commanders thought it expedient, there was an Army gotten
up so numerous and strong, that with the ordinary blessing of God was
abundantly able to have done all the professed service: but where the aversion
of the hearts of the Church, and the want of their prayers is superciliously
contemned, what marvel, that the strongest arm of flesh be quickly broken in
pieces?

The Church was not the cause of the gathering at Mauchlin-Moor.
The fourth Charge is most calumnious, That the Church gathered the Country
together in Arms at Mauchlin-Moor to expose the Expedition, Ans. No Churchman
was the cause of that meeting, a number of Yeomen being frighted from their
houses, did fly away to that corner of the Land, that they might not be forced
against their conscience to go as Soldiers to England: while their number did
grow, and they did abide in a Body for the security of their persons, upon a
sudden a part of the Army came upon them; some Ministers being near (by
occasion of the Communion at Mauchlin the day before) were good Instruments
with the people to go away in peace. And when the matter was tried to the
bottom by the most Eagle-eyed of the Parliament, nothing could be found
contrary to the Ministers Protestation, that they were no ways the cause of the
peoples convening or fighting at Mauchlin.

The Assembly is helpful and not hurtful to the Parliament.
The parallel that the Warner makes betwixt the general Assembly and Parliament
is malicious in all its parts. For the first, though the one Court be Civil,
and the other Spiritual, yet the Presbyterians lay the Authority of both upon a
divine Foundation, that for conscience sake the Courts Civil must be obeyed in
all their lawful Commands, as well as the Assemblies of the Church; God being
the Author of the politic Order as well as the Ecclesiastic, and the revenger
of the contempt of the one as well as the other. But what does the Warner mean,
to mock at Ministers for carrying themselves as the Ambassadors of Christ, for
judging according to the rule of Scripture, for caring for life eternal? Is he
become so shamefully impious, as to persuade Ministers to give over the care of
life eternal, to lay aside the holy Scripture, and deny their embassage from
Jesus Christ? Behold, what Spirit leads our Prelates, while they jeer the World
out of all Religion, and chase away Ministers from Christ, from Scripture, from
eternal Life.

Of the second part of the Parallel, That people are more ready to obey their
Ministers then their Magistrates, what shall be made? All the power which
Ministers have with the people is builded on their love to God and Religion:
how much soever it is, a good Statesman will not envy it; for he knows that God
and Conscience constrain Ministers to employ all the power they have with the
people to the good of the Magistrate, as the Deputy and Servant of God for the
peoples true good. The Warner here understands best his own meaning, while he
scoffs at Ministers for their threatening of men with hells fire. Are our
Prelates come to such open Proclamations of their Atheism, as to print their
desires to banish out of the hearts of people all fear, not only of
Church Censures, but even of hell it self? Whither may not Satan drive at last
the Instruments of his Kingdom?

The third part of the Parallel consists of a number of unjust and false
Imputations before particularly refuted.

What he subjoyns of the power of the general Assembly to name Committees to
sit in the Intervals of Assemblies, The appointment of Committees is a right of
every Court, as well Ecclesiastic as Civil.
it is but a poor Charge: Is it not the daily practice of the Parliaments of
Scotland to nominate their Committees of State for the Intervals of Parliament?
Is it not one inherent right to every Court to name some of their number to
cognosce upon things within their own sphere at what ever times the Court it
self finds expedient? however the Judicatories of the Church by the Laws of the
Kingdom being authorized to meet when themselves think fit both ordinarily and
pro renata, their power of appointing Committees for their own Affairs was
never questioned: and truly these Committees in the times of our late troubles,
when many were lying in wait to disturb both Church and State, have been forced
to meet oftener then otherwise any of their Members did desire; whose diversion
from their particular Charges (though for attendance on the public) is joined
with so great fashery and expense, that with all their heart they could be glad
to decline it, if fear of detriment to the Church made not these meetings very
necessary.

CHAP. XI.
The Presbytery is no burden to any honest man.

THe bounds and compass of the Warners rage against the Presbytery is very
large; There is no rig^ur at all in the Presbytery.
not being content to have incensed the King and Parliament against it, he
comes down to the body of the people, and will have them believe the special
enmity of the Scots Discipline against them, first because it inflicts
Church Censures upon every one for the smallest faults. Ans. The faults which
the Warner mentions may well be an occasion of a private advice in the ear, but
that any of them did ever procure the smallest censure of the Church, it is a
great untruth: no man who knows us, will complain of our rigor; here we wish
we were able to refute upon as good reason the charge of our laxness in the
mouth of Sectaries, as we are that of our strictness in the mouth of Erastians.
We would know of the Warner, what are these Sabbath Recreations, which he says
are void of scandal, and consistent with the duties of the day; are they not
the stage plays, and the other honest pastimes, wherewith his friends were wont
to sanctify the Lords Day, as no more a Sabbath, then any other day in the
year, and much less then diverse Popish Festivals? An Aposteme in the lowest
gut will show it self by the unsavory vapors, which now and then are eructate
from it. That ever in Scotland there was one word of debate about Starch and
Cuffs, is more then the Warner can prove.

Crimes till repented of ought to keep from the holy table.
The second oppression whereby the Presbytery treads the people under foot, is a
rare cruelty, That persons, for grievous crimes, whereof the Magistrate takes
notice, are called to Ecclesiastic repentance. Will the Doctor in his fury
against us, run out upon all his own friends for no appearance of a fault? Will
either the English or Popish Prelates admit Murderers, Whores or Thieves to the
holy Table without any signs of repentance? Is not the greatest crime the
ground of the greatest scandal? Shall small scandals be purged away by
repentance, and the greatest be totally past by (...) The Warner here may know
his own meaning, but others will confess their ignorance of his mind.

Excommun^cation in Scotland is not injurious to any.
The third grievance he would have the people conceive against the Presbytery,
is, The rigor of their excommunication; in this also the Warner seems to know
little of the Scots way; let excommunication be so severe in Scotland as is
possible, yet the hurt of it is but small: It is so rare an accident, men may
live long in Scotland, and all their life never see that Censure executed; I
have lived in one of the greatest Cities of that Land, and for forty seven
years even from my birth to this day, that Censure to my knowledge or hearing
was never executed there in my days but twice; first upon one obstinate and
very profane Papist, and next on some horrible scandalous Prelates. Again,
when any is excommunicated by the Church, we go no further with them then Paul's
command, 2 These. 3.14. only they who are not tied to them by natural bonds,
abstain from familiar and unnecessary conversation, to bring them by the sense
of this shame to repentance for their sins. Thirdly, The civil inconveniences
which follow that Censure, come along from the State, and the Acts of
Parliament, for which the Church ought not to be challenged, especially by
Prelates, who wont to allow their Officials to excommunicat whole
incorporations of people for a small debt of money, and to press the contemners
of that frivolous and profane sentence, with all the civil inconveniences they
could. Fourthly, what ever be the laws in Scotland, against them who continue
long in the contempt of Excommunication, (which is not inflicted but for great
sins, and after a long process) yet certainly their executon is very far
from all cruelty, as they who know the proceedings of that land, will bear
witness.

What he objects about fugitives; it is true, when a process is begun, a
fugitive may have it concluded, and sent after him; but we count not that man a
fugitive from discipline or contumacious as the Warner quarrels us, who upon
just fear to hazard his life does not compear.

CHAP. XII.
The Presbytery is hurtful to no order of men.

PRaelaticall malice is exorbitant beyond the bounds of all show of moderation:
The warners outrage against the Presbytery
was it not enough to have calumniate the Presbytery to Kings, Princes and
Sovereigns, to Parliamen^s and all Courts of Justice, to people and all
particular persons? but yet a new chapter must be made to show in it the
hurtfulnesse of Presbytery to all orders of men: we must have patience to stand
a little in the unsavory air of this vomit also.

Unto the nobility and gentry the Presbytery must be hurtful, The Praelates
were constant oppressors of the Nobility and gentry.
because it subjecteth them to the censures of a raw heady novice and a few
ignorant artificers. Ans. Its good that our praelats are now turned pleaders
against the oppression of the Nobility and gentry: its not long since the
praelatical clergy were accustomed to set their foul feet on the necks of the
greatest peers of the three Kingdoms, with so high a pride and pressure; that
to shake of their yoks, no suffering, no hazard has been refused by the best
of the Nobility, and gentry of Britain: but natures and principles are so easy
to be changed, that no man now needs fear any more oppression from the
praelates, though they were set down again and well warmed in their repaired
thrones.

The way of the Scotes Presbytery is incomparably better then that of the
English Episcopacy.
But to the challenge we answer, that the meanest Eldership of a small
Congregation in Scotland consists of the Pastor, and a dozen (at least) of the
most wise, pious and learned that are to be found in the whole flock; which yet
the Warner here makes to be judges but of the common people in matters of
smallest moment. But for the classical Presbytery, to which he referres the
Ecclesiastical causes of the Nobility and gentry, and before whom indeed every
Church process of any considerable weight or difficulty does come, though it
concern the persons of the meanest of the people, this Presbytery does consist
ordinarily of fifeteene Ministers (at least) and fifeteen of the most qualified
noblemen, gen^lemen and Burgesses, which the circuit of fifteen parishes can
afford; these (I hope) may make up a judicatory of a great deal more worth
then any official court, which consists but of one judge, a p^tty mercenary
lawyer, to whose care alone the whole Ecclesiastic jurisdiction over all the
Nobility and gentry of diverse shires is committed, and that without appeal as
the Warner has told us, except it be to a Court of delegates; a miserable
relief that all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of a Kingdom, who are
oppressed by Episcopal officials, have no other remedy but to go attend a
Committee of two or three civilians at London, deputed for the discussing of
such appeals.

The Presbyterian course is much more ready, solid and equitable: if any
grievance arise from the sentence of a Presbytery, a Synod twice a year does
sit in the bounds, and attends for a week, or if need be, longer, to determine
all appeals, and redress all grievances: now the Synod does consist of all
the Ministers within the bounds, which ordinarily are of diverse whole shires,
as that of Glasgow, of the upper and nearer ward of Clidsedaile, Baerranfrow,
Lennox, Kile, Carrick and Cunninghame; also beside Ministers, the constant
Members who have decisive voice in Synodes, are the chief Noblemen, Gentlemen
and Burgesses of all these shires, among whom their be such parts for judgment
as are not to be found nor expected in any inferior civil Court of the
Kingdom; yet if it fall out so, that any party be grieved with the sentence of
a Synod, there is then a farther and final appeal to a General assembly,
which consist of as many Burgesses and more Gentlemen from every shire of the
Kingdom, then come to any Parliament: Besides the prime Nobility and choicest
Ministry of the land; having the Kings Majesty in person, or in his absence,
his high Commissioner to be their praesident. This meeting yearly (or oftener;
if need be) sits ordinarily a month; and if they think fit, longer: the
number, the wisdom, the eminency of the members of this Court is so great,
that beside the unjustice, it were a very needless labor to appeal from it to
the Parliament, for (as we have said) the King or his high Commissioner, sits
in both meetings, albeit in a different capacity: the number and qualification
of Knights and Burgesses is ever large, as great in the assembly, as in
Parliament: only the difference is, that in Parliament all the Nobility in the
Kingdom sit without any election, and by virtue of their birth, but in the
Assembly only who for age, wisdom and pie^y are chosen by the Presbyteries
as fittest to judge in Ecclesiastic affairs, but to make up this odds of the
absence of some Noblemen, the assembly is always adorned with above an hundred
of the choicest Pastors of the whole land, none whereof may sit in Parliament:
nothing that can conciliate authority to a Court, which can be found in the
Nation, is wanting to the general assembly; how basely so ever our praelats
are pleased to trample upon it.

The second alleged hurt, All questions about pattronages in Scotland are now
ended.
which the Nobility have from the Presbytery, is the loss of their partonages
by congregations electing their Pastors. Answ. However the judgment of our
Church about pat^onages, is no other then that of the Reformed divines abroad,
yet have our Presbyteries alw^ies with patience, endured patrons to present
unto vacant Churches, till the Parliament now at last has taken away that
grievance.

The possessors of Church-l^nds were ever feared for Bishops, but never for the
Presby^ery.
The Nobilities next hurt by the Presbytery, is their loss of all their
impropriations and Abey-lands, Ans. How Sycophant^ck an accusation is this? for
who knows not how far the whole generation of the praelaticke faction do
exceed the highest of the Presbyterians in zeal against that which they call
Sacrilege? never any of the Presbyterians did attempt either by violence, or a
course of Law, to put out any of the N^bility or Gentry from their possessions
of the Chu ch-lands, but very lately the threats and vigorous activity of the p
aelats, and their followers were so vehement in this kind, that all the
Nobility and Gentry who had any interest, were wackned (to purpose) to take
heed of their rights. In the last Parliament of Scotland when the power of the
Church was as great as they expect to see it again, though they obtained the
abolition of patronages, yet were the possessors of the Church Lands and tithes
so little harmed, that their rights thereto were more clearly and strongly
conformed, then by any praeceding Parliament.

The fourth hurt is that every ordinary Presbyter will make himself a
Noblemans fellow. Ans. No where in the World do gracious Ministers (though
mean borne men) receive more respect from the Nobility then in Scotland:
neither any where does the Nobility and Gentry receive more duly their honor
then from the Ministers there. That insolent speech fathered on Mr. Robert
Bruce is demonstrat to be a fabulous calumny in the historical vindication.

However the Warner may know that in all Europe where Bishops have place, it
has ever (at least these 800 years) been their nature to trample under foot,
the h^ghest of the Nobility. As the Pope must be above the Emperor, so a
little Cardinal Bellarmin can tell to King James, that he may well he counted a
companion of any Ilander King: were the Bishops in Scotland ever content, till
they got in Parliament, the right hand and the nearest seats to the throne,
and the door of the greatest Earls, Marquesses and Dukes? was it not
Episcopacy, that did advance poor and capricious Pedants to strive for the
white staves and great Seals of both Kingdoms, with the prime Nobility; and
often overcome them in that strife? In Scotland I know, and the Warner will
assure for England and Ireland, that the basest borne of his Brethren has
ruffled it in the secret council, in the royal Exchequer, in the highest
Courts of Justice, with the greatest Lords of the Land: its not so long, that
yet it can be forgotten, since a Bishop of Galloway had the modesty to give
unto a Marquess o^ A^gile, tantum non a broad lie in his face at the Council
table. The Warner shall do well to reckon no more with Presbyters for braving
of Noblemen.

The nixt he will have to be wronged by the Presbytery are the Orthodox
Clergy. The Prelat^ continue to annull the being of all the Reformed Churches
for their want of Episcopacy.
Ans. All the Presbyterians to him (it seems) are heterodoxe; Episcopacy is so
necessary a truth that who denies it, must be stamped as for a grievous error
with the character of heterodox. The following words clear this to be his
mind, they l^se (says he) the comfortable assurance of undoubted succession
by Episcopal ordination: what sense can be made of these words, but that all
Ministers who are not ordained by Bishop^, must lie under the comfortless
uncertainty of any lawful succession in their Ministerial charge, for want of
this succession through the lineall descent of Bishops from the Apostles; at
least for want of ordination by the hands of Bishops, as if unto them only the
power of mission and ordination to the Ministry were committed by Christ?
because of this defect the Presbyterian Ministers must not only want the
comfort of an assured and undoubted calling to the Ministry, but may very well
know and be assured that their calling and Ministry is null. The words
immediately following are scraped out after their Printing: for what cause the
Author best knows: but the purpose in hand makes it probable, that the
deletted words did express more of his mind, then it was safe in this time
and place to speak out: it was the late Doctrine of Doctor Brambles prime
friends, that the want of Episcopal ordination did ot only annull the calling
of all the Ministers of France, Holland, Zwit-zerland, and Germany, but also
did hinder all these Societies to be true Churches: for that popular Sophisme
of the Jesuits our Prelates did greedily swallow; where are no true Sacrament,
there is no true Church; and where is no true Ministry, there are no true
Sacraments; and where no true ordination, there is no true Ministry; and where
no Bishops, there in no true ordination; and so in no reformed Country but in
England and Ireland where were true Bishops, is any true Church. When
Episcopacy comes to this height of elevation, that the want of it must annull
the Ministry, yea the very being of all the Reformed Churches at one strock, is
it any marvel, that all of them do concur together for their own
preservation, to abolish this insolent abaddon and destroyer? and
notwithstanding all its ruin have yet no discomfort at all, nor any the least
doubt of their most lawful ordination by the hands of the Presbytery.

The Prelates are so basely injurious to all the Reformed Churches that their
selfs are ashamed of it
After all this was written, as here it stands, another copy of the Warners book
was brought to my hand, wherein I found the deleted line stand Printed in these
distinct terms, and put it to a dangerous question whether it be within the
payle of the Church, the deciphering of these words puts it beyond all
peradventure that what I did conjecture of the Warner and his Brethrens mind,
of the state of all the reformed Churches, was no mis-take, but that they do
truly judge the want of Episcopal Ordination to exclude all the Ministers of
other Reformed Churches, and their flocks also from the lines of the true
Church. This indeed is a most d^ngerous question: for it stricks at the root of
all. If the Warner out of remorse of conscience had blotted out of his book
that error, the Repentance had been commendable: But he has left so much yet
behind unscraped out, as does show his mind to continue what it was, so that
fear alone to provoke the reformed here at this unseasonable time, seems to
have been the cause of deleting these too clear expressions of the prelaticall
tenent against the very being and subsistence of all the Protestant Churches
which want Episcopacy, where these men do still stand upon the extreme pinnacle
of impudency and arrogance, denying the Reformed to be true Churches, and
without scruple averring Rome as she stands this day, under the council of
Trent, to be a Church most true, wherein there is an easy way of salvation, from
which all separaion is needless, and with which a reunion were much to be
desired? That gracious faction this day is willing enough to persuade, or at
least to rest content without any opposition that the King should of himself
without and before a Parliament, (though contrary to many standing Laws) grant
under his hand and sa^^ a full liberty of Religion to the bloody Irish, and to
put in their hands, both arms, Castles and prime Places of trust in the State;
that the King should give assurance of his endeavor, to get all these ratified
in the next Parliament of England, these men can hear with all moderation and
patience: but behold their fu ious impatience, their whole art and industry is
wakned, when they hear of any appearance of the Kings inclination toward
covenanting Protestants: night and day they beat in his Majesty's head, that
all the mischiefs of the World do lurk in that miserable Covenant, that
death and any misfortune, that the ruin of all the Kingdoms ought much rather
to be embraced by His Majesty, then that prodigious Monster, that very hell of
the Covenant, because for sooth it does oblige in plain terms the taker to
endeavor (in his station) the abolition of their great Goddess, Prelacy.

The next hurt of Ministers from the Presbytry, is, The generality of
Episcopal Clergy have ever been covered with ignorance, beggary, and contempt.
that by it they are brought to ignorance, contempt and beggary. Ans. Whither
Episcopacy or Presbytry is the fittest instrumen to avert these evils, let
reason or experience teach men to judge. The P^esbyteriall discipline does
oblige to a great deal of severer trials in all sort of learning requisite in
a divine before ordination then does the Episcopal: let either the rule or
practice of Presbyterian and Episcopal ordination be compared or the weekly
Exercises and monthly disputations in Latin upon the controverted heads be
looked upon which the Presbytery exacts of every Minister after his ordination
all the days of his life: for experience, let the French, Dutch and Scots
divines who have been or yet are, be compared with the ordinary Generation of
the English Clergy, and it will be found, that the Prelates have not great
reason so superciliously to look down with contempt upon their Brethrens
learning. I hope, Cartwright, Whitaker, Perkins, Reynolds, Parker, Ames, and
other Presbyterian English were inferior in learning to none of their opposits:
some of the English Bishops have not wanted good store of learning, but the
most of them (I believe) will be content to leave of boasting in this subject;
what does the Warner speak to us of ignorance, contempt and Beggary? does not
all the World know, that albeit some few, scarce one of twenty, did brook good
benefices, yea plurality of them whereby to live in splendour at Court, or where
they listed in their non-residency, nevertheless it has bin much complained,
that the greatest part of the Priests, who have the cure of the souls through
all the Kingdom of England, were incomparably the most ignorant, beggarly and
contemptible Clergy, that ever have bin seen in any of the reformed Churches?
neither did we ever hear of any great study in the Prelates to remedy these
evils, albeit some of them be provider t enough for their own Families.
Doctor Bramble knows who had the skill before they had sitten seven year in
their chair to purchase above fifteen hundred pounds a year for themselves and
their heirs what someever.

The Prelates continue to hate preaching and prayer but to idolize a popish
service.
The third evil which the Presbytery brings upon Ministers, is, that it makes
them prate, and pray nonsense everlastingly. Ans. It is indeed a great
heartbreake unto ignorant, lazy and unconsciencious Ministers to be put to the
pains of Preaching and Prayer, when a read service was wont to be all their
exercise: but we thought that all indifferently ingenuous men had long ago bin
put from such impudence. It was the late labor of the Prelates by all their
skill to disgrace Preaching and Praying without book, to cry up the Liturgy at
the only service of God, and to idolize it as a most Heavenly and Divine piece
of write, which yet is naught but a Transcript of the superstitious breviary
and idolatrous missall of Rome. The Warner would do well to consider and
answer after seven years advisement Mr Bailie his pararell of the Service Book
with the Missall and Breviary, before he present the world with new paralells
of the English liturgy, with the directories of the Rerormed Churches. It is so
indeed, that all Preaching and Praying without Book is but a pratting of
nonsense everlastingly; why then continues the King and many well minded men
to be deceived by our Doctors, while they affirm that they are as much for
Preaching in their practice and opinion as the Presbyterians, and for Prayer
without book also, before and after Sermon, and in many other occasions? it
seems these affi mations are nothing but gross dissimulation in this time of
their lowness and affliction, to decline the envy of people against them for
their profane contempt of Divine ordinances; for we may see here their tenet to
remain what it was, and themselves ready enough, when their sea^on shall be
fitter, to ring it out loud in the ears of the World, that for Divine Service
people needs no more but the reading of the Liturgy, that Sermons on week days
and Sundays afternoon must all be laid aside, Vide ladensium. cap. 7.
that on the Sabbath before noone Sermon is needless, and from the mouths of
the most Preachers very noxious; that when so ^e lea^ned Scholars are pleased
on so^e festival days to have an Oration, it wo^ld be short and according to
the Court pattern, without all Spirit and life for edification; but by all
means it must be provided, that no word of prayer either before or after be
spoken, except only a bidding to pray for many things, even for the welfare of
the souls departed; and all this alone in the words of the Lords Prayer. If
any shall dare to express the desi es of his heart to God in private or public
in any words of his o^n framing, he is a gross Puritan, who is bold to offe to
God his own nonsense rather then the ancient, and well advised prayers of the
holy Church.

The Wa^ner is here also mistaken in his belief, that ever the Church of
Scotland had any Liturgy; they had and have still some forms for help and
direction, but notice ever in any of them by Law or practice: they do not
condemn the use of set forms for Rules, ye^ not for use in ^ee n^e^s, who are
thereby endeavoring to attain a readiness to pray in their family our of
their own heart in the words which Gods Spirit dytes to them; but for Ministers
to suppress their most comfortable and useful gift of prayer by tying their
mouth unto such forms which themselves or others have composed we count it a
wrong to the giver, and to him who has received the gift, and to the Church for
whose use that was bestowed.

Episcopal Warrants for clandestin marriages, rob Parents of their childdren.
In the next place the Warner makes the Presbytry injurious to parents, by
marying their children contrary to their consent, and forcing them to give to
the d sobedient as large a portion as to any other of their obedient children,
and than it is no marvail the Scots should do these things who have stripped
the King the father of their Country of his just rights. Ans. By the Warners
Rule all the actions of a Nation where a Presbyte^y lodges must be charged on
the back of the Presbytery. II. The Parliament of Scotland denies, that they
have stripped the King of his just Rights; while he was stirred up and kept
on by the prelaticall faction to courses destructive to himself and all his
people; after their shedding of much blood, before the exercise of all parts of
his Royal government, they only required for all satisfaction and security to
Religion and Liberties, the grant of some few most equitable demands. The
unhappy Prelates from the beginning of our troubles to this day finding our
great demand to run upon the abolition of their Office, did ever press His
Majesty to deny us that satisfaction, and rather then Bishops should be laid
aside, they have concluded that the King himself, and all his family and all
his three Kingdoms shall perish: yet with all patience the Scots contin^e to
supplicate and to offer not only their Kingdom, but their lives and estates
and all they have for His M^je ^es se^vice upon the grant of their few and easy
demands, but no misery e^ther of King or people can overcome the desperate
obstinacy of Prelaticall hearts.

As for parents co^se^t to the marriage of their children, how tenderly it is
provided for in England, it may be seen at length in the very place cited. It
was the Bishops, who by their warrants for clandestine marriages, and
dispensations with marriages without warrant have spoiled many parents of their
dear children: with such abominations the Presbytery was never acquainted;
all that is alleged out of that place of our discipline, is, when a cruel
parent or tutor abuses their authority over their Children, and against all
reason for their own evil ends, perversely will cross their Children in
their lawful and every way honest desires of marriage; that in that case the
Magistrates and Ministers may be entreated by the grieved child to deal with
the unjust parent or tutor, that by their meditation reason may be done. I
believe this advice is so full of equity, that no Church nor State in the world
will complain of it: but how ever it be, this case is so rare in Scotland that
I profess, I never in my life did know, nor did hear of any child before my
days, who did assay by the authoritative sentence of a Magistrate or Minister
to force their parents consent to their marriage. As for the Warners addition
of the Ministers compelling parents to give portions to their children, that
the Church of Scotland has any such cannon or practice, its an impudent lie;
but in the place alleged is a passage against the sparing of the life of
adulterers, contrary to the Law of God: and for the excommunication of
Adulterers, when by the negligence of the Magistrate their life is spared, this
possibly may be the thorn in the side of some which makes them bite and spurn
with the heel so furio^sly against the Authors and lovers of so severe a
discipline.

The Presbyteries next injury is done to the Lawyers; Synods, and other
Ecclesiastic Courts revoke their Sentences. Ans. No such matter ever was
attempted in Scotland; frequent prohibitions have been obtained by curtisan
Bishops against the highest civil judicatories in England; but that ever a
Presbytery or Synod in Scotland did so much as assay to impede or repeal the
proceedings of any the meanest civil Court, I did never hear it so much as
alleged by our adversaries. Serious catechizing is no Episcpall crime^


The next injury is against all Masters, and ^istresses of families, whom the
Presbytery will have to be personally examined in their knowledge once a year,
and to be excommunicate, if grossly and wilfully ignorant. Answ. If it be a
crime for a Minister to call together parcels of his congregation to be
instructed in the grounds of Religion, that servants and children and (where
ignorance is suspected,) others also may be tried in their knowledge of the
Catechism; or if it be a crime that in family-visitations oftener then once a
year the conversation of every member of the Church may be looked upon; we
confess the Ministers of Scotland were guilty thereof, and so far as we know
the generality of the Episcopal faction may purge themselves by oath of any
such imput^tion: for they had somewhat else to do, then to be at the pains of
instructing or trying the Spiritual State of every sheep in their flocks: we
confess likewise, that it is both our order and practice to keep off from the
holy table, whom we find grossly and wilfully ignorant: but that ever any for
simple ignorance was excommunicate in Scotland, Church sessions are not high
commissiones
none who knows us will affirm it.

The last whom he will have to be wronged by the Presbyte y are the common
people, who must groan under a high commission in every parish, where ignorant
governors rule all without Law, meddling even in domestical jarres betwixt man
and wife, Master and Servant. Answ. This is but a gybe of revenge for the
overthrow of their Tyrannous high Commission-Court, where they were wont to
play the Rex at their pleasure above the highest subjects of the three
Kingdoms, and would never give over that their insolent domineering court,
till the King and Parliaments of both Kingdoms did agree to throw it down
about their ears. The thing he je^^es at, is the congregationall Eldership, a
j^dicatory which all the Reformed done joy to their great comfort as much as
S^otland. They are far from all arbitrary judications; their Laws are the
holy Scripture and acts of superior Church j^dicatories, which rule so clearly
the cases of their c^gnisance, that rarely any difficulty remains therein: or
if it do, immediately by ref^rence or appeal it is transmitted to the Classes
or Synod. The judges in the lowest Elders^^^ (as we have said before) are a
dozen at least, of the most able and pious who can be had in a whole
congregation to join with the Pastors one or more as they fall to be: but the
Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all in any congregation: only where
there is hope of a fine, the Bishops official will summon before his own
learned and conscientious wisdom, who ever within the whole dioces have
fallen into such a fault as he pleases to take notice of: as for domistick
infirmities, Presbyterians are most tender to meddle therein; they come never
before any judicatory, but both where the fault is great, and the scandal
thereof flagrant, and broken out beyond the walls of the family.

These are the great injuries and hurts which the Church discipline has
procured to all orders of men in the whole reformed world, when Episcopacy has
been such an innocent lamb, or rather so holy an Angel upon earth, that no
harm at all has ever come by it to any mortal creature: a misbeleeving Jew
will nothing misdoubt this so evident a truth.

CHAP. ULT.
The Warners exceptions against the Covenant are full of confidence, but
exceeding frivolous.

THough in the former Ch^pters the Warner has spewed out more venom and gall
then the bag of any one man's stomach could have been supposed capable of,
yet as if he were but beginning to vomit, in this last Chapter of the covenant
a new flood of blackes poison rusheth out of his pen. His undertaking is
great, to demonstrate cleer^y that the covenant is merely void wicked and
impious. His first clear demonstration is, that it was devised by strangers,
imposed by subjects who wanted requisite power, and was extorted by just fear
of unjust suffering, so that many that took it with their lips, never
consented with their hearts. Ans. This clear demonstration is but a poor and
evil argument: the Major, if it were put in form, would hardly be granted,
but I stand on the minor as weak and false; for the Covenant was not devised
by strangers; The Covenant was not dishonorable to union.
the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, together with the Commissioers
of the Parliament and general assembly of Scotland were the first and only
framers thereof, but they who gave the life and being to it in England were the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament at Westminster by the Kings call, and
at that time acknowledged by his Majesty without any question about the
lawfulness of their constitution and authority: these men and that Court were
not I hope great strangers in England. The Covenant was not imposed upon the
King: but the Parliament of both Kingdoms, made it their earnest desire unto
his Majesty, that he would be pleased to join with them in that Covenant,
which they did judge to be a ^aine piece of their security for their Religion
and liberties in all the three Kingdoms. As for their imposing of it upon the
subjects of England, an ordinance of Parliament (though the King consent not)
by the uncontroverted laws of England, is a sufficient authority to crave
obedience of all the subjects of England, during the continuance of that
Parliament.

The last part of the demonstration is dishonorable indeed to the English
Nation, if it were true it was no dishonor to England to join with their
brethren of Sc^tland in a Covenant for maintenance of their Religion and
Liberties: but for many of the English to swear a Covenant with their lips,
from which their heart did dissent, and upon this difference of heart and mouth
to plead the nullity of the Oath, and to advance this plea so high as to clear
demonstration, this is such a dishonor and dishonesty, that a greater cannot
fall upon a man of reputed integrity; especically when the ground of the lie
and pe ju y is n evident falsehood: for the Covenant was not extorted from any
flesh in England by fear of any unjust suffering; so far was it from this,
that to this day it could never be obtained from the Parliament of England, to
enjoyne that Covenant upon any by the penalty of a two pence.

The Warners second demonstration is no better then the first; the ground of it
is, Covenanters were not deceived, but understood what they swear.
that all oaths are void which have deceit and error of the substantial
conditions incident to them. This ground had need to be much better cautioned,
then here it is, before it can st^nd for a major of a clear demonstration; but
how is the minor proved? behold how much short the Warners proofs are of his
great boastings. His first argument is grounded upon an evident falsehood, that
in the Covenant we swear the lately devised discipline to be Christ's
institution. Answ. There is no such word nor any such matter in all the
Covenant: was the Warners hatred so great against that piece of write, that
being to make clear demonstrations against i^, he would not so much as cast
his eye upon that which he was to oppugn, Covenanters swear, to endeavor the
reformation of England, according to the word of God and the best reformed
Churches, but not a word of the Scots Presbytery, nor of any thing in any
Church even the best reformed, unless it be found accorcording to the pattern
of Gods holy word.

The second ground of his demonstration is also an evident error, The Warner
unwittingly commends the Covenant.
that the covenant in hand is one and the same with that of King James. Answ.
Such a fancy came never in the head of any man, I know; much less was it ever
written or spoken by any, that the Covenant of King James in Scotland 1580,
should be one and the same with the Covenant of all the three Kingdoms 1643,
whatsoever identit es may appear in the matter and similitude in the ends of
both; but the grossest errors are solid enough grounds for praelaticall clear
demonstrations. Yet here the Warner understands not how he is cutting his own
veins; his friends in Scotland will give him small thanks for attributing unto
the national Covenant of Scotland (that Covenant of King James) these three
properties, that it was issued out by the Kings authority, that it was for the
maintenance of the Laws of the realm, and for the maintenance of the
established Religion: time brings adversaries to confess of their own accord
long denied truths. But the Characters; which the Warner in prints upon the
solemn league and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, we must b^^ pardoned to
controvert, till he have taken some leisure to prove his wild assertions.
First that the league is against the authority of the King; secondly that it is
against the Law; and thirdly that it is for the overthrow of Religion. The man
cannot think, that any should believe his dictats of this kind without p oofe,
since the express words of that league do flatly contradict him in all these
three positions.

His gentle memento, that Scotland, when they sued for aid from the crown of
England, had not the English discipline obtruded upon their Church, might here
have been spared; was not the English discipline and liturgy obtruded upon us
by the praelats of England with all craft and force? did we ever obtrude our
discipline upon the English? but when they of their own free and long
deliberate choice had abolished Bishops and promised to set up Presbytery, so
far as they had found it agreeable to the word of God, were we not in all
reason obliged to encourage and assist them in so pious a work?

The King did not clame the sole and absolve possession of the militia.
In the next words the Warner for all his great boasts finding the weakness of
all the former grounds of his second demonstration, he offers three new ones:
which doubtless will do the deed: for he avowes positively that his following
grounds are demonstrative, yet whosoever shall be pleased to gripe them with
never so soft an hand shall find them all to be but vanity and wind. The
first, after a number of prosyllogismes rests upon these two foundations, first
that the right of the militia resides in the King alone: secondly that by the
covenant the militia is taken out of the Kings hands; and that every covenanter
by his covenant disposes of himself and of his arms, against the right which
the King has unto him. Answ. The Warner will have much ado to prove the
second so, that it may be a ground of a clear demonstration: but for the first,
that the power of the militia of England does reside in the King alone, that
the two houses of Parli^ment have nothing at all to do with it, and that their
taking of arms for the defense of the liberties of England or any other
imaginable cause against my party countenanced by the Kings presence against
his laws must ^e a together unlawful; if his demonstration be no clearer, hen
the ground whereupon he builds it, I am sure, it will not be visible to any of
his opposits who are not like to be convinced of open rebellion by his naked
assertion, upon which alone he lays this his mighty ground. Believe it, he had
need to assay its relief with some color of an argument; for none of his
own friends will now take it of his hand for an indemonstrable principle,
since the King for a long time was willing to acknowledge the Parliaments joint
interest in the Militia, yea to put the whole Militia in their hands alone for
a good number of years to come: so far was his Majesty from the thoughts,
that the Parliaments meddling with a part of the Militia, in the time of evident
dangers, should be so certainly and clearly the crime of rebellion.

The Warners second demonstrative ground we admit without question in the
major, that where the matter is evidently unlawful, the oath is not binding;
but the application of this in the minor is very false. All that he brings to
make it appear to be true, is that the King is the supreme Legislator; that it
is unlawful for the subjects of England to change any thing established by
Law, especially to the prejudice of the Praelates without their own consent,
they being a third order of the Kingdom; otherwise it would be a harder
measure then the Friars and Abbots received from Henry the eight. The change of
laws in England ordinarily begin by the two houses without the King.
Ans. May the Warner be pleased to consider how far his dictates here are
from all reason, much more from evident demonstrations. That the burden of
Bishops and ceremonies was become so heavy to all the three Kingdoms, that
there was reason to endeavor their laying aside, he does not offer to dispute;
but all his complaint runs against the manner of their removal: this (say I)
was done in no other then the ordinary and high pathway, whereby all
burdensome Laws and customs use to be removed. Does not the Houses of
Parliament, first begin with their Ordinance before the Kings consent be sought
to a Law? is not an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons a good warrant to change
a former Law during the sitting of the Parliament? The Laws and customs of
England permit not the King by his dissent to stop that change. The King did
really consent to the abolition of Bishops.
I grant for the turning an O^dinance to a standing Law, the Kings consent is
required, but with what qualifications and exceptions we need not here to
debate, since his Majesty's consent to the present case of abolishing Bishops
was obtained well near to as far as was desired; and what it yet lacking,
we are in a fair way to obtain it: for the Kings Majesty long ago did
agree to the rooting out of Episcopacy in Scotland, he was willing also in
England and Ireland to put them out of the Parliament, and all civil Courts,
and to divest them of all civil power, and to join with them Presbyteries for
Ordination and spiritual jurisdiction; yea, to abolish them totally name and
thing, not only for three years but ever till he and his Parliament should
agree upon some settled order, for the Church; was not this Tantamont to a
pertuall abolition? for all and every one in both houses, having abjured
Episopacy by solemn Oath and Covenant, the Parliament was in no hazard of
agreeing with the King to re-erect the fallen chaires of the Bishops: so there
remained no other, but that either his Majesty should come over to their
judgment, or by his not agreeing with them, yet really to agree with them in
the perpetual abolition of Episcopacy, since the confession was for the laying
Bishops aside for ever, till he and his houses had agreed upon a settled order
for the Church. If this be not a full and formal enough consent to the
Ordinance of changing the former Laws anent praelats, his Majesty, who now
is, easily may and readily would supply all such defects: if some of the
faction did not continually, for their own evil interests, whisper in his
ears pernicious counsel, as our Warner in this place also does by frighting
the King in conscience from any such consent; The praelats would fl^tter the
King into a Tyranny.
for this end he casts out a discourse, the sinews whereof are in these three
Episcopal maxims First, that the legislative power is soly in the King, that
is according to his Brethrens Commentary, that the Parliament is but the Kings
great council of free choice, without or against whose votes he may make or
unmake what Laws he thinks expedient; but for them to make any Ordinance for
changing without his consent of any thing that has been, instituting any new
thing, or for them to defend this their legal right and custom (time out of
mind) against the arms of the Malignant party, no man may deny it to be
plain rebellion.

II. The praelates take to themselves a negative voice in Parliament.
That the King and Parliament both together cannot make a Law, to the prejudice
of Bishops without their own consent, they being the third order of the
Kindome: for albeit it be sacrilege in the Lords and Commons, to claim any
the smallest share of the legislative power, (this in them were to pyck the
chiefest jewel out of the Kings Crown) yet this must be the due privilege of
the Bishops, they must be the third order of the Kingdom, yea the first and
most high of the three, far above the other two temporal States of Lords and
Commons; their share in the Legislative power must be so great, that neither
King nor Parliament can pass any Law without their consent, so that according
to their humble protestation, all the Laws and Acts, which have been made by
King and Parliament, since they were expelled the house of Lords, are clearly
void and null.

We must grant that the King and Parliament in divesting Bishops of their
temporal honor and estates, The praelats grieve that Monks and Friars, the
Pope and Cardinals were casten out of England by H.
in abolishing their places in the Church, do sin more against conscience then
did Henry the eight and his Paliament, when they put down the Abbots and the
Friars. We must believe that Henry the eight his abolishing the order of Monks
was one of the acts of his greatest Tyranny and greed: we must not doubt, but
according to Law and reason, Abbots and Priours ought to have kept still their
vote in Parliament, that the Monasteryes and Nunryes should have stood in their
integrity, that the King and Parliament did wrong in casting them down, and
that now they ought in conscience to be set up again, yea, that Henry the
eight against all reason and conscience did renounce his due obedience to the
Pope, the Patriarch of the West, the first Bishop of the universe, to whom the
superinspection and government of the whole Catholic Church in all reason does
belong. Though all this be here glaunced at by the Warner, and elsewhere we
prove it to be the declared mind of his Brethren, yet we must be pardoned not
to accept them, as undeniable princ^ples of clear demonstrations.

The just supremacy of Kings is not prejudged by the Covenant.
The last ground of the Doctors demonstration, is, that the Covenant is an Oath
to set up the Presbyterian government in England, as it is in Scotland, and
that this is contrary to the Oath of Supremacy; for the Oath of Supremacy makes
the ^ing the only supreme head and Governor of the Church of England, that
is, the civil head to see that every man do his duty in his calling; also it
gives the King a supreme power over all persons in all causes: but the
Presbytery is a Political Papacy, acknowledging no governor but only the
Presbyters: it gives the King power over all persons as Subjects, but none at
all in Ecclesiastic causes. Ans. Is there in all this reasoning any thing
sound? First, what article of the Covenant bears the setting up of the
Presbyterian government in England as it is in Scotland? II. If the Oath of
supremacy import no more then what the Warners express words are here, that
the King is a civil head, to see every man do his duty in his calling, let
him be assured that no Presbyterian in Scotland was ever contrary to that
supremacy. III. That the Presbytery is a Papacy, and that a political one, the
Warner knows it ought not to be granted upon his bare word. IV. That In
Scotland no other governors are acknowledged then Presbyters, himself
contradicts in the very next words, where he tells that the Scots Presbytery
ascribs to the King a power over all persons as subjects. V. That any
Presbyterian in Scotland makes it sacrilege to give the King any power at all
in any Ecclesiastic cause, The Warner^ insolent Vanity.
it is a senseless untruth.

The Warners arguments are not more idle and weak, then his triumphing upon
them is insolent: for he concludes from these wife and strong demonstrations,
that the poor covenant is apparently deceitful, unvalide, impious,
rebellious, and what not? yea, that all the learned divines in Europe will
conclude it so, and that all the Covenanters themselves who have any ingenuity,
must grant thus much; and that no knowing English man can deny it, but his own
conscience will give him the lie. Answ. If the Warner with any seriousness
has weighed this part of his own write, and if his mind go along with his
pen, I may without great presumption pronounce his judgment to be none of the
most solid.

His following vapors being full of air we let them evanish; only while he
mentions our charging the King with intentions of changing the Religion and
government, we answer that we have been most willing always to ascribe to the
King good intentions, but withal we have long avowed that the praelaticall
party have gone beyond intentions to manifest by printed declarations and
public actions their formed design to bring Tyranny upon the States, and
popery upon the Churches of all the three Kingdoms, and that this very write
of the Warners makes it evident, that this same mind yet remains within them
without the least show of repentance. So long as the conscience of the court is
managed by men of such principles, it is not possible to free the hearts of
the most understanding from a great deal of Jealously and fear to have
Religion and laws still overturned by that faction.

But the Wa ner commands us, to speak to his Dilemma, The covenant is not for
propagating of Religion by arms.
whither we think it lawful or unlawful for subjects to take arms against
their prince merely for Religion? We answer, that the reasons whereby he
thinks to conclude against us, on both sides are very poor. If we shall say, it
is unlawful, then he makes us to condemn our selves, because our covenant
testifies to the world, that we have taken up arms merely to alter Religion,
and that we bear no alleagiance to our King but in order to Religion, which in
plain terms is to our own humors and conceits. Ans. There be many untruths
here in few words; first how much reality and truth the Warner and some of his
fellows believes to be in that thing which they call Religion, their own heart
knownes; but it can be no great charity in him to make the Religion of all
covenanters to be nothing but their own humors and conceits. Secondly it is
not true that Covenanters bear no alleagiance to the King but only in order to
Religion. III. The Parliament of England denied that they took u^ arms against
their King, though to defend themselves against the popish pralaticall and
malignant faction, who were about to destroy them with arms. IV. They have
declared, that their purpose was not at all, to alter Religion but to purge it
from the corruption of Bishops and ceremonies that too long had been noxious
unto them. V. They have often professed that their rames were taken for the
defense of their just liberties, whereof the preservation and reformation of
Religion was but one.

The other horn of his Dilemma is as blunt in pushing as the former. If we
make it lawful (says he) to take up arms for Religion, we then justify the
independents and Anabaptists; we make way for any that will plant what ever
they apprehend to be true Religion by force, and to cut the throat of all
Magistrates, who are in a contrary opinion to them; that it is a ridiculous
partiality for any to privilege their own Religion as truth and Gospel. The
Warners black Atheism.
Answ. Whether will these men go at last? the strength of this reason is black
atheism, that there is no realty of truth in any Religion, that no man may be
permitted to take his Religion for any thing more but his own apprehension,
which without ridiculous folly he must not prefer to any other man's
apprehension of a contrary Religion; this is much worse then the pagane
Scepticisme, which turned all reality of truth into a mere apprehension of
truth, wherein their was no certainty at all: this not only turns the most
certain truths, even these divine ones of Religion, into mere uncertain
conceptions: but which is worse, it will have the most orthodoxe believer so to
think, speak and act, as if the opinions of Independents, Anabaptists, Turks,
Jews, Pagans or gross Atheists were as good, true and solid as the belief
of Moses or Paul were of the truths revealed to them from heaven. Secondly we
say that subjects defense of their Religion and liberties established by Law,
against the violent usurpation of Papists, Prelates or Malignants, is not the
planting of Religion by arms; much less is it the cutting of the throats of
all Magistrates, who differ in any point of Religion. The Praelats condemn the
defensive arms of the Dutch and French Protestants.
III. In the Judgment of the prelaticall party, the defensive arms of the
Protestants in France, Holland, and Germany, must be as much condemned as the
offensive arms of the Anabaptists in Munster, or of the sectaries this day in
England. Can these men dream that the World for their pleasure will so far
divest themselves of all Religion and reason, as to take from their hand so
brutish and Atheistical maxims.

The Praelats decline the judgment of counsels. The Praelats overthrow of the
foundation of Protestant Religion.
He concludes with a wish of a general council, at least of all protestant
Churches for to condemn all breachers of seditious principles. Ans. All true
covenanters go before him in that desire, being confident that he and his
fellows as they have declined already the most solemn assemblies of their own
countries, upon assurance of their condemnation, so their tergiversation would
be as great if they were to answer to an oecumenick Synod. What (I pray) would
the Warner say in a council of protestant* for the practice of his party
pointed at in his last words? I mean their purging the Pope of
Antichristianisme, of purpose to make way for a reconciliation, yea for a
return to Rome, as this day it lies under the wings of the Pope and Cardinals.
The Praelats are still peremptory to destroy the King and all his Kingdoms if
they may not be restored.
Also what could they answer in a Christian council unto this charge, which is
the drift of this whole Book, that they are so far from any remorse for all
the blood and misery, which their wickedness (most) has brought on the former
King and all his Kingdoms these eleven years, that rather then they had not
the Covenant and general assembly in Scotland destroyed as an Idol and
Antichrist, they will choose yet still to imbroyle all in new calamities? This
King also and his whole Family, the remainder of the blood and Estates in all
the three Kingdoms, must be hazarded for the sowing together of the torn
mytres, and the rejecting of the fallen chayres of Praelats. If Bishops must
lie still, in their deserved ruins, they persevere in their peremtory
resolution, to have their burials sprinkled with the ashes of the royal
Family and all the three Kingdoms,

FINIS.

