A Brief of the Papers touching a Market petitioned for to be held in Clements
Inn Fields, As it stood before the Parliament in the year 1652. and of what
has since been offered therein, and done by his HIGHNESS and the COUNCIL.
The Petition of the Inhabitants of the Parishes of Clements Danes, Savoy, etc.
Signed by about 40. Justices of the Peace for Middlesex, Presented to the late
Committee of the late Parliament, concerning Markets, etc. And, Reasons offered
to that Committee for establishing a Market in Clements Inn Fields, etc.
Upon the Petition of the Freeholders of the County of Middlesex presented to
the Lords and Commons in Parliament for a Market in Clements-Inne-Fields three
days in the week, it was referred to the Committee for Faires and Markets,
etc.

The Inhabitants of Clements Danes, Savoy, and other Parishes adjacent in the
County of Middlesex, Petitioned the said Committee for a Market, and the
Petition was signed by most of the Justices of Peace of the said County.

The said Committee the 18. of January, 1652. upon a full hearing of the
Citizens of London and Westminster by their Council opposing the erecting of a
Market as aforesaid: And upon serious consideration had of the conveniences of
a Market in Clements-Inne-Fields, as was prayed, that Committee did declare,
That they conceived it would conduce very much to the benefit, ease and
advantage of the people of the County inhabiting in the Parishes in the
Petition mentioned: and of the County of Middlesex to have a Market in the said
place, etc. And did Order that an Act should be prepared for a Market to be
held there, upon every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday in every week. And
Master Hill and Master Lechmore were appointed to draw the Act. Prout

The Parliament the fourth of Feb. 1652. (the Citizens of London petitioning
them against the erecting the said Market) Ordered that the Committee for
Markets should bring in their Report, and the Act prepared by them for the
Market in this Petition complained of. And that at the same time the Cities
Petition should be taken into consideration. Prout.

The 17. Feb. 1652. It was Ordered by the said Committee, that the Bill,
touching the said Market then read, should be reported to the Parliament by Mr.
Challoner or Col: Lister with all speed Prout. But the Bill was not Reported,
for that the Parl. was soon after dissolved.

The Inhabitants of the several Parishes hereafter mentioned Petition his
Highness to establish the said Market in manner aforesaid: the 9. of June
1654. his Highness referred the whole matter to the Council for their speedy
and effectual consideration therein. And the Council referred it to a
Committee of themselves; but nothing was thereupon concluded, other weighty
matters of State interposing.

To the Honorable Committee of Parliament to prepare Acts to set up or alter
Markets.
The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the several Parishes of Clement
Danes, Savoy, Covent Garden, Martin in the fields, Giles in the fields, and
other Parishes and places adjoining, in the County of Middlesex, in pursuance
of a former, prepared for the Parliament.
HUMBLY SHOW,
THat the particular Parishes before mentioned being of large extent, and the
Inhabitants many, by reason of the great increase of Buildings, and diverse
persons of quality having houses and lodgings there, and great numbers
resorting thither from all parts of England, to attend the Parliament and
Courts of Law; and the Markets being far distant, none being between
Westminster and Newgate: many lewd persons are thereby encouraged to carry, and
sell unwholesome meat, and other unwarrantable goods and wares up and down the
street, to the abuse of honest people. And others by this opportunity of Sale,
and their own wicked dispositions, are induced to steal Sheep Poultry, and
other things, and here utter them in private: others for want of room in the
Markets of London and Westminster, bring their provisions to Inns and Alehouses
in these parts, and there sit and sell them at dearer prices than the Market
gives; and presuming upon the remoteness of the Market, put off bad and
unfound provisions at dear rates, and abuse the Buyers in their weight and
measure; besides many other inconveniences which daily accrue for want of
Markets in these parts; there being not sufficient room for your Petitioners,
Inhabitants in Middlesex and other parts, to place and attend their commodities
for sale, to the great loss and prejudice of your Petitioners.

For remedy whereof, and the future ease and good of your Petitioners, and
other Inhabitants of the said several Parishes, and other adjacent Towns in
Middlesex, and elsewhere: May it please you to be a means, That by Act of
Parliament, a common and open Market for all manner of Provisions may be
established, and appointed to be kept three days in the week, ( viz.) every
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, in a place in Clements-Inne-fields, most
indifferent and convenient for that purpose, and not prejudicial to any other
Market.

And your Petitioners, etc. Thomas Fowler. Jo. Thorougood. Barth: Hall. Pet:
Bradshaw. Joh: Haker. Tho: Baylie. John Barkstead. R. Jegon. Edw. Rich. Will.
Thomas. John Hern. W. Powel al. Hinson. Thomas Pride. Edw. Cresset. Rich.
Lowther. Nath. Snape. Clem. Farnham Will. Roberts. Walter Bigg. Sam. Gookin.
Rich. Sprignell. John Smith. Hum. Forster. John Key. Rich. Downton. Edw. Harvey
Tho. Marsh. John Norris. Sam. Moyer. Geo. Manley. Edw. Roberts. Rob. Nelson.
Fran. West. Tob. Lisle. Rich. Powell. John Page. Fra. Bloomer Ger. Elwaies. Ja.
Winstanly. Will. Roberts. Will. Millish. Will. Robinson Ja. Waterton. John
Holliday Sol. Smith. Will. Brownlow. Mar. Hildersley. Hen. Smith. Gilbert
Barrel.


Reasons wherefore a New Market in Clements-Inne-fields should be established
by Act of Parliament.
1. FOR that there has been within these 40 years last past, so great an
increase of Building, that the Inhabitants thereabouts are three times more
than formerly. 2. The place designed for the Market is very convenient, near
the Thames, having the two Wharfs of Sommerset Yard and Milford Stairs so near
adjoining, that it will be a very great ease and encouragement for the Country
people both of Middlesex and Surrey, to bring Mezle, and other Marketable
commodities by Water at a small charge. 3. It is near an equal distance
between Newgate-Market and Westminster; so that the Inhabitants of Martins in
the fields, Covent Garden, Giles in the fields, High Holbourn, Chancery Lane,
Clement Danes, and Savoy in the Strand, may with much more ease, then now they
are, be provided for.

And to those last mentioned places there is a great resort from all parts of
the Nation, both of Gentry and others, by reason of the Parliament and Courts
of Law, and all Innes of Court and Chancery near adjoining: so that those
parts being so populous, have often complained of the want, and do now
earnestly desire the benefit of a Market there.

4. The Market places both of Newgate and Westminster are so little, that there
is not room for half the provisions that are needful for so numerous a
peoples use; and the Country people for want of convenient room and places for
sale of their commodities, are much discouraged, and many constrained to take
places at Inns, which they pay dear for, and thereby necessitated to sell their
commodities at dearer rates.

And others bring their commodities to blind Ale houses, and thereby have
opportunity to vend stolen or unwholesome victuals and wares: all which will be
prevented, if a Market overt be established.

5. Many poor Tradesmen, who (notwithstanding their Freedoms of the City of
London) are necessitated to live in these parts for want of room; and dwelling
within the Freedom, are necessitated to go well-neere a Mile, if but to buy
two peny-worth of commodities, to their great hindrance in their labor, on
which their livelihood depends, who will be very much eased by having a Market
in the place aforesaid.
Object. The City of London pretend, that by Charter no Market is to be
established within seven miles of London.

Reas. 1. If they have such a Charter, it cannot be pretended that can bind the
Parliament, if they think the establishing of this Market is for the public
benef^t: 2. The Suburbs and places adjacent are now ten times as large as then
they were, and more numerous than the City. 3. If such a Charter be, it is
against the freedom of the Nation. 4. The opposers of this Market (how the City
of London seem to appear in it) are only particular Inhabitants of London and
Westminster, who would draw all to themselves, for their own private interests,
without respect to the public, that they may fell at what rates they please;
which by this means will be prevented. 5. That the Markets of Brainceford,
Westminster, and Somthwarke, have been set up since they pretended Charters.


And the Petitioners hope that they that have adventured their lives and
fortunes for the service of the Parliament, and present Government as far as
any other; shall, notwithstanding any opposition, have this their just request
granted, being for public good, and no private interest.

September. 1654

