A Brief RELATION Containing an Abreviation of THE ARGVMENTS Urged by the late
PROTECTOR against the Government of this NATION by a KING or a Single Person.

To Convince men of the danger and inconveniency thereof.

Urged by him to many of the Army, at St. Albans, Windsore, at White Hall (a
little before the King was beheaded) and at several other places.

Published for the good and information of Parliament, Army and People.

Printed, January, 1658.

To the Reader.
Reader,
OF what opinion or judgment so ever you are, let not your headiness or
prejudicate opinion, hinder you from considering what is here declared (the
substance and truth whereof is well known to some, in City, Army, and Country)
for thine and thy Posterities good, welfare and preservation. But beg of God
wisdom, and he will show thee the mystery of Iniquity, when it is going to be
settled by a law, and will cost thee hot service, and sorrow of heart, to
redeem thy self and Country, and it may be when thou would redeem it, it
will be too hard for thee.

A brief Relation, containing an Abreviation of the Arguments, urged by the
late Protector, against the Government of this Nation by a King or Single
Person.
The Consideration of the Obstruction that probably this true Relation will
meet with all from fawning Courtiers and Deceived Englishmen, had almost
prevented its prosecution; but remembering that naught but the awaking of my
dear slumbering Countrymen from that drousey state, that for some days they
have seemed to lie in, which if persisted in, will give too great an
opportunity to the common Enemy to effect his will on us all; I was encouraged
to proceed, trusting in the Lord, who has and will deliver the Innocent from
all the Calumnious aspersions of Court Parasites. And therefore without any
other Apology, I shall proceed to the Arguments themselves, which I shall
deliver if not in the absolute terms, yet in the genuine sense.

IMprimis, Because its possible, yea and more than ordinarily probable, that a
single person in a short time will work over his Council to his own will,
though illegal; either in conferring places of Honor and profit on them and
their friends, or else in terrifying them by threats.

2 Because that a single person being raised to such a state, is subject to wax
wanton and so forget, or rather neglect the Commonalty, in providing for a few
that will be at his beck, ready to fulfill his pleasure.

3 Because that notwithstanding for a time, he may carry matters fair, and do
some good things, Jehu like, until he has gotten an interest in the affections
of the people, but then forgetting or rather slighting what he formerly
pretended too, instead of countenancing of Justice and endeavoring
Reformation, its possible he may become a favourer of iniquity; nay, said he, a
settler of a Court, or nurserie of Whores, Rogues, Bawds and such like persons,
as was evidently seen in former days at Whitehall.

4 Because if he cannot accomplish his design on his Coun^il, but they
discover his wickednesses and abominations, and oppose him (on the behalf of
their Country) he will be ready and apt secretly to confederate and make
Leagues with other ^rinces, and so let in a Foreign enemy, rather than be kept
^ithin the bounds of Law and Justice, as we have seen in the (late) King, who
has brought in Irish and Scots, and also sent Letters-pattents with letters of
Credence to three Foreign princes, By Doctor Duck, Major Boswell.
inviting them to come into England.

5 Because if the chief Governor, King or Single person should become an
Idiot, then naught but a continual charge (upon the good people) could be
expected, even robing them of their substance, until they are made so poor,
as not to be able to oppose an enemy, which so soon as understood will
sufficiently encourage a Foreign enemy, to make an invasion upon us.

6 Because the Government by one single person, is far more chargeable to the
people, which in the laying aside of, the people will soon become sensible by
the lessening of their charge: for that Revenue (which was to uphold one man,
and spent in voluptuousness by him) being brought into the public Treasury,
will help to defray much of the charge that otherwise must fall on the people;
nay, said he, whosoever shall go about to settle the Government in one person,
will make themselves so odious, that the people will be ready to knock them
ot'head; for when once the Family of the Stuarts is gone, if you establish one
man in the government, in a little time he will become master of the Nations
Treasure, and at his first coming to the place will most eagerly desire moneys,
to buy this bauble for one, and that toy for an other; and after a little
while, when he has tasted the sweetness and deliciousness thereof, will to
maintain the same become a purchaser of lands with the peoples moneys, until
they are become so poor that they shall be necessitated to be his Vassals, and
consequently Slaves for ever; for as the first does, so a second, and third
will do after him, until the good people be utterly undone.

7 Because the Government being placed in one person, he will be subject to
judge of himself as above law, and without the reach of any law, and by
Violence, Tyrannize over whom he pleases, commanding one man to prison, and
moneys from another, and possibly both money and liberty from a third* etc. the
refusing of which arbitrary commands or actions will expose men to his mercy,
which will be no less than cruelty.

8 Because that the abominations and wickedness of a Cour^ has been, and (is
justly feared) will be, so great that both the person himself and his Council
about him will always (f^^ to uphold their voluptuousness) be ready to erect
new Monopolies, granting pattents to his Lords, etc. to get money from the
people, for to maintain their pomp and pride, and thereby keep the people in
such servitude, that in a little time, they will be out of a capacity to gain
justice on any of the Courtiers: And then the Citizen must wait for his money,
when his commodity is sold, and scarce dare ask, and not dare arrest a Courtier
for what he owes, for fear of his Master. And the Country man's hedges will be
broken down, his Corn trampled on, and spoiled, or eaten by the game, and to
complain of which, will be accounted a crime little less than Treason.

These and such ^re the things you must expect (said he) if you set up one
Single person, and who would be so mad, God having so signally witnessed
against the King and House of Lords: The much blood that has been shed, and
the vast treasure expended, and the Controversy decided on our parts,
witnesses aloud against it. Further, said he, I am confident that who ever
they be, that shall go about to settle a Court in this Nation, God will destroy
and bring to naught, and Confusion will be to them and their posterity, and
(said he) if ever I should go about any such thing, I desire God would never
bless me nor mine.

He farther declared, That God had born witness against the Parliament, for
that they were intending to make peace with the late King, and to settle him,
telling some members of the then Parliament and army, when they spoke of
settling the Government in one single person that God would destroy them, some
for going about to settle iniquity by a law, and others for not protesting
against them, and for not declaring their protest to the good people of
England: and thus now gentle reader thou have the substance of some of the
reasons, urged by the late Lord Protector against Monarchy, though suddenly he
leapt into the same himself, but now it may be said, these reasons are not
sufficient to prove the same, whether they are or not, I shall not now dispute,
but that it may appear to be probable, I present these ensuing Queries.

Upon the whole I Querie, whether any man upon rational grounds can expect,
that the present Protector or single person (pretending to Government,) should
be more honest righteous and just than his deceased Father was?

But more particularly upon the Arguments.
1 I would Querie, first, Whether the late Protector did not work over his
Council to some things illegal.

2 Whether Kings formerly and the Protector lately did not wax wonton, and
providing for some few of their creatures neglect the Commonalty?

3 Whether, our late experience of a single Person cannot testify, that though
for a small time, he seemed to favor honest men and things, yet when he
thought himself seated, whether I say, he did not then slight both them and it,
and become a favourer of the contrary? And whether our late Court did not show
more growth and increase of Rogues, Bauds and Whores, than all the time of our
Government by a Commonwealth.

4 Whether a Confederacy has not been made abroad with our secret enemies at
home, that so a single person might the better suppress those that see the
wickedness of his designs.

5 Whether the single person now pretending to Government, though the son of a
subtle man, be a wise man? fit to dispose of Commonwealth treasure.

6 Whether the good people of this Nation be not very sensible of the
expensiveness extroardinary of a single person more than of a Commonwealth?
and whether they do not find a want of that vast treasure expended upon
Baubles, Toys, and triffling gugaes? such as we of late have had two much
cause to speak of. And whether the cause of the peoples poverty, has not been
by means of purchasing lands to the Family of the late Protector, as well as
High- Spaniola business?

7 Whether the late person set up, did not judge himself above law? and whether
he did not Tyranize over men's persons, restraining both them and their liberty?
and whether the mercy he has pretended to in the execution thereof has not been
very cruelty?

8 Whether the late single person to uphold his, and his Courtiers
voluptuousness, has not been ready to uphold what monopolies he found on foot,
and likewise to devise new ways to the same purpose. and whether the Citizen
has not had experience of Court payment, and the Country man (though sad) of
the spoiling of his fences, destroying his crop, by them that belong to the
Court, and that, they please to call their game? And if these be the beginnings
what will the end be; and therefore for a closure I must say; what shall we say
or do mare then the King Protector has said and done.

Now to conclude, I humbly present to consideration, whether upon a diligent
serious weighing of the present action and past managment of State affairs, of
some being Lawyers, etc. (raised from a low estate to sit in Council) and
become great favorites at Court, it may not be found and clearly seen, that
they have a design for to bring in Charles Stuart? For if first they bring in
a single person and grant that, the next dispute will be, whether the one
family or the other has most right: and who have most interest Charles or
Richard, I think asks no long time to answer. Farther I would add, whether it
be not more likely to attain to the practice of that golden rule, do as you
would be done too, under the Government of a Common Wealth, in which lawmakers
are liable to be judged by the law made, rather than under a Monarchical
Government; where or in which one if settled is above law and accountable to
none? who though never so wicked and unjust cannot be removed but by an
extraordinary providence, as was the case of the late King and Protector.

Now whereas it is indeavored by some Court parasites to insinuate into the
people, that that which the Common Wealth party aims at, is an involving of
the Nations in blood and confusion; (I would meekly tender. Whether their
deportments and behavior under the almost insupportable burden of the Tyrany
of late times, (in which their rights and liberties have lain bleeding) has
given any just cause of such suspicion? Or rather, whether their patience has
not manifested, their hope has been, and still is in God, from whom, by the
means of a lawful free Parliament they only expect deliverance;) be not a
vindication sufficient only not from what is now suggested against them, Which
Letter Whaley foolishly showed the King.
but also, from that old brand that the late Protector in a letter to the late
King, while at Hampton Court gave them (viz.) Levellers, and that their work
would be to kill the King and levy all men's estates, by which m^^nes he
effected his end (viz) an incensing of the people and the other part of the
Army against them, which when he had done, he easily carried on his wicked
designs, which since has come to public view, for a diliverance from which
are the hearty prayers of all true Englishmen.

FINIS.

