A BRIEF RELATION Of the Proceedings of the High COURT of JUSTICE, Against Sir
Henry Slingsby And Doctor John Hewet, Who for Treason against His Highness the
Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth, in Plotting and Contriving a new and
Bloody War, by bringing in Charles Stuart into this Nation, were both beheaded
on Tower Hill, on Tuesday the 8th of this Instant June.

Also their last Speech and Confession at the said place of Execution.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion in Pye-Corner, 1658.

The Trial, Sentence, and Condemnation of Dr. John Hewet, and Sir Henry
Slingsby, who for high Treason was condemned, by the high Court of Justice, etc.
AS the mercies of God to this Nation in preserving us, have been many and
wonderful; so the mischief and malice of men in plotting and contriving our
destruction have been eminent and notorious; so that we may say with the
Psalmist, If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men plotted and
contrived our ruin, we had been destroyed, but blessed be God in the very pit
which our enemy diged for us, they themselves have always been taken: as Job
says out of six troubles, yea, out of seven has God delivered us he has
preserved us from the sword, from destruction by fire witness the late
intended desperate Design discovered, against this City I need not speak of
the Invasion in 88. Nor of that hellish Design of the Gunpowder Treason:
though these ought never to be forgotten, our own eyes will produce Examples
enough. And, O that this might be the last. To pass by many which might be
mentioned, I shall only mention that of Syndercomb, execution of a traitor
still fresh in memory, which was nothing in comparison to this, to wit, the
destruction of His Highness the Lord Protector, the good People of these
Nations, and the bringing in of Charles Stuart, and certainly thereby to
imbroil us in Blood and ruin. The chief actors in this last Design were Sir
Henry Slingsby, and John Hewet Doctor of Divinity; persons to be pitied for
their folly, in ruining themselves: a Doctor of Divinity, and a mover of
Sedition, Treason, and Rebellion; certainly these men were besides themselves,
and the Doctor besides his Text, may be seen in this following Relation.

Sir Henry Slingsby being first brought to Trial, was impeached of high
Treason, for endeavoring to raise a new War, by bringing in Charles Stuart
into Hull; he at first pleaded, Not guilty, and also excused the matter,
pretending it was only in jest: but it is not good jeasting with Edge-tooles.
After this Doctor Hewet was araigned for high Treason, in these particulars:
First, In raising Forces, and traitorously levying War against his Highness, to
subvert and destroy the Government. Secondly, In promoting Charles Stuart to be
King of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and keeping correspondency with the
said Charles Stuart; and by giving out Commissions from the said Charles
Stuart, for the raising of Forces, for to maintain a new War.

The Indictment of high Treason being read, he not only refused to plead, but
began to question the authority of the Court, and to give out very seditious
speeches to the people, against both the Government, and the Governors of the
Nation; endeavoring to take off the Peoples Affection from the present
Government.

The Court after much patience and gentleness toward the Doctor, whose
unhandsome carriage might have provoked them to advantages against him, were
notwithstanding all enforced to proceed against him to judgment.

Next after him was arraigned one Mr. John Mordant, brother to the Earl of
Peterborough, who after examination of Witnesses, and other circumstances, was
found Not guilty, and thereupon he was quitted by the Court.

The next day the prisoners, viz. Sir Henry Slingsby, Doctor John Hewet, and
Mr. John Mordant, were all three brought to the Bar, where the Judgment of the
Court passed against them, as follows: Sentence being to be given by the Lord
President, his Lordship was pleased in the first place, to express himself
very piously and seriously to the three Prisoners at the Bar, setting forth the
heinousness of the said Treason, exhorting them to repentance for the same,
showing them the sad effects thereof both to themselves and others. Which being
done, the final Sentence and Judgment of the Court was read by the Clerk, as
follows:

That upon consideration of the Treasons by them the said Henry Slingsby,
Knight, and John Hewet Doctor of Divinity, the Court being satisfied in
Judgment and Conscience, that they the said Sir Henry Slingsby, and Doctor
John Hewet, were both guilty of high Treason; for which aforesaid Treason, we
do adjudge you the said Sir Henry Slingsby and John Hewet, as false Traitors to
His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth: to be conveyed back to
the Tower, and from thence to be drawn through the City of London to the
Gallows of Tyburn, and there to be hanged, and being alive, to be cut down, and
their Bowels taken out and burnt; and their Heads cut off, and their Body
divided into quarters, and after disposed of according to His Highness the
Lords Protectors pleasure.

After this, several godly and reverend Ministers, viz. Doctor Reynolds, Mr.
Joseph Caryd, Mr. Edmund Callamy, and Mr. Marton, were ordered by the
Commissioners, to repair forthwith to the said Sir Henry Slingsby, and Doctor
Hewet, to fit and prepare them for death.

Saturday the fifth of this instant June was the Day appointed for the
Execution or Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewet, according to the foresaid
Sentence, and accordingly Warrants were issued forth for the Execution of the
said Sentence; but His Highness the Lord Protector, upon address made to His
Highness, was graciously pleased to grant a Reprieve for the said Sir Henry
Slingsby and Doctor Hewet, until Tuesday the Eighth day of this instant June;
and to revoke the said Sentence pronounced against them, doing them this
honor, as to Order, That they the said Sir Henry Slingsby, and John Hewet,
should be put to death, by having their Heads severed from their Bodies on
Tower Hill, and all other Circumstances in the said Sentence to be remitted.

And according to this Order of His Highness the said Sir Henry Slingsby, and
John Hewet Doctor of Divinity were both brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill,
on Tuesday the Eigth day of this Instant June. The Scaffold being prepared
about ten of the clock, the Lieutenant of the Tower of London delivered into
the hands of the Sheriffs of London the prisoner Sir Henry Slingsby, who
immediately conveyed him unto the Scaffold; there being several Companies both
of Horse and Foot, besides the Officers belonging to the said Sheriffs,
attending to that purpose, where in the presence of many thousands of people,
who were there to behold this woeful Tragedy, they ascended the Scaffold. Sir
Henry Slingsby being mounted the Scaffold, immediately began to take leave of
his Friends there present, and to prepare himself for the stroke of death: he
spoke but little, being not above half an hour upon the Scaffold: several
eminent Ministers being there present, they all went to Prayers; which being
done, he freely forgave the Executioner: Then laying down his Head upon the
Block, commending his Soul to God; gave the sign to the Executioner by
spreading forth his Hands, who at one blow severed his Head from his Body.
Which being done, his Corpse was presently conveyed away in a Coffin prepared
for that purpose.

After this, the Sheriff descending from the Scaffold, went down to the Tower,
where the Lord Lieutenant of the Tower delivered into their custody the other
Prisoner Dr. John Hewet; who being attended by several learned Divines, to wit.
Dr Wild, Dr. Reeves, and several others: they likewise also conveyed toward
the Scaffold, where being come, they presently ascended. The Dr. being upon the
Scaffold kneeled down to prayers several times, and for the space of some two
hours continued speaking, first to the Sheriff, after to the people there
assembled, carried himself with much courage and resolution, exhorting all men
there present to prepare themselves for death. Having ended his Speech, (the
Particulars whereof are too large to be inserted here) only these he insisted
on, to clear himself, That he had no hand in the late Plot of Firing the City.
He denied that the Marquess of Ormond lay at his House: or that he was at
Bruges with Charles Stuart. He excused his ignorance in the Law, for not
pleading to his Charge. He prayed particularly for Charles Stuart, and that
Family. Which done, he again kneeled down to prayer, recommending himself to
God, he rose up again, and put on his cap, the Executioner put up his hair, who
he freely forgave: then laying down his head upon the Block, he prepared
himself for the dismal Stroke, and the sign being given, as before, by
stretching forth his hands, the Executioner at one blow severed his head from
his body: which being done, his Corpse was likewise put into a Coffin, being at
the Scaffold very ready for that purpose, and so was conveyed away by his
friends, by whom great preparation is made for his Funeral, at Gregory's near
Paul's.

Sic transit Gloria mundi.
FINIS.

