A BRIEF. METHOD OF HEARING MASS. WITH Profitable Advantage to such as shall
make constant Use and Practice of it. TO WHICH Is added Prayers for the King,
etc. in English and Latin.

LONDON, Printed for M. T. 1686.

A Prayer before Mass.
O Most clement Father of mercy: who have bestowed not only once thy dearly
beloved Son to dye upon the Cross for Man's Redemption, but would that this
Oblation so infinitely acceptable unto thee, should daily be renewed in thy
Church, to increase in us the fruit thereof: Grant us, we beseech thee, so
attentively, and reverently to be present at this so adorable a mystery of thy
Piety, that we may be able to obtain the participation thereof. Through Christ
Jesus our Lord and only Redeemer, Amen.

The first Part to the Offertory.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

PSALM.
P. I Will enter unto the Altar of God.


C. Unto God who rejoices my youthful Age


P. Judge me, O God, and discern my Cause from an unholy Nation: From an unjust
and guileful man deliver me.


C. For thou art God my strength, why have thou cast me off, and why do I walk
sad whilst the Enemy afflicts me?


P. Send out thy light, and thy truth, they have led me out and brought me to
thy holy Mountain, and to thy Tabernacles.


C. And I will go unto the Altar of God, unto God, who rejoices my youthful Age.


P. I will confess unto thee, O God, my God in a harp: why art thou sad my
Soul, and why do thou trouble me?


C. Hope in God for I will yet confess unto him, the health of Countenance and
my God.


P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.


C. As it was in the beginning, and now, and ever, and world without end, Amen.


P. I will go unto the Altar of God.


C. Unto God who rejoices my youthful age.


P. Our help is in the name of God.


C. Who made Heaven and Earth.


At the Confiteor.
O My sweet Savior, seeing it was Sin which made thee take our Flesh upon
thee, and suffer a more painful and shameful death, I here humbly crave thee
pardon for having bin cause of thy bitter Passion by my sinful Life past.

I confess my fault unto thee, O Lord, from the bottom of my heart and being
extremely sorry for it, purely for the dishonor done unto thee thereby, make
here at the foot of thy sacred Altar a firm resolution to dye rather rhen
offend thee mortally again. No, no dear Savior, I will strike no more nails
into thy Hands by the Sins of my uncivil uncharitable and pricking words, I
will pierce no more thy sacred side and heart with the wickedness of my
thoughts, heart and mind.

C. Almighty God have mercy on thee, and pardoning thy Sins, bring thee to
everlasting Life.


P. Amen.


C. I confess unto almig'ty God, to the blessed Virgin Mary, to the B.
Archangel, S. Michael, to the B.S. John Baptist, to the holy Apostles S. Peter,
and S. Paul, to all the Saints, and to you Father, for that I have sinned
exceedingly, in thought, word and deed, through my fault, through my fault,
through my most grievous fault. Therefore I beseech the blessed Virgin Mary,
the blessed Archangel S. Michael, the blessed S. John Bapt. the holy Apostles
S. Peter, and S. Paul, all the Saints, and you Father to pray for me to our
Lord God.


P. Allmighty God have mercy on you, and pardoning your sins, bring you to
everlasting life.


C. Amen.


P. The almighty and merciful Lord grant you Pardon, absolution, and remission
of your sins.


C. Amen.


P. O God thou being reconciled unto us wilt give us life.


C. And thy people will rejoice in thee.


P. Show forth unto us O Lord thy mercy.


C. And give unto us thy salvation.


P. O Lord hear my prayer.


C. And let my cry come unto thee.


P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy Spirit.


Introite.
GIve me grace, O Lord, to come unto this holy Sacrifice with the same fervor
and devotion that the good Sheapheards had when they went to Bethlehem with
diligence, to adore thee in the Manger, or with the same Fervor that the three
Kings had who came out of the East to adore thee in the Stable. It is most
fitting, O Lord, that all Creatures should adore thee daily, and if the good
Shepherds went to adore thee at midnight, I may well do it in the morning, if
the three Kings went thirteen days journey only to adore thee in the Stable, I
may well go every day unto the Church to adore thee upon the Altar, and there
offer unto thee (as I now do) my heart, my mouth, my hands, my memory,
understanding and will, my soul, body and all my affections. And seeing, O
Lord, thou wast born to redeem us from Sin, and to have mercy on us, give me
leave sweet Savior to challenge a part of thy divine Mercy, and to say unto
thee with a pious Confidence.

Kyrie Eleison.
P. Lord have mercy upon us.


C. Lord have mercy upon us.


P. Lord have mercy upon us.


C. Christ have mercy upon us.


P. Christ have mercy upon us.


C. Christ have mercy upon us.


P. Lord have mercy upon us.


C. Lord have mercy upon us.


P. Lord have mercy upon us.


Gloria in Excelsis
GLory be to God on high, and on Earth, Peace to men of good Will. We praise
thee, we bless thee, we adore thee, we give thee thanks for thy great Glory, O
Lord God heavenly King, God the Father Almighty. O God the only begotten Son
Jesu Christ, O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father that take away the
sins of the People, receive our Prayer. Thou that sit at the right hand of
God the Father, have mercy upon us. For thou only art holy, thou only art the
Lord, thou only, O Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, art most high in the
Glory of God the Father, Amen.

Dominus vobiscum.
P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy spirit.


P. Let us pray.


Prayers or Presentation in the Temple.
O Lord we humbly beseech thy divine Majesty, to hear these prayers of the
Priest for us, and by the merits of thy most dear Son, to power down upon us
those graces and blessings, which thou know to be most necessary for our
Souls health, Grant us grace, O Lord, to love thee above all things, to do all
our actions purely for thy honor and glory; to hate the Pleasures of this
World, and its Vanities: to live chaste and virtuous Lives: to give good
Examples to others; to pardon and love our Enemies, and so to pass through this
temporal Life, that we loose not eternal Life. Through our Lord Jesus Christ,
thy Son, who lives and reigns with the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without
end.

C. Amen.


Epistle.
REad the Epistle in English (with the leave of thy Ghostly Father) out of the
Rheims Testament. But read it with great reverence, as a letter brought unto
thee from S. Peter, or S. Paul in Heaven, by the hands of some Angel: and choose
out the most pious Sentences of it to ruminate upon all that day.

In the end say.

C. God be thanked.


Gradual.
O Lord how sweet are these words of this Epistle to my Ears, above all Music
in the World! Let thy Voice and the Words of thy Apostles always sound in my
ears.

P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy Spirit.


P. The beginning of the Gospel according to S. Matthew, or (S. Mark, Luke, or
John.)


C. Glory be to thee, O Lord.


Gospel.
REad the Gospel in the Rheims Testament, with leave, stand up, to show that
thou will stand steadfastly in the Faith of the Gospel and Catholic Church.
Ponder well the words of the Gospel, seeing they either are our Saviors one
words, or else speak of some rare Action of our Savior, worthy of thy
attention, and imitation. In the end say.

C. Praise be to thee, O Lord.


Creed.
P. I believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things visible, and invisible: and in our Lord Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, born of his Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of
Light, true God, begotten, not made, consubstantial to the Father, by whom all
things were made, who for us Men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven,
and was incarnated by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man: was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was buried, and the
third day he arose again according to the Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven,
and sittes on the right hand of the Father. And he shall me again with glory to
judge both the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And
in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, and life giver, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is adored, and glorified, who
spoke by the Prophets. And one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. I confess
one Baptism for the remission of sins. And I expect the Resurrection of the
dead, and life of the World to come, Amen.


P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy Spirit.


The second Part from the Offertory to the Consecration.
Offertory.
O Lord, I humbly and firmly believe all these articles of our holy Faith, and
not only these, but all the other also, which Holy Church propose; to us to be
believed; and am prepared in mind, and most willing to endure loss of lands,
fortunes, and of life it self, rather than deny the least point of the
Catholic Faith.

O heavenly Father, I offer unto thee, together with the Priest, the immaculate
Sacrifice for my sins, and the sins of the whole World. Accept, I beseech thee,
of this my offering, and by the virtue of this holy Sacrifice; apply unto us, O
Lord the merits and value of the great Sacrifice of the Cross, which thy dear
Son offered unto thee for us; that being freed from Sin, we may serve thee more
worthily.

Mingle, O my sweet Savior, (as thou had Water and Blood mingled together in
thy sacred side) water with my wine: that is, temper, O Lord, my prosperity,
and adversity so together, that I neither be puffed up with prosperity, nor
oppressed with adversity.

I offer unto thee, O Lord, this holy offering of the Chalice; and together
with it, I offer unto thy divine honor and glory, my life, my thoughts, and
deeds: desiring that they may all be spent this day, and all the days of my
life, in thy holy service, the advancement of thy name, and the edifying of
others.

Grant me grace, O Lord, I beseech thee, to wash my hands amongst Innocent men;
that is, to seek out and delight in innocent, and civil Company, to converse
with virtuous people; to detest and wash my hands of those who offend thee in
uncil Actions, unclean Discourse, uncharitable Detractions. I am too much a
Christian to delight in the company of these WHO DENY THEE BY THEIR DEEDS. I
will be as far from them, as they are far from virtue. Thou washedst me once, O
Lord, in Baptism from original Sin, WASH ME YET MORE AND MORE, even from
actual Sin it self too, that being purged from all Sin, I may render unto thee
a more pure and perfect service.

Orate Fratres.
P. Pray Brethren.


C. Our Lord, receive this Sacrifice from thy hands, to the praise and glory of
his Name, to our profit also, and to the profit of his Catholic Church.


P. Amen.


Be merciful, I beseech thee. O Lord, unto us poor sinners. Judge us not
according to thy Justice, but according to thy mercy. I confess we have failed
shamefully, yet consider thy Son is our Advocate, we beg confidently. Grant
then, O Lord, that we may live virtuously in this World, and be saved in the
next. Have mercy also, I beseech thee, upon our Enemies; turn from them all
harm and losses, and give us grace to love them sincerely, visit them kindly,
speak of them charitably; that so we may become Children of thee, our heavenly
Father; and having imitated thee here below, reign with thee in heaven.

P. World without end.


C. Amen.


P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy spirit.


P. Lift up thy heart.


C. We have to God.


P. Let us give thanks to our Lord God.


C. It Is meet and sitting.


I confess, O Lord, it is fitting, and meet that we should always, and in all
places give thee thanks, and praise thy name, seeing we were created only to
succeed in the places of the fallen Angels, and to inherit their Office, which
was to praise thee. I beseech thee then, O Lord, give us grace to imitate the
holy Angels in purity of life, and promptness in executing thy holy will. Grant
us, dear Father, such circumspection in our words, that we may never profane
with idle, and lewd speeches, our mouths, which were created to sing with the
holy Angels in heaven that sacred and eternal Hymn, Holy, Holy, Holy.

Almighty, and merciful Lord, I beseech thee, receive his Holy Sacrifice, which
I offer here together with the Priest, for the Necessities of the Holy
Catholic Church, which, I beseech thee so to prosper and direct in this age of
Errors, that she may reduce all misbelievers into the way of Verity, and all
Believers into the way of Piety, and Salvation. I offer it also, O Lord, for
the good of our Holy Father P. N. and our most reverend Bishop N. and all other
Superiors, and Pastors, and seeing thy dear Son assured us, that whosoever
hears them, hears him, and whosoever contemns them, contemns him. I beseech
thee, O Lord, take from us all conrempt of these thy Holy substitutes; and
grant us grace so to follow their directions here below, that we may enjoy in
the next World the Society of our dear Savior, the Bishop of our Souls.

MEMENTO. I.
BE mindful, I beseech thee, O Lord, of thy servants. and of all faithful
believers, Grant all Catholics grace to abstain from sinful, and scandalous
courses. As their Religion is holy, so grant that their lives may be holy too.
Give them grace often to remember for what end they are here in this World:
that it is only to work their Salvation; not to live at ease, follow Pleasures,
Pastimes, Company, or to go bravely apparelled. Put them often in mind, of what
Head they are Members; how unseemly a thing it is to have a good Lord, and yet
to be bad Servants, to believe in a crucified God, and yet to murmur at
Crosses; to be baptized as Christians, and yet to live as Heathens; to have
promised in Baptism to forsake the vain Pomp and Glory of the World, and yet
to thirst after nothing but the Vanities of the World: Grant them often to
descend into themselves by pious Thoughts, and reflect daily upon these words
of the holy Scripture, that, the broad way leads to Hell, that no man can
serve two Masters, God and the World: that, the bad tree, cannot bring forth
good fruit. Send them, O Lord, true and zealous Pastors, who may exhort them,
Not to trust in the uncertainty of riches: not to conform themselves to this
wicked World: not to be sollicitous what Clothes they wear; but rather, To do
the true fruits of Penance: to enter into the narrow Gate: to affect those
things which are of Edification: to be called in modest Apparel: to abstain from
all appearance of Evil, and to keep themselves unspotted from this World.

The hands over the Chalice.
GIve me leave, O merciful Savior, in the acknowledgment of the greatest of
thy favors, to exercise here the greatest of all Christian Virtues, to wit,
FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY.

The third part from the Consecration to the Consummation.
Elevation.
I Believe then firmly, O my sweet Savior, that after the Words of
Consecration thou art really here present upon the Altar, and in the hands of
the priest, and because thou, who art almighty and truth it self, have said
THIS IS MY BODY, THIS IS MY BLOOD. I humbly confess it to be they true Body,
and Blood, and as humbly I adore it.

And seeing, dear JESUS, thou offeredst thy self to thy Father for me, in
recompense of this thy great Favor, I offer unto thee my Body, and Blood, and
my very soul it self, as a Sacrifice to thy divine Honout; and renew here my
resolutions of living faithful to thy divine Service, and of dying rather then
I will commit a mortal sin willingly.

I hope sweet Savior. thou will not deny me thy assistance, and grace to
perform these Resolutions. Thou who have given for me here thy BODY, and BLOOD,
wilt not refuse me the rest, to wit, pardon of my sins, and grace to serve thee.

And thou, O Father, of my sweet Savior, I beseech thee remember the bitter
sufferings of thy beloved Son. Look down upon his Blood offered here unto thee,
and remember, O Lord, the blood offered upon the Cross, by thee when thou wast
reconciled unto us. Thou promisedst anciently, O Lord, that looking upon the
Rainbow, thou would remember the Covenant made betwixt thee and mankind, and
never drown the World again by Water: and can thou look down upon the Blood
of thy dear Son, offered here unto thee in Sacrifice, and not remember the
great Covenant, and League which thou made with us in the death of thy dear
Son.

I beg of thee then, O Lord, by the Merits of thy Sons death, by his holy name
JESUS (and all obtaining name with thee) that thou would vouchsafe to grant
us thy holy Grace, and the guist of perseverance to persevere finally in it.

Memento. II.
GRant also, O Lord, that the infinite Merits of thy Son's Passion, may be
extended unto the Church suffrant in Purgatory: and that one drop of that
precious Blood may free from the pains of Purgatory, the Souls of N.N. that
they may pass speedily from the Church suffrant, unto the Church triumphant,
and there praise thee for ever.

And seeing, O Lord, thou can not look upon this holy Sacrifice without
remembering thy old Mercies: I humbly beg of thee, that thou would by this
propitiatory Sacrifice have mercy on us poor sinners, of whom I am the
chiefest, and grant us grace, to be heartily sorrowful for our sins past,
purely for thy Love sake; and to make a firm resolution to dye rather than
commit them again: as also to confess them to our Ghostly Father at the first
Opportunity.

Short Elevation.
BUT because, O Lord, no actions are meritorious in thy sight which are not
done to thy honor, and glory. I here dedicate to thy Honor and Glory all my
Actions, Words, and Thoughts, desiring to serve thee purely, that at last I may
live with thee.

P. World without end.


C. Amen.


P. Let us Pray.


Being admonished by wholesome precepts, and taught by divine Institution, we
dare confidently say:

Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: give us this day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive others their Trespasses against
us. And lead us not into Temptation.

C. But deliver us from evil.


P. Amen.


'Thou have done all things well, O Lord, All things which thou have made are
very good. Sin only, which is nothing, and which thou know not, is none of
thy Invention, but the Devils: and therefore is Evil, and the only true Evil.
Free us but, O Lord, from this Evil, and no other Evil can hurt us. This is the
mother-evil, the evil of evils, the cause of Death, of Sickness, of Misery, of
Poverty. No adversity can dominere over us, if no iniquity dominere in us.
Thou, O Lord, who art the Author of life, can only free us from this Author
of death. Free us then, I beseech thee, O Lord, from the evil of Sin, that we
may never dye eternally, but live, and praise thee.

P. World without end. C. Amen.


P. The peace of our Lord be always with you.


C. And with thy spirit.


Agnus Dei.
P. Lamb of God who take away the Sins of the World: have mercy upon us.

Lamb of God who take away the Sins of the World, hear us.

Lamb of God who take away the Sins of the World, Grant us peace.


Most Merciful and sweet Savior, seeing thou art the Mediator betwixt God and
Man: the prince of Peace: who pacifyes all things in Heaven, and Earth: pacify,
I beseech thee, thy Father, angry against us Sinners. Make also, I beseech
thee, our peace with our Adversary upon Earth. Our Adversary, O Lord, is thy
Law, it resists our Appetytes, gainsays our Desires, crosses our Wills. When we
desire, and covet unlawful things, thy Law opposes us, saying: Thou shall not
covet thy Neighbors Goods: thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, etc. And
becomes our Adversary. But seeing, O Lord, it is for our good that thy Law
opposes us; and that thy Law is holy and immaculate. Inspire, I beseech thee
into our rebellious Wills, a pompt Obedience unto thy sacred Commandments, and
grant us grace; to agree with this our Adversary quickly whiles we are in the
way with him; least our Adversary deliver us to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver us to the Officer, and we be cast into Prison. In fine, grant Peace, I
beseech thee, amongst Christian Princes, and faithful Believers; that being in
perfect Charity with one another, we may the more worthily come unto the sacred
Communion.

Domine non sum dignus.
P. O Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my Roof, but speak
the word only, and my Soul shall be cured.

O Lord, I am not worthy, etc.

O Lord, I am not worthy, etc.


The fourth part from the Communion to the end.
Consummation.
THough I am not worthy, O my sweet Savior, to receive thee really, as the
Priest here does: yet I have a longing desire to receive thee into my Soul, by
Faith, Love, and Devotion. But before I do it, behold me here, O Lord,
extremely sorrowful. for all my Sins past, purely for thy loves sake, with a
firm resolution to correct them, and confess them. Come, then, come my sweet
Savior into my Soul, by thy holy Presence, grace, and Divinity; and dwell
there for ever. But as thou passest, O Lord, into my Soul through my Body, I
beseech thee, sanctify also my whole Body, and make it a fit Temple for the
Holy Ghost. Banish from it, O Lord, all unlawful Motions, and Desires: purge it
from all rust, and dust of worldly Vanities: cleanse it from all corruption of
Vices: And as at thy entering into Egypt in thy tender Infancy, when thou
fleddest the Persecution of Herod, all the Statues there of false Gods fell to
the Ground, and were broken. so grant, I beseech thee, O Lord, that at thy
entering into my Body, and Soul, all my Vices and Imperfections may vanish, and
give place to thee. I confess, my Body is but too homely a house to lodge so
great a PersOn in; but thou who refusest not anciently to lodge in a Srable,
wilt not refuse to enter into my house. I am not ignorant how great a sinner I
have bin, yet I remember also thou refuest not to enter into the house of the
Princ of Publicans, and a prime sinner Zacheus. Enter then, O Lord, into my
House as into the House of another Zacheus; upon Condition that thou do but
give a blessing unto my soul, as thou did unto the House of Zacheus; and say
unto me as thou saidest to him: This day Salvation is wrought unto this House.

What shall I give to thee, O Lord, for all the favors which thou have done
unto me? Behold, sweet Savior, seeing thou have done me the favor to enter
into my House, I here offer unto thee the doors and keys thereof, to wit, my
five Senses, I consecrate therefore unto thee henceforth my eyes, and purpose
to keep them chaste and innocent. I will never any more let them gaze curiously,
and freely upon dangerous and tempting Objects, nor let them wander
distractedly in Churches, and in time of Prayer. Henceforth also I consecrate
unto thee my tongue, and resolve never to employ it in swearing, cursing,
backbiting, unclean, and lewd jests, or hidden knavish speeches. And seeing it
is my tongue by which I receive, and convey into my stomach the blessed
Sacrament of the Altar in the Holy Communion, that tongue that had been so
happily employed, and so honored by God, shall never be employed again in Sin,
and be dipped in my Neighbors Blood by detraction. In fine, O Lord, I
consecrate my whole Body unto thee, as a sacred place dedicated to thy Divine
Majesty, and which I purpose firmly never to defile with any sin whatsoever.

P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy Spirit.


P. Let us pray.


I beseech thee, gracious Lord, to grant me this request, that what here I have
promised by words, I may always perform by my deeds. Through our Lord JESUS
CHRIST thy Son, who lives, and reigns, with thee in the bnity of the Holy Ghost.

P. World without end.


C. Amen.


P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy Spirit.


P. Go, the Mass is said.


C. Thanks be to God.


P. Almingty God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless and keep you.


C. Amen.


P. Our Lord be with you.


C. And with thy spirit.


P. The beginning of the holy Ghospel according to St. John.


C. Glory be to God.


The Ghospel of St. John.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the
word. This was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was made nothing. That which was made in him was life, and the life
was the light of men, and the light shines in darkness, and the darkness did
not comprehend it. There was a man, sent from God, whose name was John. This
man came for testimony, to give testimony of the light, that all might believe
through him. He was not the light, but to give testimony of the light. It was
the true light which lightness every man that comes into this world. He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came
into his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, he
gave them power to be made the Sons of God, to those that believe in his name.
Who not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of
God are born. AND THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH, and dwelt in us, (and we saw the
Glory of him, glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father) full of
grace and Verity.

C. Thanks be to God.


A Prayer to be said after Mass.
I Render to thee, O sacred Trinity, most humble thanks, for vouchsafeing me
the gracious Favor to assist at this divine Sacrifice of the Mass: whereof so
many are deprived, who would have made much better use of it. I humbly crave
Pardon, most loving and merciful God, for all the distractions, irreverences,
and dissipasions of my wandering Spirit, committed in the time thereof: And for
my dear Saviors sake, most humbly beseech thee, that those infinite Merits of
his bitter Passion, and most precious Blood shed for my redemption, and
sacrificed to thee in remission of the sins of the World, may render me worthy
to be made partaker of those divine and adorable Holy Mysteries, here so truly
represented in this most Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and that with final
repentance I may dye in thy grace, Amen.

An humble Adoration to our Blessed Lord Jesus in the Holy Sacrament of his
precious Body.
O My most Glorious Lord God, and Savior CHRIST JESUS, true god, and true Man;
most Holy, worthy, pure, and PRECIOVS SACRIFICE of the most high God; living
Bread, and source of Eternal Life; with all my Heart, Soul, Forces, and
Affections, I humbly worship, and adore thy SOVEREIGN MAJESTY, in this Divine
SACRAMENT, with a most earnest desire, an intention, to repair, if I could
possibly, all the Irreverences, Prophanations, Dishonours, and Impieties, that
have been committed against THEE, in this dreadful MYSTERY, most humbly
prostrating my self before thy SACRED MAJESTY, here present, to adore thee, in
supply, for all those that never have; nor peradventure never shall be so
happy, as to honor, worship, and adore THEE; such as are all Heretics,
Atheists, Blasphemers, Magitians, Jews, Turks. Idolaters, and all Infidels,
wishing with all my heart, that I alone could as much honor, praise, glorify,
and adore THEE, as they altogether would have done, if they had known and
faithfully served THEE for all Eternity; and furthermore, from the bottom of my
HEART, and with the most fervent affections of my SOUL, I desire to render thy
DIVINE MAJESTY as many adorations, praises, and benedictions, as all the Devils
and Damned Souls will utter Blasphemies for ever against THEE; and to sanctify
this Adoration, and make it more pleasing to thy SACRED MAJESTY; I humbly unite
it to tall those Adorations, fervent Affections, and Praises of the TRIUMPHANT,
and MILITANT CHURCH, and all that the glorious VIRGIN MOTHER, and all thy Holy
ANGELS, and SAINTS have done, do and ever shall render unto THEE, our most
gracious, glorious, dear, sweet, and sovereign Lord, Eternally, Amen.

A devout Salutation to our Blessed Savior in the Holy Sacrament.
ALL hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST, eternal Word and Wisdom of the
FATHER, Son of the BLESSED VIRGIN, Lamb of GOD, Savior of the World, Sacred
Host, the Word made flesh, fountain of Piety.

All hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST, praise of Angels, glory of Saints,
Vision of Peace, Entire Deity, true Man, Flower, and Fruit of the BLESSED
VIRGIN MOTHER

All hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST, splendour of thy Father, Prince of
Peace, Gate of Heaven, living Bread, Child of the Virgin, Vessel of the Deity.

All hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST; light of Heaven, price of the World,
our true Joy, Bread of Angels, Jubily of Hearts, King, and Spouse of Virginity.

All hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST; sweet Way, supreme Verity, our eternal
Reward, true Charity, Fountain of Love, Peace, Sweetness, and Life Everlasting.

All hayle most sweet, most sacred, and precious Body of CHRIST JESUS which
laid upon the Altar of the Cross for the Worlds Salvation, I believe with my
Heart, and confess with my Mouth, to be a true Host, a holy, pure, and
immaculate Host, and most pleasing to God; the Bread of Eternal Life, and
Chalice of perpetual Salvation. I adore thee in Spirit, and truth, O PIOUS
JESV, O SWEET JESV, O good and gracious LORD JESUS, be merciful to me I beseech
THEE, and graciously grant, O my God, that as I see THEE here in the form of
Bread; so I may happpily see THEE in Majesty and Glory securely, and joyfully,
for ever and ever, Amen.

A brief Prayer to obtain a happy Death.
O Most sweet Lord JESUS, by the Merits of thy bitter Death, and Passion, thy
sacred Wounds, and all the drops of thy most precious Blood, and by that bitter
pain, and anguish thou did endure, when thy holy Soul departed from thy
precious Body, be merciful to me at the hour of my death, and deliver me from
the Pains of Hell and Purgatory, and the power of the Devils, and admit me into
the Fruition of thy Eternal Glory, Amen.

PRAYERS For the KING, etc.
PSALM XIX.
OUR Lord hear thee in the day of Tribulation: the Name of the God of Jacob
protect thee.

Send he Aid to thee from the Holy Place: and from Sion defend he thee.

Be he mindful of all thy Sacrifice: and be thy Holocaust made fat.

Give he unto thee according to thy Heart: and confirm he all thy Counsel.

We shall rejoice in thy Salvation, and in the Name of our God we shall be
magnified.

Our Lord accomplish all thy Petitions: Now have I known that our Lord has
saved his Christ.

He shall hear him from his Holy Heaven: the Salvation of his Right Hand is in
Powers.

These in Chariots, and these in Horses: but we will invocate in the Name of
the Lord our God.

They are bound, and have fallen: but we have risen and are set upright.

Lord, save the KING, and hear us in the Day that we shall invocate thee.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Verse. Lord, save JAMES our KING.

Resp. And hear us in the day that we shall invocate thee.

Let us Pray.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, that thy Servant JAMES our KING, who through
thy Mercy, has undertaken the Government of the Kingdom; may likewise receive
the Increase of all Virtues, wherewith being adorned, he may both avoid the
Enormity of Sin, vanquish his Enemies, and by thy Grace attain Thee, who art
the Way, Truth, and Life, Through Christ our Lord, Amen.

A Prayer for the King, Queen, and Queen Dowager.
To be added to the last Collect at the End of Mass.
AND defend thy Servant, Innocent the Chief Bishop, JAMES our King, MARY our
Queen, and Queen Catherine, together with our selves, and all Christian People,
from all adversity always, and in all Places: Grant Peace and Welfare in our
Times; and preserve thy Church from all Wickedness. Through our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns God with Thee, in the Unity of the Holy
Ghost, for evermore, Amen.

PRECES PRO REGE.
PSALM. XIX.
EXaudiat te Dominus in die Tribulationis protegat te nomen Dei Jacob. *

Mittat tibi auxilium de sancto * and de Sion tueatur te.

Memor sit omnis sacrificii tui * and holocaustum tuum pingue fiat.

Tribuat tibi secundum cor tuum * and omne consilium tuum confirmet.

Laetabimur in salutari tuo * and in nomine Dei nostri Magnificabimur.

Impleat Dominus omnes petitiones tuas * nunc cognovi quoniam salvum fecit
Dominus Christum suum.

Exaudiet illum De Coelo sancto suo * in potentatibus salus Dextrae ejus.

Hi in curribus and hi in equis: nos autem in nomine Dei nostri invocabimus.

Ipsi obligati sunt and caeciderunt * nos autem surreximus and erecti sumus.

Domine salvum fac Regem and exaudi nos in Die qua invocaverimus te.

Gloria Patri and Filio and spiritui Sancto.

Sicut erat in principio and nunc and semper and in Secula Seculorum, Amen.

Domine salvum fac Regem nostrum Jacobum.

Et exandi nos in die qua invocaremus te.

Oremus.
QVaesumus omnipotens Deus ut Famulus tuus Rex noster Jacobus, qui tua
miseratione suscepit Regni Gubernacula Virtutum, etiam omnium percipiat
incrementa quibus decenter ornatus and vitiorum monstra Devitare hosts
superare, and ad te qui Via veritas and Vita es gratiosus Valeat pervenire per
Christum Dominum Nostrum, Amen.

FINIS.

