A Brief RELATION OF The siege at Newark, As it was delivered To the COUNCEL
of STATE At Derby-house, by Lieutenant Col. Bury, whom the Earl of Manchester
sent to Report.

Together with Articles of Agreement betwixt Prince Rupert and Sir John Meldrum;

Wherein the perfidious dealings of the Enemy i^ made manifest; who, contrary
to the Articles, took away their Colors, Swords and Pikes, and Plundered the
Officers.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole, March 26. 1644.

A Brief RELATION of the Siege at NEVVARK.
Whereas it has been Printed thut the Newarkers forced Sir John Meldrums
Regiment to retreat, and that the Lord Willowbie came with his Regiment to
their timely releofe, there was nothing done that could color that Relation.
WHen we first drew before Newarke, Colonel Kings Regiment marched to the
Countess of Excesters house, where a part of the Regiment had a sharp
conflict, and after they had gained that place, the enemies horse gave them a
hot and desperate charge, notwithstanding they remained Masters of the place:
after this Sergeant Major John Lilburne desired Sir John Meldrum to send him
with a partee into the Island, which Sir John waved, judging it a despereate
service, but at last the importunity of the Major, and the resolution of the
Soldiers prevailed: as soon as a small party of them were over the water, the
Enemy drew forth their horse into the Island: and we hasted over the greatest
part of Colonel Kings Regiment, and two Troops of Horses; the Enemy
perceiving our Forces to draw themselves between them and the Town, never
charged, but hasted over Muscom Bridge, we followed on, and beat the Enemy
from the Fort, which commanded that passage, and possessed our selves of it; in
view a considerable Force coming to their relief: then we entrenched our
selves in the spittle, and made our approaches; the Enemy sallied out and fell
into our Trenches, the point being deserted by Capt. Caudron, but Ca. Cambridge
(who had done bravely in managing of Muscom Bridge) enforced their sudden
retreat. When part of Sir Michael Hubbard Regiment were marching off the guard
toward their Quarters at Balderton, the Enemy sallied forth with nigh 100.
horse, finding them without light Matches fell upon them, took their Colors,
and carried them prisoners into Newarke; two of the Lord Willoughbies Troops,
assigned for that Guard, looked on, but never offered to engage.

After this, these Newark Horse sallied into the Island; the relator drew forth
his own, and another Company of that Regiment, and took with him the Lord
Willonghby his Regiment of Foot, and advanced into the Island; he commanded 20.
Musketeers out of his own companies, and desired a proportion of the Lord
Willoughbies to line the Hedges, so to prevent the enemies return over the
Bridge, although he earnestly importuned them, promising they should go no
further then himself, he could not obtain one man. When Sir John Meldrum had
Intelligence that the Horse which were driven from Newarke over Muscome Bridge,
and those which came to the releif, pillaged and plundered Leicestershire, he
sent away all the Horse and Dragoones which could be spared, under the Command
of Sir Edward Hartrop, who coming nigh the Enemies Quarters, sent in a
forlorn hope of above 100. who fell in among them before they had an Alarm;
and drove them forth, crying, Horse and away, we are all cut off: the forlorn
hope took diverse prisoners in the chase, one of which was a Major, who was
left behind at Melton Moberrie. The Captains of Horse seeing the Enemy in a
confusion, desired Sir John Hartrop to let them fall on; who answered them, his
Commission was not to fight, but upon apparent advantage, although they
conceived this to be so, and the Soldiers crying, March, march, on, on, they
could not get leave to engage; but upon Tuesday in the night returned toward
Newarke, valiant Capt. Buff, with his brave Dragoones, whom Sir John had
commanded to secure a pass, were left to the enemies mercy, or to shift for
themselves. In this Retreat the Lord Willoughbies Horses drew up, sounded a
charge, and Captain St. George, bid Captain Lilburn draw up his Horse and
fight, for the Lord Willoughby should not be affronted by Coll. King: but the
Capt. and other Gentlemen moderated that fury, and prevented the mischief.
What reason may be rendered that the Lord Gray his Horses left Sir John Hartrop
and returned to Leicester; the Relator knows not. On Wednesday noone Sir John
Meldrum with his Council of War, resolved to send forth these Horse and
Dragoones again, and would have conferred that Command upon Colonel
Rochester, who modestly desiring to be excused, it was confirmed upon Colonel
Thorney, but before they could march, came certain Intelligence that Prince
Rupert was joined with Sir Charles Lueas; which made that partee 8000. strong,
and that they were to quarter that night 8. miles from Newarke. Sir John
Meldrum was moved by Sir Michael Hubbard and others in the Council of War to
retreat to Lincoln, but he resolved to draw all his foot into the Countess
of Excesters house, and to send his horse over Muscom Bridge to bring in
Provision. (It was demanded where the L. Willoughby was; the relator answered;
he heard not of him after Wednesday, it seems about that time the Lord
Willoughbie rode to Gainsbrough.) The Enemy drew through Balderton in the
morning, our horse drew up upon Bekon hill, whence they might have discerned
and engaged upon advantage, but Sir John Meldrum ordered them not to fight till
they came within the reach of our Ordinance.

Then as soon as our horses quitted the hill, the Enemy advanced thither, our
horses standing in the valley nigh the Spittle facing the Enemy; as they were
ready to close, Sir John commands off the Derby-horse, to guard the 200
Pyoneers and 400 Musketeers, which Sir John then sent into the Island to make
a Fort-Royall. The Enemy having drawn up two bodies of horse against our two
bodies, Colonel Rocester led on the left division, wherein were the 21 Captain
Liburns, Captain Bethel and Captain Hunt, etc. who fiercely charged the right
wing of the Enemy, led by Prince Rupert, routed them, and drove them up the
hill to their reserve; but our right wing of horse ran away, and would have
pressed in upon our own foot, had they not stood upon their guard. This Relator
(after much entreaty, and many promises that they should not engage nor advance
beyond the command of our Muskets) prevailed with them, to rally and face the
Enemy, so that Colonel Rocester made a safe and orderly retreat, and according
to Sir John Meldrums order, drew all the horse, except 500. over the bridge,
into the Island. In this conflict, the Noble valiant Colonel Thorney was shot
in the belly, which i^ feared, will be his deaths wound; Captain Moody, and
Captain Lieutenant Lilburn, were taken prisoners, amongst others we took a
great commander of theirs, who being much wounded were sent into Newark, then
the Enemy drew down half their horse, and the greatest part of their foot to
force that Bridge, which was gallantly maintained by Colonel Kings company, and
two or 3. of Yorkshire companies, although hotly assaulted by the Welsh
Regiment, they were forced to retreat with much loss; all this time our Cannon
played upon their Horse, the Master Gunner with the great Piece did excellent
execution the enemies expectation of the Bridge being frustrate, they drew out
the Newark foot with a considerable strength of Horse, not giving Sir John time
to raise his fort Royal, possessed themselves of the Island, and entrenched
themselves there, to cut off our provision. The three companies of Colonel
Kings, and the three Nottingham companies in the night, (Sir John not knowing
thereof) quitted the Forte, and passed over Muscom Bridge, brake up the Bridge,
and so secured themselves, and our horses on that side, and taken Nottingham
Colors and nigh 20. Musketeers, as Col. Airs, upon his reputation reported:
the counsel of war resolved that we should retreat that night over Muscom
bridge, not imagining, that our guard there would have given us the slip, before
the Enemy came to charge them. But perceiving the Enemy passing over their
foot into the other side of the Island nigh Melthrop; and Norfolk Red-coats
mutining, Sir John sent to the prince for a parley, which being accepted, Sir
Michael Hubbard, and Sir John Paygrave Colonels, about nine of the in the
clock at night went to treat, and by seven in the morning brought the Articles
which the Enemy had granted, to have Sir John's anent, and at ten of the clock
returned with the Princes Commissioners, for the Prince to sign.

I. That we should leave all our Artillery, and Ammunition, and Fire-armes. II.
That all our foot Soldiers should march away with their Swords, Pikes and
Colors. III. That all our Horsemen and Dragoones should march away with their
Horses, Swords and Colors. IV. That all Officers and their Servants should
march away with their Horses, Swords, pistolls, moneys, bag and baggage. V.
That we should have convoy for our safe conduct, two miles beyond the Princes
out-most Quarters.
By twelve of the clock the Foot marching forth according to agreement, the
enemy contrary to the Articles, took away their Colors, swords, and Pikes,
fell to plunder the Officers, the relater repairing to the Convoy for security,
meeting greatest part of them galloping to plunder, and came away, holding it
safer to trust in God, then put confidence in Princes.

Postscript.
THe reporter Judges the Enemy, being joined with the Newarkers, to be nigh
3000. Foot, and Dragoones, and 4000. Horse, without Artillery, and that we have
lost two Mortar Pecces, one Demi Cannon, one Sacre, seven or eight Drakes,
Arms for 3000. and much Ammunition.

Printed according to Order.


