A brief Relation of the Proceedings before his Highness Council concerning the
Petitioners of the Isle of Ely, against George Glapthorne Esquire; to take away
the false report that is made touching the same, and that the truth may plainly
appear.
WHereas George Glapthorne of Wittlesey in the Isle of Ely Esquire, and chief
Bailiff of the Liberty thereof, and Justice of Peace of the same; Has seemed
to cloud himself under this Shadow, and says: That his Highness Counsel, had
not heard him; And said further, Surely, they would not judge him before they
heard him. Therefore to unvaile him, and take off that slander which he would
seem to lay upon them, that dealt so Honorably and Honestly with him and the
County: You may understand there was a Petition with about four hundred hands
to it, out of the Isle of Ely (a joyful thing to see so many witnesses against
iniquity) Their complaint was against the said Master Glapthorne, that he was a
common Swearer, a common Curser, a frequenter of Alehouses, and an upholder of
those of evil fame, that he was famed to be a companion of lewd Women;
therefore they thought him not fit to be a Lawmakers or Parliament man for
them: Upon this complaint his Highness Council gave Summons for Witnesses to
appear to prove this charge; which was substantially proved by several
Witnesses, and they have left their testimonies behind them upon Oath. There
was examined before the Council and in the presence of Mr. Glapthorne and
diverse other persons and Mr. Glapthorne excepted (though without cause) but
against one Witness, who did modestly forbear: There were examined Capt.
William Lane, William Head, Mr. William Marshall, George Bate of Wittlesey, and
Roger Branham of Wisbich,; and there was William Manesty, and Thomus Cony came
too late at that time to be examined before the Council; but their Affidavits
are here with some other of the Witnesses, which will like the Giants foot set
forth the whole stature: The Council gave him liberty to say what he could for
himself; and gave him also upon his desire a further day; but when he was
called, he did not appear; he was called again the next morning, and in the
afternoon, and the next day after, but, never appeared: Now let any honest man
judge whether this man has cause to complain, that he was not heard; but, he
has done like himself: When you have read these Affidavits annexed, then judge
whether this man be fit to be a Parliament man or a Justice of Peace, or a
chief Bailiff: for why should honest menly under the power of him that's a slave
to his own lusts, an enemy to sobriety and honest living; Being the Laws are
made and Justices ordained to keep men within the rules of sobriety and
honesty: This is of public concernment; For if wickedness get into high
places misery will be to the Commonwealth. Therefore it is desired some use may
be made hereof, as may be to the public good.

George Bate of Wittlesey in the Isle of Ely in the County of Cambridge Yeoman.
Says,
THat he has known George Glapthorn of Wittlesey in the said Isle Esquire, for
above twenty years, last past; for all which time, he has known him to be a
common Swearer and Curser, and a common frequenter of Alehouses, his usual
Oaths and Curses being, By Gods wounds, by Gods blood, by Jesus Christ, by the
eternal God, God confound me body and soul, God damme me, the Devil fetch
me, God refuse me: In or about August 1653. he the said George Bate heard the
said Oaths and Curses: And since the said time (that is to say) the Sunday
before the Election for Knights for the said Isle, he the said George Bate,
heard him swear, By God, and by Gods wounds; and the Tuesday after the
Election he heard him swear and curse bitterly, (viz.) By Gods wounds, by Gods
blood, God refuse him, and the like. And further, he has heard, the said
Master Glapthorne, famed to be familiar with Women of evil fame (viz.) Dorothy
Fox and Anne Martin, and Elizabeth Me.

And further says, he has heard the said Master Glapthorne does usually play
at Cards on the Lords Day.

George Bate his mark.
Sworn the 27. of October 1654. before me.
The Deposition of Captain William Lane.
CAptain William Lane of Wittlesey, says, That he has known George Glapthorn
of Wittlesey aforesaid Esquire for about 30 years, to be a common swearer, his
usual oaths being, By Gods wounds, by gods blood, god refuse my soul, and
such like. And in August 1653. he that said George Glapthorne did swear the
said oaths: And since the Election, which was the 12 of July 1654. he has
heard him swear by god: he has often by diverse people heard him famed for the
use of women, namely Anne Mason and others; and that Master Robert Compton told
him this examinate, that there was a wench kept for the said Mr. Glapthorn at
Wisbich by one he did bestow a Bailiffs place on.

W. Lane.

The Information of Roger Branham of Wisbich in the Isle of Ely and County of
Cambridge this 26. day of October, 1654.
Says, He has known George Glapthorne of Wittlesey, in the said Isle Es1uire,
about the space of of 20 years, from the date hereof; and that he has known
him all that time to be a common swearer and curser, his ordinary oaths being
these, viz. Gods blood, and by the eternal god, and such like; his curses
being, god refuse me, and god condemn me, and curses of that nature. And the
said Roger Branham further says, That all the aforementioned time, that he
has known George Glapthorne, he has known him to be a frequenter of women of
evil fame, as in particular, the wife of John Mason of Wisbich. And the said
Roger Branham says, he going to Wittlesey upon a time with a company of Horse,
going into the house of one William Martin of Wittlesey, heard one John Norman
pleasant with the wife of William Martin profering her five shillings for a
good turn; but she the said Anne Martin called him Puppily-foole, and said, the
old Justice Glapthorne had offered her eighteen shillings for an occupying, and
promised to make it up twenty shillings when he had more money.

Roger Branham his mark.
Sworn the 27 of October 1654. before me. Bent.
The Deposition of William Head.
WIlliam Head of Wittlesey aforesaid, says, That he has heard George
Glapthorne of Wittlesey aforesaid Esquire, Swear and Curse, By Gods wounds, by
Gods blood, by the eternal God, and the like; and that he has often observed
him to be in Alehouses both before and since the time of the said Election, and
that he has heard him much spoken of for Women.

William Marshall of Wittlesey in the Isle of Ely in the County of Cambridge,
Gentleman.
Says, That he has known George Glapthorne Esquire, for about one year and a
half last, all which time, he has taken great notice of the said Master
Glapthorne his usual common Swearing and Cursing, (viz.) about a week before
the time for the Election of Knights for the said Isle, which was on the
twelfth of July 1654. By God, and by Gods blood, and such like Oaths, and the
Sunday at night after the said Election, he heard him curse and swear bitterly,
(viz.) God confound, the Devil fetch me, by Gods blood, and such like Oaths
very grievous to be heard. And he has heard the said Master Glapthorne
reported to be a common frequenter of Women of evil fame, viz. Elizabeth
Searle, whom this Deponent has heard say, that the said Master Glapthorne had
her Maidenhead. And he further says, he has heard the said Glapthorne does
play at Cards on the Lords Days.

William Marshall.
Sworn the 27. of October 1654. Bent.
William Manesty of Wittlesey in the Isle of Ely Gentleman upon Oath, says as
follows.
THat he has known George Glapthorne of the same Town and Isle Esquire, for
the space of twenty years last past; And that he has known him to be a common
swearer, his ordinary Oaths being, God damme me, Gods blood, by Jesus Christ,
God renounce me, by the eternal God, with many other Oaths frequently flowing
from him: This has been his ordinary expressions in my hearing, at several
times in London, and in several Alehouses in Wittlesey; as at Dorothy Harrods,
Henry Atkins, William Quickloue, and other houses in the same town, and
sometimes has sworn forty of the former and the like Oaths in one hour, when
he has been gaming and at play; and likewise strange imprecations in his
Cursings, using these words, God confound me body and soul, with many other
such of the same nature. And this I have known to be his constant practice from
the beginning of my acquaintance until within these twelve months last past,
since which time I have not been much in his company; but when I have been in
his Company, I have heard him swear the former, or the like oaths. The said
Master Manesty further says, that hehath known the said Master Glapthorne, to
be a frequenter of Women of evil fame, by their light carriage and lewd
conversation, as the wife of John Fox, and the wife of Simon Me, and others in
Wittlesey. And likewise the said William Manesty going home about twelve of the
clock in the night to his own house, being in his way, went to the house of one
William Martin, being a common Alehouse, but at that time unlicensed, being
about one year and a half since the said Wiliam Manesty did find the said Mr.
Glapthorne and privately heard him uncivilly familiar with the wife of the said
William Martin, tempting the chastity of the wife of the said William martin,
with large promises of rewards, viz. that he would buy her a Roll of Tobacco,
Give her Husband to Brew and sell Ale, and that he would make her Husband as
rich a man as Henry Atkins, conditionally, that she would be constant and true
unto him, in her affections, and to love him with greater love then that which
was due unto her Husband; enticing of her also at that unseasonable time of the
night to go home with him for a License; she modestly denying, fearing his
incivility to her, as she told me the next morning, being taxed about it; but
promised to send her Husband to him the next day. And Mr Manesty further says,
that he has heard Elizabeth Zachary say, that the aforesaid George Glapthorne
had her Maidenhead.

Sworn the 26 of August 1654. John Page. William Manesty.


Thomas Coney of Wittlesey in the Isle of Ely upon Oath, says, as follows.
THat he has known George Glapthorne of the same town and Isle Esquire, almost
these two years, and that he has heard him swear and curse bitterly, both at
his own house and at the house of Licutenant Colonel Underwood of the town
aforesaid, his Oaths were, Gods blood, and by Jesus Christ, and such like
execrations, his curses were, The Devil fetch him, the Devil confound him, and
such like; and that he has set up common Alehouses in Wittlesey aforesaid,
which were formerly put down at the Sessions; That is to say, George Ground and
Ed Plummer. And also further says, he commonly heard him reported to be a man
familiar with Women of light and loose conversations, keeping company with
the-wife of John Fox, and the wife of Simon Me, and such like in Wittlesey
aforesaid. And he further says, that it is commonly reported, that the said
George Glapthorne had the Maidenhead of Elizabeth Zachary of Wittlesey
aforesaid.

Sworn the 26. of August 1654. John Page. Thomas Coney.


Finis.

