A Brief CRONOLOGY of GREAT BRITAIN, From the first discoveries of this Isle,
through the several Conquests of the ROMANS, SAXONS, DANES, and NORMANS.
A BRITAIN


A ROMAN.


A SAXON.


A DANE.


A N^^MAN.


THe Isle of Great Britain is Bounded on the South with Normandy and France,
upon the East with Germany and Denmark, upon the West with Ireland and the
Atlantic Ocean, and upon the North with the vast Deucalidon Seas.

The ancient Government of Great Britain was at first rather after the manner
of an Aristocratie, that is by certain great Nobles and potent men, or Petty
Kings, so Caesar himself found the state of Britain.

The Glorious Romans that were become Lords of the world, were the first that
set foot with displayed Ensign for the Conquest of Britain, and the first that
Assayed this was Julius Caesar from the coasts of Gallia. But this Jewel which
was so much desired and had been kept with as great Care, after 500. years
claim was now laid at stake to the that could win it, and thus was Britain
abandoned by the Romans.

The next Actors upon Britains stage were the Saxons, a People of Germany
fierce, bold, and irreligious, these infested the coasts of Britain by Piracies.

But Britain being through Tumultuous uprores much wasted by the Scots and
Picts Ancient Enemies, and albeit the stone wall that was raised athwart the
whole continent to impeach their inroads, yet that availed little, their
assaults were so great whereupon the Saxons were sent for, and in their first
service freed the Britains from those raging Picts, and undertook the Lands
defense, and the inhabitants consented to maintain the charge which was
received thankfully whilst it was giving only; for they emptied faster then
the Britains could fill, and ever complained they had not enough, till at last
by surprise they got the whole possession, and then was the British Isle
divided into an Heptarchie, or of one Imperial Crown they had seven Diadems to
adorn their own heads; which were not long worn, without intestine wars,
each striving to in large his own.

But Egbert forbad the Islands old name, and commanded these Provinces to be
called Anglia. Yet almost as soon as this was accomplished, a savage Nation the
Danes succeed, which endeavored all they could to impoverish where they had
possession for five and twenty years. These Danes were a People descended from
the Scythians, as Andrew Velley a Danish Writer reports but Dudo of Saint
Quintin will have them come from Scandia an Island situate Northward, not far
from the continent of Denmark.

The Normans a people fierce and valorous; William the Bastard, won the English
Crown from King Harold, that held it in a bloody field at battle in Sussex.
And by changing laws, disinheriting of Nobles, and bestowing the Lands revenues
upon his, he laid the foundation of a glorious Monarchy; His two younger
successively wearing it, to the prejudice of their elder; Stephen having no
right, but such as intruders pretend.

But Henry Plantagenet placed on the Throne. 331 years taken up in the Reigns
of 14 Kings of his line; but these branches were torn down by homebred broyls,
till Teuder of Lancaster with Plantagenet of York, gave them sap by marriage,
whereby the long dead stem began to bud forth, and five renowned Princes of
that name succeeded.

The first of them, the richest and wisest King of this Western world; viz.
Henry 7.

The second, the wonder of the Papal Authority; Henry 8.

The third, the hopefullest in pious actions; Edward 6.

The fourth, fervent for Romes Religion; Queen Mary.

The fifth renowned, Queen Elizabeth; under whose Reigns one hundred and
sixteen years did completely run.

And from her in the person of one Sovereign, Britain returned again to the old
Britains, and to her old name, viz. King James.

Brief observitions upon the untimely ends of the Roman Emperors.
SOme slew themselves, as did Nero and Oath; some were smothered to death, as
was Tiberius; some poisoned by their Wives, as Claudius and Commodus; some torn
in pieces by their own Subjects and Soldiers, as Vitellius, Heliogabalus,
Pupienus and Balbinous; some stabbed by them they most trusted, as Caligula,
Domitian, Didius, Gallienus, and many others; some tumultuously murdered, as
Pertinax, Severus, Maximius, Aemilius, and Probus; some slain in battle and
defense of their titles, as Macrinus and Gallus; some hanged themselves, as
Gordianus and Maximianus did; some drowned and swallowed up, as Decius and
Maxentius were, some slain by a Thunder boult from Heaven, as Carus was; some
died in most miserable captivity, as Valerianus did, whose skin was fleaed off,
he yet alive; some cut their own veins and bled to death, as Quiutillius and
Florianus did; some dying mad, as Dioclesian did; some few (and them favoring
Christians) died in their beds.

Several memorable passages worthy observation.
THe continuance of the Roman Monarchies was but little above five hundred
years.

And the state of Gods own peculiar people, from the promise to Abraham and
giving of the Law, was four hundred and thirty years, Gal. 3. 17.

And from Isreal's departure out of Egypt until the building of Solomon's Temple,
were four hundred and eighty years.

And from the anointing of David the first King set upon Judahs Throne, unto
the death of Zedekiah the last King thereof, slain by Nebuchadnezzar, and the
holy Tem^le consumed by fire, were four hundred and seventy years.

And other Politic States have stood much upon the like space of time. The
Kingdom of Athens, set up by Cecrops the first King thereof, unto Codrus the
last, is said to continue four hundred and ninety years.

The Lacedaemonians state from Lycurgus their law giver, until Alexander the
great, that overthrew it, flourished four hundred ninety one years.

From the expulsion of Romes Kings under Tarquinius unto the affected Empire in
Julius Caesar, were four hundred ninety and nine years.

And from Caesar's first Invasion of Britain, unto the days of Valentinian the
third, wherein the Romans did quite abandon it, were five hundred years.

From the Saxons Intrusions and division of this Realm, into an Heptarchy under
their government, until the united Monarchy made by King Egbert, were four
hundred sixty nine years.

And from the Norm^n^ Conquest, unto the death of Queen Elizabeth, when began
again the nam^ of great Britain, and the union of the whole Island to be
brought into one ent^re Monarchy by the entrance of King James, are five
hundred thirty six years, which so continued until the 25. year of the Reign of
Charles where that line is ^xtinct.

London, Printed by T.C. and are to be sold by T. Cross in Green-dragon court
in (...)


