Brightman Redivivus: OR THE POST-HUMIAN OFFSPRING OF Mr. THOMAS BRIGHTMAN, Jn
IIII. Sermons.

Viz.
1. Of the Two Covenants. 2. The danger of Scandals. 3. Gods Commission to
CHRIST to Preach the Gospel. 4. The Saints Security.


LUKE, 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rise from the dead.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, and Hannah Allen at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHRISTIAN Reader; here may thou have one speaking to thee from the Dead,
for as (Heb. 11.4.) it is said of ABEL'S Faith: That by it being dead he yet
speaks: So may we truly say of this Faithful man, that being Dead he yet
speaks by his works of Faith. Witness those on the Revelation; Who, though
he was silenced Living, that neither he nor his Works might speak in
England: Yet now we see them have liberty to speak; when all those their
Enemies are pressed to silence and shame: As he by a divine and prophetical
Spirit discovered out of the Epistle to the Angel of Laodicea. And that hand
which preserved those his works from the destruction of those cruel Pharaohs:
that caused such Children to be strangled in the birth, has brought these unto
Light and Life: which may be called, The Post-humian Of spring of that Learned
and Godly Mr. BRIGHTMAN; being borne out of due time from having the benefit of
the Father in polishing, and sending them abroad, but not out of due time, in
regard of the benefit they may bring to the Church of CHRIST: and they contain
rich Treasures in Earthen vessels; Divine and heavenly Substances under homely
Garments: They are his Notes who is worthy to be heard in the least and meanest
of his Messengers; The gleanings of Brightman, better then the vintage of the
Prelacy.
for they faithfully deliver the message of the great GOD of Heaven: They are
gleanings of his Harvest, in which thou may find not only to fill thy hand,
but thy bosom, Psalm. 129. What though they be Fatherless? Pity them and use
them kindly for the Father sake? Though they want his Apparel (for they were
found clad in Roman Buffe) yet they have his stamp and Image on them, though
altered in apparel. If any Relics ever deserved respect, these do and are
honorable, though not venerable in Romes sense: Receeive these Orphans to
house and lodging, they shall not get so much by thee as thou by them; but
lodge them in thy Understanding and in thy Affections: thou may receive
better Ghests, then thou art aware of. They are the Discoveries of that bright
Light, whose eyes were made bright by that true Eye Salve: They will lead thee
right, not as the Prophet led the Assyrians into the En^mies holds and hands,
but into the Land of the living: into the land of Righteousness.

They contain four Sermons, 4. Posthume Sermons.
discovering several Doctrines, but all ^^^t precious Truths; The first
discovers most plainly yet learnedly the two Covenants of Works, and Grace:
The second will inform thee fully and profitably in the Doctrine of Scandals:
through which, the world is at this stay it is. The third, represents Christ in
his Prophetical Office so fully to a poor Soul, that it cannot but cry out J
have enough: CHRIST JESUS is mine by the free gift of God the Father. The
fourth, sets out Faith, Hope, and the Love of God very sweetly and clearly. But
J shall not need to speak for them, they are of age and ability to speak for
themselves. God give thee blessing in the Reading them, as J wish to mine own
Soul: To which, J commend thee, and rest thine in Christ Jesus, etc.

JOHN HALSTED.

THE POST-HUMIAN OFFSPRING OF Mr. BRIGHTMAN.
Galat. 4. Verse. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For, it is written that Abraham had two
Sons, the one of a Bondwoman, the other of a Freewoman. But he that was
borne of the servant was borne after the flesh, etc.


TWo things of great weight are handled in this Epistle; First, the Apostle
does avouch and maintain the truth and dignity of his Apostleship, and this is
done in the two first Chapters. Secondly, the Apostle does by many reasons
confirm the true manner of Justification, to be, not by the conjoined works
of the Law with Faith, but by Faith alone in Christ: and this is done in the
3d. and 4th. Chapter, and to the 13. verse of the fifth Chap. In these words
here set down, the Apostle does most sharply tax the folly and madness of
the Galatians, in that being freed from the yoke of the Law by CHRIST; they
would again submit and subject themselves unto it: and this is done by an
argument of contraries, or by showing the most unlike contrary condition and
effect of the Law and of Faith; it is thus framed. It is a most foolish and
absurd thing, for the free and ingenuous to give themselves or inthrall
themselves in bondage: But all that Believe in Christ, are manumitted and set
free, but they that are and will be under the Law are slaves and bondmen: And
this madness was partly laid open before, by showing that the Law was as a
Prison, chap. 3.23. We were kept under and shut up, etc. By showing that the
Law is as a severe Schoolmasters. That it is also as a tutor and guardian for
such as are in their minority; and therefore all those that were or would be
under the Law, they did offer themselves to be detained in Prison, and do
acknowledge themselves ignorant and children, that need to be ordered and
nurtured with the sharp discipline of another: now who is so fond and foolish
as to delight always to be in this condition.

The first part of the Apostles reason is not expressed and needs no
declaration, as being plain to reason and common sense and experience. The
second part of the Argument has prefixed to it, an indirect reproof of this
Ignorance, in the 21 verse; as if he should have said. It is a most foolish
and rash part for any man to bind himself or to desire to serve any Master,
and not to know what wages or reward he shall have: Will ye serve the Law, are
you ignorant what is the fruit or profit of it, or if you be, why do you not
enquire and you shall find, that it is the bondage of your self and your
Posterity. So that herein is the natural inconsiderations of us all detected,
that we run a head in the way of error and wickedness, and never consider
what will follow of it, what benefit we shall get, as the Apostle elsewhere
shows, by opposing the Romans, with the like question, Romans 6.21. What fruit
had you, etc. After this preparative, there follows the just and sufficient
proof of the truth of the second part of the reasons in the 22 verse. From the
type of the family of Abraham: for as the Son of a bondwoman is a servant and
bound, so the Son of a freewoman is free: So the worshippers of the Law, borne
of the law of their Mother, a bondwoman, are servants: But the believers in
Christ borne of the freewoman, are these. The first part of this type is fully
laid down in the 22, and 23 verses: the tradition, or latter part in the 24,
25, and 26 verses.

Abraham, it is written, Abraham had two Sons. Second, they are described by
their peculiar and differing Parents, and this difference is twofold: First,
from the adjoining or adherent condition of the Mothers. One namely, Agar, a
bond-maid; the other, to wit, Sara, a freewoman. Second difference is, from
the procreating or begetting causes, the one is of and by the flesh; the other
is of and by the Promise: and thus have you the parts and division of the first
part of the Text, of which in order.

It is written. I where? Ans. No where in express words, but it is gathered
out of the 16 Chap. and 21 Chap. of Genesis: as if he had said, by conference
of Scripture, it may be gathered. Whence arises this observation: That the
sense and collection of the Scripture, is rightly called Scripture; although
the sense is not in express and entire terms, any where: and this is often used
in the Epistle to the Hebrews: This is to be noted against Arius Sabellius and
such Heretics, who when they did impugn the Divinity of CHRIST, and the
distinction of Persons in the unity of Essence in the blessed Trinity, they did
condemn the names and words of Essence, Consubstantiall, Subsistence, Unity,
Trinity, which were used of the ancient Fathers; to open these mysteries, they
I say, accused them of Novelty and falsehood; because not found expressly in the
Scripture. But by this place of Paul we learn that there is no need that every
word and syllable be found in the Scripture, so that if the reason thereof be
manifest out of the true sense of the Scripture, it is all one; as if it had
been written:

Secondly, hence we learn, what we are to judge of the Sermons of Ministers.
It must needs be, that in Preaching, while they open the Doctrine and exhort,
that they utter many words and sentences, which in every syllable are not found
in Scripture; yet while they speak out of the true sense of Scripture, all
their words are the words of God: Neither is there hereby any way made for the
Papists, to establish their smoakie and reasty traditions, who when they hear
those terms of Consubstantiall, Coessentiall, etc. Think that they may by the
like right, obtrude upon us their foolish Superstitions as authorized by
Scripture; for herein as in all other things, they err fondly; for though is
be lawful to devise new words, the ground and meaning whereof is manifest out
of the Scripture, yet to coin names repugnant to Piety, or such as through
their ambiguity may bring the same in danger, is wicked and not to be
attempted.

And thus much out of the words, is it not written.

Abraham: He had also six Sons by Keturah, Genesis 25.1, 2. But Paul makes mention
only of those, wherein God did principally shadow forth the condition of the
Church. Now Paul makes mention of Abraham their common Father, that none might
boast in the prerogative of the Flesh, as it was an usual thing with the Jews
to boast of their Stock, Math. 3. But when Abraham had two Sons of such
differing conditions, to what purpose is it to boast of kindred, Piety is not
propagated by birth, but infused by Believing; and therefore, least any should
ascribe holiness to nature, rather then to grace, God permits often, that the
Posterity of the godly, to become wicked. As Cain of Adam, Cham of Noah, Ismael
of Abraham etc. So that its not enough to Piety and Grace; that one be borne of
godly Parents, which thing does illustrate the grace of God, in that hence it
is manifest that godliness flows alone from Gods grace, and not from any
humane endeavor, John, 1.12. For when as Abraham did so diligently apply and
employ himself in instructing his Family, Genesis 18.19. It is likely, he left no
means unattempted, whereby his son Ismael might be instructed to Piety, he
loving him so well, Genesis 17.18. Whence came it then, that Isaac was godly, and
Ismael profane. Surely hence, that God has mercy on whom he will; neither
does Birth or humane endeavor profit any whit without the grace of God; for as
in Trees, set and planted, in the which, the Husbandman bestows equal pains
and care, yet God gives life and increase as seems good to him. So in
distributing his graces, God does select out of men, in every respect, equal,
such as on whom he bestows his mercy, passing by others.





David's fault made him more humble himself for that Child; so though Parents
beget not Children in sin in that behalf, yet all are conceived and borne in
sin received from Parents, which must make them sue to God, that Grace may
correct Nature. And thus much of the general description.

In the particular description of Sons; the first difference is of the Mothers
and their conditions. For one of the Sons was born of a Maid, subject to the
authority of her Mistress; for he is a Servant, that may not live after his
own will, but does serve at the appointment and pleasure of another; And hence
note, that when in Abraham's time and family, there were such Servants: It must
needs be, that this condition and outward difference is both ancient and
lawful; otherewise, this holy man would not have suffered it in his Family,

Now who and what manner of Servant this was here mentioned, nothing is
mentioned in this place; but Genesis 16.1. she is described by her Nation and
name. She was an Egyptian; for it is likely, that while Abraham was driven by
the famine into Egypt, ( Genesis 12.8.9.) he did with his money purchase this
Maid; for men for the most part, delight in servants of strange Countries as is
to be seen of Joseph, advanced by Pharaoh, in Naamans servant: diverse others
in Scripture, as Nehemiah waited on Ashuerosh.

For this woman's name, it was Agar, this as occasion served, was imposed on her
by Abraham or his Family, and it signifies so much as that Stranger. So then we
see what manner of one the Mother of the one Son was: to wit, a Servant, an
Egyptian by Nation, a stranger by her Name. But what is this to the Son? Namely
this, To show her Son to be a Servant, as the Proverb is; The brat or brood
follows the Belly. But you will say, It was showed before, that the condition
of the Parents, neither helps nor hurts the Offspring. To this the answer is;
It is true, in regard of the grace of God, but not as touching External and
civil condition; for in this regard, such Parents such Children.

Now this External condition of these Sons, God does not make the cause of
bestowing or withholding his Grace; but only a figure and type thereof. But
why is the son of the Servant, first mentioned. Answ. First, because he was
the elder. Second, because for the most part, the condition of the sons of
this world, in carnal things, is better then the children of God; they take to
themselves, lofty tytles, as the Son of the servant was called Ishmaell, one
heard of God: But the Son of the freewoman called Isaac, Laughter; not only
of the laughter of his Parents, but because he was laughed at and scorned of
Ismaell; which Paul calls Persecuting in the 28 verse: again, Ismaell grew
presently into a mighty and populous Nation, Genesis 17.20. and 25. chap. 11.12
verse. But Isaac scarce crept up in many ages; but such is the will of God, who
has laid up better things for his, least being fastened to the earth, they
should forget heaven.

The other Son was of the freewoman, of Sara, a wife, no captive, nor bought
with money, and no way of Servile condition, but Free, the neice of Abraham:
and this is the first difference of these two Sons, arising of the differing
condition of their Mothers.

The second difference is, in regard of the manner of Procreation; the Son of
the servant is said to be borne after the Flesh, that is, after the ordinary
course of Nature, without any word of God going before to that end. Secondly,
he is said to be borne after the Flesh, because he was begot and borne by the
counsel of the flesh; which Sara suggested to Abraham: For when they had
received from God a Promise of a Son, and had long expected the same, till
growing in years, she thought it vain to expect it any longer of her self;
she thought it might be, that what God had Promised, he would perform by
another, and so out of the desire of seed, she persuaded her Husband to go in
into her Maid: This counsel was of the Flesh, and therefore that that was
borne of it, is said to be borne after the Flesh.

This practice though it did argue great Humility and Ingenuity in Sara, in not
envying that honor to her Maid which she thought was denied to her self; yet
herein greatly to be blamed, because she ought not by her own overhasty
desire to have prevented the Lords opportunity; and therefore this her fact
does openly declare our corruption: which can not bear any long delay, but
through irksomeness we are ready to attempt by unlawful means, such things
as God would have effected by himself in seasonable time: neither was Abraham
blameless in this, that he did so easily hearken to his wife advising so ill.
But such is our Nature: thus did the Children of Lot, Genesis 19.32. Thus the
Israelites, not expecting till Moses returned ( Exodus 32.) made the Calfe: Thus
did Saul in presuming to Sacrifice, (1 Samuel 13.8, 9.) And in consulting with
the Witch, 1 Samuel 28.7.

Israelites, Psalm. 78.41. That the limited the holy one of Israel. And David
was overtaken with this in his Passion, Psalm. 116. I said, that all men were
liars. But he that Believes, makes not have, Isaiah 28.16. and 30.18. Blessed
are all they that wait for him.

A second thing to be observed hence, is, That albeit Ismael was begot by holy
Counsel in regard of the parties giving it, and in regard of the end, why
given; yet because he was conceived without the authority of Gods word, he is
said to be born after the Flesh. Abraham was not moved by lust but by his wives
persuasion: If yet for all this, the Scripture does tax this as a carnal
Birth; then of what account, shall that unbridled lust be had, to the
fulfilling whereof men are carried with the breach of all the bars and bonds
of Nature, modesty, and the ordinance of God. Sure the damnifying of the Child
so borne, should be of greater force to restrain, then the gain got by such
filthy pleasure, should provoke; for (though God being bound to none, can and
does freely bestow his mercy, where seems him good) yet as much as in us lies;
that which is borne by such conception, is made altogether Carnal. Not only
opprobious in regard of civil condition and dishonesty of birth, (then which,
what injury can be greater) but is also made naked and destitute of divine
Grace; which consideration of it might take place, would be an effectual
bridle to this raging and reigning sin of Lust, seeing this is so, that this
action and the fruit thereof in some sort holy, is termed carnal, let us take
heed of good intents; it is the Devils subtilty to corrupt our good we do by
doing it often to bad ends, and to encourage us to do evil by propounding good
ends, but both these are displeasing to God. Good intents then though never so
holy, yet being besides the word, are taxed and are unlawful and dangerous; as
are seen in the examples of Saul. 1 Samuel 15. In sacrificing. See what a goodly
end he had, verse 11. and 12. so 1 Samuel 15. They were reserved for Sacrifices.
So 2 Samuel 23. beginning. Saul slew the Gibeonite forzeale to the Israelites,
yet a Plague came on the Land for the same.

Second, It behooves us to watch over our hearts, and to examine the thoughts
and suggestions thereof, that they savor not too rankly of the flesh; for even
this counsel here called Carnal, had not his ground merely on the flesh, but
in part of that faith which she had in the Promise of God. So subtle is the
devil (says learned Beza) that he can serve his own turn, not only, of our
corruptions, but even of God graces in his Children, as here, and the like in
Rebecca, who grounded on the Promise of God made her; that the elder should
serve the younger, was enduced to practice the accomplishment of it by
unlawful and unseasonable means, to the endangering of her Son Jacob, and to
the obscuring of the wisdom and truth of God, which else would have appeared
more glorious, being effected by God himself. Thus much of the first Son and
his condition.

The other Son was born of the freewoman by Promise, not but that he was
conceived and born of Man and Woman, but it is so said; because their barren
and out-worne bodies were made able by virtue of the Promise to beget that Son.
Romans 4.19. For in the begetting of this seed, there was something more, then
the naked strength of nature; to wit, a word of Promise, Genesis 17.19. God before
had Promised to Abraham a numerous seed, Genesis 13.16. But he neither told of
whom he should conceive that Seed, nor what manner it should be: But in the
word of Promise, by whose virtue Isaac was conceived, every thing is determined
distinctl^, as that Sara his wife should be the Mother, the Seed should be
masculine, a Man. His name Jsaac, and his condition, a confederate with God.

Hence we may observe two things. certain difference of men as touching Gods
grace, before they are bo^^er conceived; for some are sons of the flesh, as
Ismael some of the Promise as Isaac; neither may any say, that these are
personal and particular differences of these two ^ere, for S. Paul takes away
this cavil. Romans 9. and 11. Cap. and the Type following here. It is not in the
Parents power to constitute this difference of their Children. For the Promise,
according to which, they beget Children of the Promise, is made unto them of
God they make it not themselves. Neither is it in the power of the Children
borne, that at their own pleasure, they can make themselves Sons of the flesh,
or of the Promise; For how can that be left entire to them, that went before
their being and beginning: So then it is in the power of God alone, who for his
infinite goodness and Justice, and Sovereignty do choose most freely on whom
he will have mercy as is plainly taught. Romans 9.

Isaac above Ismael, or Jacob above Esau, as God himself in upbraiding manner
for their unthankfulness, witnesses against the Jews. Malachi 1.2, 3. Was not
Esau Jacobs brother, etc.

A second thing hence to be learned is, what manner of procreating of Children
is pleasing to God; to wit, that which is of his Promise. For here we see,
that this Son so born was enriched with all spiritual blessings, the other
being past by. First, that if any desire a holy and blessed posterity, he must
seek it by Promise. But you will say, there is no such Promise extant now, as
was then. J Ans. Not as touching that particular kind of propagating the
Messiah, and extraordinary raising of the Church; but there is a general
Promise whereby God has promised to bless the lawful and holy conjunction of
Man and Wife, they then that go a whoring after strange flesh, seek strange
children, out of the Promise, which how heavy a thing it is, may easily be
learned by those, who have been borne after this manner.

Verse. 24. By the which thing, another thing is meant. J We have heard of the
first part of this comparison, now follows the latter to the special
application whereof, before he come, he does admonish, that this History which
he has rehearsed, does contain more deep matter, then it might seem at the
first view. But it does not only barely relate a thing done, but does also
shadow, and represent the condition of the future Church. And therefore he
says, these are to be allegorized, which is, when one thing is signified by
another, which is done two ways; first in words, second in actions, persons or
things. When one thing is said in word and another is signified, that is
properly called an Allegory; for so the very word Allegory sounds. As Psalm.
91.13. Thou shall tread on the Lion and the Adder. Math 5.29.30. If thy eye
offend thee, etc. These are Allegorical speeches, by which another thing is
meant, as is in other figurative speeches. Second, when things are used whether
dead or alive, brute or reasonable, and that their persons or actions are used
to signify another thing, then it is called a Type. So that in this place.
This Anagogicall application of a thing done, is not properly an Allegory, (for
that is only in figurative words) but it is so called in a large sense, or
abusive manner as Rhetoric speaks. For it is a Type indeed. For the house of
Abraham was the true Church; and whatsoever in it, or in the succeeding old
Church, when it was a Nation, did happen as memorable, were Types to us. 1 Cor.
10.6. Heb. 10.1. Hence arises a double Instruction.

and so by Allegorizing, they take away all the literal sense of Scripture,
which for the most part, is the true sense, but is not in an Allegory; now to
do this is an intolerable wickedness, far from the Apostle; for he does not
weaken, much less, destroy the credit and truth of the thing done, but out of
the History and literal sense, as a shadow, does deduce or extract a further
truth signified.

The second sort of men to be reproved hence, are such, as do indeed abhor
Allegories. But yet do exercise great liberty in interpretation of Types, and
wresting them at their pleasure; for as every imprinted stamp and form is
proper to the Character by which it was stamped, and every shadow is peculiar
to it own body: so every Type is an express representation or shadow of the
pattern or truth to which it was appointed of God; therefore it belongs not to
us to coin new and rash interpretations at our liking, neither may we in this
case compare or imitate the Apostle, who had drunk deeper of the Spirit, then
we have done; and if any thing be dark to us, we must refrain our selves till
God reveal it.

The second thing to be learned hence, is the agreement twixt the old and new
Church, for when so many hundred years past things done in the old Church, are
Types of ours now, it must needs be, that there is great consent every where,
for how can things better agree, then the Type and the thing signified by the
Type, then the Seal and the stamp of the same; so that there is one and the
same way to Salvation, one head, one Church, the same members, though
distinguished by times and places. But in this is our condition better then
theirs, that they only saw the truth in the Type and shadow, we in express
feature, shape, and body. Which must teach us to be answerable in faith and
manners; so many Promises performed, confirm us, and a thing done is easilier
believed then that which is to be done. And so for our life, we must express
more obedience, and give more honor to our God, as more is looked for at the
hands of one of discretion, then of a Child. Gal. 4. at the beginning.

Now follows the second part of the comparison it self. Which stands thus. As
the two Mothers are to the two Children, so are the two Testaments to the
worshippers or embracers thereof.

In this, two things is to be considered. 1. The fitting of the Type with the
thing Typified, 2. The manner of accommodation or application. The application
is twofold, first, general in these words. These are the two Testaments, that
is, these two Mothers are the two Testaments, the old and the new. But how can
this be. Ans. Not in the thing it self or very deed, but in Type and
signifycation; for as in the Sacrament, the earthly matter being a Symboll of
the heavenly, is often called by the name of it. As the Tree of life and of
knowledge, of good and evil. Genesis 2.9. The blood of the Sacrifices is called
the blood of the Covenant. Genesis 41.26. The seven fat Kine, are seven
plentiful years, the Bread is the body of Christ, with infinite such
speeches. So in this place, the two Mothers are the two Testaments, not that
Agar or Sara were the Testaments themselves, but because they were the signs
and Types thereof.

Hence we learn, that as often in Scripture as one thing i^ called another, to
consider what is the reason thereof, and not to conclude thence, that the one
is forthwith the other, as Mat. 26.26. Shall we thence absurdly conclude with
the Papists, that the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated, but we must know
that Christ spoke after Scripture manner, calling the sign by the name of the
thing signified. Thus much of the general.

The particular Application is twofold. First of Agar, second of Sara. In that
of Agar, the applycation it self is in verse 24. The manner of it in the 25.
verse, and it is on this wise. Agar signifies one Covenant and Testament, which
was given on Mount Sina, which Covenant does beget Children to bondage. Here
two things to be considered. First what Covenant is meant, second what is the
effect thereof. To wit, bondage.

The Covenant is described from the place where it was given, Sina. Which what
it was and the manner of it is set down^, Exodus 19, 20, 21, 22. chap. It was
threefold. 1. Moral, touching the inward service of God and Eternal worship;
The second Ceremony concerning the outward manner of Gods worship, for the
time, place, persons and Sacrifices. The third was touching the Policy and
Commonwealth of the Jews.

The effect of this Covenant, was servitude and bondage, and this was seen in
two sorts of people. First in those that knew how to use the Covenant, and were
the true Sons of God, and believers, yet unto these, this Covenant was a
heavy bondage, to be holden with so many prohibitions, whereby sin was
increased, to be cumbred with so many Ceremonies both costly and painful; but
especially the Moral Law, was a great bondage to the Conscience, making them
to tremble, as Psalm. 119.120. David trembled at the threats therein, and in
this regard the Law is truly called the Spirit of bondage to fear again. Romans
8.15. Hence the Law in regard of these, is called a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.24.
And as long as one is under such, he differs nothing from a servant, though he
be Lord of all. Gal. 4. at the beginning.

The other sort of men who are in the bondage of the Law, are those, who knew
not nor do not understand the right end and use of the Law, and so cleave to
it, boast in this their Mother, as if by her right, they would claim the
inheritance. It must needs be, that these men are most miserable slaves. You
will say how? Answ. One is said to be borne to servitude, to whom by right of
birth, nothing is due, but if he desire any liberty or dignity, he must
purchase it by his own merits. So they that cleave to the Law and seek not for
salvation out of the same, they have no liberty nor inheritance purchased for
them, but such as they can get by their own deserts. Now it is a hard servitude
when the things commanded, exceed strength, and it is a most hard and
intolerable bondage to them, who for want of these things must undergo the
heavy wrath of God and torments of Eternal punishment, even for violating of
an impossible command. Now by the Law, every Son of the Law is bound in his
own person to perform all the things of the Law, Gal. 3. Romans 10.5. For these
comes wrath, Gal. 3.10. and these are impossible, Romans 8.3. Whence comes fear,
terror, and despair, when one sees that he is excluded from all hope of
Salvation by the same thing, by which he hoped once to obtain it.

Hence we learn two things. First, that the Law suffices no man to get the
inheritance of Heaven, for this belongs to the Sons and free, not to
Servants. Now the Sons of the Law are servants. Hence the Jews by cleaving
to the Law, and not to Abraham's faith, lost the Inheritance. Gal. 3.8, 9. and
14. verse. So Romans 4.1.12, 13, 14. verse. And Paul twice beats on this, that the
Jews lost Salvation because they sought it by the works of the Law, Romans
9.31, 32. and Romans 10.4. So that we must take heed, that we apply not our
selves to the keeping of the Law with this hope, as the Papists and common
people do.

Esa. 9.3, 4, 5. The Papists use to boast that their followers do more devoutly
give themselves to the practice of good works then we do.

What then? It may be, that a servant may use greater industry and pains then
a Son; is his condition therefore better then the Sons, no: the obedience
which is performed through fear, proceeds from love of it self: this which is
done in love, does come from the love of another, whom we love. Now whereas
every man loves himself more then another, it must needs be, that that be
greater obedience (in outward show) which comes from fear, then that is, which
comes from love; but that greater obedience has less truth and solidity, then
this lesser; and therefore by this it cannot be rightly judged of men, it must
be left alone to God. O that the Papists or seduced by them, would consider
what wrong they do Chrstians; for while they go about to make them the Sons
of God, they make them most fearful bondmen, and prescribe them such a course
that the longer they walk in it, the further from liberty: do you so reward
your followers, do you so bless your friends. And thus much of the
Application.

Now of the reason or manner of applycation, verse 25. Why Agar does resemble
the Law given in Mount Sina. This is for the great agreement that is twixt Agar
and Sina, and this agreement is seen in four things. 1. In Name. 2. In the
Place. 3. In the Married condition. 4. In the Servile.

As touching the Name. I think the Greek Fathers are here to be followed,
Chrysostom, Oecumen, Theophilact, who say, that Mount Sina had two names; the
one whereof was Agar. For these men, in regard of vicinity both of time and
place, when and wherein they lived, might know these things better then we can
do: Again, the Article To prefixed before the word Agar, being of the newter
Gender, does show that the woman her self is not here understood, but the
name; but the name was not a Type of the Mount or of the Law, but the woman
herself; and therefore the name is here taken, because the name of the Mount
was the same, as the Scripture seems to teach. 1 Chronicles. 5.10. And other
Authors, as Dion in Trajano, and Ziphilin.

The second thing is the place of this Mount, whence is great agreement twixt
Agar and the Mount, and so of the Law delivered there. The Mount was in Arabia,
out of the confines of Canaan, and what does Agar signify, but a stranger, as
was showed before; so that whether we respect the name it self, or the force
of the Name, it might justly and fitly resemble this Mount. Whence is manifest
that God does govern and dispose the smallest things in the earth with great
Counsel and wisdom. For what is more sleighter, then the imposing of a name,
and yet we see here, that the names both of men and places are so wisely
ordered, that they are not rashly imposed, but so as may serve most fitly, both
for his own providence, as also for our Instruction, and the Law was given on
this Mount, out of the bounds of the promised Land, that we might understand
that it was not the Law of our Country and of heirs, but of Exiles and
banished; whither also tended that, that Moses the Lawgiver could not bring
the people into Canaan, but Joshua did it, whom the Author to the Heb. calls
Jesus.

And answers, to Jerusalem that now is.] Here is touched the third argument,
and it is as it were of conjugall condition, for as Agar was not the lawful
wife of Abraham, but subordinated by her Mistress into the fellowship of the
marriage bed. (So this may seem to be the meaning of the word in the
original, which in military use properly signifies, a Rank in the Army,
extended from the Forefront to the rereward or hindmost.) So was Agar
subordinate to Sara in the same rank or order, but behind, in a more inferior
place and order, then was Sara; and so, as Agar subordinate to Sara was
correspondent to her; so was Sina to Jerusalem. For this Covenant that God made
with the Jsraelites on Sina, is compared to a Marriage. Ezech. 16. For this
Covenant of the Law was as the fellowship, Abraham had with Agar. But as this
servant though she was admitted into the fellowship of the marriage bed, yet
was subject to her Mistress, so is Sina inferior to Jerusalem; to which God
made a Promise of straiter fellowship. Hos. 2.19, 20. This interpretation may
show strange, and is new indeed, yet me thinks, it agrees most fitly with the
purpose of this place.

The fourth Agreement is, that as Agar with her sons are in bondage, so is Sina
with her Sons, and in this the Jerusalem that now is on the earth, is in
bondage also, both bodily and spiritual. For first, they were in subjection to
the Roman Empire, and are now under the Tyranny and Superstition of the Turk
and Mahomet; neither was the Inhabitants of that place only in bondage, but all
those, wheresoever they dwell, which cleave to the Law. And thus much for these
four particular agreements of Sina and Agar, which are sufficient to declare,
that Agar was a Type of the Law.

Verse. 26. But Jerusalem which is above, is free.] Here is the second
Application, of Sara to the other Testament, it stands thus: As Sara was to
Isaac, such is the Church of the New Testament to the faithful; and that the
Text might run more fully, some words may seem needful to be supplied,
thus. But the other Mother, which is Jerusalem, or is Sara, etc. As in the Text,

This Mother the Church is described by three things. First, she is above. 2.
She is free. 3. A Mother of all believers. For the first, she is said to be
above, first in way of distinction from the other, and that thereby their minds
might be withdrawn from thinking on the earthly Jerusalem: For as this was a
Type of the other above, because by the appointment of God, it had a
Propitiatory, yet when the true one comes the shadow will vanish. And out of
this first respect of this title, here falls to ground, the vain boasting and
confidence of the Jews in their earthly Jerusalem; for those goodly and lofty
Predictions of the Prophets of Sion and Jerusalem did not concern the flesh or
the earthly Jerusalem but in a Type. God is not tied to any place, though it
has been beautifyed by him with most singular blessings, and special
Promises. So then much more vain is the bragging of the Papists of their
Romish Babylon, which can show no such Promise as the earthly Jerusalem had,
but only resembles herin this, in a reducing and reviving all the dead and
buried Ceremonies of the Synagogues.

Jerusalem is said to be above, in regard of the Original of it. Because it
has it beginning from the Heavenly grace. John 1.13, 13. John 3.3, 4. Every
member must be borne from above. Psalm. 110.3. The birth of thy womb is as the
Morning dew, which comes from above, Esa. 60.21. The graft of my planting shall
be the work of my hands, that I may be glorified; hence it is. Heb. 11.10. and
Heb. 12.22. We are come to the Celestial Jerusalem.] From this arises this
necessary and comfortable consequence, that the Church is invincible, though
Satan and the world plot the destruction of it never so much. For it cannot be
that the planting of God should be rooted up, and it cannot be that the earth
should be stronger then heaven, Man or Devil, then God. Second, hence it
follows that the Papists are no children of this Church, or else Bastards, for
they will have part of the strength of Nature, and Free Will; and not be borne
wholly from Heaven; whereas this Church and every member of it is merely from
above, as Isaac was not conceived by strength of nature, but by the mighty
power of God and gracious Promise.

Christ told Nathaniel, John 1. at the end. That hence forth he should see the
heavens open, and the Angels ascending and descending, this is that, Heb.
12.23, 24. We are come to innumerable Angels; and to the Spirits of just men,
and to Jesus the Mediator, etc. So that though the faithful live here on
earth, yet they have Communion with Christ. The way to the Holy of Holies, is
now wide open.] This serves, First to disprove the Papists no true members of
this Church, both because their Doctrine is earthly, fixing men's minds to
earthly things by them Doctrine of Images, Transubstantiation, and all the
manner of their worship; as also their lives and conversation^ i^ earthly,
consisting in a vain pumpe of outward things, and in heaping up riches, and
bearing rule over the Kingdoms of the earth, and conforming themselves to such
a Policy.

Second, this serves much to strengthen Gods children when we may certainly
determine, that they that are the true members of the Church or earth, are and
shall be members of the Church in glory.

Third, our Conversation must be in heaven, not grovelling on the earth, but our
mind and meditation must be of the glory prepared, our heart and affections of
love, joy, delight, desire and hope must be fixed there, and thereby be made,
to purge our selves. 1 John 3.3. By out steadfast hope, doing the will of God in
earth, as it is in heaven, as we Pray and Promise.

The second Property, is Freedom. Because she is freed from ^he l^g^^
servitude. From the bondage of Ceremonies, from the rigor, compulsion,
terror, justification, curse and condemnation of the moral Law, and the
consequences thereof; from the wrath of God: For Christ has purchased true
liberty from all these. Colos. 2.11, 16, 17, 18. verse. Gal. 5. at the
beginning; stand fast in the liberty. John 8.36. If the Son make you free, you
shall be free, 2 Cor. 3. at the end. Where the Spirit of the Lord is (as in the
new Testament) there is liberty: And therefore, as Sara though for a while
barren, yet because the Wife and free, remained with Abraham, and was partaker
of the same dignity with him; when as Agar because a Servant, though fruitful,
was cast forth. So the Church of Christ, though barren of deserts, yet because
a wife and free, whose dignity and worth is not to be measured by deserts, she
shall be copartner of the heavenly Kingdom; whereas Agar puffed up with her
carnal conception and goodly brood of works, shall be excluded.

Rome to the quick, who as a lewd Son, nothing regards his Mothers true
prerogatives, but does seek to impeach them, making the state of the Church
more intolerable then the Jewish was.

Luke 1.74, 75. And it behooves us to look to it, for it had been better, never
to have been freed then to suffer our selves to be brought into bondage again.
2 Peter 2.20, 21, 22. How earnestly do men conte^d for liberty, once lost and
recovered: and how carefully is health preserved, after it is restored from
sickness. Relapses be dangerous, let us not provoke and tempt God.

Thirdly, this serves for comfort of Conscience to the godly and weak, that
are cast down with the terrors of the Law, such must know they are freed from
this fear, the Law has nothing to exact of us as debtors; for Christ our
creditor has discharged all, both punishment and perfect obedience, and has
made the Law amiable to us, it being only as a rule for Christians to walk by.

Pet. 1.21. James 1.18. Gal. 3.19. Paul travailed in birth, till Christ was
fashioned in the Galatians.

Second, she Feeds them with the same word and and Sacraments. Heb. 5. at the
end. 1 Cor. 3. 1 Pet. 2. at the beg.

Third, she restraines their Wantonness, by showing the anger of God, the
unspeakable torments, of hell, by holy admonitions, exhortations and
threatenings.

Of us all.] This is said for distinction from the old Church, which was of the
Jews only, but this of all sorts, times and places. Hence Christ expounding
the parable of the Tares, expounds the Kingdom of Heaven: First, the Church to
be the World; because it is dispersed all over the same. Second, hence is
taught, that all that will be Children, must be borne of this Mother, neither
can they have the true God to be their Father that has not the Church their
Mother.

Rome again. Where are her Conceptions, where is the food, where true
discipline; nay does she not murder in soul and body, the true Children of
the Church, giving them poison in a gilded Cup.

Secondly, this Church is Universal, and therefore cannot be Rome.

Pet. 2.1. For this is not as the first Generation where the Child is not
sensible of it; but none have this, but they know it: True it is that the
wonderful manner of working of it can not be conceived, no more then the wind
can be seen, John 3.5.6, 7. But yet it may be felt and discerned by the
stirring and blast thereof. And every Regenerate shall find as great a
difference in himself, betwixt that be was by Nature and now is by Grace, as
a Child does twixt the dark and strait prison of the Mothers womb, and the
world which is large and light. So then, many deceive themselves, thinking they
are Gods children, though they never came almost where the seed was sown, and
never show themselves Spiritually alive by hungring after the milk of the
Word; so that it may ranckle in the breasts of the Nurses, before these will
desire to draw it out; and hence comes the neglect and contempt of the Word and
Ministers.

Verse 27. Rejoice thou barren, etc.] This is the reason of the Application out
of the testimony of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 54.1. And by allegation of this
Scripture, it is manifest, that Sara was a lively pattern of the Evangelicall
Church, and the Apostle warranted by Divine authority, did undertake the
interpretation of this Type. For when the Prophet in these words alluding to
Sara, does speak to the Christian Church, it is meet that by the other, either
Wife or Concubine of Abraham, that the other Church should be understood; so
that this Interpretation was not fained of himself. For though the Apostles,
of their own authority might propound and command any thing to the Church, as
being Promised the infallible assistance of the Spirit; yet often did depart from
some part of their right, and for the weaker ones, did confirm by Prophetical
authority, what they did deliver, but this was touched before.

This testimony does show a threefold agreement twixt Sara and the Christian
Church: First, in Sterility. Second, in joy for Offspring. Third, in multitude
of Posterity. For the first, Sara was long barren, even till she came to that
age, that she might despair of Seed, but when she had received a Promise of a
Son, sh^e was so joyed with it, that her Son had her name thence, Genesis 17.17.
and 18.12. And this joy the Parents showed by an extraordinary Feast, Genesis
21.8. Then in progress of time, the seed became so fruitf^ll, that in
multitude it far passed the Posterity of Agar, for the Ismaelites might not
compare with the Israelites, either in largeness of Territory, or multitude of
People. And even such like was the state of the Christian Church before Christ,
while the Temple and Sinagogue flourished, it was barren of any truly
faithful, and sat as a widow forsaken, and so long remained thus, till all
hope of ever being visited with Offspring might seem to have been taken away.
But when the promised seed came, how great joy and gladness possessed the
hearts of the faithful, so that it was truly said of the Angels. Luke 2.10. J
bring you great tidings of joy; and now we see the Christian Church far to
pass the Synagogue, that she may now contend with her and overcome. Hence
three things is to be learned. First, that judgment is not to be given of a
Churches truth or being, by the multitude of her Sons; for Agar was ever
fruitful, and Sara long barren, and the small number of the Church is not to
be despised, much less to be forsaken. Why then does Rome boast of her
multitude, may she not be Agar for all that.

2. The Church does rejoice in the multitude of her Sons, that is, in the
conversion of men to God, as the Angels do for a repentant sinner. Luke 15.4,
7, 9, 23. verses.

3. God is not tied to means, for he makes the barren and forsaken woman more
fruitful then the married. Psalm. 113. at the end. Esa. 62.4, 5.

Hos. 1.10. This most diligently Saint Paul admonishes the Ephesians of,
Ephesians 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 11, and 12 verses. So does Pet. 1 Epist. 2.9. and 10.
verses. For hereby we shall be stirred up to thankfulness and a walking worthy
our calling, and a great means to keep in obedience. To this end God
appointed a service to the Jews, Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6. Wherein they should solemnly
remember their former condition. So did the Prophet Ezech. chap. 16. O that we
could think how deformed, ugly, wicked, and enemies we were, would it not
inflame our heartt with a love of God.

2. Romans 7. at the beg. Pa^l shows that the Law was as an unsufficient and
impotent Husband, by whom we could not conceive Children to God; but now we
are freed from that Husband and married to CHRIST, who is all-sufficient; so
that there remains no excuse for us, and as much as in us lies, we shame our
Husband; and therefore it behooves us to be fruitful in all good works, not
walking in the oldnesse of the Letter, but newness of Spirit. No marvel if a
Land be barren, that has neither dew, Sun, nor rain to refresh it. But the
Land that has all these plentifully, and yet remains barren, is cursed and
near to burning; and have not we long had all these.

Esaias. 62.4 and 5 verses, O how should this move all, to be ready to plant the
Gospel where it is not, and to make smooth way for it, and to take away the
stumbling blocks, that hinder the free and the fruitful course of it.



Christ's time and in our Fathers days, and as the Jews were in captivity,
Ezech. 37. And with this power and love of God to his Church, Ezechiel, does
comfort the Church chap. 17.24. that God exalts the low Tree; and abases the
high; that he makes the green Tree to wither and the dry to flourish, I the
Lord have spoken it, and have done it. Amen.

FINIS.
THE DANGER OF SCANDAL AND OFFENSES. Sermon, II
MATH. 18.7. Woe to the World, because of offenses: It must needs be that
offenses come; but we to that man by whom the offense does come, etc.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, is decl^red, how the Disciples of Christ,
had ambitiously reasoned about dignity and greatness, a part from Christ.
Christ omitting no occasion, how h^e might profit his Disciples, asks them of
the matter of their disputation, himself well knowing is, though he did not
expressly tax their Speeches, Mark, 9.33. And knowing Pride to be the bitte^
root, he exhorts to Humility and that by the example of a Child set before
them. Now because that is a C^rnall conceit and stron^ imagination; that if one
carry himself humbly and lowly, that he shall be trodden under foot of every
one, and be regarded of none; therefore to prevent this, he teaches that the
humble are a special care to God, so that he will most severely punish them,
who shall offer the least injury unto them; and by their insolences shall
weaken the endeavor of the practice of this so holy and commendable grace, and
so on this occasion, Particular, he does with great Patheticalnesse of
affection break forth to the prosecuting of the Doctrine of Scandal in
general. So that the words read, do contain a most passionate exclamation,
and a bitter bewayling of those horible evils and Calamities, that hangs over
the wo^ld through their Scandals: and the reason is set down Cryptically or
imperfitly, which is thus enlarged. An Inevitable calamity hanging over one, or
approaching one, does make his condition miserable: But Scandals are inevitable
and they draw with them misery; and therefore the state of the world thereby
must needs be wretched and woeful: The first part of the reason is appa^ent and
needs no demonstration. The second part of the reason is in these words. It
must needs be, that offenses come. The conclusion or last part is in the first
words. Woe to the World. And in the last end of the verse, is a secret
objection answered. And now of the first words containing the conclusion or
thing to be proved, the meaning whereof in general is, that the world is
miserable through Offenses; and here are three points to be handled. First,
what Scandals are, and the kinds of them. 2. The misery coming by them. 3. The
inevitableness of them.

The word here usually translated Offense, is not meant so much, sin in it
self, as commonly they are called Offenses, as they are indeed against both God
and man. But the word offense is here taken for a peculiar effect or fruit that
follows on the evil behavior of men; and therefore is well translated
Scandals, it being the Greek word here used, and it properly signifies that
crooked piece of wood, to the which the bait in a Trap is fastened, which while
the Mouse or other thing does gnaw or move, it pulls the Trap on it self. It is
also any block that is cast in ones way, whereby one may be endangered to
stumble and fall, and so figuratively it is used in Scriptu^e for every public
and open evil and sin, whither word or deed which while others do endeavor to
follow by his example and authority, that did it or spoke it, being allured, as
with a bait, they entangle themselves in the Devils trap or snare; or thereby
they are made to stand still or fall in the right way. And therefore this word
is interpreted, by a departing as may appea^e by comparing, Math. 13.21. With
Luke, 8.13. For that which in the one place is called a Scandalizing, in the
other is called a Falling away: And Romans 14.13. It is directly called a
stumbling-blocke, whence a Scandal may be defined to be any word or deed,
giving occasion to any of falling into sin, or of falling away from the
received truth or practice of Piety, or does cause a negligence in the same.

Now these Scandals are of two sorts. First, given. Second, taken. Scandals
given, are all wicked sayings, and deeds, repugning the love of God and of our
neighbor, and whereby the former effects are occasioned, and these are either
in matters of Doctrine, or in life and manners. Thus all false and erroneous
Doctrines, as of Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Papists, are great means whereby
many are withheld from the right way to Salvation; but especially the Papists
are hereby a great scandal unto the Jews who live among them; for they seeing
Idols so usual in their Churches and Practices, which they justly abhor;
they are made thereby to loath Christian Religion. Again, all profane and
irreligious speeches of God and his worship, are of this kind, as Mal. 3.14.
All blasphemous contumelies and reproaches of the truth of Paul's Doctrine was
Scandalized, Romans 3. at the beginning, Romans 6. and Romans 7. And our Doctrine of
Justification, Free Will, with other necessary truths, are so perverted by the
Papists to their followers, that thereby great offense is given to the
ignorant. So for wicked actions, they are Scandals, for thereby other are
encouraged to evil, or made not so much to fear them ( Math. 16.17.) Thus the
incest of the Corinht. 1 Cor. 5. For the Scandal of the contagion is called a
Leaven. And so scandals give^ are by all sorts of wicked men professing Christ
but especially by such who being forward and zealous in Religion, do either
grow unsound, decaying or dissolute. The neglect also of good things, whither
private, or such as belong to public callings, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. As the Magistrates Scanda^l is, when he does not his duty in
punishing wickedness and cherishing the good; the scandal of Ministers is,
when they are negligent and careless in their Ministry: and here chiefly,
Nonresidency and unsufficiency are grievous scandals; for hereby men are
exceedingly weakened in the course of Piety, by the example of such as are
counted wise and learned, and so such as whose example might safely be
followed. And thus were the Pharisees a great Scandal to the common people of
the Jews, as Christ charges them. Math. 2^ They would not let the people enter
into Heaven: There are also Scandals given, not only in doing things unlawful
in themselves, but in things indifferent, which are not evil in themselves.
Thus Peter was a great Scandal, by his eating and living as the Jews, so that
Barnabas was stumbled by it; and this Paul teaches plainly. Romans 14.13, 14, 15,
16. 1 Cor. 8. and 9. chap. For though the nature and use of these things be
always lawful in themselves, yet it may be offended in the external usage of
them; for thereby another may be hindered, either from the truth or Piety, as
is seen, 1 Cor. 6.12.

The second sort of Scandals, are such as are taken, not given. That is, that
are of such nature of themselves as might incite to Piety, and might confirm
in truth, but yet are abused to the contrary. And thus every word or action,
good in it self, may be the matter of Scandal, being taken to be evil,
whither it be done slanderously out of malice, or out of weakness through
ignorance. And that these are not to be blamed, it may appear, for even the
most holy things are within this compass: All these Scandals may be referred
to three chief heads. First, the word of God. Second, the works of God. Third,
the godly, their sayings and doings. For the first, the word of God is a
Scandal, in either part of it, whither the Law or the Gospel. The Law is to
many a Scandal, either through ignorance or wilfulness. Thus the Jews were
Scandalized through a carnal zeal they bare to the Lord; thus Romans 7. The Law
is a Scandal to out corruption, which while the Law restraines, it rages more
and takes occasion to work Concupiscence and death. Thus also the impossibility
of the Law is a great Scandal to ignorant men, they not conceiving how it
should be just with God to command things impossible, to corrupt nature.

But chiefly, the Gospel and Christ are great Scandals in the world, in so
much, that Christ pronounced them blessed that were not scandalized at him.
Math. 11. And we have diverse particular examples in this case. John 6.61. and
66. Math. 15.12. Some are Scandalized at the person of Christ, because
outwardly it was contemptible; some at his familiar conversing with sinners;
some at his ordinary kind of diet; some for speaking against traditions, some
for derogating from Moses and the Law: some at his sufferings and death; some
at the Doctrine of justification, of spiritual eating his flesh, and at the
secret and free work of Gods drawing men to him. Ioh. 6. Some are offended at
the diversions that arises through the Gospel, called for this end Fire. Some
are offended at the cross that follows Christian Profession. Again, many are
offended at the condition and quality of the Church, as well in regard of the
Preachers thereof, that they were simple unlearned Fishermen, not learned
Rabbis; and now the Preachers thereof, mean men and no great wise men for the
world. Some are offended at the Believers, that they are few, not many, and
those of the meanest sort; Not many wi^e, noble, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Some are
offended at the Worship and service of God. These with more which might be
added, do show how true this is, but without any default on the truth sake;
for so dear and precious ought the word of truth and every part thereof be to
us, that though the whole World should be offended, yet it may not be concealed
and made merchandise of. Indeed the manner of handling of some parts of it, as
of Predestination may minister offense justly; but that is not in the Doctrine,
but in the indiscretion of men, handling it amiss.

Secondly, as the word and worship of God is a great Scandal, so are the works
of God: For man not being able to conceive the reason of them (for God does not
give a reason as Job speaks) yet man thinking to measure them by the line of
his crooked judgment, is offended at the varying from the same. Thus David was
offended at the work of God in smiting Vzzah, and was grievously troubled at
the work of God in the prosperity of the wicked and affli^tion of the Godly.
Psalm. 37. and 73. So was Jeremy and Habbacuck. So are many, calling into
question the Providence of God by this means. Some are offended to see the
wicked as live in pleasure, so die in Peace, without disturbance, when as yet
the godly, besides the evil in their lives time, have much bitterness of
soul and body in their death. Of all these the Prophet Hosea speaks
excellently. Hosea 14. and the last verse, The ways of the Lord are Righteous,
the Righteous shall walk in them, but the wicked shall stumble at them.

John's Austerity, nor Christ's Lenity did please the Jews; and this in some is
through ignorance, while good is taken for evil, and evil for good. Others of
malice, while good is disgraced with reproachful names, and evil is varnished
with goodly pretenses, and amiable names; yet, what has the Righteous done,
but that the poor sheep if she drink must be counted a disturber of the
water. Thus Ahab was offended with Elias, Ahaziah and Iehoram, with Elizeus,
Ahab with Michaiah, Daniel offensive to Darius Courtiers; but God forbid that
the Righteous should forsake his Integrity for all these things. And thus we
have seen the diverse kinds of Scandal against others, either God or men. The
Scripture also shows how men are Scandals to themselves; because, by corrupt
words, affections and lusts, they do make themselves at least to saker and be
slothful in the way of Salvation, ins^aring themselves in sins. As Math.
5.29.30. and 9. verse. The knowledge of these things are necessary for the
informing of our minds, and reforming of our judgments, and for direction in
the whole course of life; that knowing them, we may avoid them. But the
further use of it will appear in that that follows. Having spoken
sufficiently of the first point, let us come to the second.

The second point, is the Misery, for least Christ might be thought to speak
of a light or unnecessary matter, he does forewarne that it is most weighty, as
being not the least cause of the miseries and judgments of God on the world.
And this is set down in the word Woe, woe: which comprehends all evils, Ezech.
2.20. It is a word of one sorrowing, which in great grief and lamentation is
usually taken up of mourners, whither for themselves or for others. And Christ
does here partly express the heaviness of it, by that is added. It were
better a Mill stone were hanged about ones neck and he cast into the Sea. So
that here it is used figuratively (being a Metonymya of the effect for the
cause.) For a great and lamentable evil, which is to come on the world through
Scandals. For it must needs be a most fearful calamity, whereby not one or two,
but the whole world should be driven to an effeminate kind of mourning; because
the judgments on the same are universal and grievous.









But the faithful, whose eyes God has opened to see these evils, they sigh
and testify their sorrow by sighing, as the Prophets while they cried out the
judgments of God to the secure people, themselves mourned and fasted, Crying
my leanness, my leanness, I am pained at the heart. Esaias. 24.16. Habacuk 3.2.
and 16. verses, Ier. 4.19, 20. Ier. 9.112. Esa. 22.4. Luke 1^.21. Christ wept
for Jerusalem, when it laughed, fasted while it feasted; he foresaw the evils
to come, when as they would take no notice of them; as neither the old World
did, M^r. 9.24. The Father of the possessed Child cried with tears, when he
saw his Son rent of the Devil; when as yet the possessed himself was not
greatly sensible of the same. Appoplexies Palsies and Lethargies be dangerous,
yet senseless; and as Cancers and other filthy Ulcers, do more disaffect the
eyes of the beholders then they do the men themselves in whom they are. Even so
it is here. So that the truth hereof is not to be measured by the sorrow of the
world; for Christ said the World would rejoice (though woe unto it for that)
and Esa. 22.12, 13. But it must be measured by that it should be and would be
if it did truly and fully apprehend the present evils and future misery.

Jeremy from God reproved Baruch. Jer. 45. But seeing these are the times,
wherein Scandals are and will wax rise as Christ foretold; let us remember this
lamentable evil, wherein woe and all the World are enwrapped. That being
affected with sorrow according to God, we may a^oid these evils, and be counted
worthy to stand before the Son of man, or may find favor and lift up our heads
when the day of our Redemption shall come.

No doubt, Christ that wept in compassion for Jerusalem, did not utter this
lamentable Prophecy without great grief of heart. Neither is any man so
yronie, which should with sound and open eyes behold the face of miseries which
is in the World through Scandals, that can refrain his eyes from tears. What
the will of Scandal (...)?
And thus we see, what the sorrow ought to be; but let us see the evil and
we shall know the sorrow the better. This evil of Scandal as touching the
effect of it, is an aversion of men from God through the fraud of the Devil to
impiety, to the destruction of their souls and of their bodies.

And as touching the number of these which are taken with these Scandals as
with the traps of Satan, they are not a few, but the whole World; that is the
greatest part of the World, that the whole World may seem to perish by this
fraud: Now in both these regards, this evil is most heavy and fearful, for
the Salvation of one man is more worth then the whole World; for all the riches
of it, will not pay the ransom of one soul: and what ought to be more sought
for by us of God, then that we daily ask, That his Kingdom may come, and his
will be done; but when we see the whole World to be carried away from God
through Scandals, what is less done then that we desire; yea, the contrary is
daily practiced; how much vexation then must needs come to (...) godly mind,
which alone desires the glory of God and the Salvation of its brethren.

Now if thou desire to see how far and wide this evil spreads, there needs
no arguments to prove it. Look only on the times and manners of men, and thou
may read it too too plainly; whither can thou turn thy eyes, or what order
and condition of men is there among whom Scandals reign not. I would the
Active Scandala magnatum were not rifer then the Passive.

How great, long agone have the Scandals of Religion been evil examples of the
Truth despised. Religion so far observed; as the estimation thereof serves
our turn for advantage and preferment, have not many Consciences suffered
shipwreck against this stone; in whom the love of truth waxes cold through
others example. Zeal decays, Charity waxes cold, and no regard had of the
Consciences of men. Only a counterfeit of Religion and shadow remains, (I
speak for practice) how does the name of God wax vile through blasphemies.

Saint John has reduced these Scandals, to three heads. John 2.16. First the
concupiscence of the flesh, lusts of eyes, and ^^^de of life, to pleasures and
riches, with the beholding and enjoying whereof, the eye is never satisfied.
And for pride in Honors, Ambitions, great Trains, Gorgeous apparel, strange
fashions. Has not this Gangreene ceazed on many members of the Church. Who
sees not how most follow the pleasures of Eating and drinking, lying soft,
lofty buildings, filthy lusts; defiling their bodies which should be Temples of
the Holy Ghost; while Spiritual pleasures are counted base, and are
distasteful in comparison of these.

Who sees not how all gape after profit by hook and crook, right and wrong;
our lives are short, our desires unsatiable: So pride of life bewrayes it self
in all sorts, by the contempt of others in excess of Apparel, for matter and
form.

In comparison of these; Piety, fear of God, Conscience, ^are of furthering
the truth are banished; for the worldly lusts and carnal affections do as
mighty prisons detain Gods sacred Truth in unrighteousness, to the provoking
of his wrath from Heaven, and Scandals rainging who almost stumble not at them,
to the inducing of Athisme.

And, as if we were not miserable enough by our own natural wickedness, the
Devil does outwardly minister Scandals by all our senses, that whithersoever
we turn our eyes, ears, or whatsoever we do, we incur some grievous
Scandal, either given or taken. So that by this we may see in part, how great
an evil is on the World.

Sam. 8.5. For every one thinks that is done by good right which is done by
example. But, our eyes are to be directed to the Word of God, and thence to
fetch the rule of life; and with so much the more earnest care, by how much
there are the more Scandals; in greatest darkness, there is the greatest light
needful; in the greatest dangers, there is need of the greatest guard. Now the
Word is a light to our feet and a powerful instrument of God, not only for
our defense, but also to east down strong holds. 2 Cor. 10.3.

So that if ever there was need of diligent reading, Preaching, Praying,
Meditation; and Christian society, daily exhortations, use of Sacraments, and
all exercises of Religion, It is now; if ever there was need of the conferences
of the holy, and the company of the godly; whereby our minds drooping through
evil Examples, might be awaked. Our staggering and weak hearts established;
our coldness warmed, and so we edifyed in all godliness: J say, if ever
there was need, it is now; so that all endeavor must be given of all those,
who with inoffensive course desire to go on in the way to Salvation, that they
fall not away, nor be plucked away, (note the violence) from their own
steadfastness through the error of the wicked. And here; who can sufficiently
bewail the blindness of men, that when their eyes are opened to see, that
multitudes is no good proof of a truth and sound Doctrine; yet cannot see,
that it is as deceitful and insufficient for life and manners, yea more
deceiveable. Because more may see the truth, then have grace to practice it;
that if it hold not in truth of Doctrine, it will much more fail for practice
of life: as if Treason were naught in one or two, yet allowable in a multitude;
as if one piece of counterfeit silver should be rejected, and a thousand of
them go for Current.

And thus we have seen the misery of the World through Scandals given,
consider it in Offenses taken, whence through the great corruption of man, not
a few evils arise. For as was showed, wicked men are offended at the Law; many
at the Gospel for the Cross, through divisions; whence many pretend they know
not what Religion to be of; many, because they hate the godly, are offended at
their courses: they traduce the persons, calumniate their actions, and make
others offended at it. Thus Caine was offended at Abels acceptance, Esau at
Jacobs simplicity, the brethren of Joseph, at their fathers love; wicked Judas
at good Mary's fact; the Covetous is offended at the liberal, the filthy at
the clean, the sluggish Magistrate at the diligent, the idle Minister at the
diligent.

Whence comes a new increase of miseries; the band of love is broken twixt
those of the same place, envy repining secret undermining takes place, and
which is the misery of all, while some build diligently, others negligently;
some with good stuff, silver, gold; others with hay and stubble. When will the
building be finished, and what manner of one will it be. But let us apply this.

woe, as has been showed; O then how careful should men be of what they say,
what they do, and before whom. For be a man never so poor and base, thou art
threatened this fearful Woe, if thou Scandalize him. 1 Cor. 8. Saint Paul
shows two fearful evils that came of Scandals, that makes God so to punish
them. First, the endangering the soul and salvation of man. Second, the
trespass against the blood of Christ.

Now what can be more wicked and unbeseeming Christian profession, then to cast
away a soul, and to cause the least drop of Christ's blood to fall to the
ground, O the fearful state of blasphemers, profane talkers, loose-livers,
masters of disorder, actors of wickedness. Oh with what fear and trembling
should our Salvation be wrought forth. Saint Paul on this consideration cried
out, that if his brother should be Scandalized through his eating of flesh, he
would not do it while the World stood. Lo, love and the care of Paul.

The second use to all Magistrates and Governors to look carefully to
redress these evils. O how shall they deserve of the Church and Commonwealth.
For, if Christ has avouched that the World becomes miserable through Scandals,
then how much shall they engage their Country unto them, if by their means,
these evils be removed, then shall they truly be called gracious Benefactors.
Think it not enough if you can escape the Woe denounced against them that
write grievous Laws. If you cannot escape the Woe that comes of Scandals,
which are rise through your default,

How does the Brownists and Anabaptists traduce our Church and draw multitudes
after them, they all running on the Rock of Scandal in the Church. For the
many abuses of the Ministry in the entrance and execution of the same, Whence
they call into question the state of our Church, and for personal abuses,
condemn the sacred Function. Now how happy a thing were it, that these things
were removed, that we might have no unsufficient, idle or dissolute Ministers;
who offer strange fire, and come before the Lord in their sins. Such as God
himself wishes, that the Church doors might be shut against. Malach. 10.





It must needs be that offenses come.] Hitherto has been spoken of the
conclusion or last part of our Sermon: reason now follows the second, by which
the view and sight of our evil will appear more fully. We heard before how
heavy a thing a Scandal is, and what the misery ensuing was. Which had been
more tolerable, if there had been any way open to escape for evils are then
much qualified, when there is any refuge for them, or avoidance of them. But if
all means of escaping be excluded, and all ways intercepted, then a light
evil becomes sore. As ( Esaias 24.24.) Fear, pit and snare. Amos 5.19. Amos
9.12. Now this does happen to the Scandals, to which above and beyond their own
unmeasurable weight, there is added as pressing down, the burden of Necessity,
It must needs be.

Object. But whence comes this necessity.

Ans. There is a threefold reason of it.



This is manifest, 2 These. 2.11. Examples of this, we have in Rehoboam and
Jeroboam, 2 King. 12.15. The like Amos, 7.10. And most plainly, 1 King. 22. Of
Ahab, who refusing the true Prophets, God permitted the Devil to be a lying
Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets, to seduce him. This is one reason of
Mahometisme and Popery.

For when the world began to loath the true God, he permitted these false
Doctrines to arise to seduce many; So that the Romish Antichrist arose, who
challenged the authority of God to himself, in abrogating divine Ordinances,
and making new, in binding Conscience, in pardoning Sin, and in making a God of
the Bread, and how many follow this worship! Now whence is it, but that by the
just Judgment of God, they dash against this Rock, which have not received a
love of the truth. And the same Judgment of God is among us; for when the love
of Religion has long since begun to decay, God has sent such as shall embrace
the same in show only.

Has not this Scandal caused, that many who began to profess Religion long
since, have made yet so small progress. Many that had gone well on, are gone
backward, and few that increasing, persevere: hence it comes by Gods just
judgment, that the evil we see in others, we follow as a Banner displayed.

This is the first Reason of this necessity, which teaches, that men are far
off from that happiness, they dreaming, feyne to themselves, while they enjoy
occasions and liberty of Sin without controlement; for then are they carried
with the heaviest judgment of God, if they had eyes to see it, as the Prophets
above did bewail the peoples case in this behalf, and such as Christ in
justice, left the Pharisees unto; saying. Let them alone: and the Scripture, He
that is filthy, let him be filthy, Dan. 12.10.

Adam; for if it were in us by Creation, it could not be put off by no means,
nor in no measure: As by no means, the Fire can be made to cool, or the Stone
to fly; and therefore, seeing many holy men do in part put of this
Corruption, it is apparent, it is not Essential to man's nature.

Now the particular Corruptions, which in men are the procuring causes and
instruments of Scandal are these. First, a want of the love of God and his
Truth. Second, the want of the Love of our Neighbor. Hatred against some
private persons, love of our estimation, profits, pleasures, honors; and in
general the whole corruption of man, whereby the tongue is made a Scandal by
evil speaking, the members of the body by being weapons of iniquity.
Blindness of mind, frowardness of will, perverseness of affections,
self-love, naughty Conscience, conceit of ones own wit, holiness and
righteousness, and an aptness to receive any evil from another, as one body
receives infection from another. These are the subserving causes, to which the
Devil insinuates himself.



The third reason, is the final cause of Scandal, which in regard of the
Elect, is their trial; for it is the will of the Father, that the elect be
tried, that the chaff may be severed from the wheat, that his gold might be
purged his power in preserving, might shine in our weakness, and his mercy in
our misery. And the truth and power of Gods graces might be known to be
greater while thereby the godly are preserved from the common infection. As we
admire those constitutions, on those receipts of Art, whereby men living in the
midst of an infected air and persons; are yet free from the infection: this
consideration affords a double use.

Math. 24.24. There should be such strange delusions, that if it were possible,
the Elect should be seduced, thereby inferring to their endless comfort, that
it is not possible. This is the privilege of Gods children, and the staff of
comfort in all miseries.



In the fourth place, a secret objection offers it self, to be satisfied, which
is this.



there is a double Necessity. The first, is of Coaction or constraint, when by
some outward force, and not of any internal and voluntary motion; one is
compelled to the doing of a thing. As a stone by force is made to fly upward.

If such a necessity lay on man, as whereby he were made to sin against his
will, then he were free from all fault. But when as this necessity do add no
violence to the will, but it is carried wholly by its own swing to
wickedness, as loving the same, this Necessity has no excuse; because it
takes not away freedom.

This is briefly set down, but excellently by that learned and judicious writer
Doctor Abbot, out of Barnard. It is a voluntary and miserable free Necessity,
wherein, neither can necessity, excuse the Will, because it is voluntary; nor
the will exclude necessity, because it is entangled with delight therein.
Wherein, Will takes from man, all matter of defense, and necessity bereaves him
of possibility of amendment of himself. So that the Will in a strange wise
causes this Necessity to her self, for there is one way, Necessity by the habit
of corruption; and another way, liberty by the free motion of the Will.

Use.
Hence we learn, that excuse that men make, pleading Necessity, is a false
plea and unsufficient, seeing this Necessity is such as was voluntary, and was
also contracted and procured by our own default. The Philosophers could say,
That he that offended by Drunkenness, was worthy of double punishment; First,
for his fault; Secondly, for his Drunkenness. So, men are so far from
helping themselves hereby, as that they do but aggravate the matter and
provoke the Judge; for who would endure a Thief reasoning thus: I can do no
otherwise, it is so sweet to me, and I have been so accustomed to this course.

Second, when it is said, Woe be to that man by whom the offense comes, etc. So
Christ does show, that that Woe which belongs to the authors of Scandals, is
far heavier, then that which before was showed to hang over the World. For
greater must be the punishment of advising and purposed wickedness, then of
error and rashness. Greater of the seducer, t^en seduced; he that does mingle
a Cup of poison to another, ought by all equity, to undergo a greater
punishment, then he sustained pain, that drank the poison. So that the authors
of Scandals shall not answer for themselves alone, but for all those that have
been Scandalized by them.

Peter, Math. 16.23. Who when by a foolish speech, proceeding from ignorance
and love to Christ, yet did Scandalize Christ. Christ called him Devil for the
same, even because he was a Scandal.

And in very truth, the authors of Scandal are in some sort worse then the
Devil; for he only by persuasion and suggestion, but these do by Example and
action; which does give further encouragement, then a simple temptation; from
which fear might deter.

Now let us come to the Use.
If this thought did deeply possess the minds of men, how careful would they
be of every word, least that by idle, lascivious, filthy and blasphemous
speeches, they should give occasion to others by doing the like to decay in
Grace. How great modesty would be used, what gravity in outward carriage and
Attire, no distemper in Eating and drinking would be seen, least by their
Example others should be drawn to sin. But are these things so? No: But as if
Christ had played the false Prophet, so does the whole World heap up Scandals,
to their own, and the destruction of their brethren. Yea, if they may know,
what will offend and grieve their brother, that they will do of purpose.

But be it, that men in this world, do little perceive their misery, and the
evil; there will come a time when they shall find that true, which Christ has
told.

Therefore, my brethren; Let us remember that our s^^s extend further then our
selves, by our Example, be encouraged to do the like; and when every man's own
burden, is greater then he is able to bear; How intolerable will it be to
stand guilty of all those souls, which we have destroyed by our Scandals.





O that this one lesson could be learned, it would awake men, make them live
circumspect, and those that have sinned, to repent betimes, that they might be
Examples to others of good, as they had been of evil, and of praying for
those, whom they had occasioned to fall.

For most fearful is the estate of those men, Math. 5.29, 30. If thy right
hand offend thee, pull it out; So if thy hand or foot, though they be the most
necessary and useful members Pull them out and ou^ them off.



Mark, 9.42, 43, 44. When three several times he urges the fearful effect of
Eternal misery. O how should this rouse the Worlds deadness.

For Conclusion.
Let all things be done to Edification. 1 Corinthians. 14. Edify our selves in
our most holy Faith, 1 These. 5.11. Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow those
things that concern Peace, and wherewith one may edify another, verse 20, 21.
AMEN.

FINIS.
GODS COMMISSION TO CHRIST, TO PREACH THE GOSPEL. Sermon, III
LUKE 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,


THese words are that portion of Scripture taken out of the 61. Chap. of Esa.
Whereof Christ Preached in the Synagogue of Nazareth, where he was brought up;
as a recompense for his harbor, popular use and edification, might be
collected. And this choice of such Scripture, was here made by Christ, as might
serve to instruct the people of a most weighty point touching their Salvation.
John 17.3. Showing whence Christ came, wherefore; and what great need we had of
his help. Three things. These words then teach three things.

The Spirit. Esa. 11.2. The Spirit with all the gifts thereof are upon him; is
sent and given by God the Father, and abides in Christ. Yet it is said upon him
because the Spirit came down from heaven and did visibly rest on him. On me, I,
that is on my Humanity. Math. 3.16. So that these words signify thus much.

The gifts of the Holy Ghost, proceeding from God my Father, does reside and
dwell in this my Humanity, which ye see; by which gifts, I am sanctified to
this Office of Reconciliation.

Esaias affirms the like of him, and so may other Holy men, that they have the
Spirit.

Esaias is chiefly to be understood of Christ, and not of himself; and with
great difference the Spirit does reside in Christ and in others. And this
difference appears in two things.

First, in the Universality of the gifts in Christ. Second, in the Perfection
of gifts. As touching the first God did not bestow one or two, or more gifts on
the Humanity of Christ, but he powered them out most plentifully on him. John
3.34, 35. Col. 2.3.9. It pleased the Father, that all fulness should dwell in
him: all gifts are not given to one, but to every member, as much as seems
good to the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 12.11. For as the head is the common
receptacle of all the senses, and does exercise their faculties, when as yet,
every Sense has it distinct Office; In the execution whereof, they are
employed.

For the second, all the gifts of Christ were most perfect in him, perfect
Wisdom, Knowledge, Justice, Holiness; not inchoate, but in their perfect
maturity. There was no defect of any gift, or in any; but all were ministered
unto, absolute in all parts and degrees, to the full perfection of his
Humanity; and this not only from some time of his Age, but from his first
Conception. Luke 1.35. To his Resurrection and Ascension. 2 Cor. 5.21.

Now the gifts, given to the Saints, are only the first fruits, a handful and
as earnest-pence. 1 Cor. 13.12. We know but in part, we Love but in part. So
that we may easily see, how far the dwelling of the Spirit in holy men,
differs from the manner of the same in Christ. In the one without measure, in
the other in measure. In Christ full, in us in part; in him Primarily, In us,
Secondarily. So that as great difference as there is twixt the spring, and the
stream flowing thence. Twixt the light of the Moon and stars, and the Sun.

Pet. 1.17. For we see here, what a Mediator and Reconciler we had, who is all
sufficient, which when alone it is peculiar to Christ. Psalm. 45.8. It must
needs be, that the Office of Reconciliation belongs to him alone. Neither is
Christ unfit for any part of it, or defective, who has all gifts, and in all
degrees. Neither is any other fit for any part of that Office, seeing there is
perfection in none. So that neither Peter nor Paul, nor any Saint dead or
alive; may presume to offer themselves to partake in this Function, much less
may any intrude themselves. We may not feign to our selves other Mediators, it
is a burden too heavy for any to undergo. If Paul could say. 2 Cor. 2. at the
end. Who is fit for these things, to wit, to be a Servant and an instrument in
administering any part of these things, then who may be found meet to be the
Lord and disposer of these. Christ admits no companions in any part of his
Office, either Regal in binding Conscience and giving Laws, in opening or
shutting; or in his Priestly Office of Praying or Sacraficing or Suffering;
neither in his Prophetical Office of inward effectual teaching. Here then is
overthrown the blasphemous Doctrine of the Church of Rome, usurping all these,
being far unfit for any of them.

John 1.16. Both all new graces that are wanting, as also new strength and
increase of the Graces we have received. And this must be done by a lively
Faith apprehending Christ, esteeming him above all, desiring him before all,
and delighting in him more then all, till we may enjoy his glorious presence:
neither need we fear any defect; a Spring the more drawn, the faster it
rises: Pray we then, that seeing we have a dry ground, the Lord would give us
of the springing water of the Spirit, that we be not scorched with heat, or
pinched with drought.

He has Anointed me.] This is a Metonymicall speech of the adjunct, for the
subject of the sign for the thing signified. For God appointed that the chief
Magistrates, when they entered into their Offices, should be anointed with holy
Oil; and now the chief Magistrate among the Jews, was either Civil or
Ecclesiastical: the Civil, was the King, who was Anointed. 1 Samuel 10.1, and
16. chap. 14. The Ecclesiastical, was either extraordinary, or ordinary; this,
was the high Priest. Levit. 8.12. Exodus 29.30. chap. The other was the Prophet.
1 King. 19.16.

Now this Oil did signify the gift of the Holy Ghost, wherewith they were to
be endewed, which entered and executed these Offices. And because the Annoynting
was used at such time as they were consecrated, it is but for the Consecration
it self, and investing into the Office. And therefore, these words, He has
Anointed me, import thus much. The meaning of the Text.
For this cause, God my Father has ordained me to this Function, and has
given me power to execute the same. Further, touching this Annoynting, two
things is to be considered.





Men indeed, because they receive the Spirit by measure, diverse are Anointed
to diverse Offices, one not being sufficient to discharge many. But Christ being
furnished with all fullness of Spirit, is most sufficient for all the three
Offices.



Jordan. Math. 3. at the end. When he was almost thirty years old.

Now where the Truth is, what needs the shadow. And we read in Scripture of
some said to be Anointed, before there was the material Oil, of the inward
Spiritual Annoynting. Psalm. 105.15. and 1 Kings 19.16. Elisha is said to be
Anointed, and yet had nothing but Elias Cloak cast on him.

then Christ was Anointed in his very Conception.



Heb. 5. chap. 4, and 5. verses.

So that whosoever embraces Christ, he does by the same means and at the same
time come into favor with the whole Trinity, who committed this Office to
Christ; as on the contrary, they that despise Christ the Anointed of God, in
vain do they boast of God; when as together with Christ, they reject the Father
and the Spirit. And hence appears the miserable Condition of the Jews,
Turks, and all Infidels, who refuse to hearken to the Anointed of God.

John 6.27. Him has the Father sealed; to wit as with his Letters Patents
testifying, that Christ his Son is the only Mediator by whom he will be
Reconciled. 2 Cor. 5.21. God was in Christ, reco^ciling the World. And 1 Cor.
1.30. Christ is made to us of God. Acts 4. There is no other Name or Person. by
whom we may; yea, or by whom it is lawful to seek Salvation. Acts 5. at the
end Acts 10. Him has God anointed. So that always, the Apostles from this,
infer that this Christ is the Savior.

So that all are accused of falsification and forgery before God, who presume
to Translate the praise of this to any other then Christ, for they go about to
Corrupt the Authentike Seal of God.



Though in a Land, there may be many fit for an Office yet if by Charter, the
Kings Majesty grant it to one alone, who dare presume, not only not to set up
another, but not so much as go to any other about that business or Office, but
he shall incur the Kings displeasure.

And shall we not think, Joseph, that God shall not be offended? Shall one Sun
in the Firmament suffice to inlighten the whole World and shall not the Sun of
righteousness, Christ Jesus.

Better had these men controuled any of the works of Gods Creation (yet a woe
belongs to such) then of Redemption; and as their madness would appear, who
to help the Sun, would light Candels, at noone day. So no less madly deal
they, who would adjoyn any assistants unto Christ.

Second the meditation of this. That God anointed Christ, is the foundation of
Christian comfort, both in that we may be assured, that no exception can be
taken against Christ, who was sent by God himself; as also because God out of
his infinite and free Love to Mankind, gave Christ to be a Savior. And this
the Scripture often beats on, as Romans 3.21, 25, 26. Romans 5.8. 2 Cor. 5. at the
end. And Christ himself. John 3.17. So God loved the World. For we being the
parties that had offended, a Mediator should have been procured by us and from
us. But we were unable to supply any, because we were children of wrath. Behold
and wonder! It was Man that had offended, it was God that was injured; and
therefore, in all reason it was, that if man could not by himself, yet he
should have sought out one, who might have stood twixt God and him to make an
atonement. But lo, the contrary, God offended, and Man offending; even God I
say, the Creator, all-sufficient in himself and blessed for ever. And man, a
worm, a wretch before him, yet this great God vouchsafes to send an embassage
to us weak men to entreat of conditions of Peace, and to offer the blood of
his own Son to be shed who was the Ambassador to confirm the league of Peace
twixt himself and us. Was there ever any love like this, and wonderful! Oh the
Ocean of comfort! O endless love, how should this confirm weak Consciences.
How can we doubt that the Lord will fail his, when he has done this for them
all ready! O let us render love for love, that we be not worse then Publicans
and sinners, who love those, that love them.

Christ was Anointed, because he was furnished. So was Saul. 1 Samuel 10.9. And
David. 1 Samuel 16.14. So Cyrus. Esa. 42. and 44. chap. So Joshua, Moses, and all
the Apostles and Ministers, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

them in some good measure: and as they mock both God and men, who will enter
Marriage estate, having neither ability or desires to perform Marriage duties;
being either born Eunuchs or so made of men: even so is it, for any to enter
this holy Calling without some furniture. How dangerous is a Ship without
tackling, how venturous is that Soldier that leads an Army without Armor or
Weapons: no less dangerous is the case of these men. It behooves therefore
those, who under Christ are appointed for Ordination, to look diligently unto
this.

Lastly, Christ contents not himself to mention his gifts, but he does also
adjoyn Ordination. For these two be required and must go together. The first
without the second is not sufficient. For God is not the God of confusion. The
second without the first is nothing worth, it is but as a shadow or Ceremony
without substance, as an outward seal to a blanke: and hence it is, that
neither John Baptist entered his Calling, till he was appointed by God, Luke 3.
at the beginning. Nor Christ till he had been solemnly Consecrated.

To Preach the Gospel.] We have heard, who and what manner of one he is, that
was sent; as also the sending it self. Now follows the end, why he was sent,
to wit; to reconcile Mankind fallen through sin, from God, and that he might
restore him to a better estate then he had at first. Now this Office and
benefit is described. First, as it is in it self in the 18. verse. Second, this
showed, what manner of one it uses to be in those, in whom it uses to be
effectual, and in whose hearts it works, verse 19. And that for our threefold
Necessity, is threefold every one whereof is to be considered.

For the first.

He was sent to Preach glad-tydings to the Poor; where Poor. For without the
knowledge of this, we cannot conceive the benefit; and second, what is the
benefit, which is signified by the word Gospel, or glad-tydings.

For the first. Our misery is here called poverty or beggary.] The first degree
of our misery is beggary.
Not of the outward estate, but of the soul; but as in other things, the
Spirit of God does bring us to the knowledge of Spiritual things by comparing
them with earthly; so here, for all knowing, what outward Beggary is, how
reproachful, how miserable, especially where the estate has been good, and
the change has been wilfully made through misdemeanour and riot; as also it is
our case.

Beggars, as touching the Spirit, who are destitute of all things needful to
Salvation, such as are, the true knowledge of God, Faith, Hope Patience, Love
Holiness, etc. with the means thereof. These are the Spiritual riches, which
who so wants, he is deprived of the means of Salvation and of the sound hope
thereof. Now all men that ever have been, are, or shall be; are such poor
men. Adam and Eve were enriched of God with these riches we have spoken of, for
in these things consisted the Image of God. Ephesians. 4.24. But after Adam and Eve
had disobeyed, they lost these riches from themselves and their posterity, they
were cast into extreme Poverty, and out of the Berry-steed of Gods great
Manor, and in stead of these holy and rich graces lost, there are come many
foul evils, which has ceazed on all the powers of the soul and parts of the
body. This woeful estate of Man, called here Beggary is set out also, Ezech.
16. Luke 15. In the prodigal Son, and is figured by the wounded man, Luke
10. And by the Creeple that lay by the Poole of Bethesda. Yea, all outward
defects and diseases, as Blindness, deafness, lamenesse, leprosy, which were
cured by Christ, are but shadows and figures of this our inward misery, which
in it self is much worse then the outward, by how much, Heavenly good things
exceed Earthly; Spiritual surmount Carnal, and the soul excel the body: The
one also being easily apprehended the other hardly.

Math. 5.



First sort of poor. One of those who being poor, yet perceive it not, nor
acknowledge it. But as some in the World being poor, yet do (as Solomon
observed) boast of great riches. So here as is seen Revel. 3.17. They of
Laodicea. These are not the poor in Spirit to whom Christ was sent. Math. 9.13.

Second sort of poor. There is another sort of Spiritual poor men, to wit,
such as feel and confess their poverty that they are beggars in Grace, and
great debtors besides. These are called Babes. Math. 11.26. And weary and heavy
laden. Math. 11.28. Such as was the sinful woman. Luke 7. And the Publican.
Luke 18. And to these was Christ sent. Psalm. 25.8. and Psalm. 9.



passed on the rich worldling, Luke 12. Thus it is, when one is rich in the
world and is not so with God. What will thy great attendants do thee good, as
Lord of all, when as yet thou art subject to Man, Devils, and slave to many
sins. Let us therefore acknowledge our poverty, not in words only; but in true
sense and humility of heart, that we may find true riches; let us cease from
this our wisdom (indeed folly) of heaping up dirt and clay, and in mean while
neglect Pearls.

Esa. 55.1, 2. John 7.37, For so he has promised. Luke 1.53.54. And thus much
of the first degree of our Misery.

for declaring whereof Christ is sent, and is called The Gospel or glad
tidings of Salvation exhibited to every Believer by Christ: And this remedy is
most agreeable to our misery; for that is, Ignorance of God, deprivation of
Salvation, Spiritual poverty.

Now the Gospel is the treasure of Knowledge and Wisdom, Colos. 2.3. The rich
Pearl, Math. 13. Nay, the superexcellent riches of Gods grace, Ephesians. 2.7. and
3.7. This brings us the wedding Garment that covers our Nakedness, Math.
22.11. Bread, water, wine, and Milk to refresh us, Esa 33.3. Hence did the
Father supply to his prodigal Son all things wanting at his return, Luke 15.
Yea, this is truly called Glad tidings; For it declares how we are delivered
from four great Evils: As first, the weight of Sin; 2. The intolerable burden
of Gods anger. 3. The Power of Death. 4. The tyranny of Satan. And not only
these good Tidings, but does further comfort us with the Tidings of four
singular Good things. First, the Image of God to be restored. 2. Gods favor.
3. Eternal righteousness and perfect Redemption. 4. An inheritance purchased
and all freely, without any impossible condition.





Now the immediate and vocal Ministry of Christ is ceased, but the mediate,
which is internal and effectual in his Children, that is not ceased. The
outward, Christ performed as a minister of Circumcision, and touched the
outward care, but was often ineffectuall, and this after a time, laying aside, he
put over this service and Office to men. Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Corinthians. 5.20.

Nazareth. And this Christ would have so, because the condition of sense should
not be better then the condition of Grace, and that more might not be ascribed
to his Carnal presence, then to his Spiritual and holy Ordinance. But Christ
did ordain this Outward, that it might be as a way and gate to that inward
Preaching; for Christ will not ordinarily Preach or speak inwardly to an^, to
whom the Word is not outwardly Preached by some sent from God. Romans 10.14.

Secondly, The other kind of Preaching is the internal, whereby Christ does
make men believe and persuades their Consciences; That he is the Son of God and
Savior of the World. And this Preaching is peculiar to Christ, and is
perpetual; neither does he lay it aside himself, or put it off to any
Creature. 1 Cor. 3.6. Neither he that plants, nor he that waters. is any thing,
to wit, as touching this inward work. So Mat. 3. John Baptizeth with water, but
Christ with fire; that is, with the Spirit which purges as fire. This thus
opened, there arises Instructions hence both to People and Ministers.

outward Preaching of the word is the beginning of all the benefits of Christ;
for it is the means both to declare it and to apply it.

In vain are all other benefits expected, where this is wanting can any
Building be reared, where no foundation is laid, can a man come to the end of a
thing, the beginning and middle and means whereof, he has neglected: Shall
we by the despising the only way into the house, attempt to enter in by
another, Christ himself near propounds to us, a Ladder of three distinct
steps, by which we should ascend Heaven. Can we, omitting the lowest step, to
wit, of his fitting and Consecrating, reach the highest and effect of all; this
is most certain and worthy to be imprinted in men's minds, That to whom Christ
is not a Prophet, to them he is neither Priest nor King. Cor. 1.30. This
Ministerial Function, is the chief of all divine worship, and the soul and
life of the rest; it is the road and the highway whereby we are brought to
Christ, and whereby we are admitted into his treasures.

Second the Preaching exercised in Christ's own person, is not only the
beginning and means of the other benefits of Christ; but even that external
Office performed by his Ministers, Math. 10.14.

This point serves to strengthen us against the Scandal, which our corruptions
does take at the infirmity of the Ministers: For the Preaching of the Gospel,
by reason of the outward abjectnesse of those to whom it was committed, was
always counted of the World folly. What was more divine then Christ, who ever
spoke more graciously, yet who more contemptible for his outward abject estate;
they were astonished at his words, yet they said; Is not this the Carpenter, and
are not his brethren with us. Mark. 6. But if we shall consider, That Christ is
King or Priest to none, to whom he is not a Prophet, and he is not a Prophet,
to those that contemn his Ordinance of Preaching, then men shall he made to
give due respect to the same.

touching the Ministers, they ought not to be daunted, if they see the prove
contemn their Ministry; for let them remember, that they, as Christ were sent
to the poor, so that if one or two poor embrace our Doctrine, we have wherein
to rejoice. Ezech. 2.5.

What was the matter of Christ's Doctrine, to wit, the Gospel and not the Law.
For this cause came he out of the bosom of his Father. John 1. The Law was
given by M^ses, etc. So that this does ^ichly commend the Office and benefit of
Christ, for the Gospel far surmounts the Law.

Did not Christ teach the Law (Math. 5.) and other places, as to the young man
Luke 29.

He did it ^^t as his chief Office, but as a preparing of men thereby to the
Gospel; for as the proper office of a Carpenter is ^o build, not to pull
down, forced often to do both; Even so was CHRIST.



This being remembered, to return to the Point, to wit, The excellency of the
Gospel, it will soon appear by the riches and benefits it brings with it. As
first, Pardon of Sins. Secondly, gift of Righteousness. Thirdly, adop^ion of
Sons. Fourthly, acceptance into the favor of God, yea unto life everlasting.
Fifthly, gift of the Spirit, Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, Holiness, etc.
Sixthly, freedom from the Curse of the Law, Hell, Death, and dominion of Sin.
Seventhly, Communion with the blessed Trinity, 1 John 1. at the beginning.
Eighthly, access unto the throne of Grace. Ninthly Peace of Conscience,
Perseverance: Sanctification of all afflictions, with all other riches of
Christ, all which are wrought by the Gospel, which how great they are may be
seen by the contrary or the want of them; as to be under the gui^t of Sin*
wrath of God, Children of Satan, Curse and Death bondage, sting and woe me of
Conscience, debarred Gods presence, and reserved for the fearful soci^ty of
Satan: And as the excellency of the Gospel does partly appear hereby, so will
it further, by considering how it differs from the Law.

For the Law, first is Natural; second the Gospel is Supernatural, both for
matter and the manner of Revealing, (Ioh. 1.18. Colos. 2.16. 1 Cor. 2.7.) Had
not he wi^dome of God found out this means of Salvation, and published the
same; all the wits of Men and Angels had not been able to have devised such a
way, whereby Gods justice might be fully satisfied, and yet infinite Mercy
extended to miserable Man.

Secondly, The Law and Gospel differ in the way that leads to Righteousness
and Salvation. For the Law says by Doing. The Gospel, by Believing. The Law
teaches, it must be done by our Selves. The Gospel admits and sets forth
Another, Philip. 3. Gal. 3. Romans 10.5, 6, 7.

Thirdly, they differ in the manner and nature of the Promises annexed to
either. For the Legal requires the condition of our Righteousness, and that
every way perfect. But the Evangelicall requires not our own but accepts
another nor exacts Perfection in us, but only Syncerity. Romans 4. By debt, and
freely distinguishing the Law and the Gospel.

Fourthly, They differ in their effects, for the Law causes wrath, Increases
sin, gives not strength to do the things Commanded. But the Gospel, brings
Peace, Righteousness, and (...) the Ministry of the Spirit. This is largely
and excellently taught. 2 Corinthians. 3.

Cor. 4.1, 2, 3. So that the Ministers thereof need not to be ashamed. Romans
1.16. It is the power of God to Salvation. Ephesians. 3.7.8, 9. And hereby, the
meanest Preacher of the Gospel is become greater then John Baptist, namely in
regard of his Office; Because they are publishers of these glad-tydings
accomplished by Christ.

Math 13. Luke 10. Blessed are the eyes that see those things which you see,
etc. Heb. 12.17 18, 19.

Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. If they escaped not that transgressed the Law, much less
shall they that offend against the Gospel. For Christ is the Prophet whom who
so will not hear, must be destroyed. Acts 3. at the end. God suffered evil
entreaty of his Servants, but after he had sent his Son, and they had despised
him, presently he took away the Vineyard. Woes were denounced against Corazin,
Bethsaida and Capernaum, wherein is showed that their state should be worse at
the day of Judgment, then Sodom and Gomorrha.

Scripture, as whereby all the wiles of the Papists may be discovered and
avoided. They commonly teach, that the Gospel is the new Law, and a more
perfect Law, whence they inferred their Doctrines of Counsel and works of
Supererogations. But alas, if the Gospel were a more perfect Law, it were
woeful tidings to all mankind: Hereby also may appear that the Law and Gospel
cannot be joined in the point of Justification; for as these two are quite
contrary. To to do a thing by our selves and to do it by another; to have a
thing by desert, and to have it of free gift, and such are the Law and Gospel
in the justification of a sinner.

To Preach deliverance to the Captives.] That which before was set down in
general only, both in regard of the Benefit, as also of the Misery of man;
this same, after the usual manner of Scripture, is described more particularly
and as opposites set together, do make each other more conspicuous; so is it
here, a Misery and a mercy, a defect and a supply. And as the disease is before
the remedy, so it must first be handled: and it is expressed in the word
Captives, wherein as before, the outward and bodily Captivity is used to
express and declare our inward miserable Captivity and bondage.

Captives.] As God sold his people into their Enemies hands, suffered their
houses to be pulled down, the fields and Vineyards to be spoiled, and in wrath
to commit them to their fury; even so, through sin we fall into a most cruel
bondage, far passing that of Egypt or Babylon, both for the misery it self,
as also for want of means of deliverance. Now this Captivity is fourfold.
The first Captivity is under Original corruption, whereby the Mind is captived
in the chains of ignorance, error and vanity: The Will is manacied with
perverseness, the Affections with contrariety, violence, insolency and
importunity; and by the daily fruit of this, by actual transgressions, we
bring our selves into a great bondage, as the Israelites were by the
Philistines, who had not so much as a weapon among them.

The second Captivity is under Satan. 2 Timothy 1. at the end Luke 11.21. Ephesians.
2.2, 3. Wherein he deals no less cruelly with those whom Spiritually he
possesses, then he did with those whom he bodily possessed. Depriving them of
the use of their memb^rs, Tongues, Ears Eyes; making them to offer violence to
themselves, and to cast themselves into fire and water. And this cruel bondage
under these two might be showed by many particulars, as that they command most
base and ignominious services, they give no rest to their vassails, day nor
night.

The third, is the dominion of actual transgression and sinful corruption and
affections under which the wicked serve a most sore bondage. One being a slave
to Lust, another to Pride, another to his Belly, a fourth to Honors; another
to Passion and Pride: and thus have the greatest Monarchs been slaves. As
Alexander and Heliogabulus.

The fourth bondage, is of Mortality and the Grave called by St. Paul the
bondage of Corruption. Romans 8. With all the attendants, Sickness, pains,
diseases, death it self; and to these might be added the bondage of the Law.





Ier. 9.24. For what would it avail to be all these, and yet to be in
vassalage to some conquering Power.

The knowledge of this, Theodosius rejoice and praise God more for making him a
Christian, then an Emperor, knowing that Religion brought that to him, and
took that from him, which all the Scepters in the World could not. To what
purpose is it for men to talk of their Nobility, when lost by attainter; and
for a Prince taken Captive to brag what he was, is but vanity and vexation, and
this is right our condition.





Labor then for pardon of sin and release of bondage, for till such time, thou
can live no more in Peace, then a condemned man in Prison, daily expecting
his Execution. If such a one should build, purchase, and keep a stir in the
World, all would pity his folly and madness, and yet we deal more madly for
our Souls and Salvation.

Math. 11.28. Romans 7. Wretched man who shall deliver thee; Thanks be to God for
these sakes Christ came, Esa. 61.3.4, 5.

And thus much of the misery described by the first particular, the remedy
follows.

Deliverance, suitable to the Misery.

Here is two points. First of the kind or manner of our Deliverance. Second, of
the Measure of it. For the first, we must know that there are four kinds of
ways for delivering Captives. First, by Exchange. Second, by free Manumission.
Third, by force and violence Fourth, by price and Ransom. The first of these
has no place in our Deliverance; for whom or for what should the exchange be.
But for the other three means, though they are differing, yet do all sweetly
agree and concur in our deliverance: For if we look into the Original and
fountain of our deliverance. It streams from the most free and everlasting
love of God, yea from the bowels of compassion in our God, pitying us in our
misery. Luke 2.75, 76, 77, 78.

Again, if we consider Satan, who did cruelly detain us in bondage, we are
delivered by force. Colos. 1.16, 17. And Luke 11.27. Christ buckled with Satan
and spoiled his holds and triumphed over him. Colos. 2.14, 15, 16. and 30. If
we respect the justice of God, which was offended, and so had justly given us
over to thraldom. We are delivered by the all-sufficient ransom and
satisfaction which Christ made and paid, whereby Gods wrath is appeased, the
Law fulfilled, and through the efficacy of the said death and resurrection in
the hearts of Gods children by the Spirit of God, the power and dominion of sin
is abolished, his strength abated, and man endewed with the strength of God to
encounter against sin. And thus much of the kind and manner of Deliverances.

Now follows the Measure, which is not fully as yea, in regard of actual
enjoying the same. Not that there is any defect in our Deliverer, nor that any
damage shall ensue to us thereby; but this is so disposed of, as may turn to
Gods greater glory and our further good.

When David's Ambassadors were disfigured with their shorn beards, and
curtayled clothes, they were not meet presently to come into his Presence, but
were enjoined to stay for a time.

Even so, being deformed and mangled with Sin,

So that, true it is; we must Dye, threats may take place, which once
denounced, could not be revoked; but as Assuerosh, though he could not revoke
the sentence of Death, sent against the Jews: yet he sent forth another
Edict, whereby he armed the Jews against their Enemies. like as the Worm that
breeds in the Tree, kills the tree. Before, Death was the Devils Sergeant to
arrest us and to carry as without bail to perpetual Prison; but now it is
made the Lords gentleman Usher to conduct us to Heaven: Before it was said,
Thou shall Dye and not Live, now it is said, Dye that thou may no more dye,
but Live eternally.

Luke 1.74. Upon this ground are made all Exhortations in the Scripture, Romans
12.1, 2. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. It had been better otherwise never to have been
delivered, 2 Pet. 2. at the end. Math. 12. When the Devil is cast out of a
man, he seeks rest, etc. And if a Bondman be escaped, and caught again,
more bonds are laid on him the eye of his Keeper more observes. He that once
escapes Fire and Water and will cast himself into them, is well worthy to
perish. Israelites were delivered from Babell, how did they Watch, build with
one hand and prepare to fight with the other, to defend their Liberty; and as
Ez^^ reasoned, Chap. 9.9. That when as we were bondmen, thou O God, forsook
us not in our bondage; and seeing thou have stayed us from being beneath for
our Iniquities and have given us such a Deliverance, shall we return to
break thy Commandments, would not thou be angry, till thou had consumed
us, so that there should be no more escaping: Even thus ought we and must we
reason with our selves; Nay, what can we say, if we resist not Sin. Have we
not a Promise we shall vanquish. When we were weak, unskilful in battle;
nay, wilful not listing to fight, and our Enemies were strong, resolute and
well appointed, no marvel if we turned our back. But now that the advantage
is to us, and disadvantage to our Adversaries, what can we say, if we faint?
who will pity that man that suffers himself easily to be spoiled of his goods
by Robbers, having on himself good armor and well weaponed, and being
stronger then the Thief. Let us then stand fast and not betray our Liberty,
but often meditate of the bitterness of our former bondage: one that being long
in Prison, and there fed of scraps; if being delivered, he pass by and sees
other at his old diet, he partly trembles, partly his stomach rises at it, and
so should it be with us.

Secondly, This does admonish us of Thankfulness: No benefit to this, Exodus
12. The night of their Deliverance out of Egypt was solemnly to be kept. Yet
this was nothing, and therefore to be forgotten in comparison of the
Deliverance from Babell, Ierem. 16.14. Now this of ours far exceeds both the
other, as being but temporary and bodily Deliverances, from Miseries ceazing on
the body, which Death would have ended. And yet for this, how does the Psalmist
stir up the people, Psalm. 107. To thankfulness, verses 1, 2, 8, 13, 16, 21,
31. Nay, it is to be observed, that the Scripture speaking of Deliverance from
the bondage and guilt of Sin, calls all Creatures to rejoice with Man, for this
his happiness, and the fruit of it, Esa. 44.22.24. Rejoice ye heavens for the
Lord has done it, etc. Esa. 49.13. And sure great cause have we, Psalm. 116.8.
Therefore he inferres in the first and 2d. verses, That he will love the Lord
dearly, and that he will walk before God in the Land of the living. And in
other places, meditating of it. He breaks forth. Lord what is man that thou art
mindful of him. What was the Lord God more tied to us then to the Angels
falling, yet passing by them in woeful misery, has vouchsafed us mercy.

Elizabeth could cry out in admiration! whence is it That the Mother of my Lord
should visit me; what ravishment of affection should possess us?

Let us acknowledge this unfainedly, and give him the glory of his Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Truth, Holiness; for all these appear in our
Deliverance. Let us study to express thankfulness by avoiding what is
displeasing to God, and by doing that may please him: Otherwise if forsake good
and cleave to evil we shall be cast off from God and all goodness, and
shall be tied by an inseparable bond to all perfection of evil, as a just and
befitting recompense of our own choice.

Esa. 52.7, 8. And because this is not thought of it is that men are so dull
and heavy in entertaining the word and the Ministers thereof. And thus much of
the first particular.

Now follows the second.

Verse 18 To Heal the broken hearted.] Herein by a second comparison the
misery of man is set forth with the remedy by the benefit of Christ. Where
first, of the Misery.

This broken heartedness is a fruit of sin and Corruption, whereby the heart
as with a mighty burden is bruised (yea so heavy it is, that God affirms of
himself, that he is pressed with sins, as a Can is pressed that is filled with
sheaves, Amos. 2.13.) And the whole man is made to go drooping and
languishing. Now this being the general estate of all by nature, as the former
was in regard of the effect of sin. Yet because in Scripture they only are
properly called broken hearted, who feel the burden of their sin; therefore by
this, is understood all those who are smitten in heart and wounded in
Conscience for their sin, being called also in Scripture, the sick, the humble
the poor and contrite, the weary and laden, the soft and melting heart.
Whereas the other, not truly pressed with the burden of sin, but dead in it and
senseless of it, they are termed the whole, (to wit, in their own fancies) the
Proud, the lofty, the righteous, the fat heart, the hard and stony hearted.

That the promises of the Gospel and the benefits of Christ belong only to the
contrite in heart. The Scripture is a plentiful witness in this case, Esa.
57.15.116. Esa. 65.4. ^sa. 61.4. Math. 9.12.13. Math. 11.28. Examples of this
truth, Luke 7.37. and 47 verses. Luke 15. The prodigal Son. Luke 28. The
Publican. Acts 2.37.38. Acts 16. The Iaylor: And the truth of this is most
apparent. For Christ was sent to no other but such, For none will rest on
Christ for their Salvation, till they ^ee no other mean^s to escape
Condemnation, none will ever s^ek to Christ to be their Redeemer, till they
perceive they are the bondslaves of Satan, Romans 7.10. they will never look for
the riches of his righteousness^ till they feel their own poverty. Never
desire Chr^sts garment, till they see their own nakedness till any feel
themselves Sick they will never seek to the Physician, he that is full
despises an hony-combe, and what cares he for a pardon that thinks he has not
offended. And so of necessity, there must be a knowledge of sin, that there may
be asking, seeking, knocking; without which, there is no obtaining again: who
can imagine, that Christ who is infinite in wisdom will unadvisedly bestow his
benefits on such as finding no want of them, desire them not absent, nor
esteem them present; and so can never, nor will be thankful for them. Who can
in reason conceive that he will offer himself a Savior to such as acknowledge
themselves not condemned, that he will redeem those that confess not
themselves Captives, or heal those that think themselves sound, or that he
will vainly spend his precious Blood in clensing them who take themselves holy.
So then it is apparent that none are or shall be partakers of Christ but the
broken hearted.

the small number of those, who can justly lay any claim to Christ, for who
almost sees his sin and groans under the burden of it. Nay, is not sin become
a delight no burden, a sport and pastime, do they not hide it under their
tongue as a most sweet thing, as Job speaks. So that they are loath to part
with it. Yea the Spiritual Physician that shall offer to purge this Corrupt
humor, he must look to suffer the same things, that the bodily Physician does
at the hands of the Frantic.

It is the first degree to health, to feel the disease. And till this be in
the soul, there is and will be a scoffing at all the riches of Christ, as is
to be seen in the Jews. Acts 2.13. Till they were pricked, and then they
sang another song. The like John 4.11.12. A lewd Strumpet could frump Christ
till her sins were laid open. Yea this does most plainly appear in the Example
of Paul. Romans 7.9.10. Who while he truly knew not sin, nor the burden of it.
Was alive in his own conceit, and thought himself a jolly man, and so proudly
scorned, yea persecuted the Doctrine of Christ. Now to the procuring of this
sight and sense, there is required a lively sight of Sin, as it is set forth in
the glass of the Law, with the heinousness and filthiness thereof, as being
against an infinite Majesty, against a holy Law, and so most vile, against a
good Law and so most evil, against a just Law, and so most unrighteous, and
without all just excuse. The Punishment also of sin is seriously to be
considered of, as it is to be seen in many heavy spectacles, as Adam and Eve,
Sodom and Gomorrha, the Old World, the Angels fallen, and infinite persons
with Dives in Hell torments. And lastly, in the glass of Christ's most bitter
Agony.

If we did daily look the face of sin in the glass of all these, it would
awake us, and make us to fly from the vengeance to come. To this end it was,
that John Baptist so thundered before Christ; hence it was, that Christ so
opened the Law, and showed the Spiritual sense and deep search of the Law.
Hence it was, that Christ at first dealt so rigorously with the debtor. Math.
18.23, 24, 25. And with the young man bidding him sell all. Luke 19. So that
we must he content that the Law works on our Conscience and first slay us as
is did Paul, before we shall be truly alive.

Third, this serves for the comfort of the afflicted. As darkness is not
descryed by darkness, so neither is Sin but by Grace. No Element is weighty
in his proper place. No more is sin in a natural man. He that is dead, feels
nothing. So that in that thou feels, thou art alive; and if hereby thou art
made to hunger and thirst after Christ's righteousness, thou shall be
satisfied. And thus much of this misery. The remedy follows. To Heal. Christ
is often compared to a Physician, so are his Ministers and his word. Ier. 8. at
the end. Is there no Balm at Gilead, Christ healed the bodily diseases, but it
was but to make the people understand, that he came to cure the Soul, and
herein Christ applies himself to our misery. Are we hungry, he is Bread; are
we Thirsty, Naked, Poor, Weary, Sick; then he is Water, Garments, Riches,
Ease, and Physic. But as the sickness is Spiritual so is the remedy. And as
the sores and diseases are many, so many are the Salves and Plasters of
Christ. They are four principally 1 Gods promises.
the first sovereign Balm or Nectar, is the suppling Oil of his gracious
Promises, which are most true and most free; and therefore may not be counted
as Physic of no value, and these leaves and fruit of the tree of life. Revel.
22.2. Are every where dispersed over the whole book of God, able to revive the
fainting Spirit. Some whereof, are, Esaias 40.1, 2, 3. Esaias 42.2, 3. Esaias 51.5,
6. Esaias 54.9, 10. If the World shall not be drowned again, because God has
said it; no more shall an afflicted Soul be cast away. Yea Ier. 31. at the
end. Ier. 33. If Gods Covenant with Day and Night, and with Sun, Moon and
Stars can be broken, then may the truth of Gods promises fail. Nay they
shall not, though Heaven and Earth pass.

2 Salve is Christ Jesus blood.
The second Sovereign Salve that Christ cures withal, is the plaster of his
own heart blood. He does not only help by promising, but he performs it
it-selfe. He does not only give the Receipts, but he makes it and affords the
Ingredients, which grow alone in his garden. Hereby Christ takes away the
guiltiness of sin, and eases the Conscience and heart of that burden that did
crush it. Esa. 53.3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. at the end. John 1. The Lamb of God. Heb.
9. How much more shall the blood of Christ, etc. Yea whereas there are three
great wounds and running sores in Man: First guiltiness of Adams sin. Second,
Corruption of Nature. Third, actual disobedience. Christ the heavenly
Physician does cure all those. The first by his Death. The second, by the
holiness of his Nature imputed. The third, by his obedience to the Law.

3 Is the working of the spirit.
The third Plaster Christ afford and provides; is the effectual work of his
Spirit, which is as a defensive and disperser, and consumer of all the Corrupt
humors, that they grow not to a head. These takes away the dominion of Sin,
and eats out the Core of Corruption, drying up the filthy streams of sin, and
opening a new spring for Holiness and Sanctification. This Plaster is taught,
Romans 6.2, 3, 4. Phil. 3.10. Heb. 9.14.

4 The Intercession of Christ.
The fourth and last effectual Remedy; is the Intercession of Christ for
whereas there are two things, which are ready to cause the sore to break out
again, being healed. To wit, our daily sins, and our failings and coldness in
our best actions. The Intercession of Christ does help both these. For he does
thereby daily remember his death to God his Father, that it may be effectual
for (...) our si^s, past and to come, and he does forthwith as the great high
Priest, take his Censer and step into the gap, when at any time we have made a
breach. And for our Prayers, he does perfume them with his sweet Incense.
Revel. 8.4, 5.

Romish Church, which are like the Plaster and Salves of many dishonest
Surgeons. They do but venom and cause the sore to rankle, But let (...) to
Christ, who is able and willing, h^ ^ever excluded any coming to him for
bodily (...) in the ^^guish of s^^^^, he has said, He would not break the
broken Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. O then, let us beseech him with
David to heal us and he will restore us. Psalm. 38. How ready is he to embrace
and heal the widest gaping wounds; as of Manasseh, the sinful Woman, the
prodigal Child, yea many of the murderers of himself, whereby they murdered
themselves in Soul, he healed.

Secondly, Let it teach us thankfulness. How is the bodily Physician honored
and rewarded; Much more the healer of thy Soul. Psalm. 103. Luke 17. Remember
the Leaper that was cleansed, he requires no other gift. He showed great love to
thee and all Mankind, that he stayed not for sending, but he came to visit us.
Which is strange in the World, to see the Physician seek to the Patient, and
not the Patient rather to the Physician. O then! should we not love our
Physician, should we not follow his direction, which is, being healed, Go thy
way, and Sin no more. And seeing Christ has made his Minister the Apothecary
to temper and administer these Heavenly Physics, how should we seek to their
Shops, the places of Gods worship; how should all that are diseased, come and
lie down at this Poole of Bethesda, waiting till the Lord effect our cure:
there God opens his School of Physic and Surgery. Examine what comes from
thee, what thy Pulse is. Observe thy heart, if any Lust of uncleanness,
Ambition, or Covetousness like a Plurisie vex thee; here may thou have a
vein opened: If any Fever of malice vex thee, it may be abated. If any
swelling of Pride and Vainglory, it may be taken away. Does any Vital part
wast in thee, or any Spiritual Consumption ceaze on thee; as if any defect in
thy Liver, that the Word turn not to good nourishment, or if thy Lungs be
naught, that thou growest cold and feeble in Prayer, here may thou have
remedy. Does the Palsy, Lethargy, Apoplexy or such stupifying diseases
creep on thee, here may thou have those gross and tough humors expelled.
Does loathsome Leprosy begin to rise up in botches, here it may be cured. O
then! seeing there is such Sovereign confections, why is not the sore of my
daughter healed. Let it not be said of Israel as it was of Babell, We would
have cured her and she would not be cured. Least the Physic of the Word not
prevailing, God send his scaring Iron, and make Incisions. Yea excisions, which
God for bid.

Ministers and Spiritual Physicians are admonished how and whom they heal, to
wit, the Broken and not the whole. Ezec. 34.16. We must take heed how we draw
a dead skin over the wound, before it be thoroughly searched: For, as we may
not wound and gall the wounded with sharp wine of threats and rebukes, so
neither may we power in Oil into festered sores, and da^be with untempered
Mortar: we must take heed we sley not the Souls which we should revive, and
quicken those we should kill, Ezech. 13.18.19, 20, 21, 22. For so to do brings
death, and was a cause of destruction to the old people of God. Lament. 2.13,
14. O the misery of a Land through foolish and flattering Physicians. And thus
much of the second Metaphor, declaring our misery, with the remedy
correspondent.

Verse. 28.
Recovering of sight to the Blind.] This is the third comparison or Metaphor
expressing our misery, by a word fetched from the defect of bodily sight, and
applied to the Mind. This shall not need much to be insisted in, because partly
it has been handled before as a branch of our Spiritual Captivity. Yet
because the Scripture is most frequent in the use of this, as much delighting
in it it shall be profitable a little to view the Spiritual blindness by that
of the body, the understanding is the eye of the Soul, and the informer and
director to the Will, affections, and so to all our actions; now therefore for
it to be b^ind, who sees not the great inconveniences thereof. For if the eye
be darkness, how great is that darkness: and if the blind lead the blind both
shall fall into the ditch; now the Scripture does exceedingly beat of the minds
blindness; true it is, that in things pertaining to this life, there is some
conceits; as also in Moral and Civil actions and Virtues. But in the chief,
to wit, in things Spiritual; i^ is stark blind. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. Where the
reason is given, because the things of God cannot be discerned, but by the
Spirit of God; as none can know what is in man, but the Spirit of man; and in
the 14 verse of the same chapter, he shows that the natural man discernes not
the things of the Spirit of God; yea they are folly to him. So that, as a Beast
is stark blind in things to be apprehended by reason, neither can they be made
so plain, that he can conceive them; because he wants reason. Even so, things
Heavenly and Spiritual cannot be comprehended by the depth of reason. The
truth of this does further appear by the estate of men, both within and
without the Church at such time as Christ came into the flesh, and the Gospel
began to flourish. In the Church was many learned Scribes and Pharisees, and yet
they could not see Christ that was the Sun of righteousness, and how
ignorant did Nicodemus show himself, yea indoc^ble in the point of
Regeneration. Ioh 3.

For others, out of the Church, the University of Athens then flourished, but
how did they entertain the Truth delivered by Paul. Acts 17. Eloquent Tully,
alive a little before. But learned and Divine Seneca, and learned and modest
Pliny lived in the times of the Gospel, but favored it not. And the whole
state of the World, that it was almost three hundred years, before Religion
was countenanced in the World, is a Testimony sufficient of the World
blindness. So then, for the true manner of Gods Worship, and the right way to
Salvation, with all things subordinate to these. Man in his best wisdom cannot
conceive. Now to say no more hereby may appear. That this is a great misery.
These bodily defects may be supplied by others, if thou be blind, thou may
be guided. But here every man must have an eye for himself, another knowledge
will do thee no good if thou remain blind thy self. Now as bodily blindness
to any whatsoever is very uncomfortable and disadvantageous. For the blind eat
many a Fly, and can hardly discern Poison from wholesome meats, yet for some
men of some special condition to be blind is very prejudicious. As first, For
a Travailer who can take never a step forward but is either ready to stumble,
or to fall into some ditch, or to go out of his way. So that if some be not
adjoined that guide him, (which is here denied) he must needs perish, by one
misfortune or other, running into the mouths of wild devouring beasts while he
straggles the Forest of this World. Secondly, For a watchman to be blind is
most heavy and miserable, for he can foresee nothing, nor discover evils
approaching. Thirdly, for a a Soldier, because he must needs be wounded, not
knowing which way to decline the battery against him. Fourthly, for an overseer
and keeper of precious Jewels and such like. Now all these are our conditions,
we are Travailers in the unbeaten and strait way to Heaven. We are all and
ought to be Watchmen to foresee the Judgments of God; we are all Soldiers in
the Lords Battle; we are all keepers of our own Souls and what other precious
Jewels we have from God, Which the Devil lies in wayt for. How miserable then
needs must the condition of Man be, by reason of this blindness.

We can take it for a great Judgment for any to be borne blind in body. Yet we
never bewail our selves, being such in Soul.

Second, Hence may we learn a reason of the Worlds boldness in going on in
Sin, as that of the Proverb, Who so bold as blind Bayard. The blind man because
he sees no danger, he fears none. That which the eye sees not, the heart rues
not. One plodding through a desert of wild beasts in the night though
continually there is but a step twixt him and death, he fears nothing; but if
the Light arise, and he see in what danger he is, he is at his wits end for
fear. So is it with blind ignorant men. Now whither this Ignorance be simple
or affected, whither in the mind or in the restraining of the knowledge,
through perverse violentnesse of affections, or self-conceit, the danger is
alike; yea greater to these latter, as is seen in the Church of Laodicea.



Verse. 18.
Recovery of sight.] We read of Christ giving sight to many blind in body, all
which were shadows of this great work of Spiritual Illumination, this benefit
is in general, the grace of Sanctification or more especially of Illumination
and Christian wisdom and prudence whereby we may be made to discern twixt
things that differ. How great and necessary this benefit is, may appear both
by Paul's earnest Prayer unto God in the behalf of the Ephesians. Ephesians. 1.18,
19, 20. and Ephesians. 3. and 18, 19, 20. And his putting them in mind of it,
having received it. Ye were darkness, but now ye are Light, and so also his
earnest Thanksgiving for it in all his Epistles. as Ephesians. 1.8. Colos. 1.3, 4,
5, and 12. verses. Phil. 1.3, 4. And so in both his Epistles to the
Thessalonians. We may see it also by the earnest Prayers of David. Psalm. 119.
And by that serious counsel that Christ gives to the Church of Laodicea. Now
for the manner how Christ does perform this, we must know, that there are
three things required to good Sight. First, a clear Object. Second, a right
Organ or Instrument the eyes. Third, the Medium or means of transporting the
Object to the eye.

Now in all these regards, Christ does help the sight. For first, for the Eye
it self, the Mind; he does cause the thick scales to fall off, and does take
away all inward disturbances and annoyances, and fits it for the right
performing of his action, he settles the eye, that it be not distorted.

Secondly Christ helps the sight by clearing the Object, and making it nearer
to our view. For if the thing to be seen with the bodily eye, be either dark
or too remote, it is not discernable. Such were heavenly things, they were too
dark and hard for us, they were too far off, too small: God has given us
Spectacles, to make them seem bigger; the Word is made more easy and clear,
in the face of Christ. 2 Cor. 3. The veil is taken away, and we all behold
with open face the glory of God, verse 17, 18. And so for the Medium or means,
that is should not be too much disturbed; the Lord has given gifts to men, for
the further opening of the Word, and for the expelling or removing those
outward hindrances, which might darken the same.

which is often compared to Light, especially the Gospel. Luke 1.78, 79. This
Christ himself taught. Math. 4.16.

Shall we esteem it a great benefit to have a Torch or Lantherne held out in a
dark night and shall we not esteem this. Does not this make us escape the Woe
of those who through ignorance call Light darkness, good evil, and sower
sweet: How joyful is the light and comfortable, who would desire to live in
the World, if Egyptian darkness possessed it. How is the true state of every
thing hid in the darkness; bad Wares are not known from good. Counterfeit God
from current. Crooked things from straight, false ways from right, clean
things from unclean; deformed from beautiful. So that while we were in
Ignorance, we lay secure in our sin, and had perished in our security, never
misdeeming our estate; but as Agar and her Son did scoff at Isaac, so should
we have done at the promise of Heaven. And as Agar cast forth, and in
perplexity was vexed, till God further opened her eyes to see the Well. So when
by the Law we had been awaked to see our ugly face and fearful estate, we
should utterly have dispaired, if God had not showed us a second vision of the
Gospel. Oh then, with what thankfulness and reverence should we embrace this
Light and sight thereby, as the blind man in the Gospel, followed Christ.

Second, let us walk in the Light; the night is past and the day is come, let
us walk honestly as in the day time. Let us walk in the light while we have
it; and now having sight, let us not wallow in filthiness as before, let us
direct our paths aright, and order our steps by counsel, carefully avoiding
whatsoever might draw us out of the right way to Salvation. And having our eyes
restored, let us learn often to look up to our Maker. And thus much of the third
manner of expressing our Misery.

Verse. 18.
To set at liberty the bruised.] This is in effect the same with the second,
and is again inculcated by Christ both as well to make a deeper impression of
us in our Misery, that cannot sufficiently be expressed in many words; as also
more fully and effectually to commend unto us the benefit of Christ: Both which
does argue our dullness and backwardness either to apprehend our own Misery,
or Gods great mercy. The matter then being the same, I will not be too trouble
some to detain thee longer in the same.

Let us come to the fifth and last manner of expressing the great glad-tydings
of the Gospel, wherein also secretly is included our Misery.

The acceptable year of the Lord. Verse. 19.
] These words will admit a double interpretation. As first, by allusion to the
year of Jubilee, which among the Jews was a most acceptable time, and that
for five causes. First, Bondmen were set at liberty. Second, debts were
released or at least not exacted. Third, Inheritances sold or morgaged, then
returned to their ancient houses and lines. Fourth a^^ servile works ceased.
And fifth, there was great joy and feasting. Levit. 25.8. It was a year of
Reconciliation. Now Christ compared his coming in the flesh, fitly to this
year. All those former being figures of that which indeed was performed by
Christ; for by him, we that were Spiritual bondmen, are set at liberty. Our
debts of Sin are released. Our inheritance of Heaven that was forfeited, is
returned to us again^; the servile works of the Law and our own strength do
cease; and the Trumpet of Reconciliation is sounded through the World.

Away then with Popes Jubilees, what need we shadows, where the Truth is come.

the time of the Preaching of the Gospel is this accepted time, as Paul
expounds it. 2 Cor. 6.2. For this is the time of Reconciliation. While this
sounds, there is time, and Heaven gates are open. But when this Trump^t shall
cease blowing, then shall Heaven gates be shut. Let us then embrace this time,
let us hearken to the exhortation of the Apostle. Heb. 3. While it is called to
day, harden not your hearts. Ier. 13.16. Give glory to God before ever your
feet stumble in the dark Mountains. Let us take heed, the speech of Solomon.
be not ve^ifyed on us. Prove. 1.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. O ye foolish, how long will
ye love foolishness, because I have called and ye wou d not hear; I, you
shall call and I will not hear, And so too late we lament with the Jews,
Lament. 1.1, 2, 8, 17, 18, verses. O let us hear that patheticall voice to
Jerusalem. Math. 23. O Jerusalem Jerusalem! How often would I, etc. And Luke 19.
O that thou had known in this thy day, etc. Let not the folly of the
Pharisees fall on us, that we should be skillful to know the Skies and
seasons, but to know the times of Salvation we have no knowledge.

Let not the silly birds rise up to witness against us. Jer. 8.5, 6, 7. The
Storke, the Swallow, and the Crane know their appointed times, but my people
have not, least this day being expired, we here that there be no remedy. And
then there follows that which the Prophet Esaias adds to these words, The Day
of vengeance of our God. The time of the Gospel is a most happy time to the
receivers, but a heavy time to the rebellious aund unbeleevers. Luke 19. Those
mine Enemies that would not have me reign over them, etc.

Hence David so earnestly exhorts Kings themselves to be wise, and to kiss
the Son, yielding subjection betimes. He has an Iron Scepter, and a more
fearful judgment will fall on the contemners of the Gospel then of the Law;
as is notably taught, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Hence Christ denounces such heavy woes against the Cities where he had
Preached and it is worth observing, To whom and for what he denounces those
Woes. He denounces them not to Nazareth, nor so (...) to Jerusalem, as to
Bethsaida, Corazin, and Capernaum, where he h^^ Preached most, and done most
miracles.

Now Nazareth and Jerusalem all knew and thought worthy of destruction, because
they expelled Christ and thought to kill him. But the other places harbored
Christ, he had open liberty to teach, the R^ler of the Synagogue, the Courtier,
(John 4.46.) and the Centurian, were all for Christ. The people followed and
reverenced him, so that they were highly conceited of themselves, that they
should have no mean place in Heaven; but Christ denounces Woe against them;
because they had not unfeinedly Repented and wholly turned unto God, and
broug^t forth fruits worthy the same.

Deliverance to the Captives.] This is in order the third degree of man's
Misery, and does add weight to the former. For to be poor and destitute of
necessaries, is heavy; but if that any disease or torment be added, the burden
is heavier. But if to these two, there come a third affliction, that the same
should be taken Captive, carried into a strange Country, be evil entreated,
far from all friends and acquaintance, without any hope of return. Where
this is, what is wanting to the perfection of misery; yet so it is with man.
And all this is caused by one and the same thing; namely Sin, for as in regard
of Spiritual riches, it being poverty; and as it looks unto the Law, it
wounds the Consciences and breaks the heart, as is after showed. So as it
respects Satan, it is the very sphere under which we are sold, the chains
wherewith we are bound, and by which we are carried far from God. Esa. 59.2.
It is that by which we cease fighting against Satan, and throwing away our
weapons of defense and offense, we even fly into his Camp. So that Sin in
diverse respects does work the diverse degrees of our Misery. And this the
Scripture teaches plentifully. John 8.44. Romans 6.16. And that by nature we can
do nothing but Sin. Ier. 13.23. 1 Kings 8.46. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.21.

So that, by Sin men are made the Devils Captives, and we must know, that men
are not judged what they are, by their stock, whence they are borne, nor by the
place, wherein they live; nor by the like circumstances, but by their studies
and actions, as if one an English man by Nation, Noble by birth, a Courtier;
yet in mind and heart be wholly a Spaniard, bewraying our Counsels to them, and
helping theirs; whose Servant would such a one be counted, sure not of our
Prince; but even a secret and close factor and Servant of Spain.

So it is with us, it little availes to be borne in the Church, or of Christian
Parents, to profess Religion, to be present at the Word and Sacraments, if our
wills do serve the Devil.

That we learn to abhor Sin, even for this cause, that it does bring us
into bondage. Who loves not, and from his heart desires liberty? Wherefore are
Laws, but that we may live freely; whence are wars, but to recover lost
liberty; for which, many have jeoparded lives and livings. And shall we so much
esteem the liberty of the Body, and neglect it for the Soul, which is so much
the more excellent, by how much the Soul excels the body. What do we then by
Sinning? Surely this, we cast away our Liberty.

Egypt was a figure of Hell, Pharaoh of the Devil. The iron Furnace of death,
the Clay, works of Sin; whereby Satan holds us bound. Now how were they
delivered? Sure by Christ alone, and that by his Blood, and that war figured
two ways. First, the Paschall Lamb was to be slain, with the blood whereof,
the doore-posts were to be sprinkled and so free from the destroying Angel.
This was a Figure of Christ, who by his Blood shed, destroyed the first borne
of death, even by his power and strength; and this was the first degree of our
Redemption. The second degree and absolute, was the Drowning of them all in the
Red Sea.

Now that was a figure of Christ, which did open the way of safety to the
Jsraelites, and brought utter destruction to the enemies. So that we see a
double Deliverance in this shadow; first a Killing of the chief strength and
darlings of the enemies, but yet not a freedom from the pursuing of the
enemies. The second was, wherein all Perished, not one escaped. So it is with
us, The sprinkling of the blood of Christ has cut the nerves of Satan and
Hell. But when by Death we shall be drenched into the Sea of his blood, we
shall be free from all assaults of enemies.

A second Type was in Joshua, whose Victories were lively shadows of Christ.
For as by the blowing of Rams horns, the Walls of Jericho fell; so by the
Preaching of the death of Christ, the horn of Christ, the Ram Sacrificed,
being blown, it caused the pillars of Satan's Kingdom to shake, and the doors
to open.

self, and makes us to behold it, he proclaims the severity of Gods justice.
Now true it is, we are not able in our own strength to stand against the least
of these, but in the power of Christ we shall be more then Conquerers, and dare
boldly behold the same.

know that true Liberty consists in being freed out of the bondage of these
cruel Enemies; and therefore not so to live, as that we suffer our selves to
be entangled again.

By the Broken heart, is not meant a heart lightly bruised, or somewhat broken;
but a heart broken into the smallest pieces, as Corn is broken twixt the
Milstones, or as any thing is beaten to powder in a Mortar. Now the heavy
Milstones and the strong Pestle or Hammer that does this, is the Law of God
with the Attendants, The sight of Sin, the apprehension of the Curse, the wrath
of God, the fear of Hell, Death, Damnation and the Devil.

Seeing Christ cures such only, it much concerns us to stir up this sense
of Sin in us, and to avoid all such things, whereby it may be deaded and we
lulled asleep; and to this end Christ diligently warnes us of two things. Luke
21.34. The first, is Surfeiting and all wanton and riotous Pleasures and
delights, For this takes out of the heart all sense and fear of Sin, Curse,
Death, Hell. Esa. 22.115. Amos 6.3. For how can any Godly sorrow take place
amidst all voluptuous delights; the like is showed, Esa. 57.4, 5, 6, 7, 11
verses. For when day and night is spent in devising and musing of outward and
Carnal pleasures, what room is left for holy Meditations, examinations and
considerations, which was the means that made David turn to Gods testimonies.

So that if we regard our Souls health, we must avoid the excess of Carnal
delights, and think it much better to sorrow here a while, and to be
comforted hereafter; then for transitory delight to incur Eternal torment.
So for the second, the cares of this World is a manifest hinderer, for they
choke the Word, it cannot have it perfect work; this is seen in Dives; this is
seen Luke 14.18. In the refusal of the Invited guests. This also is observed,
Amos 8.4, 5. They thought the Saboth long, because their minds were after their
Covetousness.

Sins; for Christ is ready to heal such of all Afflictions; there is none to
that of the wounded Conscience, for such may and do complain as the people of
God, Lament. 1.12, 13, 14. But be thou of good comfort, for now is Salvation
and Health nearer to thee then before. For sense and feeling is of the Living
not of the Dead; whip a dead man and he regards it not: the force of a drawing
Corasive and searching, is not felt in the dead and proud flesh: the sense of
the Judgments of God do argue, that the Mind is quickened by the Power of the
Spirit and is not quite dead in Sin, and Satan being now to be cast out makes
a tumult, being quiet before while no force was offered him, Math. 12.29. The
Israelites when ready to come out of Egypt, were pressed with sore bondage.
Even so it befalls all the Broken hearted.

Object. But they will say. I feel my self forsaken of God?

Answ. So said David, Ezechias, and other holy men in the anguish of their
Spirit and apprehension of the Flesh; but ye are not to judge of the grace of
God by your own sense and feeling, but by Faith; which against feeling
persuades the heart, that God is gracious, Psalm. 22.2.

we take heed of Sin; for do we not see, what companions it has, the wrath
of God, curse, death, etc. Which though now they be held from thy eyes through
the pleasure thou take in Sin; yet when that short vanity shall vanish they
will seize on thee with such horror, as thou would wish thou had never been
borne. Let us then bethink how foolish a thing it is, for so small a pleasure,
to plunge our selves into such Miseries. Is it not a lamentable thing, that men
endued with reason, should suffer themselves to be taken as Fishes, which have
no understanding, or conceit of danger and evil; and yet it is so, the Hook
is b^^ted, the bait swallowed and the fish is taken.

Pleasure is the bait of Sin, which while men greedily swallow, they are taken
of Satan by the jaws, and we suffer our selves to be as easily deceived as
is the silly Bird by the cunning Fowler.

Were it not a part of great madness for any willingly to stab himself or cut
his own throat with a Dagger, because it was curiously gi^ded; or to drink
Poison sweetened a little with Sugar: When Cyrus warred against the Amazonits
and saw himself the weaker, he used this policy; He counterfeited flight, and
left their Tents wherein were great store of Wine. The Amazonits finding it
fell on the prey and drank securely, then Cyrus suddenly returning, slew them
all: Even after this manner, the Devil deals and how many are slain by him,
swallowing the full cups of Pleasures. Take we heed then, etc. Thus much of
this Misery.

The Remedy follows.

To Heal.] Great is our Misery by the curse of God hanging over our heads;
but, most heavy had it been, if there had not a Remedy been found by Christ:
The brazen Serpent, for as he of all Creatures is the most abject; so was
Christ in his Humiliation, a Worm and u^ Man, etc.

Sight to the Blind.] This adds yet to out former Misery, for when to Poverty,
inward Affliction, outward bondage and Captivity, shall be added the taking
away the comfortable use of the Eye, and on a contrary, uncomfortable
Blindness falls on us, it is a great increase of Misery: and more heavy is
the blindness of the Soul, then of the Body. This Blindness consists chiefly
in three things: First, in a want and inability of saving Knowledge in things
Spiritual; Secondly, in the not knowing our Misery the filthiness of Sin, the
horror of Eternal death and wrath of God; Thirdly, the ignorance of the
Remedy of all these.

But it may be said, that these (happily) may be true, of Pagans and such as
are out of the Church; but all that are in the Church, taught by the word of
God, they know and can spe^^e distinctly of these things.

To this, it may be answered, That the knowledge of all men sticking in the
dregs and mire of Nature, is mere Blindness, and far differing from that,
the Regenerate have, as shall be showed by Examples. One borne blind, by the
relation of others, and some help of the other senses, comes to some knowledge
of Colors of the brightness of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and of other
things done in the World. But if on the sudden, his eyes should be opened;
such an inexpected shape and show of things wou^d offer themselves to his eyes,
that he would think, he knew nothing before; And as it comes to pass with
us: For as our minds may have some conceit of Towns and Countries far of, by
the relation of others, and inspections of Mapps, yet our knowledge is far
otherwise then theirs, who have seen exactly these several Countries
distinctly. Even the like difference is 'twixt the knowledge of a Natural man
and one renewed, for the one sees Sin naked in his lively colors, and abhorres
from his heart the filthiness of it: But the other sees it a far off, and
through a false and deceitful glass of pleasure or profit, whence follows a
desire of committing sin. And as a Drunken man is not altogether blind, but
sees those things before his feet, and yet, one while knock his face against
this Wall, another while, stumbles against a stone and yet feels no pain of
this hurt, till he has slept out his Surfets.

So the Natural man being drunk with Pleasures, dashes his face against this
Sin, his foot against another, continually reeling and falling into some ditch,
and never grieves for all these, but even as the Drunkard is still a thirst,
he desires more; so these, run most greedily after Sin. But after he is once
thoroughly awaked, he wonders how he has escaped alive and perished not in one
danger or other. Even such, is the knowledge of the Natural man.

teach all Natural men not to trust themselves and their own senses,
concerning sin and other things belonging to Salvation, but they must know they
are Blind and Drunken, and so not fit to judge of these things, and so they
must suffer themselves to be guided by others, till the Spirit of God vouc^^afe
to open their eyes. Thus much of the Misery, the Remedy follows.

Recovery.] Which is a wonderful enlightening of the mind, whereby it is able
to judge twixt good and evil, true and false, and I say it is wonderfu^l; for
when this is once come into the mind, Sin, the wrath of God, Christ and his
benefits, do seem such strange things from that they did before, as that we
shall wonder both at our own Blindness and Ignorance, as also stand amazed at
the Excellency of the thing we see; as the Queen of Saba did at the sight of
Solomon's glory. For this Recovery is nothing but a raising from the sleep and
drunkenness of Sin, whence it is said of them, They come to themselves, and 2 Timothy 2.26. To come to sobriety of mind: and this is seen in the example of
Paul, and manner of his conversion as himself reports it. Acts 26.13. Then we
feel our wounds, Acts 2.37. This Light is wrought by the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. By
the Preaching of the Word. Acts 26.18. A representation of this, Christ gave in
the Blind man, John 9. For what was that Clay tempered with spittle, which
anointed his eyes, but the Ministers, men made of Clay; the word of God is
like the spittle came out of Christ's mouth: An unlikely matter to open Eyes. So
is the Preaching of the word by silly men.



Second, content not our selves with any Knowledge, but such as is effectual
and has such fruits as the opening of the bodily Eye has. If one long shut up
in Prison, afflicted with bonds and chains, should suddenly understand, his
bonds were loosed, the door opened; so that he might fly, and yet did not move
himself to get out. All would judge such a one blind both in body and mind,
even so is it here; we boast of our chains, and as if not being sure enough
bound to Satan, we cast more bands on our hands, and feet, and put our necks
into his Iron yokes.

Let us then think, to whom we make our selves servants by sinning, to whom
we give our hands, when they are used to fighting or filching, to whom we lend
our Eyes, when used to wantonness; our Ears, when used to idle and filthy
talk; our Tongues, when used to slandering and lying; our Members, when abused
to uncleanness. In all these and the like we give our selves vassails unto
Satan.

And that we may grow into a more earnest hatred of Sin, let us a little
consider the Misery of this Captivity: there are some kind of servitudes, that
have some refreshing and ease, as such as are borne Servants or bought do find
either through a meekness of their Masters nature, or through their diligence
to please, receives some kind usage, and recompense, or protection; as we have
examples in Scripture. But there is another sort of servitude, as when one
serves an Enemy, as being taken in war, even for his Country, or kindred and
profession, is used with all discourtesy. Now this is our estate, we are taken
by Satan, our arch Enemy, whose hatred is unspeakable; because we were made in
the Image of God: his envy unresistable, because the Lord meant good unto
Mankind, and neglected the Angels fallen. Now then, what an Enemy provoked by
ancient hatred, incensed with daily envy at our good, what (I say, such a one
can and will do all these indignities) must they look for, that are taken
Captives of them. Joseph endured a hard bondage, but yet at length found favor
and advancement. But we while we are Captives to Satan, are without hope of
coming thence, and of ever satisfying our cruel Tyrant, or of being benefited
by him. Joseph was not urged to forsake his Religion, but this is all the
intent of Satan, thereby to make us as odious to God as himself, and to make us
stink in Gods nostrils: The Israelites were in sore bondage in broyling in the
fiery furnace, in being tied to a task impossible, in being beaten, in having
their first borne murdered. Yet all these were but outward miseries and
bodily, and some comfort was in it, that these things were exacted of them, not
to much to reproach or disgrace them, as to satisfy the covetousness of the
Prince. But our Captivity is both of body and Soul; and is merely to the
reproach of our Persons and to the dishonor of God our Lord, and not any way
to benefit Satan: So that our Captivity is with no less cruelty, then we read
executed, 2 Samuel 12.31. Yea, herein is the greatest cruelty exercised, where
we are made to bring most woeful Destruction on our own heads. As if some
cruel Tyrant should compel one adjudged to Death, to gather Wood, to build
the fire, to cast in great store of Pitch and Brimstone, and then to cast
himself into the Fire with a pair of Bellows in his hands to kindle the flame
most fiercely. Even so deals Satan, while he carries us from one Sin to
another, and heap them together, there is nothing but fuel of Gods wrath:
the adding of new Sin is as Brimstone to kindle it. Lo thus in some part may
we conceive the woeful Captivity and the cruelty therein exercised by Satan on
all his Vassails; let us then tremble at the same, let not his alluring baits
of Pleasure deceive us, which ends in much woeful Misery, let us not wilfully
heap coals of Fire on our own heads.

O how should we breath after the same, Romans 7.24. Thus much of this part of
man's Misery.

Now follows the Remedy.

To Preach Deliverance.] As Sin in diverse regards did perfect the diverse degrees
of our Misery; so in like manner does the benefit of Christ: and as our
Poverty was and is healed by the Prophetical Office of christ. Our wounds and
Broken-heartednesse by his Priestly office; so this by his Kingly the effect of
his Priestly: And this Point is plainly taught, Colos. 2.15. Where he is set
forth after the manner of Emperors who led in Pomp their conquered Nation;
for as their great Pomp was showed more in the Riches of the vanquished then
in the Prowess and Nobility of them, which followed the Emperor sitting in
his tryumphing Chariot adorned with Garlands, his Soldiers attending making
Verses and insult us over the Conquered.

Even so CHRIST our General tryumphed in the Chariot of the Cross, spoiling
Principalities and Powers; that is, all the strength and troops of Devils.
Then did he cancel the Law which was as a Bill obligatory, and has so every
way subdued them, that the faithful of Christ have great cause of joy, and
dare with confidence insult over their enemies, and tread on the neck of them,
as Joshua made the Israelites on the Cananites, 1 Cor. 15.26. The truth as also
the manner of this will appear by comparing it with the Type.

The acceptable Year.] Alluding to the year of Iubilee set down, Levit. 26.
Touching which three things are to be considered. First, the Number; second,
the Name; third, the Privileges. Touching the Number, it was the Fifty years,
which consists of Seven seven weeks. It may seem that God of purpose did
not appoint any short time for this Festivity, but to have extended the space
of it, as far almost as the bounds of Man's life. To this end (as may probably
be conjectured) that we might understand, that this happy estate cannot be
attained, but we must pass through many troubles before; and God would not
put a further distance of space, least men should despair the living so long
as to be partaker of the Joy thereof. Thus in wisdom, with respect to us, the
Lord does vouchsafe to dispose of things.

For the second thing. The Name, it was so called of the Rams-hornes, whereof
the Trumpets were made, wherewith that Feast was proclaimed and published, the
Tenth day of the seven Month, which was called the Feast of Expiation. Now
this was a lively Figure of Christ's death; for those Trumpets were of
Rams-hornes, and there the Feast had the name: Which argues, it was for some
special reason, and it is this, That the Death of Christ, was figured thereby;
for Trumpets were made of the Ram sacrificed. So by the Power and joyful
voice of Christ's death, Reconciliation was brought to the people. 3. For the
Privileges. They are mentioned in the Books, by all which it is manifest,
That this Year was a lively representation of the Life to come; for all these
things are there fully accomplished: And the Gospel was also figured, as that
whereby all these were begun in the Faithful, and by what degrees we come to
it; is, by the former benefits of Christ and the gracious effects of Gods
Spirit, by being poor in Spirit, and contrite in Heart.

Sight to the Blind.] Use to see our Natural estates that we are so miserable,
and our Misery is the greater in that it is not acknowledged, but it is easy
to demonstrate it; for first, if one walk by the way and there be before his
feet a most deep Gulf, beside him a rich Treasure, and he see neither of
these, but neglect the Treasure and fall into the ditch, who will not say, such
a one is Blind; and yet do not we so naturally.

Secondly, who will say that he sees, who discernes not 'twixt Light and
Darkness, who takes Coals for Gold, and yet do not all men so by Nature, 1 Corinthians. 2.14.

Thirdly, the Blind know not whither to go, or which way to turn them. So we
in the undertaking any thing out of the Word of God, we know not what to do
aright, thence especially in Religion; we are apt to wander and to turn into
one by-path either of false Doctrine, Superstitions, Traditions, or bad
manners: Besides our stumbling and faltring in our pace, and our often falling,
does argue our great Blindness, so that we need not deny it; it being as
palpable in us as in the men of Sodom, who were smit with Blindness, they
could not find the Door; so neither we the door of Heaven.

For Conclusion.

Of all Sins, take heed of the Contempt of the Gospel; for as a company of his
Majesty's subjects rising up in Rebellion, the King should graciously offer
them Pardon, if they will truly submit themselves: If they should proudly
disdain this Pardon, were it not a greater Sin then the former, and would more
provoke the King to a severe and ^^^^y Execution against them; even such is the
Condition of us all. We have risen up against God, he has graciously
Pardoned us, shall we refuse it: Oh far be it from us; Though we have been
once miserable by natures Corruption and diseases, yet let us not make our
selves twice more wretched and without all excuse, in rejecting Grace, and the
means of Curing and Salvation: Which the Lord for his mercies sake grant unto
us, Amen.

THE SAINTS SECURITY. Sermon, IIII. Which was Preached in St. MARY'S in
Cambridge, A^no Dom. 1590. December. 4. Written for his own use in Latin and
now Translated: The words are out of the Epistle of
JUDE, the 20, and 21 verses. But ye Beloved build your selves in your most
holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, and keep your selves in the love of
God, etc.


MAny wicked men had scattered many capital Errors through the Churches,
while the Apostles themselves were alive; teaching (as Aecum^n, writes) That
Sin was indifferent, denying the Lord. Jude the Apostle, to whom with the other
Eleven belonged the joint ear of the Church determined to oppose against these
men, and to guard the Faith^^^ with some aid, least unawares they should fall
into the Devils Snares, being circumvented by him. The Apostle therefore makes
this the drift of his Epistle, to encourage and instruct the faithful how to
fight for the maintenance of the Truth of the Gospel the Doctrine of Faith,
least by hearing wretched men, they be cast from their station; and that this
exhortation might have more force with them, he uses a most forceable reason
after this manner. From what thing there is great danger least we should
swerve, and from which to swerve is a most grievous Sin; for that thing, every
one must earnestly contend. But there is great danger of falling from the
Faith, and a grievous Sin it is, procuring fearful Punishments; and therefore
it is most necessary to see to this. The first part of the reason being plain,
and such as will be confessed, he confirms the second part; first of all,
showing the danger in the fourth verse. That the Enemies of the Truth are such
as will not openly and directly oppose against the same but will slyly seek to
undermine it, as subtle and close Pyoneers.

Second, he shows in 5, 6 and 7 verses, How hainously God took at any time
the defection from the Truth and turning to Sin by woeful and evident examples;
as of the Israelites in the Wilderness, of the Angels that kept not their
first Estate, and of Sodom and Gomorrha, in that they regarded not the
admonition of Lot. Now because men are more sensible of the grievous
punishments of Defection, then they are of the danger of Falling, Fearing more
the punishment, then Sin the cause. Therefore, the Apostle pulls back his foot
again, and betakes himself to a more lively and large demonstration of the
danger. And therefore from the 8 verse to the 20. Does set down, a most full
description of the wicked, the show whereof and kinds are painted forth so
terribly, that worthily it may awake any to circumspection, what these men
speaks, what they meditate, and what mischief they nourish in their secret
hearts, he brings forth to light; and all these things are done so plainly and
particularly, that none can but marvel at, as well the diligence of the Holy
Spirit, as his care of us, in that he has so marked and branded these wicked
men in the foreheads, that every one might know them and avoid them. And that
none might wonder that such swarms of wicked men should arise at the light of
the Gospel, he shows that this was no other thing then such as was long since
foretold by Enoch of these last Times, and lately also by some of his fellow
Apostles, St. Paul, and St. Peter. So then the greatness both of the danger
from these evil men, as also of the Sin of defection being opened sufficiently
in this 20 verse and following, he concludes his Exhortation: but the very
conclusion is not expressed in so many words, to wit, That they must fight, but
in the room thereof, it is declared, by what means and after what manner the
faithful must contend. For in vain might one discover a danger, unless some
means be prescribed for the avoiding of it. He therefore shows that the
faithful must contend both for themselves and for others. For themselves in
the 20, and 21, verses; and for others their brethren, verses 22, 23. Whereas
they are not in a like danger or fault; therefore to some, one kind of means
must be used, for they that are fallen by Infirmity, must be restored by the
Spirit of Lenity. Gal. 6. at the beginning. But they that have betrayed
themselves into their Enemies hands, and drawn others, they must be brought
home again with Terror and severity, by showing them their dangerous estate
wherein they stand.

For themselves. The way of safegarding themselves, is by the diligent practice
of one chief thing, they must keep themselves in the Love of God. And fence
themselves with it as with a Trench, but to the making of this fence, they need
three things, as three ditches or banks (to wit,) Faith, Prayer, and Hope.
Briefly. There are four things commended to every Christian, whereby he may
defend himself against the force of the wicked. (to wit.) Faith, Prayer, Love
of God, and Hope. Now let us speak of each particular in a word first
admonishing this, that this care ought not less to touch us, then those
ancient Christians to whom Jude wrote, Yea, it much more concerns us,
diligently to provide for our selves, least our Faith being vanquished, we be
brought into bondage, yea everlasting destruction, we being in as great danger
as ever were any. For we see (Reverend Fathers,) into what times and manners we
are fallen; for although at the mention of so great Impiety as the Apostle here
speaks of, There is none but does fear and tremble, yet these are the times
wherein Christ foretold, That Iniquity should abound, the Charity of many wax
cold, and in which the Son of man, when he came to judgment, should scarce
find Faith in the Eath. The Apostles time was the best, and as the Spring time,
fit to grow and increase the Church; but these our times, are Autumnall, fit
for gathering fruits, which if they be not reaped in their due time, do grow
flush and wither through too much ripeness, and go backward, while at last,
the grain or Seed being shaken and fallen to the earth, there remains nothing
but empty blades.

I confess, that the horrible Impiety of Popery, is by the power of God
(blessed be his Name) long since banished, our Church with the neighbor
Countries are illustrated with the beams of the truth. Yet there does slyly
creep some secret and lurking evil, in the wrapping it self in the cloak of
Religion, which does weaken all the strength of Religion: We will all be
called Christians, and all profess we know the true God. But who almost denies
him not with his deeds. We all make a show of Piety; What? Did I say All. I
would it could truly be so said. For many do so hate the semblance of Piety,
that they abhor from all show of honesty.

But be it, that all profess Piety, but how few make Conscience of any Sin;
Yea, who is it not almost, that under this name of Religion, thinks not that
all liberty is granted to filthy lusts. So that although these times have
whereof they may boast, (if they knew to use the good given them) yet it is
come to that dissolute negligence in all Piety, that there is none but can
witness that to be true, which Christ and his Apostles once foretold of the
miseries of the Times. Wherefore, seeing Iniquity, the flood gates being set
open, does pour forth it self into our Age; let us think that this
exhortation of the Apostle does merely concern us. And let us be armed and
prepare our selves to the battle, and let us diligently attend The Precept of
the Spirit, that we may be found worthy to escape these heavy times. And now
let us come to the first particular propounded before.

The first succor of preserving the love of God in us, is Faith it self. For
this only certainly knows, that we are received into favor, Through the al^ne
mercy of God for Christ's sake. It feels all our sins b^otted out, it knows
that nothing can befall us, which is not a furtherance to good. Wherefore it
must needs be, that while this shall remain in our hearts, it will m^ke the
greatness of Gods love to us, most clear and sure. And not this only but it
does also so vehemently inflame us to a mutual love, that we shall desire to
show our selves thankful by all means; The Woman that had many Sins
forgiven Loved much; and the debtor, Loves much, whose debt forgiven was the
greatest. 1 John 4.19. We Love him, because he loved us first.

But let us see the Precept it self. This Faith is declared in this place by a
twofold argument. First from the adjoynt of Holiness called a Holy Faith;
because this alone does teach us to think holily of God and to conceive
honorably of him. It does purge the heart and endue and season it with true
holiness. Acts. 15.9. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. The second thing by which Faith is here
described, is the subject Our, the common Faith of all the faithful; for the
Apostle does not exhort Christians to build themselves of another Faith,
whereof themselves have either none or a very slender notion; but by this
speech, he does warn that no man privately coin to himself a new Faith,
devised from that, the holy Scriptures would have one and common to all. Hence
Paul calls the same Faith a common Faith, as Jude did a common Salvation. Tit.
1.4. 2 Pet. 1. chap. 1, verse. The thing exhorted to be pe^formed touching this
Faith, is noted in this word Build up; which is a figur^tive speech taken from
Architectors or Masons; for as that they build not on one side or other besides
the Foundation laid; but does rear their building, just and straight on the
groundwork, and after the work once begun, they never intermit their labor,
till they have finished the just building. So if we desire to bear the force
and assaults of the wicked, it behooves us that our selves, and all our actions,
thoughts, and words, be laid on no other, then the sole foundation of Faith,
and that we never give over so doing till we have brought our work to some
perfection. So that two things are here commanded. First, that whatsoever we
do, we refer it to Faith as to the square thereof. Second, that we labor
daily to increase in Faith.

As touching the first.

What Faith is. That Faith, whereby all our actions and counsels must be
ordered, (as far as I can judge) is not only a certain and steadfast manner
and knowledge of things to be done, and not to be done, (for why should this be
called most Holy) neither is this certain persuasion, common to all Christians.
But rather hereby is meant that justifying Faith, whereby we are persuaded and
assured, that our selves with all ours, are acceptable to God through Christ,
with the object and ground of this Faith, to wit, the Gospel and Promises of
God. For though we were most certain, that that we do is lawful and
expedient, yet unless it come from this Faith, it is sin and cannot please
God. For, such works as cannot expect God a rewarder of them by his Promise,
such as are all those, that are done without this Faith, though they be most
glorious outwardly, yet they cannot stand before God.

Object. It may be asked, how then must this be done, that all our actions may
be grounded on Faith.

Answ. To this answer is made, that Paul teaches this plainly. Colos. 1.10, 11,
12, and Colos. 3.16, 17. What ever you do, do all to the glory of God.

Object. If it be demanded, how all things may be done after this manner.

Answ. The next words do teach, giving Thanks, or rather, being Acceptable:
verse 15.

So that the meaning of Paul in this place is, Do all things in the name of
Jesus, and daily think of that infinite mercy of God, which you have obtained
by Jesus Christ; and therefore, what ever you do in word or work, study to
show your selves thankful to GOD through CHRIST.

The like direction St. Paul gives. Colos. 2.6, 7. So walk in Christ, rooted,
and built and stablished in the Faith. Sure a most godly and wholesome Precept;
For if the sense of Gods mercy did always dwell in our hearts, and that we
would examine all our thoughts, sayings, and deeds thereby, as by a Goldsmiths
Scales, what dishonest things would at any time be undertaken of us; or if it
were begun, would not soon be rejected with many Tears. Esra. 9.13, 14. Who
would not accuse himself sinning, and secretly reprove himself after this
manner. Is this my wicked thought, saying, or deed, worthy and beseeming him,
all whose sins God has pardoned in Christ, whom he has drawn out of the jaws
of Death, whom he has adopted for his Son and heir of everlasting life? Shall
I show my self thus thankful for all his benefits. Deuteronomy. 32.6. Yea rather O
God! Seeing my goodness extends not to thee. Psa. 16. I will take the cup of
Salvation and give thanks, I will admire thy goodness, saying. Lord what is
man. Psalm. 144.2, 3. Thus if we would square all our projects according to the
Gospel apprehended by Faith, we should not build Hey, and Stubble, but Silver
and Gold: And thus much of the first Point, of applying all our actions to the
rule of Faith. Now it follows, how we may apply it to increase our Faith.

There are diverse degrees of Faith. There is a little Faith. Math. 8.26. There
is a great Faith. Math. 15.28. There is a fullness of Faith (Romans 4.21.) of
Abraham who was fully persuaded and assured; and then the mind and heart of a
Christian is like to a Ship carried with a full sail. Heb. 10.22. Yet this is
not meant, that the Faith of the best is perfect in it self, but respectively
in comparison of those that are weaker. Hence (1 John 2.14, 15.) diverse names
of ages are given to Faith. For it has its Maturity. I write to you Fathers,
that is, to you which have long believed and increased in Faith. Faith has its
youth, I write to you young men, It has its Infancy. I write to you Children
and Babes. For these ages St. John does Spiritually understand for the measure
of the knowledge of Christ, and for the time which they had for the getting
thereof. Mark. 4.28. Our hearts when they have received the seed of the Word,
are compared to the Earth, which first brings forth the Grass, then the
stalk, then the fruit in the stalk, noting the increase of Faith and Grace.
Which also is done in the Parable of the Mustard Seed and of the Leaven. Math.
13, And the Gospel does acknowledge no other righteousness for Salvation, then
that which is of Faith to Faith, that is, from a lesser degree to a greater.

So that, let this be the Point.

praises God and commends the Thessalonians for increasing in Faith. And yet
further exhorts them to it. 1 These. 3.1, 2. And Paul though he commend and that
justly, the Faith of the Romans. Romans 1.4. Yet he desires to see them to
strengthen them, and exhorts them to go on. Romans 15.14.

So then hence it follows, that every one must carefully endeavor that his
weak Faith may be increased, and that he grow on forward to Grace. Phil. 3.12,
13, 14. St. Paul sets himself for a president. Solomon avouches, that the
Righteous man mounts in increase of Righteousness, as the Sun does till it
come to his full height. Prove. 4.18. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. There is showed that
it was a chief end of Christ's Ascension to Heaven, to furnish his Church with
such gifts, as that every member might attain his due proportion, and St.
Peter shows, that all the Faitfull are as living Stones, which daily do
increase. 1 Pet. 2.7. Whosoever therefore he be whither Noble or Ignoble learned
or unlearned, unless he be a living stone, he is not a Stone of this building
For as S. Pet. teaches. 2 Ep. 1.6, 7 v. Unless there be a joining of one Grace
to another, Christians will be idle and unprofitable in the knowledge of
Christ; hence on the one side are those serious exhortations. 2 Cor. 7. at the
beginning. To grow up to perfect Sanctification. And on the other side, sharp
reproof of those, who decay in Grace. Revel. 2.4, 5. How great force then
should these things have, to stir up our dead minds, and to give our utmost
endeavor to this end. What? Shall we play the men in our youth and first
times, and become children and weaklings when we have been long fed.

Every thing moves swifter nearer the Center. Do we not see, how in all things
which are not perfited in their birth, what care and diligence both in Art and
Nature are used, to finish the same. What pains do the beasts take to perfect
and nourish their young, the Husbandman diligently covers the Grain in the
Earth, breaks Clods, draws Furrows, Weed and drive away all destroying
Beasts. And no less care is in any other Trade, whither Merchandise or
Mechanical.

When as therefore, there is the same nature and condition of our Faith, shall
not we apply all our care hereunto, especially, the Lord so encouraging us, To
him that has shall be given, and to him that has not shall be taken away.
Luke 8.18. Mark. 4.24. With what measure you meet, etc. That is, according to
our diligence and sincerity in the use of the means, such will be the measure
of the Lords blessing for increase. If we Hear, Read, Pray, seldom and
coldly, our increase will be slender as he that sowes sparingly shall so reap.

But alas, in what things do men Macerate themselves with cares, pains,
watchings, but in such things as are frail, short and unprofitable, from which
Christ earnestly diswades. John 6.27, 28. But Faith is not dear to the World,
though it alone free us from the slavery of Satan, and makes us the Sons of
God, sets us at liberty, this opens heaven to us, that was shut. Yea it
represents it to us in this life, and gives us both a pledge and taste of it.



What is the reason, why, when we profess the true God, true Christ, and
sincere Religion; Yet all this our knowledge and profession is idle and
unfruitful. Many regard not Faith at all, others content themselves with a
name or Vizard thereof.

Hence it is, that true Religion does abound with no less swarms of wicked
men, then once the horrible Popish Superstition.

For as a Picture, being the work of Art;

So the Popish Superstition was only a Picture and counterfeit of Religion, the
work of men's hands,

Wherefore (my Brethren) if there be any care of freeing the Church of God,
(the dear Spouse of Christ,) from those opprobies and imputations, wherewith
for our sakes, it is unjustly charged of the Adversary, if we desire to prove
to our selves, that our Faith has taken deeper root, then that ever it should
wither away with the heat of the Sun, if we desire any comfort in adversity
and in the hour of death, let us apply our selves to increase and cherish
Faith.

Object. But some may say, what means do thou show us of doing this.

Ans. To which answer is made, that every thing is perfitted by the means it
was begot and begun, and is brought up by the same it was brought forth, 1
Peter 2. at the beginning.

But notable is that place, Heb. 20.25. Showing how Faith, Hope, and Charity
are increased; for in the former words he had exhorted to these, and in the 25
verse, he shows the means, which are two. First, is, that we cleave to the
holy Assemblies with a holy mind, and never suffer our selves profanely to be
pu^led away, nor of our own accord to forsake them. And secondly, to apply at
all times mutual Exhortations.

Heb. 3. Let us take heed of discouraging any in good, of giving evil example,
of exhorting to ungodliness. Alas then, it is easy to see why so little Faith
appears, why it decays; because Prophesying decays, and men grow weary of
it. Christian admonition is intolerable. What greater policy can be of the
Devil, then to stop the breath of Faith, and to dry up the breasts thereof. As
therefore we desire the preserving and increase of Faith, let us make much of
the means, this will soften the heart; for as Grain cannot grow, if the
ground be not moistened continually, so our hearts grow so hard that good
things cannot thrive; and especially this burden lies on those,

How can a building go forward, if some builders build, and the others loyter,
and who sees not the necessity of this; how can a Soldier escape unwounded
without his Shield of Faith, this is that also, that sets the edge on the Sword
of Faith, called also the Breast Plate. 1 These. 5.8. For even all the parts of
the Christian. Armor, are hammered on this Anvill, and smit out with this
Hammer, and are wrought with this fire. And thus much of the first Christian
duty, or of the first succor, whereby we may be preserved in the Love of God.

The second follows.

And that is Prayer, which is as a certain Embassage whereby we entreat for
Rain, Assistance; for Faith, Hope, and Charity are by the gift of God, made as
it were our household Servants, but so great is our wickedness, that unless a
new supply be duly levied out for us daily, to the opposing the same, that for
any base reward of Honor, Riches or Pleasures, we should betray those
excellent gifts and our whole Salvation, (as much as in us lies) to the Devil.
Wherefore, the Holy Ghost would not have us trust too much to our natural
strength, but to place all hope of Victory in foreign aid. The Faithful can
do all things, but it is in Christ strengthening them. Phil. 4.13. Whence St.
Paul Ephesians. 6. Having exhorted to take the whole Armor of God, at last adds
this, as a safe defense and Munition, Prayer. As if all the other had been of
little force to saveguard, unless this from above did make a new supply. Let
us then see how we may receive some benefit and use of this succor. This the
Apostle shows in a word, adding this, Praying in the Holy Ghost, that is, by
the same.

Object. But when or how is this done?

Answ. To this, answer is made. What true Prayer is. It is to call on God in
true Faith by Christ, for things necessary according to the will of God; and
all this, with a certain divine and heavenly commotion or stirring of the
Mind, whither through sorrow for the feeling of our own wants, or of joy
through the sense of Gods favor. In this manner calling on God, we may be said
to Pray in the Holy Ghost, because the Spirit does stir up in our minds all
these things.

For we of our selves (such is our Ignorance and blindness) know not
altogether what we should Pray for as we ought; and therefore the Spirit does
help this infirmity, and does teach us being in a streit, what we should ask;
and not this only, but when as a wonderful blockishnesse of heart does wholly
possess us, the same Spirit does mollify our hard hearts, and does infuse
such lively heat into our minds, whereby we tremble at our own unworthiness,
and rejoice in the most acceptable mercy of God. Whence also it does suggest
sighs that cannot be uttered, and does also so enlarge and delight the heart
with heavenly ^oy, as is to be seen, Romans 8.26.

Object. But why does the Apostle, presently after the exhortation to maintain
Faith, adjoyne the Invocation of the Spirit. Does not the mention of the Holy
Spirit seem altogether superfluous in this place. For all Believers together
with Faith, receive the Spirit; neither does he leave them, who have once
received him. So that the Faithful whenever they Pray, do it by the Spirit.

Answ. But I answer, that this is far otherwise, and therefore of singular
purpose, the Apostle admonishes them, that they do not only Pray, but they do
it in the Spirit. Luke 9.54. How ready were James and John, to ask of God that
fire might come down, etc. But Christ reproved them, telling them they knew not
what Spirit they were of. For they Prayed not with the Holy Spirit, but from
the Flesh, or the Spirit of Pride, rashness and revenge. Likewise Luke 22.40.
When Christ had taught his Disciples what they should Pray, and yet they being
destitute of the heat and earnestness of the Spirit, knew not how to Pray,
this thing Christ had commanded them; and therefore in verse 45. Christ found
them on sleep, in his greatest extremity they could not watch one hour. James
4.2, 3. Ye obtain not, because ye ask not, ye ask and have not, because
ye ask amiss. By all this it is apparent, that the Faithful themselves, who
have tasted of true Faith, and have received the first fruits of the Spirit, do
often by negligence fall into security, that either a long while they intermit
the duty of Prayer, or their Tongue is divided from their Hearts, and perform
it so coldly, that if God did not pardon the same unto them they should
undergo some heavy judgment for their negligent wantonness, wherefore we are
admonished of two things in this p^ace. First, that we apply our selves to
appear before God by daily Prayer. Second that we do it by the Spirit, in a
true sense of our own want and Misery.

For the first.

This is fitly adjoined to the former, for Prayer is the breath of Faith, and
while Faith lives it cannot but breath this breath. For he that feels his own
wants (as Faith teaches it) and know, that the way to speed is Begging, and is
also persuaded of the love and favor of God, how can he but Pray, Who would
not ask a thing h^e much esteemed, if he think he should speed in his suit.
And sure it is, as in other divine graces. Faith as the Mother produces Prayer,
and Prayer as the Daughter, preserves the Mother; gathering daily strength and
food for her, and then it does, not only for the present, but als^ for future
times; for this gain we get by Prayer, that we only obtain not a relief of
our present necessities in things grante^ that were asked, but for time to come
we gather assurance of entertainment: As in the World, where we have found
favor an^ kind invitements, we gather much confidence against an evil day,
and sure, who sees not, that these our days require assiduity in Prayer. When
at home and abroad there are great dangers from Antichrist and other wretched
men, even to the whole Church and every member thereof.

Who sees us not environed on all sides with all enemies, Atheists, Epicures,
Sophisters, Wolves, Hipocrites, and Persecutors; so that, when there is little
wanting, but that the Ship of the Church is like to be covered over with Waves
and Billows, why do we not solicit God with often and earnest Prayers. Saying,
Master, save us, or else we perish.



God does plentifully afford to us Manna and Partridges, but does not God
withal, send leanness into our Souls; when as God has contracted and drawn
in to himself, his saving Arm, and has broken the staff of his heavenly
Bread. What remains unless we will perish quickly, but that we run to God,
that he would be pleased to keep us safe and sound from the contagion of the
Times, and that he would strengthen us in true Faith, and make us persevere to
the end.

The other caution is, that we Pray by the Spirit; that we offer not the
Sacrafice of fools. For it is not enough, to right Praying, that one persuade
himself that he is Faithful, but he must also see, that the Spirit be not
quenched by the neglect of those means, wherewith it will be cherished in our
hearts; and that it be not grieved with any filthiness committed, but that it
may flourish and stir up those inaffable sighs in us, wherewith God is
exceedingly delighted for Prayer is said to be (...), that is, effectual or
opperative, when we Pray not perfunctorily, but fervently. James 6 16. For God
does fill the hungry and thirsty alone, he enriches the poor, heales the
sick, confirms the weak; and this choice God does make in bestowing his
benefits, that he that comes with the widest heart and largest desire, he shall
receive most, and as Christ speaks of hearing. Mark 4.24. Take heed how you
hear, for with what measure you meet, it shall be meeted to you again. That
is, according as are our pains, labor and desires in seeking and asking
things heavenly, shall be more or less, such will be the measure of Gods
Graces in us. The same is verifyed in Praying. For should God power forth his
heavenly riches, on men that are not privy to their own wants, and do only
through custom slightly ask them, when as there is none of us that would
give the least halfe-peny to a Beggar asking coldly and lazily.

Let us then (my Brethren) look well to our Hearts and Lips when we come
before God to ask, that we utter nothing, but what comes out of a lively sense
of the heart, and a high estimation of the worth of the Grace required, both
which proceed from the Spirit. Take heed that when our Hearts should be lifted
up, it be not pressed down with security, and when our Faith should be carried
in the Bark of a good Conscience, that we make not the least leake in it. For
how can we ask or entreat for that, which our Conscience tells us, we can have
no hope to receive it, preferring more Inditements and accusations against us,
then we can utter petitions with our mouths for our selves. And thus much of
the second duty commended to a Christian as a succor, both of his Faith,
before mentioned; as also of the principal thing exhorted unto in the words
following.

And keep your selves in the Love of God.] This is the chief thing aimed at,
to the which all the other things do serve. To wit, Faith, Prayer, and Hope.

The Love of God may be, yea is taken two ways in the Scripture. First
passively, for that whereby we are beloved of God, or Gods love to us. And this
is that so frequent in the Scripture. Second, it is taken actively, for the
love wherewith we love God. If we refer this precept, to the former kind of
love, how can we preserve our selves in the same; for we can neither procure
the love of God toward us, by any merits; nor preserve the continuance of it.

But to resolve this doubt, we must understand that the passive love of God is
taken two ways.

First, for the love wherewith he loved us, before we were borne, or the World
was made. This love is wholly gratuitall. neither did the Lord find any thing
in us, by which he should be swayed with the least inclination of love to us, 1
John. 4.10. Yea there was in us contrary matter of hatred. And this love in it
self is never interrupted, never increased or diminished, but is one and the
same, constant and equal. And of this Love of God as it is in God, the Apostle
gives not charge here, for we have no part or act in this, that we can
preserve it.

Only touching this, we are willed, never to let go the sense of it out of our
hearts, in which meaning the Apostle uses the word Love, Romans 8.35, 39. And
therefore it is said, Keep your selves in the Love of God, and not keep for
your selves the Love of God. The other sort or part of this passive love, is
that, which is called actual beneficence or bountifulness, by a Metonimye of
the cause for the effect; that is, those effects of love, and for those
kindnesses wherewith lovers do prosecute them they love.

So that to this, are referred, first the will and pleasure of doing good and
then the actual beneficence it self. And this love of God is not alike toward
all the Elect, but is greater toward these. That is, he does bestow greater
benefits on those, who have fully and wholly put off all corruption of Nature,
such as are the Saints in Heaven. On these I say, he bestows more, then he
does on those Elect, which either lie still in their sins, as not yet called,
or then he does on those, in whom the grace of Regeneration is begun; and yet
he bestows more on these latter, then on the other; and so we may conclude
that they are dearer to him. John 14.21. He that Loves me, shall be Loved of
my Father, etc. Wherein he does show, that he does bestow a greater measure of
love on the Elect called, who now actually love Christ, then he does on them
that know him not.

For God loves his own gifts, and the more they are, the more he loves, and the
more lively Image of himself, he loves more then an obscurer, To the same
purpose are these words, John 14.23.



And thus much of the Passive love of God, with the two degrees thereof.

The Active love of God, is that whereby we love God. 1 John 2.5. If any keep
my word, truly the Love of God is perfect in him. That is, he shows that he
does sincerely love God, not in word, but in deed expressing it, as St. John
speaks of our love one toward another.

Now to apply this distinction of Love.

Quest. If you ask whither of these two the Apostle means.

Answ. Surely neither must be excluded, for though they are distinct, yet never
severed; the last being an effect of the former, and a meaner to retain the
same; though it be no cause thereof.

Yet the Passive love of God must have the pre-eminence, and is chiefly meant,
and as an argument that this is so, may be that Precept of Christ in the same
words. John 15.9. Abide in my Love, and the Apostle here may seem not darkely
to allude thither.

And whereas this love of God was expressed in two degrees, this cannot so well
be understood of the first degree, but only of the sense and feeling of that
Eternal, immense, constant and most free love of God is always to be
cherished in our hearts, and that by the bountifulness and operative Love of
God, which is as a special means to Seal up in our Hearts the former.

For this gratifying love of God, though it be always gratuitall, yet God
would there should be some part and duty performed of the Regenerate, which
while he does bestow on us, as deserving no such thing, it might give us a
taste of that secret and hidden Love of God, and might persuade us to depend
and lean wholly on that.

So that this Exhortation has this meaning.

Cherish in your Hearts (ye beloved) with all care and diligence, the sense of
the Eternal Love of God, wherewith before all beginning, he embraced you in
Christ; and because the Actual and gratifying Love of God, whereby he does
daily bestow his benefits on Soul and Body, and is most availeable to preserve
this sense and feeling, we must give all endeavor, that we may provoke the
most bountiful liberality of God, toward us; especially in things concerning
our Souls and Salvation.

Quest. Now if you ask, how this may be done.

Answ. Sure Christ has given us a general Rule. John 15.10.

If we will keep his commands, we shall abide in his Love, for to those that
do continue in the ways of his Precepts, God does daily give a more plentiful
increase of the gifts of his Spirit, whereby he does make that his Eternal
Love more conspicuous, and witnessed to our hearts.

And hither belong these places above named, wherein God does promise, that he
will familiarly converse with those that do sincerely love him, that he will
fix his seat there, and never remove it, as we may see, how he testified the
same upon David's expressing the uprightness of his heart toward God. 2 Samuel
7.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. They that Honor God, those w^ll he Honor.

ye great measure of his Graces in us, is a most undoubted testimony of Gods
eternal love; let th^s be the first rule of cherishing the love of God in us,
and a most strong inducement to persuade us to it, and as a notable
encouragement to confirm us in the course of Sanctification. And this reason
St. Peter urges. 2 Epist. 1.10, 11 verses. To make sure our Election and
calling, and to get an inward and evident testimony of Gods eternal Love.

And let us not think it in vain, to serve God, and that there is no reward
in keeping his command: For if all outward advantages fail, yet this does not;
an increase of Grace whereby is increased our assurance. As St. Paul teaches.
Romans 6.22. That being the Servants of Righteousness, they had this fruit, to
wit, an increase of holiness. So Romans 5.5. Hope makes not ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad. That is, the sense of the love of God is poured
into our hearts by the Holy Spirit, for by him as a most certain pawn or
witness, that we are beloved of God, and how good he is and Fatherly affected.

So that we see by what means this sense of Gods Love is brought into our
Hearts even by the Holy Spirit.



But we shall not need to seek other means for the effecting of this then
those the Apostle delivers in this place. For if there shall be a continual
Meditation of our Righteousness purchased by Christ, If there shall be a
serious Meditation of those good things, wherewith God rewards the Servant
calling on his name, If also our hearts shall be thoroughly enflamed with a
constant expectation of that felicity laid up in Heaven for the Faithful: What
can be wanting to us, for the preserving a lively sense of this Love we speak
of. See how loftily the Apostle vaunted himself in the confidence of never
loosing the sense of this Love, bearing himself only on these grounds and
props. Romans 8.33. Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ, etc.

Now what can be more renowned and Honorable, what more to be desired, then
that frail and weak man should be stronger and more powerful, then Life,
then Death, then the Devil, then Sin and all the terrors of Hell; and yet St,
Paul does witness that the sense of this Love alone did put this Noble heart
and Victorious Spirit into him. And every godly man, truly fearing God, has
experience of this in himself.

This is, that admirable and wonderful power, which carries men violently
through glory and Ignominy, through good report and bad, through fire and
torments, that they might Magnify the name of their God, whose unspeakable love
they feel in their hearts. 2 Cor. 5.14. The Love of God constrains us. 2 Cor.
4.8, 9, 10.

For when they have Gods favor, they stand not much on it, that the World is
against them. For say, the wicked spoil their goods, thirst after their blood;
yet what need they be discouraged in heart, when they know that these light
afflictions shall be recompensed with so great reward as is showed, 2 Cor,
4.15.16, 17. Wherefore let us get to our selves, this most strong Bulwark
against all the force of Satan and his adherents.

Let us endeavor to Sanctity, that being made richer in Graces, we may have a
more plentiful assurance, and deeper stamp Imprinted in our hearts, which
none has ever tasted, or shall no not with the least sipping, that sets not
himself unfainedly to this task, and makes Conscience to proceed and increase
in the same course, having a pure heart, a true tongue and clean hands.

But alas, if these things be so, who can sufficiently bewail these our days,
wherein men show that they are so far from preserving themselves in the love
of God, that they are set to cast themselves out of the same, while some seek
above all to preserve themselves in the love of the World, and so the love of
God cannot be in them. They being carried away so with the Pleasures, Honors,
and profits of the World, as they desire no other.

Others go on in the open breach of all Gods Laws, grieving the Spirit of God,
provoking him to his face, and moving him to turn his Love into Anger.

Is not the love of many waxed cold, and does not the failing of this love in
men, show that God begins to withdraw his Love, which was the beginning of the
other.

What means that deadness of men's hearts? what means either a general
neglect of all means,

O then let us awake and hold fast our Bridegroom! Let us entreat him, and
endeavor our selves in his way, then he will enrich us with his Graces, take
us into his secret Cabinet, and Seal up to and in our Souls, the Charter of
eternal life. O how should this make us pray with David! O that my feet were
so directed, etc. O how should Christ and his Truth be in our hearts to dye
and to live, how should we sigh and contend for it.

Who would loose his Evidence. Take heed of Sin, if thou cherish it, it will so
eat out the letters of thy Evidence, that thou shall not be able to read them;
and so weaken thy title and tenure in the Heavenly Inheritance, that when the
Earthly shall fail, thou will not know, what shall become on thee. Arise then
by unfeigned repentance from thy Sins, and never give over till by thy Tears,
thou have so washed out all the Spots, as that the letters of thy Evidence may
be cleared, and that the Star which was so darkened, may so clearly shine,
and directly conduct thee, not as it did the wise men, to Christ in the Manger,
but to Christ in glory, at the right hand of the Father; whither thou shall
always be admitted, not to offer gifts, as they did; But to be filled with all
pvrfection of happiness.

Waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.] Hitherto of preserving our
selves in the love of God, the last furtherance thereunto is here set down, to
wit, Christian Hope. It is described by three things.

First, from a property or effect, namely. Waiting.

Secondly, from the object or thing waited for, the Mercy of Christ, called the
Grace of Christ, 2 Cor. 13. at the end, as also the fruit thereof, Eternal
Life, which often is called Hope.

Thirdly, from the end Eternal Life. So that the sense of all is. Waiting for
Eternal Life through the Mercy of Christ. Where at the first, is discovered
that impudent devise and falsehood of the Popish Church, touching their double
justification, the first whereof they avouch to be of Grace; but that at least
of Grace and works, whereas here it is expressed, That a Christian justified
waytes for Mercy.

But leaving them to their blindness,

This Waiting, here expressed, is a lively property of true Christian Hope, in
part, common to it with Faith. For Faith and Hope have both the same grounds,
the same causes, the like effects; and therefore, as he that Believes makes not
have, so neither does he that Hopes.

So that, To Hope, Wait, Expect and Trust, are put all for one in the old
Testament. Lament. 3.40, 41. and 1 These. 1.3. Describing the three common
graces of a Christian, the Apostle gives to each one their peculiar property or
effect; giving to Faith a Work, to Love Labor, and to Hope Patience. is made
a Badge of a Christian. 1 Cor. 1.10. Romans 8.24, 25. Tit. 2.13, 14. Yea this is
not only a Badge, but it is a part of the Christian Armor, and that a chief
one, the Helmet (of Salvation) to cover the head and to bear of the bl^^es.
Yea also it is compared to an Anchor. Heb. 6.18, 19. And therefore it had need
be of good Metal and well tempered. Now the grounds of Christian Hope are
chiefly three.

First, the merits of Christ, for as Faith believes justification and
forgiveness, so Hope believes (as I may say) Salvation and the possession of
the Inheritance. And in this regard, the Apostle has conjoined Faith and Hope
in one common description. For Christ as well purchased Heaven, as pardon of
Sin, so that as Faith believes the one, so does Hope the other; especially,
since Sin being taken away, nothing can debar us Heaven.

Esa. 54 9, 10. Ier. 31.34, 35, 36, 37, verses.
The second ground of Hope is the Truth of Gods Promises, not only simply in
themselves, But confirmed with experience of accomplishment of many past,
concluding thence, that seeing the greatest is accomplished, the less will
much more; especially these Promises being ratified with an Oath. Heb. 6.16.

The third ground, is the Pledge of the Spirit, the earnest and first fruits
and a Seal. Now any of these are sufficient with men to put away doubting,
much more with God.

If Hope be not builded on these grounds as on a Rock, the House will fall, as
the Papists have given experience, when the Tempest has come on them.

So that hereby is overthrown both the Hope of the Papist, as also of the
common people. For as it is in Faith, so with Hope in the Idiot. He hopes well,
but gets naught, because both his Faith and Hope are misgrounded. Arising of
the ignorance of God and himself. While not knowing his deserved misery and
cursed corrupt estate, he takes himself to be wholly Gods workmanship,
forgetting how the Devil by his finger has marred the same. And so think
that God cannot but love him, and accept his own handy work, and if happily he
know and in some sort confess this yet presently all is stopped with this,
that God is merciful, not thinking of his justice, without satisfaction
whereof, there is no place for Mercy.

But whosoever would not have his Hope deceive him, he must have better
grounds then this conceit; for as he that for some heinous offense is cast in
Prison, and for the same, has the sentence of Death passed on him: Now for him
to have not only a pardon for his offense, but also a great revenue assigned
him. He has need to have all the Kings Seals and large Charters.

Even so, must every true Christian be able to show his pardon under the broad
Seal of the Word and Blood of Christ, and must also know the Conveyance, Title,
Tenure of Heaven, and by what service he holds it, before he can have an
assured Hope, especially there being great danger in mistaking the Title; for
if we claim Heaven any other way, then that by which it is offered unto us, we
can never obtain it. As the Apostle does notably show. Romans 9.32. Romans 10.3.
Romans 4.16.

Secondly, true Christian Hope does qualify a man and fit him that while he
holds this in Reversion, he may daily prepare himself for it, against it
fall; and therefore, look what conditions are enjoined on his part, he will be
careful to perform, and what the Word prescribes to be in them that hope for
Heaven, he does demonstrate to be in himself. As 1 John 3.3. He clenses
himself, continues in Prayer, arms himself with Patience, puts on the Shoes
and all the Christian Armor, and where his treasure and purchase is, there is
his heart, talk, joy and delight, and makes him that he cannot settle himself
on any thing here below, he has casted so of the fruits of Chanaan, that he
cannot pitch his Tents in the Wilderness, this is plainly taught in the
example of Abraham, who forsook his own Country, etc.

The reason was, He looked for a City whose builder was God. Heb. 12.19.
The like of Moses, Heb. 11.27. And this effect is notably taught, Heb. 6. at
the end. Where is showed, that Hope is the Sacred Anchor that pierces in.

For as in the storm, if the Anchor be so deeply pitched, that by the
violence of the Tempest, it lose not his hold; the Ship safely endures the same.

So a Christian man having this, is secured from Storms and Raines, which the
Devil and all his forces can raise.

And therefore, light wind, so to be tossed in the World as in the deep Sea,
and float here and there.

What is the reason but that they want this Anchor, which being pitched in
Heaven, they might stay themselves till the Tyranny was passed. Esa. 26.20.
This is as a Pent-house to keep off the dashes. And thus having cast Anchor,
let us apply this a little and so draw to shore.



Wherefore (my beloved) let us strengthen our weak hands and weary knees, let
us call back this Hope and expectation, which may seem to be almost banished
from among men.

For why are the Profits of this life so greedily sought after? why is there no
end of heaping up wealth? what mean these common fraud and circumventions one
of another? Whence is that lust of ruling, every where; there being no care to
profit those over whom they are set? Why will many be Pastors and will not feed
their Sheep? Why do men at this day, measure the Truth,

They hear and partly see, that the Godly are of all men, most miserable, this
Hope excepted; and they thinking this Hope to be a small comfort and succor
against so great a misery, they chose rather to embrace things present, leaving
Hope for Fools as they think.

But sure it is not for true Christians, so to lead their lives as they that
have no Hope, not to be grovelling on the Earth as Sons of the Earth.

We are borne of God, and are Citizens of the Heavenly Inheritance, we are as
strangers, not Denizens? why should we be curious or inquisitive in a strange
Country? why do we embrace the place of our Exile, as our home.

But we whither we be called in the Morning or at Noone, into the Vineyard; let
us labor stoutly, and let us look for the penny at the end of the day.
Neither will the Lord defer our Hope long.

For lo, He comes, and his reward is with him, and yet a little while, and the
Lord will come and not stay. Heb. 10. at the end.

Our Fathers dyed in the Faith four thousand years since, and received not
the Promises, but saluted them a far off. Heb. 11.

Our race that we have run, is much shorter. It shall not need, that we
should lie so long in the dust, before the Creature be perfitly restored; and
though it should be long, yet our days are circumscribed in the compass of a
few years.

Wherefore, let us li^^ (...) th^ads that hang down to the Earth, let us with
great Joy behold these everlasting Tabernacles.

If we shall feed our selves with this Hope, surely we shall abide in the
Love of God, in all affliction. 2 These. 1.5, 6, 7. For this Hope will whet our
desire, and as a Wife looking for her Husband, does prepare her self, and will
not be entangled in any business, much less set her affection on any other
man.

So the Faithful Soul longing for Christ will dispose it self for this Hope,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. For he shall appear to all that look for him in
Faith, to Salvation.

But the to wicked. Woe to that day! when they shall fly to the Mountains to
fall on them, and the Rocks to hide them. For if the time of his first coming
be so terrible as is expressed in the second and third chapters of Malachi. How
then will they endure the second.

Now the same Lord JESUS CHRIST, our Lord and our God, even the Father which
has loved us, and has giver us everlasting Consolation and good Hope through
Grace, comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good word and work. 2
These. 2.16, 17 verses. Glory to GOD alone.

Jmprimatur

JOSEPH CARYL. 1646.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Forcet, for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain
in Paul's Churchyard, and Hannah Allen at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley 1647.


