The true Copy of the Complaint of Roderyck Mors, Sometime a Gray Friar, unto
the Parliament Hsouse of England, about an hundred years ago, when the Bishop
of Rome being Banished out of the Realm, the Bishops of ENGLAND acted his part
by power of the old Romish Canon, newly Translated into English Law.
Let the Reader take notice, that in that day when the Roman Wolf was
Metamorphosed into an English Fox, the Prelates that (in our first reforming
Parliament of this latter age, cried out fearfully, the destruction of the
Church, and the ceasing of the glory of the Kingdom, 1530) at least for their
livings sake, joined in law-making, and wrote, and swore solemnly against that
Roman jurisdiction, 1534. Being yet bound by their own cords, and when they
would have King and State believe that both Pope and Popery were banished, even
in the same day, both by word and letter, at home and ^broad, took all
occasions to draw back K. Henry the 8. his Highness from Reformation: and on
the other hand, procured Injunctions and Articles, 1540. with penalties
attended, in which even dealing against Transubstantion was to be considered as
Treason: And themselves sat in Commission, and were cheiefe prosecutors of
such as withstood them. Their attempts against the Queen Katharine Parrs own
life, are they not on record. How says our Church History, came the Noble
Courtier, and so lamented of the King Earl Cromwell to his untimely end? How
were diverse, Londoners and others; Ministers and People, cast into the burning
flame, in the same, both place and time, that others perished for adhering to
the Roman Bishop? And since the last Banishing of the forraign^ power, in the
end of the Marian times, what public persecutions, Murders, Prison-murders,
Gondemnation to death, Banishment, Torture, and Spoil, by means of those
cruel Canons, and usurped Offices, has bin so sore, and long endured, who
sees not, when the public slate has so discerned? In this day when the
advancement has bin so fair for a renewd Patriarchat, or Popedom within our
selves, we may less wonder the condition of the Land to be as it is, though
the Prelates protest against Romes Supremacy. Cannot they be a block to the
expedition for Ireland, and designs of the Major part in Parliament for
Reformation, and our safety; and agree in vote with the Popish Lords, and boast
how they could settle the present distraction in quietness, troubling only
some which they call Sectaries, and yet keep close to the rule of Romish
government, shared among themselves, thus still letting, and like to do, till
they be taken out of the way? For the further discovery of this order of Men,
to every eye that is but half open, and regulated well by common sense, the
judgment of the godly learned on the contrary side, in the day of our begun
escape from the Romish Wolf, in this Prophetical admonitory Lamentation
(being the Title and words of the 23. Chapter of his Book, Printed in Anno
1545.) is annexed.

A Lamentation, for that the Body and Tail of the Pope is not banished, with
his Name.
OH merciful Father of heaven, I can never lament enough to hear the Gospel
thus blasphemed, to be named a thing causing Sedition; when it is the only
cause of concord and peace in Conscience unto the faithful. Yet these Bishops,
Deanes and Canons of Colleges, with other the Popes shavelings, according to
their old wont, shame not to blaspheme this holy Word, by all the subtle
means that can be devised. How busy were they to stay the putting forth of
the great Bible, and to have had the Bible of Thomas Matthew called in: but the
Lord strengthened the heart of the Prince to set it forth against their wills:
yet how shamefully have they and their members, in many places of England
driven men from reading the Bible? yea and Bonner Bishop of London, shamed not
in the year a thousand five hundred and forty, to Prison one Porter and other,
for reading in the Bible, which if it be not Heresy to GOD, then what is
Heresy? And if it be not treason to the King to deface his Injunctions then
what is treason?

And again, if it be not theft to the Commonwealth, to steal from them their
spiritual food, then what is robbery and theft? And even in the beginning of
the last Parliament in the year a thousand five hundred, and forty one; how
did they blaspheme, rage, and belly the Holy Ghost, saying, It is not rightly
translated, and that it is full of Heresies, and that they would correct it,
and set out one rightly. Sooner can they find faults than amend it. Who
perceives not your wicked intentions, that in the mean time ye look for the
death of the King, whom GOD preserve to his pleasure.

O ye blind Phylistians, the Scripture is full of sentences, which teach men to
know you, and to beware of you. I cannot blame you, though ye fight against GOD
and his Word, to shut it up from his People. For why? Whosoever reads or
hears the Contents of that Book, and believes the Holy Ghost, shall plainly
see, that ye be the very enemies of GOD, and so shall cast you out of their
Conscience, where ye have long sitten in the place of God; whereby also ye
should lose your great riches and authority, which makes you to roar like
Lions, and tear like Bears, and to bite like cruel Wolves and to sting like
Adders. No doubt one Bishop one Deane, one College, or House of Canons, has
ever done more mischief against Gods Word, and sought more the hinderance of
the same, than 10 houses of Monks, Friars, Chanons or Nuns ever did.

The Kings grace began well to weed the Garden of England: but yet has he left
standing (the more pity) the most foulest and stinking weeds, which had most
need to be first plucked up by the roots, that is to say, the pricking
Thistles, and stinking Nettles, which still standing, what helps the deposing
of the petty members of the Pope, and to leave his whole body behind, which be
the pompous Bishops, Canons of Colleges, Deanes, and such other? Surely it
helps as much as to say, I will go kill all the Foxes in S. Iohans Wood,
because I would have no more Foxes bred in all England. We say we have cast the
Pope out of England: how so, I ask you, seeing he came never in England, how
can he be cast out therefore? Some will say yes his tributes and other pollages
be taken from him. Well thanks be to God, we be somewhat eased of our temporal
and bodily burden. But there be greater things in this matter, than that,
which well pondered, we may say, and lie not, that the Pope remains wholly
still in England, save only that his Name is banished. For why? his body (which
be the Bishops and other shavelings) does not only remain, but also his tail,
which be his filthy traditions, wicked Laws and beggarly Ceremonies (as S. Paul
called them) yea and the whole body of his pestiferous Canon Law, according to
the which judgment is given through the Realm, and men condemned after the
prescript of it; so that we be still in Egypt, and remain in captivity, most
grievously laden by observing and walking in his most filthy dross aforesaid,
which is a misty and endless maze. And so long as ye walk in those wicked
Laws of Antichrist the Pope, and maintain his Knights the Bishops, in such
inordinate Riches, and unlawful Authority; so long say I, ye shall never
banish that monstrous Beast the Pope, out of England. Yes, and it shall be a
mean in process of time to bring us into a temporal bondage also again, and
to have him reign as he has done like a God. And that know our forked Cappes
right well, which thing makes them so boldly and shamelesly to fight of their
Gods quarrel, against Christ and his Word. The Bishops of England never took
so great pains to defend the Pope and his Kingdom, as they have done since
the Kings grace took rightfully from him his accustomed pollages, which
usurpedly he had out of this Realm. To prove this to be true, what blood have
they shed? since that time, of the beloved servants of the everlasting God, for
preaching, teaching, writing, and walking in the truth; as Teukisbery, Bainam,
Frith, Bilney, Barnis, Garet, Ierom, with diverse other in Kent, Salisbury, and
diverse other places. And William Tindall the Apostle of England (although he
were burnt in Brabant) yet he felt the Bishops blessing of England, which
procured him that death, which he looked for at their hands. Nevertheless, I
doubt not, but that all these be of the number of them, that S. John speaks
of in the Apocalypse, which lie under the Altar, till the number of their
Brethren be fullfilled, which shall be slain for the Gospells sake. I rehearse
not their names for any praise to be given to them: but that the Congregation
of Christ may laud and praise the everliving God, for giving them grace to
stand so faithful in the Lord to the end, leaving us the victory, which is
part of your spiritual comfort. For God promises the Preachers and Ministers
of his Word, no other reward in this life. And through the preaching of these
poor wretches (but outcastles in the sight of the world) he has wrought this,
that whereas the King was before but a shadow, or at the most but half a King,
now he does wholly reign through theie preaching, writing and suffering.

But now to the tyranny of the Bishops, once again, which besides the
murdering of these Saints, how have they bewitched the Parliament House, in
making such viperous Acts, as the Beast of Rome never made himself? for the
Pope never made the Marriage of Priests to death, and such other.

Thus by your subtilties and most crafty wiles, ye make the People to abhor
the name of the Pope of Rome, for a face, and compel them to walk in all his
wicked Laws. And the Word of God which we say we have received, is not, nor
cannot be suffered to be preached and taught purely and sincerely, without
mixing it with your invented traditions and service. For whosoever does
(standing faithfully to it) he shall die for it. Thus you may see, that the
things which we say that we have cast off, we receive, cherish, maintain, and
walk therein: and again, that thing which we say we have received by the
craft and tyranny of the Bishops, is abhorred, despised taken for Sedition
called new Learning; and men be driven from it for fear of loss of goods of
punishment of body, and danger of death, so weak and frail is our flesh.

What a lamentable thing is this, that men should be driven from the Gospel of
Christ, the glad tidings that brings peace in Conscience to the faithful,
that is forgiveness of sins in Christ's blood. By these fruits all men may
know, that they be more natural to their wicked Father the Pope, than any
Child can be to his natural Father: and that shall the Realm feel at the
change of a Prince, or at such times as they look for, unless God of his very
mercy break the wicked councels of them. What is the cause, that the Bishops be
so diligent to sit so often upon the six wicked Articles, but only that they be
establishing of the Popes authority, be thou sure? Now therefore, that same God
which gave grace to Achab to hearken unto the voice of Elyab, the 3. of the
Kings the 18. to the confounding of the false Prophets give our noble King that
same grace, if it be his Godly will and pleasure, to hearken to the godly
learned, to confound and destroy all the false Prophets in England, and then I
am sure there shall not be remaining one pompous Bishop in the Realm.

Wherefore to open the conclusion of this little Lamentation, if ye will banish
for ever the Antichrist, the Pope, out of this Realm, ye must fell down to
the ground those rotten posts the Bishops, which be clouds without moisture,
and utterly abolish all and every his ungodly Laws, decrees, Traditions and
Ceremonies, without Sgnifications, for they wait but for a time to rob some
Noble man of his wit, as they would hay done with the Marquess of Exetor.
This is as sure, as Winchester received a Letter from the Pope, at his being at
Regenspurg. Well, these filthy dregs once expelled, then make no Laws but
such as shall be agreeable to Gods Word; and so shall ye drive out Antichrist and
his members, or else never: and thus we shall not only avoid our temporal
bondage, but also our spiritual captivity, which thing is most to be desired.
And surely, seeing there is no power upon earth above the Temporal, to
redress civil matters, Commonwealths, and to change wicked Laws, and evil
customs; and inasmuch as the higher powers be fully certified by the
Scripture, that as the Pope is enemy to the Gospel, so be his Children the
Bishops (which thing is open and manifest to as many as will not wilfully be
blind) therefore, I say, I cannot see, how they can suffer them thus to reign,
persecuting the setters forth of the Gospel, but that they be partakers of
their iniquity, and sprinkled with them in the blood of the righteous.

FINIS.
Printed in time and place of public observation of the English Prelates, so
contrary handling the matter with the peace-seeking Protestant Subjects of
SCOTLAND, and the blood-sucking Popish Rebels of IRELAND. 15. Jan: 1641


