THE VNLAVVFVLNESSE and danger of LIMITED EPISCOPACIE. Whereunto is subioyned
a short reply to the Modest advertiser and calm examinator of that Treatise.
AS ALSO The Question of Episcopacie discussed from Scripture and Fathers. BY
Robert Bailly Pastor of Killwunning in Scotland.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1641.

To the equitable Reader.
SOme months ago there came out, from a learned and very judicious hand, a
small treatise to prove the unlawfulness and danger of limited Prelacy.
Shortly there after, there appeared in answer to this, a modest Advertisement,
and calm Examination, which was sent enclosed in a letter, from a Bishop of
prime place, to a Stationer for the press, written whether by the Bishop
himself, or a friend of his acquaintance, a Doctor of good esteem, I do not
know. Some very few days after the first appearance of this answer, the reply
following was ready, albeit till now it could not get the benefit of a press.
I confess the Reply is not suitable to the great worth of the first Treatise,
but if it do sufficiently retund with clear reason, all that the Answerer has
opposed, it attains its end: of this performance be thou the judge, unto thy
discretion I freely permit the pronouncing of the sentence. I could wish from
thy hands but one not very unreasonable favor, that thou might be pleased to
call for, and compare all the three Writs which are al but short, that thou
would lay together in every passage, first, what the Author did say,
Secondly, what the Bishop or Doctor does answer, and thirdly, what is here
replied. This little labor will enable thee from due consideration to make
they equitable decree in the court of thy conscience, according to which thou
may cheerfully proceed, first, to thy hearty desires, and thereafter, as thy
calling permits, to thy best endeavors, either for the holding up or pulling
down this much agitate estate of Bishops. Farewell.

A Reply Unto the modest advertisement and calm examination of the
unlawfulness and danger of limited EPISCOPACIE.
AMong the multitude of rare novelties, It is much to see that Prelaticall
faction modest, and calm.
which of late have bin seen, We must take it for one not the least, that
Episcopal men have so far in writing changed their style, as to meet their
greatest adversaries, and extreme opposites, with no more, then modest
advertisements, and calm examinations. God and the Parliament must be thanked,
that men may now dispute, and discourse upon Miters, without the hazard of
starving in a close prison, after the loss of ears, and stigmatizing of
cheeks upon the pillory. Who yesterday did rage like Lions, to day take upon
them the skin of the meekest lambs. This modesty is not sincere.
If with the outside, the inward parts be truly metamorphosed, a short time
after the rising of this Honorable Court will declare. For the present they
must pardon the worlds misbelief of their total change while in the art of
dissembling they are yet so imperfect, as to let appear at the lands foot
their old Leonine paw: for besides that in the midst of your modesty you
cannot forbear the old Common place of calumnious railing against the very
well deserving Saints of God, Calvin, and Knox, as usurpers of greater
authority over their brethren, then any Bishop did ever in your knowledge
assume in England, Page 6. for my own part I should be sorry to see any Bishop
in this land have such authority over other Ministers, as Calvin had in Geneva,
or Knox in Scotland.
Your very party whom you profess to rencounter with nothing but calmenes and
moderation, is traduced openly by you without any cause, as a bloody man, as
one who for the obteining of his conclusion, the overthrow of Bishops,
threatens the shedding not of vulgar blood, but that of Princes, of their whole
families, and no less then the ruin of Kingdoms: You make him a Turkish
Dervise, P. 12. As for other arguments, that if we admit not the Presbytery,
there will be jealousies between us, and Scotland, that there will be changes,
and periods of States, of Families, and Kingdoms, for these are insinuate in
this book, and some are reported to have said that the Bishops must down, or
much blood will be shed. These we think not proofs but threatenings, and fitter
for the mouth of a Turkish Dervish, who plants Religion by the sword, then for
a Minister of the Gospel of Christ.
rather then a Preacher of the Gospel, Pap. 18. I shall desire the Author to
remember that there may be as much ambition in Corah, as in Aaron, and as much
pride in refusing to be governed, as in desiring to govern, and to consider
whether these two speeches are very unlike, that of his Page 15 Is there none in
the assembly fit to be President but one? and this of Corabs, Numb. 16. the
Congregation is all holy, wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord.
an ambitious Corah, a very Devil changed in an Angel of light: Isid. And for
the light whereof he speaks page 7. we desire him not to be too consident,
but rather that he will remember that of the Apostle, that Satan sometimes
changes himself into an Angel of light, and causes that to be reverenced as
an illumination, which many times is but an illusion.
his arguments not only to be false, but Satanick illusions. Behold, this is
the calmnesse of your examination, the meekness and moderation of your
advertisement.

The greatest part of your professed virtue, Wherein their meekness does
consist.
we find to consist in a key-coldnes, and well nigh mute-silence, when the
hotest, and most pungent arguments approach your skin. Here it is indeed, where
the meeknes of your spirit, and unwillingnesse to strive, does most appear;
for you are ever sure, when any pressing reason is brought, either altogether
to let it go, as if you were stone-deafe, or if you take courage to contradict,
your answers are so evidently impertinent, or trivial, and weak, that we might
doubt whether this your opposition were made in earnest, or merely for fashion,
unless we did see it in the conclusion offered unto the grave eye of the high
Court of Parliament, before which no wise Man will adventure of purpose to
trifle.

Who so misdoubts the equity of this our sharp censure, let him be only
pleased to fight with his own eyes both the writs, comparing part with part,
and every Argument with its answer, readily after this labor he will
subscribe my Sentence: To facilitate the pains of any, who are desirous to
undertake this travel, I am content to go before in the way.

The Authors Preface, To the Preface nothing is answered at all.
though short, yet full of nervous considerations, it is your wisdom to pass
by without one syllable of examination.

After the Preface, And to the first principle nothing pertinent.
the Treatise it self begins with this proposition; All the lawful offices of
the Church are appointed by God in his holy word: This serves both for a Major
to the first argument, and a Principle for all the ensuing discourse. The
Author proves his Principle by a number of clear Scriptures, by many evident
reasons deduced from Scripture, and diverse grounds of the most intelligent
adversaries; what oppose you to all this? That the reader may not observe how
you speak to the point, you cast up at the entry a quantity of dust, to mar
his sight, you lay down a Principle nothing pertinent to the purpose: You
propone a number of questions, which come not near the Proposition of your
party, when at last you come to your answer, you will neither grant, nor deny,
nor distinguish your adversaries Proposition, nor dare you oppose any thing to
the manifold arguments whereupon it is builded, only you fall in before the
time, and out of the due place upon the Hypothese of Episcopacie, and by way of
contrary argumentation, with some old Popish flourishes of words, you insinuate
to the simple, rather then prove to any intelligent mind, that your
Episcopacie, as an Apostolic institution is to be embraced with a divine
faith, no less then the Creed, or the most holy Scripture.

Your Principle is, That all would be careful to keep the public peace, as
also, Your impertinent principle concerns none but your self.
That no man for gain of things temporal, would lose eternal: Your Falcon
flight is here so high, your springs so far away, your conduit pipes so
crooked, that he must have a skilled eye who can perceive the ways, how you
bring home your waters, for any use to the purpose in hand. Do you think that
these who petition the Parliament, for rooting out of Episcopacie, P. 2. That
men be not in their consultations so misled either by some appearances of
godliness, and fair colors of extraordinary zeal as thereby to hazard the
disturbance of the common quiet.
which yet (as the whole I Will are now eyewitnesses) is the proper crime of your
dearest friends: for who else, to keep upon their heads their tottering
Mitres, did draw the King, and all his Dominions, to the very brink of the late
desperate danger.

The other half of your Principle, were very expedient to be enlarged, and
gravely applied to these whom it concerns. You cannot be ignorant who these
men are, who these Years past, upon no other grounds that can be conjectured,
but only their own temporal advantages, and worldly fears, have betrayed the
eternal truths of God. Who these are, who so long have sat still in a
lethargick quietness, and yet cannot be gotten awaked to break off their
dumb silence, when Arminianisme, and all the heads of the Canterburian Popery,
from so many Pulpits and Presses, have been over-spreading the whole Land.

The questions which so severely you urge to be answered, Your first questions
answered.
needed not to have been at all proponed. Anent your first, suppone we grant
that salvation may be obtained under Episcopacie, what then, will this infer
that Bishops necessarily must be retained, and that their rooting out is
needless? All your friends confess, that under the Pope, and Cardinals,
salvation may be by all, and is by the most, obtained: Will you therefore
conclude, that the ejection of the Pope, and Cardinals out of England, was a
needless work? Your friends do so indeed, Vide Ladens. (...): c. 3.
And so your Episcopal principles force them, but I hope the Parliament, to
whom you submit your Treatise, will be loath in haste by your persuasion to
bring back the Pope, and Cardinals Authority.

How many good works your Bishops have forced men to omit, and how many evil
to commit, search the Registers of the House of Commons, and you shall want no
store.

Shall the Reformers be in great darkness, and the Martyrs miserable, if in
their days there was in the Church any thing, which they were not able to
amend, or which came not in their mind to complain of? Did any Martyr of the
Reformed Church ever die in the quarrel of Episcopacie, or Ceremonies? Did
their persecutors require them to seal any of these things with their blood?
Was it any disgrace to these Martyrs that Queen Elizabeth rectified many things
in King Edwards Liturgy, and went beyond that Reformation which in their days
was attained?

Your second questions are not unlike the first, Also your second.
for their pertinencie. All the Reformed World is fully agreed to have
Episcopacie overthrown, only some few of the English Church, for their own
interest do oppose. There is as great an harmony among all in setting up of
Presbyteries, and Synods, as in casting out the old rubbish of Bishops and
their Courts; If some few of the English be scrupulous about the limits,
bounds, and extent of the power of Synods, It is no marvel, Episcopal tyranny
has bred, and fostered more Schisms in England, then have been heard of in all
the Reformed Churches beside; If this fountain of Schism were once well
stopped, We make no question, but as in Scotland, Holland, France, Swize,
Geneva, and many places in Germany, there is no discord, so like ways in
England, one or two well governed general Assemblies would amicably put an end
to all the questions that are, or need to be moved about the Discipline, or any
thing else whatsoever.

What you enquire further, of the divine right of Presbytery, of the places of
Scripture brought to prove it, of the sense, and consequences of the
Scriptures. In all reason you are obliged to hear with us great Patience avow
that the Scripttures we bring, do infer necessarily, and clearly our Concusion,
till you brought some material answer to the contrary.

The last of your Questions, Your last Question answered
is but a flash of your Rhetoric faculty of exaggeration, your self must make
answer to it; for you do say that God discharges under pain of damnation all
that is unlawful, and that every thing is unlawful which is against the Word
of God: That Presbyters, by the Word of God, have the power of laying on the
hands, and of using the keys, you will shortly grant; that therefore an
Episcopacie should be permitted, to spoil these Presbyters of the privileges
which God in his word has granted unto them, or to usurp unto themselves, and
devolve on their Officials, the Rites of the inferior Clergy, you dare not
deny to be a wrong which deserves amending.

At last you come to the purpose, The Authors principle left unbrauled.
the Authors Principle, but you find it so hot, that you dare not stand long
upon it.

You tell us first, that the Authors discourse upon this Principle is written
with much art, and eloquence, for insinuation with the unwary Reader. Who
pleases to read the writ it self, shall see, that all the art of the Author
is in a very plain discourse to couch, so briefly as is possible, a number of
clear and strong probations, for to convince the mind of all attentive Readers.

Again, you tell us that the Principle may be granted. Why do you mutter
betwixt your teeth? speak out clearly, and plainly, for if you grant it, your
cause is lost, if you deny it, your next will be to answer the numerous
arguments, wherewith it is compassed, not any one whereof you are bold to try.

In the third place, that you may leave a posterne for escaping, the Authors
clear and plain principle, That no office is lawful in Gods house, which
Christ has not appointed, you transform in an other mold, to wit, That none
may administer the Word or Sacraments, impose hands, or use the keys, but such
as Christ has appointed; When thus you have taken leave to corrupt, not the
words only, but the matter of your adversaries very principle, Episcopal
Courts acknowledged to be unlawful
Notwithstanding you see the Conclusion that flows from your own proposition,
to wit, that your high Commissioners, your Chancellours, and all the Rabble of
your Official Courtiours do meddle with Church censures contrary to Christ's
appointment; This you do not deny, but bear us in hand that these corruptions
may be amended without noise, or scandal. It were good that your friends in
the Convocation would preveen the honorable House of Commons, that at last
they would offer of free accord to pass from these long defended oppressing
Courts, before with greater noise and shame they be compelled to render to the
Presbytery these Rites, whereof too long it has been dispossed, by your
Bishops fraud and force.

When you have broken in unseasonably upon the Hypothese of Episcopacie, how
marvellously do you shift, and extenuate the question? The authors principle
did speak expressly, and soly, of a distinct office in the Church of God: you
dare not say whether Episcopacie be any such thing or not, All the distinction
betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter that you speak of, is a higher, and lower
degree, as it were of the same office: Your Brethren will give you small thanks
for this extenuation; for you know they maintain Episcopacie to be a true, and
distinct office from the Priesthood, unto the which, beside a Superiority of
degree, the distinct faculty or power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction,
essentially does belong, wherewith simple priests, qua tales, have naught at
all to do.

Beside, the Authors principle, and the probations thereof, conclude all that
you here do require, for they infer the unlawfulness of any majoritie of
one Church Officer over another, without Christ's appointment, from so clear
texts of Scripture, and so sound grounds of uncontroverted Divinity, as you
find not your self disposed to answer any one of them.

While as you require proof in that place, for all the other parts of our
Discipline, you are unreasonable. When you have given satisfactorie answers to
all that is brought in the head of Episcopacy, it will be then time, and no
sooner, to proceed unto other Articles, which so long as Episcopacy stands,
were needless to be spoken of.

In your contrary argumentations you undertake to prove a very strange
conclusion, Your great words extolling Episcopacie are full of vanity.
That the order of Bishops is no less Apostolical, then the very Creed, and
to be received with no less faith then the very Scriptures, yea, with much
more, as it seems you import; for you equal the Scriptures and Bishops in this,
that both are alike universal, and unquestioned traditions: but in this you
seem to give Bishops a surer ground then you grant to Scriptures, for the
ground whereupon you here, and many of your fellows elsewhere embrace the
Scriptures, is sole Tradition, but the grounds whereupon you receive the order
of Bishops, is not sole tradition; but sundry passages of Scripture also as you
allege.

This your mighty Conclusion you prove not by any argument, but only by a
number of big words borrowed from the Papists, in this same and many more
subjects. You tell us that many Scriptures are alleged for Episcopacy, and
that these Scriptures are exponed in your sense by all the Fathers, yea, by all
Writers for fifteen hundred years. I hope that your self will find it
reason that we be permitted to take your great words for naught, but vain
echoes in the Air, while you be pleased to produce at least some one
Scripture, some one Father, some one Writer, which here you have not done. Also
while you would have us taking it on your naked word, that all times, all
places, all persons are for Bishops, and that for such Bishops as you here
expreslie describe, to whom alone it belongs to rule, as it is proper for the
inferior Presbyters to be ruled, suffer us to say that you are greatly
mistaken, till we have heard some one of your proofs. Your patience will here
I hope be the greater, when you read in the subsequent writ for this our
contradiction more Scriptures and Fathers then you in haste are like
satisfactorily to answer. The question of Episcopacie discust.
In that same short writ you will see all the Scriptures, and the most pregnant
passages of antiquity which the best learned on your side are accustomed to
produce, answered by the ancients themselves so clearly, that while you give
some evidence to the contrary, Indifferent men will pronounce, that we have
but too good reason to avow Episcopacie as your self in the same place
describes it, to be a plant which God never set in his garden, to be a mere
stranger to the ancient Church for some hundred years, and ever while the Pope
had usurped mainly by the help of his Episcopal jurisdiction, many
Antichristian privileges.

Your consequences, besides the palpable error of your Antecedent, are weak,
vicious, and inconsequent; though your Episcopacie be an Antichristian error,
yet it will not follow that all people who are subject to it must be condemned
as Antichristian, and false worshipers of God; for you know that one fault and
one quality is not sufficient to put on the subject an absolute denomination.
What you add of the fountain and original of Presbyteries, it shows, if not
your ignorance, yet your great forgetfulness, not only what Cyprian, and
other of the ancients have written of the Presbyteries in their times, but also
what your self within a few pages does write of Presbyteries which you could
admit, though with an Episcopal Moderator.

This is the matter of your first six pages, To the Authors first argument the
answer is Popish and naught.
upon the Authors Principle; when you come to his Arguments, your Answers are
shorter, but nothing better. The first Argument, That these places of
Scripture, which of purpose, and most punctually set down the offices of Gods
house, especially the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, speak not at all of your Bishops. You first deny the Argument, albeit in
your denial you are so rational, as neither to give any reason for what you
say, nor to answer any of the proofs whereby the Author confirmed his
assertion, Then you deny the ground whereupon the argument is builded, The
Principle which before in the proper place you durst not deny, but rather did
insinuate your granting of it; however the Authors Probation of that Principle
stands as yet untouched.

While you tell us here that Tradition is a sufficient ground for Episcopacie
though Scripture were lacking, you but join with your Brethren the
Canterburians, who upon this ground press upon us already their Altars,
Crosses, Images, the primacie of the Pope, and much more, and show their mind
by this door to let in upon us the whole flood of Antichristian abominations,
when they find their season, especially as your self here does profess, any
matter of practice, of discipline, of government. This your popish error of
tradition is a very general, and catholic one, which shakes not one or two
but all the ground-stones of Protestant reformations.

The Authors second Argument is, The second you answer by a nonsense and
childish toy.
That no inferior officer in the new testament, carries the name of any
superior; but so it is that a Presbyter every where carries the name of a
Bishop; Therefore a Presbyter is not an inferior officer to a Bishop. What
here you bring, is so far from the show of any answer, that it is like you
have not conceived the drift of the Argument, only the non sense of your reply
is compensed with your extraordinary quickness, to take your adversary twice
in his own argument, in his own net, first you will put him to a non plus by
an Interrogatory, where then are ruling Elders by their names distinguished?
you have read I believe the 1. Timothy 5.17. there you may see ruling Elders,
by their name, and surname, clearly distinguished from Preachers of the word;
you know also that there are a number of passages of the Fathers for these
ruling Elders in the book of Gersombucerus, which the boldest of your party
for all their big words and exclamations in the ears of silly people, durst
never yet after twenty two years advisement so much as offer to answer.

Thereafter you triumph as if you had drawn from your Adversaries own pen, by
an ocular demo^stration, the full proof of your whole conclusion. The superiority
of a Bishop to a Presbyter by divine right, because forsooth the author says,
That Bishop and Pastor which are all one, are made by the Apostle superior to
a Presbyter. We did not believe that any man of the least acquaintance with
these controversies, had been ignorant of that common, and trivial homonomie
of the word Presbyter, and Elder, sometimes taken for a preaching Elder,
sometimes for a ruling Elder, and sometimes for both. The Author with the
Scriptures makes, a Pastor, a Bishop, a preaching elder, to be altogether one,
and in nothing to differ, but as three synonimous names of one, and the same
officer, which by divine right is indeed superior to a ruling Elder, or
Presbyter, this no man ever did question, but no way superior to a preaching
Elder, of whom alone is all the present question.

The Authors third and fourth Argument confirmed strongly by a number of
pregnant Scriptures, are all utterly misspent, To the third and fourth argument
no syllable of answer appears.
and not one word of answer made to either of them.

His fifth Argument, The fifth is in show granted.
That by Christ's institution and the constant practice of the Apostles, the
power of ordination, and jurisdiction, is never committed to one Bishop, but
ever to a number of Preachers and others, as is cleared, by a multitude of
manifest Scriptures. This you cannot deny, yet your heart will not permit you
freely to grant it. You are content that in ordination, and jurisdiction,
Bishops should be assisted by Presbyters, but the argument infers much more, to
wit that your Bishops in usurping to themselves the power of jurisdiction, and
transferring of it to their carnal courts, that their assuming by virtue of
their office the power of ordinatio^, though for the form they admit some
Presbyters to be their assista^ts in giving of orders, that both these
faculties which make not the abuse but the two main limbs, and integrall parts
of the office it self, are wicked practices against Christ's ordinance, not to
be reformed, but presently abolished, with a great remorse, that with a high
hand for so long a time these tyrannous usurpations have bin maintained.

The sixth Argument was from the 22. The sixth is absurdly answered.
Luke 25. where Christ forbids all Pastors to accept any Majority or
pre-eminence over their brethren, This the Author proves from Scripture,
Reason, and Antiquity, to evert the office of Bishops. All that you answer is
that this place does not forbid the Apostles to accept any degree of Honor
above their brethren wherein they may govern them for their profit, It follows
then that by this place Bishops are not hindered to assume as great authority
over the Church as the greatest Emperors ever had over the bodies, or Christ
himself as you confess here over the souls of men.

Having evinced the unlawfulness of Episcopacie it self by the former
Arguments, The Authors first reason against all limitation of Episcopacie is
but slighted.
nothing enervate by all your Opposition, in the rest of the treatise the
Author reasons against the lawfulness of the least degrees, and best
limitations of that evil; his first argument is well confirmed with Scripture,
and reason, you answer but to one piece, casting by the first, and strongest
parts of it, to wit, all parts, all degrees, all means, all appearances of the
discharged evil; you had good reason to cut off all these portions from the
Argument, for you saw that your distinction was not applicable to these, for
you will be loath to deny that Episcopacie, howsoever limitate, is some degree,
some part, some mean, some appearance, not by accident, but of its own nature,
of that Episcopacie which now stands in England.

The part of the Argument which you take in hand is not sufficiently answered,
for you clear your distinction with no more then your own simple assertion,
That limited Episcopacie is not in it self, but alone by Satan's malice, either
a cause, or a beginning, or a provocation to Episcopacie as now it stands;
Surely that effect which has followed limited Episcopacie, in all places where
ever it has dwelt, may not well be denied to be natural unto it, however you
dare not apply your distinction, for it will sound harshlie in the ears of
your Neighbors, that limited Episcopacie should be a beginning, and a
provocation, by the malice and craft of the Devil, of that Episcopacie which
now in Rome and England has place.

The Author in the next place by clear Scriptures does prove, The second is
unwittingly granted.
That the reformation of Episcopacie must be taken, not from the times of the
posteriour Fathers, but from the beginning, the days of Christ, and the
Apostles; your answer is short, but how good, your self be judge. You grant
the Argument in all things which have a divine pattern; but that Presbyteriall
Government is such, you deny: you remember that the question here is alone of
Episcopacie, what say you of its pattern? if its pattern be not divine you
have lost your labor; If it be divine, then according to your self it must
be conformed to the first, and Apostolical times. As for Presbyteriall
Government which places the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, never in
one, but in a multitude of Presbyters, that the pattern thereof is
Scripturall, and divine, your self before durst not contradict.

While you make it the Authors tenet, that all the fathers, and all Christians,
in all ages throughout the world, have agreed to bring forth Antichrist, we
acknowledge a tract of your professed modesty, for the furthest the Author
says is that many of the fathers did unwittingly bring forth the Antichrist,
and that the lights of the Protestant Churches, at, and since the reformation,
have discovered many secrets concerning the Antichrist, which were not known
in former ages; that you have not faith to believe this, We do not marvail,
for this is one of the heads among many more, wherein you of the faction, long
ago have made Apostacy from the English, and all the reformed Churches; So far
are your brethren from denying the Popes Antichristianisme, that they avow his
holiness this day to be a true and lawful Bishop, the first Patriarch of the
Christian world, from whose See of Rome the English derive their succession,
and to whom in reason all Bishops where ever they live, ought subjection, and
canonical obedience.

In the third place the Author casts together a number of grave considerations
against all degrees of Episcopacie, The third also but slighted.
almost in every sentence is couched a pithy Argument. In your answers you are
in such haste, that you cast all behind your Back, you ascribe to him that he
did not write, that Popery and Prelacy are inseparable; This your own conceit
you refute, but of all your party has said, you take notice of nothing, save
one word, that Prelacie is a step to Popery; Sundry reasons are brought by the
Author to prove this, all which you misken, only you argue to the contrary,
that the suppressing of Episcopacie is the way for supporting of Popery and
introducting Anarchie. Upon this last you run out in a large discourse; for
this is the field wherein you of the faction are wont to expatiate with
greatest delight.

You prove your first point by a clear mistake, All Papists advancers of
Episcopacie.
distinguish the Accident from the Subject, Episcopacie from Bishops, you will
find that neither the Council of Trent, nor any Popish Divine are for
suppressing of Episcopacie; This office to the uttermost of their power they
all uphold, neither have you or any of your brethren any one argument for that
office, which is not borrowed from them: It is true that the most of the
Papalines do suppress other Bishops, to make great their Pope, but the means
whereby they put under the Popes feet both Bishops, Friars, and all, both
Clergy, and Laity, is chiefly this unhappie instrument of Episcopacie, which
in the Popes person they advance to the highest degree of its extension, and
this is nothing less then true Antichristianisme. If you have read Padre
Paulo's History of that Council you name, you must subscribe what I have said.

That from the removal of Episcopacie, The putting down of the Bishops would
bring to an end the present confusions and schisms.
confusion and anarchie does follow, you would have the Divines of New England
to prove by the Authors principles. The manifold co^clusions which you ascribe
to these Divines, whether they will own them or not, themselves do know, with
their tenets I am not well acquainted, only it seems nothing marvelous, if
Episcopal cruelty banishing them to the Wilderness of a new World, should
have driven them to greater extravagancies then any you name, but were they
once freed of all fear of that monster Episcopacie, and brought back to their
Country, where in liberty and peace they might enjoy in a national assembly,
the benefit of a leasurely conference with their brethren, we make little
doubt of their acquiescing to the government of all the rest of the Reformed
Churches.

As for these grounds, you make the Author lay for them, you are no more happy
here then in the rest of your writ; For this is your Syllogism. Whatsoever God
has not established in his Church, is unlawful; but God has not established
that some pastors should be over others; therefore this is unlawful: What a
poor caption is in your minor in the word Some taken for one only, or for
more, for one Bishop, or for more Pastors, and Elders conveened in a Synod or
Presbytery? That any one should rule over the rest, the Author has proved it to
be against the ordinance of God; That a Presbytery and Synod of many should be
over every one particular person, when ever it shall be challenged, it may be
easily proved to be according to holy Scripture and all good reason.

What you subjoine about the State of the question, though it be not very
tymous in the end of your dispute, yet we shall consider it since you so
request. You say that the state of the question is not whether a Bishop in the
Primitive times had a Presbytery under him, This you dare not deny unto us,
for you know too well, and all that have looked upon any of the Ancients, must
confess that a Bishop without a Presbytery was a strange Monster in the
primitive times, and a plain non ens not to be found in many hundred years in
the Christian World. But withal you may not deny the impudent oppression of
your Bishops in England. You must confess the oppression and impudence of the
Bishops.
Their oppression in that (as they have learned alone from Popish Bishops in
the late most corrupt times) they have abolished the ancient Presbyteries, It
is true that some of them now, when they are like to be compelled to live a
little in order, begin to show their contentment to have set up again in all
the Kingdom these Presbyteries, but who of them all before this time were ever
heard to speak one word of restoring the Church to the use of Presbyteriall
government, which now they dare not deny to be her due by right both divine and
also Ecclesiastic, in all the ancient times of any purity. Their impudence
that hitherto they have had faces and brows to bear the King and State in
hand, that their Episcopal Government without Presbyteries was according to
the Practice of the ancient Church, that Antiquity, Universality, and what not,
was for them, when yet the least twitch of trial must extort from them a
clear confession, That the chief sinews of that government which was
universal in the ancient Church, was seated in the body of Presbyteries, the
very name whereof till the sitting down of this Parliament all of you did
abhor, cane pejus, et angue. If there remain any drop of ingenuous blood, you
would proclaim openly, and no more mutter within your teeth, that your late
injurious error, and without further delay your self be the first, and most
earnest Solicitor of the Parliament, for the re-erection in all the Kingdom of
these Presbyteries, which now at last you confess were universally in use in
all the purer times of antiquity.

As for that which you desire to be the State of the question, English
Episcopacie is a late corruption, a mere stranger to the ancient Church.
whether ever there was a Presbytery without a Bishop over it, you will I hope
be content after the fashion of reasonable men to speak of things not of
names, you will make no question with us about the name of Bishops, which we
never deny to be frequent, both in Scripture, and antiquity, But the thing
signified by this name, An officer, as all your party describes him, who in
his Diocese has the power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, by virtue of his
office, This is the subject of all our question. You affirm that in the
ancient times Bishops in this Sense were set over Presbyteries, We do deny. We
should be glad to see your Affirmation proved, that ever there was in the
Church of God any such Bishops before the Pope had brought his Bishopric to
the Cope-stone of Antichristianisme; Our negative we have labored to prove in
the following treatise, by more passages of antiquity then you will have
leisure in haste to answer.

As for the Bishops of the ancient Church which agree with yours only in the
naked name, but in the essential parts of the office do differ as much as the
Duke of Venice this day from the Duke of Muscovie, as the Emperors of Rome in
the days of Seneca from the old Imperatores in the time of the Commonwealth:
The question about them will be whether their right in these ancient times was
divine, or human, whether they stood by Apostolic tradition, or alone by
Ecclesiastical constitution established at the Churches pleasure, and so by
her free will removeable. You will be a better disputer then any of your side
who yet have appeared if you can make good the first, yea that you can prove
the second to have been universal, we do not believe. If every Church would
search their original rights, as they of Scotland have done their own, readily
as these have found their Church in the most ancient times governed by
Presbyters without any bishops at all, so much as in name, for some hundred
years, so many other national Churches might find the same upon the like
diligence of trial; however when it comes to the exactest search, it will
appear that Episcopacie was at most but an humane Ecclesiastic constitution,
neither more ancient, more universal, nor received upon any better grounds
then the Primacie of the Patriarch of Rome, then the manifold fraternities of
the Monks, Friars, and Nuns, These, though according to your friends
assertion, so anciently, so universally, so piously established, that all the
reformed, and England among the rest, are much to be blamed both for their
first rashness to reject, and there too long lingering since to restore them,
yet as England did never repent the casting out of the former, according to the
example of her sisters abroad, so now we believe, if she may be pleased to
follow the same example in casting out the other she shall have as little
cause of sorrow.

The Author did show at length the vanity of their expectation who deceive
themselves with hopes to get Bishops kept in order by the bonds of any
imaginable limitations: No caveats are able to keep Bishops long in order.
for the demonstration hereof, he sets down the caveats, whereby the Scottish
Kirk and Kingdom did bind their Bishops, then which England can not invent
harder this day for theirs. The knot cannot be faster tied. The Scots had their
Bishops consent, subscription, and solemn oath, The King in person in the
general Assembly did ratify the bargain, numbers of Parliaments did
establish the liberties of Presbyteries. Sundry reasons the Author brings to
clear that England is not able at this time to employ such means to keep
their Bishops low, as Scotland then did use, your answer to all is
compendious: you say that all your adversaries arguments are weak, but how
your saying may be proved, you take not time to tell us.

The Author in the end of his writ makes answer to a number of the common
jargous of Prelaticall men, Presbyteriall government a heavier hammer to
schism then Episcopal.
especially that of Schism in the Church, and danger to the State, which by
the removal of Episcopacie, they take upon them to prophecy, will certainly
fall out: To both these Objections he gives a number of very satisfactory and
grave replies. In your answer you misken well near them all, These few you
pick out are cast in a strange confusion here and there in your Papers.

Against his replies to the first objection of Schism, you rejoinder that the
divisions of New England are witnesses of these Schisms which proceed from the
want of Episcopacie: you do well to speak to us of men in an other World, with
whose estate we are not acquainted, but can you say that there are half so many
Schisms in New England where Bishops are not, as we see in Old England where
Bishops are in their full Strength. Speak of the things we know, Behold the
Churches of Europe, from whence Bishops are banished, Scotland, France,
Holland, Swize, Geneva, etc. Did you ever hear of any either Schism or
Heresy, in these places, except when Presbyteriall government was suppressed?
did that discipline any sooner get leave to employ its native strength, but in
a short time it made the Countries where it dwelt free of all these evils

It is made evident in the next place, If Bishops stand schism in England must
increase.
that the keeping of Episcopacie on foot any longer, in all probability will
fill the Church of England with many pitiful divisions, both amongst
themselves at home, and from all their Neighbors abroad; concerning the
reformed Churches over sea you answer, that in time bigon you have kept good
correspondence with them, notwithstanding of all the difference in discipline;
but truly the correspondence you speak of is to be ascribed much rather to the
patience and long suffering of your good Neighbors, then to any well deserving
of your Bishops: for their doctrine in the point of Episcopacie, is clearly
Schismatic, as you may see in the Pedagogick, and Master Likes Letter of
Andrews to Muleine, and in other of your Prelaticall writs, where your men with
the Papists, by all the arguments they can invent, do press the Reformed
Churches to embrace their Episcopacie as an Apostolic institution, the want
whereof puts them from the very being of a Church, and makes the calling of
their Preachers to be unlawful, without any right. This wound, I grant your
Bishops, when they have given it, go about incontinent to cure, but in vain,
for if their ground of Episcopacies divine right hold, it is not possible to
defend the calling of these Ministers who refuse Episcopal Ordination.

While here you prefer for number, and equal both for learning and piety, the
Lutheran Churches to all the rest of the Reformed, we do not marvel, since
you contemn them both so far, that when they are joined together, being
compared with the Roman Church, and the Grecian which follows the Roman in the
most of her errors and Idolatries, to be but a few persons in the West of
Europe, not comparable with all the Christians, as you speak Page 12. upon the
face of the earth.

You profess at last, it is a small thing to you, to differ from all the
Reformed, when you join with the ancient Kirk in the first three hundred
Years; we have shown before the vanity of this Language, for in Episcopal
Government, you differ little less from the ancient Kirk, then from the
Reformed, of whom ye were speaking, for the ancient Presbytery is a stranger
to your Land, and your Episcopacie would be as great a stranger in any
Christian Kirk, for the first five hundred Years, as the drink of Muscovia
would be this day in Venice, or the Empire of Tyberius in Rome, in the days of
Cato the elder.

The Author named the jealousies that would be inavoidable betwixt the two
Kirks of England and Scotland, if Episcopacie, which the one, with the King,
and all the Worlds consent has cast down, should by the other be kept on
foot; upon this passage you fall once and again, at the first time, that you
may have a larger scope for a tract of your modesty, you draw a passage from
another far distant place of the Authors writ, where he says no more, but
that vices contrary to piety, righteousness, and sobriety, where they do
reign, are certain forerunners and causes of many calamities, judgments, and
changes of States, Kingdoms, and Families. This you cut out from its own
place, and join with the forenamed sentence, that from both you may make out
your very modest conclusion, that your author, more like a Turkish Darvise,
then a Minister of the Gospel, does threaten to overthrow Bishops, by the
bloody Sword, by the change of States, Families, and Kingdoms, and that not
the author alone, but also all the Presbyterians, yea, the Presbyteriall
government it self, is guilty of persecuting the persons, and tyrannously
pressing the souls of men, no less then the papists; if this be your style
when your mood is calm, how crabbed must your dialect be when you are commoved?

When in your roving you fall the second time upon this same point, you answer
somewhat more pertinently then is your custom, That you trust the Scots will
count it as unreasonable to have their discipline pressed upon the English, as
they did esteem it, to have the English pressed upon them; but I pray you, what
if the Scots should leave here their own way, and follow your example, might
any of you in reason complain of such a retaliation? Did ever your Bishops
give over to force upon the Scots the English Government with all their might,
till the whole Isle was in arms, and in the midst of a dangerous war? Left
they ever their design, till God, the King, and the Parliament, made them
unable for a further prosecution thereof. It is like that the Scots will be
loath to follow that your example; Yet certainly, they have all the reason of
the World to persuade with all their power, their Brethren of England to join
with them, and all the Reformed every where, to batter down that unhappie
Episcopacie, without any resting, till the greatest Bishop, the Antichrist
himself, from whom the Prelates of England confess they draw the line of their
pedigree be overthrown, and quite abolished.

If in this no less noble then necessary enterprise the English will be
lacking to themselves, in this season of so golden an occasion, the Scottish
cannot fail to register for the posterity a Protestation of their great and
too well grounded fears, that Episcopacie in England may well change the
habit, but never the nature, that as it has been ever since the Reformation a
bitter fountain of almost all the troubles that has vexed the Scottish Kirk, so
it shall remain like it self a Spring of future woes to the Churches of the
whole Isle.

The domestike divisions which are like to increase amongst the Subjects of
England, if that root we speak of be not drawn up, and cast over Sea toward
Rome whence it came, the author expresses them clearly; all that you answer
is a salt gybe; it is truly strange if any should make question that as to this
day many of the most Godly in England who have been far from resisting
authority in any thing, yet could never follow the Doctrine of the Bishops so
far, as with them to believe that the sentence of authority, whether Civil or
Ecclesiasticke, was a sufficient argument to persuade their conscience that
Bishops were a holy ordinance, so hereafter that many more who walk most
carefully according to the rule of Gods law, will refuse to submit their hearts
to the government of Bishops, though after the loss of their cares, their
Heads should be chopped off from their shoulders.

The Author in his Answer to the second ordinary Objection, anent the danger
of change, No hazard to the State in changing the present government of the
Church.
propones a number of very wise considerations, whereby he makes it evident,
that presbyteriall Government will much better accord with the estate of
England, then Episcopal; all these you pass by in your answer, only you
snatch at a word or two, in some few of them. The Author upon presupposition of
his first principle, that no Office might be permitted in the House of God,
without his own appointment, infers, that as a man would be loath to suffer
any of his servants to place in his house Governors beside his own knowledge:
so that Christ will not be content when any does erect in his Church, Bishops
to be guides, which he did never ordain.

You touch not the point while ye tell us, that a Wiseman would never permit a
Democratie to be erected in his Family, and so that none would set up a
Presbytery in the Church; a Presbytery is not a Democracie, but be what ever
it may, the reason here proceeds alone from the authority of a Master, to
plant in his own house what Government he will, without liberty for servants
to dispute the quality thereof.

In the current of his Discourse, You snatch at some few of the Authors words,
but let pass without answer, the most of his matter.
amongst other interrogations, the author did question, if in a whole Synod
there was none meet to presede, but only one perpetually: For it is well known
that in every dioces there is a number much meeter for any good service then
the Bishop. Of this harmless question you make a great quarrel, and compare
the author to Cora, your self to Aaron, and his interrogation to the
rebellious speeches of that wicked man, Numb. 16.

When the whole has sufficiently overthrown all the matter of Episcopacie,
whether absolute or limitate, he brings sundry arguments, why the very name
of a Bishop would not be retained, but you are not pleased to take notice of
any one of them.

In the last two pages, very cleerlie by diverse evidences, he declares the
great and rare opportunity which God has put in the hand of this present
Parliament to remove the whole root of Episcopacie, with as great ease, as to
cut off its branches; all this you misken, only to give us a further taste of
the temper of your modest Spirit, you insinuate, Page 14. that the greatest
opportunity you can remark in this season, is for men by fraud and force to
work out their own ends.

When you have done with the author, The right of Presbyteries is divine, not
humane only.
you turn your self to two other sorts of men, first to these who press
Presbyterian Discipline upon a mere humane right; who these are I do not
know, if any such be, it seems they are more unconsiderate then your very
self, and many others of the Prelaticall faction, who dare not now deny, what
ever before was their language, the divine right of the Presbytery, that the
principal members thereof, the preaching Presbyters, are invested by God with
the power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, though the Bishops of England, ever
since the Reformation, have spoiled them of their due, and kept them in
slaverie, as much altogether if not more, as the Romish Bishops do their
inferior slaves of the Clergy this day.

The two considerations you bring to bear off these men are both impertinent,
Your plea for keeping up of Bishops, is the very same which the Papists used
against King Henry the Eighth, for the upholding of the Pope and Monks.
The first was pressed with much more acuracie and eloquence, then you, or any
of your party can use, by More the Chancellor, and the Cardinal of Rochester,
in the days of Henry the eighth; it was the ordinary and passionate
declamation of these men, that the Popes authority was ever reverenced in
England, since it was Christian, That for many ages it had been confirmed, by
numbers of Parliaments, That Abbots and Priors were a considerable part of the
Parliament, at least four times more then Bishops, That Monks, Friars, and
Nuns had been established in all times, in all places, That the casting out of
these would be a change exceeding dangerous for the State, That the keeping of
the things with the removal of the abuses would be a reformation satisfactory
to all reasonable complainers. This here is your most specious plea answered
long ago by the actions of King Henry, King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, to use
now any verbal reply were but superfluous.

What you speak of the great learning of your Bishops, suppone it to be true,
yet you are exceedingly prejudicate, if you see not as much if not more of that
quality in far mo of the English Divines who never were Bishops, these few
whose eminencies has kythed in the episcopal charge might have advanced
further, as themselves will confess, both in learning and piety, if they
never had been burdened with Episcopal distractions.

Your gloriation of the honor done by strangers to your Divines we do not
envy, only we conceive you mistaken, when you apply the respects done to the
fame of the Church of England unto the persons of the Bishops, let be to their
Episcopacie, what ever respect that gracious Kirk has gotten from any stranger,
we believe it might have been multiplied if their Bishops had long ago bin
abolished, for they and their tail has been allways the only subject of
fear and restraint of the full and plenary affections of foreign Churches
toward their Sister of England. Your selves are forced to agree unto all the
confiderable changes that are requifite.
To fall out upon that Common place of changes in Church or State, it does not
well become you, since both your self, and all these of your Prelates, who
would be conceived to have any sponke, either of piety, wisdom, or
moderation, do willingly consent to the far greatest part of the change,
whereby you would affright the State at this time; for your self along all
this Treatise, and the prime of your Prelates, in the draughts of Government
that come from their hands, seem to acknowledge the necessity of erecting
Presbyteries over all the Land, and pulling at last from the Bishops, the power
of Ordination and Jurisdiction, which too long they have unjustly possessed,
that therewith the Presbyteries and Synods may be invested, to whom by Divine
Right they grant it belongs. Further, the putting down of the Chancellor and
Official Courts as merely abusive, the removing also of all the Clergy from
Secular employments, and so from the House of Parliament. What more is
petitioned, will not introduce any farther change, either of custom or Laws,
that is considerable; while therefore your self do offer to begin, or at
least to go on with the far greatest part of the change, you ought not to be
heard in opposing some farther Reformation then you can agree to upon the
pretended danger of alteration.

Your other consideration is less pertinent to the purpose, The world has had
too long and too heavy experience of the ungracious fruits of Episcopacie.
but more injurious to your professed modesty, your prudence here is not ruled
by reason, while you advise the holding out of the required discipline for some
years, till by experience you have seen the fruits of it amongst your
neighbors; is not the experience of twice forty years and above, which many
places have felt both of the Presbvteriall and Episcopal discipline, more then
sufficient? in all the reformed Churches we see powered out upon the Presbytery
by the hand of God, the first author of it, plentiful blessings, We see
Episcopacie cursed in every soil it comes with very bad consequences, in the
Romish Churches this government is the powerful instrument of Satan to bar out
the light of the Gospel, in England and Scotland we have seen grow upon it
the Aples of strife, superstition, pride, and many other evils, till of late it
did become the horse, whereupon came poasting to the whole Isle, Arminianisme,
Popery, and a bloody war for the hazard of the lives, estates, liberties, and
all that was dear to any man, if the miraculous hand of God had not cast the
Horse and his rider in the ditch of his vengeance; those that would wait any
longer to get any further experience of the fruits of Episcopacie may in
justice meet with the mischiefs which ordinarily fall upon them who tempt the
Almighty.

What you speak of the unquietness of the Church of Scotland in the time of
the Presbyterian discipline, it is far beyond the truth, never Church more
quiet and free from inward divisions then that of Scotland, from the beginning
to this hour, except so far as this unhappie instrument of Episcopacie did
creat them trouble.

Your boasting of so great Piety and virtue of those plants who have grown
under the shadow of your government needs not any answer.

Comparisons are odious, where England had ever one gracious Plant, we wish it
had been multiplied to a 1000, yet we must be permitted to think that the
goodness which has appeared in any member of the English Church has flowed
from other fountains then that dry one of Episcopacie, what grace it has been
the instrument of, to those who have been nearest to its influence, what
virtues are most conspicuous in their families, their Cathedralls, their
Chaptors, their Courts, the World knows, If you were so wise as you pretend,
you would have been silent at this time of Episcopal fruits; read over the
thousands of petitions that are presented already to the eyes of this very
Parliament against Bishops, and Preachers, their greatest favorites, you dare
not say, if all the crimes that ever were known, let be presented to any
judicato ry, of all the presbyterian Preachers this hundred years were put to
gether, that either in number or quality they come near to the black roll
which the registers of this own year will transmit to the ears of after ages,
of the gracious effects of that your noble plant. Who so will take pains to
compare the crimes presented to the Parliaments in the days of Henry the
Eighth, against the Friars, Monks, and Nuns of those times, for which their
whole orders were for ever banished the land, with these which now are delated
of the Bishops and their faction, We believe that the former shall be found
not so important for the razing of the Abbacies, as the later do require the
pulling up by the root of that old rotten tree of whose fruits you are here
boasting.

The other kind of men you admonish are a multitude of your brethren in the
Prelaticall faction, Your reproof of these crying abominations whereof you
confess the Prelates to be guilty is both cold and short.
who^ you say are too obstinate in retaining what ever has been established;
your advertisement to them is calm, modest, and short enough, it is but in
some few particulars (and that with the clause of a perhaps) wherein the
general and constant clamor against them, you confess, is justifiable and
ought to be heard. How faintly and coldly touch you upon these evils which
your conscience does know to be crying abominations, and to have been long
committed with an high hand? you name but too few; their abolishing of the
fourth Command: of the Moral Law, their turning of all the piety of the
Gospel, into a number of Legal, and Popish Ceremonies, their contempt of Souls
for the love of money, in a world of Pluralists, and Non-Residents, their
mixing of Heaven and Earth, Christ and the World, in joining to the burden of
their spiritual charge, the load of all the temporal offices which by any
means they can attain, they teach, that the Bishop is the only proper Pastor of
his whole Diocese, to whom alone the immediate and most proper care of all the
souls in that great flock does belong, and yet as if it were not enough to
charge one poor man with the cure of some five or six hundred thousand
persons, yea of some forty or fifty hundred thousand, for readily the diocese
of Lincoln will exceed the first number, and that of London the second, as if
all these brought not burden enough to the shoulders of one man, The weight of
the great Seal and of the white staff, the greatest temporal offices in the
Kingdom, must be joined thereto, that the censure of the Church should be
rest, against all Law Divine, and humane, out of the hands of Preachers, and
cast on the rabble of your Laick Canonists, that they by their Courts may make
havoc of the goods and persons of the whole Nation, In all these you do well
to confess your sin in fighting against the voice of God, in your impudent
outfacing, and obstinate resisting the clear light of all reason; here it was
indeed where your pen would have been a little more pungent, for you know, you
have to do with an hard hearted generation of men, who mind reformation in
nothing if they be not compelled; as every pin of their Tabernacle, and the
whole frame of their government, is brought from the Mountains of Rome, so that
principal maxim of Popish policy, that the Church must not be conceived by
People ever to have erred, is the chief square, and great rule, according to
the which hitherto they have ruled all their administrations, to think of a
reformation in any thing were to give ground to the adversaries, were the
beginning of a declination, they see a deep precipice before them, if once they
be put to a mooving they know not where the rest and period of their descent
may be, so by all means, the present station must be kept without the
yielding willingly of one foot of ground. No Prelate can be excused of great
guiltiness.
Have not these spiritual Lords sitten already above 4. months in the
convocation and Parliament? have any of them to this day made the least motion
to stop the course of those heresies and Idolatries which to their certain
knowledge have bin these years past like a gangreene, like a pest, like a fiery
poison infecting souls over all the Land? Should any reasonable men ever more
take notice of any their motions? can ever any faithfulness be expected from
them who so manifestly have betrayed the trust which the King and the Country
did commit to them, of their religion, and souls? no thanks to them, that
Canterbury long ere now had not so firmly rooted Arminianisme and Popery in the
Church, with a tyrannous oppression in the state, as we and our posterity had
never been able in any after age to have gotten it amended. It is easy to
discern what spirit he is, who moves men to be clamorously contentious, when
the question comes to any matter of their own dignity, their own rents,
their own ceremonious toys, but to be dumb like fish, when before their eyes,
the doctrine, the worship, the Saints of God, are most miserably trampled under
the foul feet of most insolent men. Those of the Prelates who count themselves
most orthodox, and innocent, cannot be excused of these crimes, which by their
connivence they did foster, and well near as much promove by their suffering,
The World upon good grounds, expects from this Parliament, the abolition of
Episcopacie.
as the other who were esteemed more guilty by their doings; who so will be
pleased to make an accurate search by what means the Prince of darkness did
most enable the one, I mean the Canterburian Prelates, to be so active and
successful in their evil design, and by what means the other who still in
private did profess their disaffection from these ways, were subdued to be so
passive and silent, when error, superstition, and oppression, in the Church
were advancing with such speed before their face, Episcopacie will be found the
instrument which closed the mouth, and tied the hands of the one from speaking
or doing those things which the honor of God, and welfare of the Church, then
so deeply wounded, did require, but opened the mouth, and strengthened the hand
of the other, for saying and doing what ever they found conduceable for their
mischievous ends. How happy and glorious a work would it be for this gracious
Parliament, to add as a Crown and Coapstone to all the blessings which the
Church and State has felt already, and yet expects from their hands, the
breaking in pieces of this unhappie instrument, which in the hands of evil men
is a very sharp sword, and firebrand, for executing of all their furious
follies, and in the hand of good men becomes a bond of brass or steel, for
binding them up from those good words and works, which the World would
certainly have expected from them, if they had been free of such slavish
fetters?

If it might be the will of God to move the minds of the House of Commons, to
behold the tears, the sighs, the prayers, which for many years numbers of
godly souls have been pouring out before God and men, from their heavy sense
of the cruel oppression, spiritual and temporal, of the hierarchy, to read
with a compassionate eye the supplications, which from the hands and hearts of
many thousands, in all the corners of the Kingdom, are come already, and daily
increase against that root of all their woe: to look upon the respectfull
faces of all the Reformed Churches who at this instant of time with more
passionate desires, with a greater measure of hope then ever before, are
greedily gazing to behold, if now at last, that great stumbling block and sole
impediment of a full conformity amongst all the gracious Sisters can be gotten
removed, and cast into the Sea. But above all, to blenke up and fix their
thoughts upon that great God, who but just now, here saved them all from so
horrible a danger, and in the midst of despair, has lifted up to them an
ensign of the fairest hopes; Unto that God, who daily walks in the midst of
these Honorable Houses, which he alone has both assembled and kept thus long
together above the thoughts of all men, whether friends or foes, expecting by
way of thankfulness from those who desire to be counted faithful servants,
either to him or their Country, a full resolution to govern themselves in the
affairs of his House, especially this great one which so nearly concerns his
honor, by his sole pleasure, without any regard of worldly midses, or base
ends, which may draw them away one hairs breadth from his Majesty's direction:
If it may be the good pleasure of the Lord to settle such thoughts in the
hearts of the house of Commons, they are few who make question, but by their
means, the higher house of the Peers may be induced, as in all things else, so
in this, to concur in a joint supplication toward our gracious Sovereign,
that by the strength of their threefold cord, they may pull up that old bitter
root, which so long has been noxious to the soil, both of the Church and
State.

If otherwise the thoughts of the lower house should be diverted from these
and the like considerations, if they should faint and give over to prosecute
with courage, with faith, and hope, this truly noble design, they would do
well to forethink, unto whom after ages will impute all the inconveniences
which readily may be procured to the King, to the Country, to the Churches
abroad, by this unhappy Episcopacie, which if now retained after so full an
examination of its nature and consequences in so grave and wise a Court cannot
but take deeper root then ever, and be more firmly established against all
possibility of any future removal. What ever the events hereof may prove, our
Gracious Sovereigne, and higher House of Parliament, may not so well be charged
therewith, they having given so many late documents of their great readiness
to hearken unto all the equitable motions, though never so full of difficulties
at the first appearance, which the House of Commons with any unanimitie and
earnestness have as yet proponed: Beside, it is to that House alone, unto
which the numerous petitions demonstrating, not only the excesses of the men,
but the inherent and essential corruptions of the office has been presented:
It is the state of Commons that most have tasted of Episcopacies bitterfruits,
It is the Commons of the Land who will most be beaten, if Bishops remain with
their pastoral rod, who most will be trod upon by the feet of their pride, and
spoiled with the violence of their rapacious hands. To this House therefore,
above all others, since for this once, God has put in their hand to may, if
they will, shall be ascribed either the un-utterable grief of the Godly, for
retaining, or their unspeakable joy, for utter abolishing all degrees of
Episcopacie.

FINIS.
Errata.
IN the Epistle l 19 r. thy. p. 10. l. 3. r. us with. p. 17. l. 2. r. Gersem
Bucous. p. 25. lin. 23. for that read what.

The Stationer to the buying Reader.
LOving Reader, be pleased to take notice that the question of Episcopacie
discussed from Scripture and Fathers, promised upon the title of this Book, was
intended by the Reverend Author to be joined to this Reply, but some weighty
cause having brought this to public view first, and by it self, I thought
good (after the printing of the said title, in service both to him and thee) to
give notice of it. I rest

Yours T. V.


