A brief State of the Case and Trial had in the Kings Bench, in the Assize
brought for the Office of Chief Clerk for inrolling of Pleas in the said Court;
between William Bridgeman, Esquire Plantiff; and Rowland Holt, Esquire and Edward
Coleman, Gent. Defendants.
THe Plaintiff declares that the Office of Chief Clerk for the inrolling of
Pleas in the Court of Kings Bench, was time out of mind granted and grantable
by the Kings and Queens of this Realm: And that King Charles II. by Letters
Patents under the great Seal of England, dated 2 June, 25 of his Reign
(reciting that he had by his Letters Patents, 1 July, 14 of his Reign (after a
recital therein that Robert Henly and Samuel Wightwicke were duly admitted to
this Office for their lives) granted this Office (upon the Petition of Elliot)
to Silas Titus so soon as it should become void, and that Wightwicke was dead,
and Titus had surrendered his Patent) did, in consideration of service done by
the Earl of Arlington, grant this Office to the Plaintiff and his heirs, for
the lives of the Earl of Arlington, Duke of Grafton, and Duchess of Grafton,
and the longer liver of them, from and after the death, forfeiture, or
surrender of Sir Robert Henly. And that Sir Robert Henly was dead; and that
thereupon the Plaintiff became seized, and was seized of the Office till the
Defendants disseized him, etc.

The Defendants pleaded that they did no wrong or disseizin to the Plaintiff,
which is the General Issue.

The Recognitors were, Sir John Wolstenholm of Enfeild, Bar. Sir William Hedges
of Finchley, Knight. Ralph Bucknell, of St. Giles in the Fields, Esquire.
George Ford, of Bromely, Esquire William Underhill, of Cripplegate, Esquire John
Raymund, of Highgate, Esquire John Smith, of Hackney, Esquire William Northy, of the
same, Esquire Edward Harris, of Southgate, Esquire Daniel Thomas, of Highgate, Esquire
Abraham Dashwood, of Cripplegate, Esquire Arthur Baily, of Mile end, Esquire


The Plaintiff gave no Evidence but the Letters Patents of 2 June, 25 Car. 2.
And being put to show that the Office was anciently granted by the Kings and
Queens of England, according as he had declared; he did show none but the
Patent of King Charles II.

Though the Plaintiffs Grant were to him and his heirs (which ought not to be
of such an Office, for so it might come to an Infant) yet the Defendants
Council waved that just exception, and insisted upon the mere right of Granting
the said Office, (viz.) That it was not grantable by the Crown, but was an
Office belonging to the chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and only grantable by
him.

And for proof hereof it was showed, that this Officer is to inroll the Pleas
between party and party only, and had nothing to do in the Pleas of the Crown,
or Criminal matters. That all the Rolls and Records in this Office were in the
custody of the Chief Justice; who with his own Money pays for the Parchment of
all those Rolls and Records, and all Writs to certify or remove the Records in
this Clerks Office are directed to the Chief Justice; and this Officer is in
truth but his Clerk, and the Office grantable by him alone, for any life, or
two lives, when void.

And for further proof of the Chief Justices right to grant this Office, it was
showed and proved by the Records of the Court, that for the space and time of
235 years last past, this Office, when void, had been granted successively by
the Chief Justice for the time being, to whom he pleased, and enjoyed
accordingly by such grants; which was plainly made out by the following Records.

Trin. 36 H. 6. Rot. 36. int. placita Reg. A. Dom. 1458. 235 years since.
It is enrolled thus: Be it remembered that the tenth of July this Term, in the
Court of our Lord the King at Westminster, came William Sonde, Chief Clerk of
our Lord the King for enrolling Pleas before the King himself in his proper
person, and in the same Court, of his Free Will did surrender his said Office
into the hands of Sir John Fortescue, Knight, Chief Justice of the Court (to
whom of right it does belong to grant that Office to whomsoever he pleases,
whenever that Office shall be void, during the time that the said Sir John
Fortescue shall be Chief Justice,) and that Office does resign and relinquish
to the use of William Brom. And the said Chief Justice does accept the same
surrender, and the same day grants the said Office to the said William Brom,
who is presently admitted to the said Office for his life, and sworn
accordingly.

Mich. 1. E. 14. Rot. 51.
Upon Bromes surrender to Sir John Markham, then Chief Justice; the Chief
Justice grants it to William Sonde, who is admitted for life, and sworn.

Mich. 8 E. 4. Rot. 26. 1467.
Upon the surrender of William Sonde to the said Sir John Markham, then Chief
Justice; he grants it to Reginald Sonde, who is admitted and sworn.

Reginald Sonde enjoyed this till the time of H. 7. and then Bray came in, and
was Clerk till 13 H. 7. and then came in Roper.

Upon Surrender of this Office to Sir John Fineux Chief Justice, Hill. 9 H. 8.
Rot. 3. 1518.
by John Roper, the Chief Justice grants the Office to Sir John Roper and
William Roper, who are admitted for their lives, and sworn.

Upon Surrender of William Roper (Sir John being dead) to Sir Richard Lisler
then Chief Justice, Hill. 1 and 2 E. 6. 1547.
he grants the Office to William Roper and Richard Heywood for their lives, and
they are admitted and sworn.

Upon Surrender of William Roper (Heywood being dead) to Sir Robert Catlin then
Chief Justice, Hill. 15 El. 1573.
he granted this Office to John Roper and Thomas Roper for their lives, and
they are admitted and sworn.

Upon Surrender of John Roper (Tho. being dead) to Sir Henry Montague then
Chief Justice, Mich. 14 Jac. 1. Rot. 2. 1616.
he grants this Office to Robert Heath and Robert Shute for their lives, who
are admitted and sworn thereupon.

Shute being dead, Hill. 14. Jac. 1. 1620.
upon Sir Robert Heath's Surrender to Sir James Leigh Chief Justice, he grants
the Office to Sir Robert Heath and George Paul for their lives, and they are
sworn, and admitted in Court.

Upon the Surrender of Sir Robert Heath and Sir George Paul to Sir Nicholas
Hide then Chief Justice, Mich. 5 Car. 1.
he grants it to Robert Henly and Samuel Wightwicke for their lives, and they
are admitted and sworn.

Upon Wightwicke's Surrender to H. Roll then Chief Justice, Trin. 1654. Rot. 1.
( Henly being then under Sequestration) the Chief Justice grants it to Samuel
Wightwicke and Robert Henly junior, for their lives, and they are admitted and
sworn.

Upon the Surrender of Samuel Wightwicke and Robert Henly to Sir Robert Foster
then Chief Justice, Mich. 12 Car. 2. Rot. 2.
he grants it to Henly and Wightwicke for their lives, and they were admitted
and sworn.

Wightwicke dyed soon after, and Sir Robert Henly enjoyed it under that Grant
32 year.

Note, In every one of these Records (except the last) after the mention of the
Surrender to the Chief Justice, are these words, (To whom of Right it does
belong to grant that Office to whomsoever he pleases, when it shall be void,
etc.)

It was then insisted by the Defendants, and proved that there was three
Officers considerable in the Court of Kings Bench, all of the nature of Clerks.

The first and chiefest is the Clerk of the Crown, called sometimes Coronator.
and Attornat. Domini Regis, etc. His business is to draw all Indictments,
Informations, etc. in Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal matters. This Officer
being the Chief Clerk in this Court, is always made by Patent under the Great
Seal.

The second Officer is this Prothonotary, or Chief Clerk, for enrolling Pleas
between party and party in Civil matters. He, and his Under Clerks, enroll all
Declarations, Pleadings, etc. in Civil Causes, especially where the proceedings
are upon Bill. This Officer files in his Office all Bills, Declarations, etc.
and all the Writs of this Court in Civil matters are made by him and his Under
Clerks. and tested by the Chief Justice; and he has the custody of all Returns
of Elegits, Executions, Scire fac.'s, and the fileing all Bails: All which are
in the eye and Judgment of the Law, in the hands of the Chief Justice, whose
Clerk in truth this Officer is.

The third Officer is the Custos Bre. who keeps all the Rolls and Records of
Judgments in this Court, which are yet said to be in the Custody of the Chief
Justice; and this Office is in the gift and disposal of the Chief Justice, when
void.

It was further showed by the Defendants, that in the Stat. of E. 6. against
the Sale of Offices, etc. there is yet a Salvo to the two Chief Justices and
Justices of Assize, to dispose of the Offices in their disposition, as they
used formerly; and ever since that Statute, these Offices of Chief Clerk to
enroll the Pleas, etc. and the Custos Bre. have without control been disposed
by the Chief Justice of this Court; and are in truth the only considerable
Offices in his gift.

It was observed that in the Grant of this Office to Mr. Bridgman the
Plaintiff, it is recited that Henly and Wightwicke were debit. modo admitted to
this Office, yet they never had any Grant from the Crown, nor no other Grant
save that of the Chief Justice beforementioned.

And then to prove that the Defendants have a good Title to the Office, the
Grant of the now Chief Justice to them for their lives was produced, and proved
that they were admitted, and sworn in Court.

To answer all this Evidence: The Plaintiffs Council produced the Copy of an
Act of Parliament, which was made 15 E. 3. to this effect; It is consented,
that if any of the Offices aforesaid (which are other great Offices mentioned
in the Act) or the Controller or Chief Clerk in the Common Bench or Kings
Bench, by death or other cause be ousted of their Office, the King, with the
consent of the great men, ande. shall put another fit person in such Office.

From whence the Plaintiffs Council would infer, that the King had a right to
grant this Office; and that this Act was declaratory of such his right; and
that all the Grants by the Chief Justices since, were but usurpations on the
Crown; but no usage of granting it by the Chief Justices, how long soever such
usage has been, would prevail against the Kings right.

To this the Defendants answered, That this Act was repealed, which appears by
the Statute of 17 E. 3. Note, The reasons of the Repeal are expressed; because
the said Statute of 15 E. 3. is contray to the Law and Usages of the Realm, and
the Rights and Prerogatives of the King.

But for a full and plain answer, Stat. 2 H. 4. made against the extortion of
this Officer on the Crown side calls him Clerk of the Crown.
they showed that the Office in question was not the Office mentioned in that
Act; for that Act mentions the Chief Clerk in the Kings Bench, which is the
Clerk of the Crown, who is not only called the Chief Clerk, but in reallity is
the Chief Clerk in that Court, and has the precedence of this Officer, both in
Court and elsewhere. And the Officer whose Office is now in question was never
so much as called Chief Clerk in the Kings Bench: But it is true he is the chief
of those Clerks that are for the inrolling of Civil Pleas in that Court, and
therefore is called Chief Clerk for the inrolling of Pleas, to distinguish him
from the Under Clerks whose business is likewise to inroll Pleas there.

And the Defendants further insisted, that the usage does demonstrate that this
Chief Clerk in the Kings Bench, in that Act named and intended, was the Clerk
of the Crown in that Court; for that Office has ever since been granted when
void by the Kings Letters Patents, and that it was not this Officer that is
named and intended by that Act; for that this Office was never enjoyed one day
by virtue of any Grant from the Crown.

And the Defendants further insisted, that it was a scandal and unworthy
imputation upon all those Chief Justices, persons of clear and unspotted
reputations to suggest that they would impose upon the Crown, and usurp upon
it, if the right of granting this Office had been in the Crown. And Sir Robert
Heath, that was then the Kings Solicitor took a grant of the Office in
question, from the Chief Justice; and upon his Admittance, the Chief Justices
Right of granting is asserted upon Record.

And all this Evidence on both sides being given, and fully heard, the Court
briefly summed up the same, and particularly the Evidence of the Act 15 E. 3.
and what was urged from the same by the Plaintiff and the Defendants answer
thereunto, and left the matter to the Jury upon the whole Evidence: And this at
the desire of the Plaintiffs Council.

The Jury withdrew, and after some time of Consideration, gave a Verdict for
the Defendants.

Upon this Verdict given, the Plaintiffs Council prayed leave to bring in a
Bill of Exceptions; and after several days meeting by the Plaintiffs Council,
they produced in Court, and tendered to the three Judges to be sealed, a
Parchment writing, which they called a Bill of Exceptions, formed in such a
manner, and stuffed with such matter as was never before known; and is hoped,
that for the honor of Justice, and for the sake of Property, will never again
be offered in any case. In which, after a recital of the Record of the
Declaration and Issue in the Cause, it is alleged that the Plaintiffs Council
produced in Evidence the Grant of the Office to the Plaintiff, and showed to
the Court and Jury, that the Office is of the grant of the and Crown; that to
make out the right of King Charles II. to grant this Office to the Plaintiff,
they gave in Evidence the Act of 15 E. 3. which in the Bill is set out at
large, (and is in substance as is herein before set forth) and in the Bill it
is alleged, that the Justices refused to allow, admit, and receive the
allegations and matters given in Evidence, as sufficient to prove the
Plaintiffs Title to this Office, by reason whereof the Jury found the
Defendants did not disseise the Plaintiff. And the Bill prays that the Justices
would put their Seals thereunto, according to the Staute of Westminster. 2.

And the Justices, upon reading the Bill of Exceptions, refused to Seal it, and
that upon very good reason: The matter and ground of that Bill being false,
idle and frivolous. 1. Because it is therein positively asserted that Mr.
Attorney, and others the Plaintiffs Council, did (besides the Patent in
question, and the Act of 15 E. 3.) show to the Court, and the Recognitors of
the Assize, that the Office was of the gift and grant of the King of England,
whenever it should be void. But there was no Evidence to show any such Right
in the King, unless the Councels affirmation, without proof as well as reason,
shall be accounted a demonstration. 2. The allegation in the Bill is, (that the
Justices refused to allow, admit, and receive the Allegations and Matters given
in evidence for the Plaintiff, as sufficient to maintain his Title) if it be
thereby intended that those matters showed by the Plaintiff in the Trial of the
Cause, were not by the Judges allowed and admitted to be Evidence, or to be
given as Evidence. This is notoriously false in Fact, for as they were given in
Evidence by the Plaintiff, so they were summed up by the Court in their
directions to the Jury, as part of the Plaintiffs Evidence, together with the
Defendants answer to them.

But if by that Allegation in the Bill it is intended, that the Court did not
allow these matters showed by the Plaintiff at the Trial to be a sufficient
evidence to maintain his Title, this is as frivolous as the other was false:
For it is not the business of the Court in Trials to determine what Evidence is
sufficient to maintain the Title in question; that is the work of the Jury,
unless it be referred to the Court, upon a Demurrer to the Evidence (in which
case the Jury is discharged) which was not in this Case: But the matter upon
the Plaintiff and Defendants Evidence was left fairly to the Jury, both for the
truth and validity of it (as in such Cases it ought to be) and they having
found the Defendants did not disseise the Plaintiff, if the Plaintiff conceive
himself aggreived, he has a plain remedy by an Attaint, wherein the truth or
falsity, sufficiency or insufficiency, both of the Plaintiffs and Defendants
evidence will be fairly tried again by another Jury. V. Stat. West. 2. C. 31.
But no Bill of Exceptions will lie in such Case, by the Statute, when the
Evidence given is admitted as evidence, and left to a Jury by the Court.

And then to mend the matter, It is alleged as a fault of the Judges, that
they did not admit of Allegations, together with the matters given in evidence
as sufficient to maintain the Plaintiffs Title, whereby it plainly appears,
that the Plaintiffs Council would not rely upon the evidence given, but they
were forced to supply the defect of it by bare Allegations. And this is the
first time that ever Allegations were thought of any force to make out a Title,
or to supply the defect of evidence: And if this should be admitted, men's
Titles may easily be defeated. By all which considerations, and diverse other
reasons it will appear that this pretended Bill of exceptions is groundless,
false and impertinent. And if the Justices had not refused to seal it, they had
done an apparent injustice to the Defendants.

It is next to be considered, that unless the Judges, or one of them had sealed
it, the matter of it cannot be examined upon a writ of Error, for it is the
Justices sealing makes it assigneable upon Record, for so does the Statute of
Westminster. 2. require. And if it be objected, that then it will be in the power of
the Judges, by refusing to seal the Bill, to deprive the party of the benefit
of the Statute.

It is answered, Resp.
The party grieved may have his Action upon the Statute against the Judges that
shall refuse to seal a Bill, when by law they ought; and he shall recover
damages proportionable to the injury received.

If therefore the Plaintiff thinks himself aggrieved by the Judges, the course
of common Justice is open, and he may pursue his remedy, and have satisfaction
if he be injured.

And there can be no failure of Justice, for the Judges may be sued in either
of the two Courts of Westminster Hall, in the Common Pleas, or the Exchequer;
for the three Judges are to be Defendants. And the Chief Justice, tho not a
party upon the Record, yet his Title and interest being the question, he ought
not to try the Action against the other Judges; therefore they are ousted of
having the privilege of being sued in the Kings Bench. There lies also a Writ
out of Chancery, to command the Judges to seal a Bill of Exceptions.

And this further observation may be added, that if the inheritance of this
Office may be granted (as it is by the Patent in question, to the Plaintiff and
his Heirs determinable upon three lives; and by another in Reversion to
Babington and his Heirs in trust for the Earl of Arlington and his Heirs) it
would be a great inconvenience, for then it may descend to Women and Children,
who cannot be Clerks. And tho the Defendants did not take advantage of this
upon the Trial, yet are they not hindered from insisting upon it at any time,
since it is a matter that appears upon Record, and might have been moved in
arrest of Judgment, if a Verdict had been given against them. Moreover, it is
to be observed, that if the Crown should grant this Office, the Chief Justice
will be no longer answerable for the Keeping of the Records, if the Officer
should be insolvent.

LONDON, Printed for Isaac Cleave, next Sergeants Inn, in Chancery Lane, 1694.


