A brief DECLARATION OF The Reasons that moved King JAMES of blessed memory,
and the STATE, to erect a College of Divines, and other Learned men at CHELSEY.

Together with a Copy of His Majesty's Letters in favoring the same.

And an addition of some MOTIVES forcible to excite good Christians zeal to a
voluntary and liberal Contribution.



LONDON, Printed by E.P. for Nicholas Bourne. 1645.

A brief Declaration of the Reasons that moved King JAMES of blessed memory
and the State, to erect a College of Divines, and other Learned men, at
CHELSEY.
Understanding by experience, that want of information has much hindered men's
devotion in contributing toward the erection and dotation of Chelsey College,
we have thought it very fit, together with his Majesty's Letters, seconded by
my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to declare the reasons that caused this
work to be undertaken, and to add such Motives, as we have supposed may be
most effectual to give satisfaction to his Majesty's desire, and perfection to
this honorable design.

First it was considered, that the ^opes Agents traveled Sea and Land, wrote
books in favor of their faction, devised lies and slanders, to bring Religion
and the Professors thereof into hatred, and not sparing any standing in their
way, by falsehood and treachery oppugned Kings and Princes, that could not
endure the Popes tyrannical government. And for this end, men of ready wits,
good speech, long experience, and competent learning, have been maintained in
Colleges, furnished with Books, helped with Counsel and directions, bound
with Laws and Oaths, to uphold the Papal Hierarchy and Heresy, and which
moves much, encouraged with great promises and large rewards.

Whereunto albeit private men piously affected have from time to time opposed
themselves, yet because they wanted encouragement to undertake fo great a
labor, counsel of their Ancients to direct them, Books and Libraries to
instruct them, forms of proceeding to keep them in compass, and rewards to
maintain them, those excepted that are due for Ecclesiastical cures, it was
further advised, that to make a sufficient defense for the truth of Religion,
and honor of the State, and a strong and continual opposition against the
continued lies, slanders, errors, heresies, sects, idolatries, and blasphemies
of our Adversaries, it was necessary to unite our forces, and to appoint
special men, that without other distraction might attend the cause of Religion
and the State, being furnished with Directions, Instructions, Counsel, Books,
Presses, competent maintenance, and other necessaries.

This then was the reason why this College by his Majesty and the State was
first designed, and a corporation granted with large privileges, viz. That a
select number of Divines and others should be gathered together into one body,
and united with one form of Laws, and there maintained, who being furnished
with Books, and directed by men of experience and action, might always be
ready to maintain our Christian faith, to answer the Adversaries Calumniations
as well against Religion as the State, to defend the Majesty of Kings and
Princes, against the usurpation of Popes, the liberty of Christians, against
the yoke of Superstition, to supply the defect of teaching where Appropriations
have devoured the Ministry, by teaching and conference to convince the
obstinate Papist and Atheist, and by all lawful means to maintain truth, and
discover falsehood.

This is the College commended by his Majesty, and intended by the State, and
easily to be pefected if it please all true Christians to further it with their
help and favor, according to some proportion of their means. His Majesty's
Letters directed to my Lord of Canterbury, follow in these words:

Right trusty and wel-beloved Counselor, we greet you well.
Whereas the enemies of the Gospel have ever been forward to write, and
publish books for confirming of erroneous doctrine, and impugning the truth,
and now of late seem more careful then before to send daily into our Realms
such their writings, whereby our loving Subjects, though otherwise well
disposed might be seduced, unless some remedy thereof should be provided. We
by the advice of our Council have lately granted a Corporation, and given our
allowance for erecting a College at Chelsey, for learned Divines to be
employed to write as occasion shall require for maintaining the Religion
professed in our Kingdoms, and confuting the impugners thereof. Whereupon
Doctor Sutcliffe designed Provost of the said College, has now humbly
signified unto us, that upon diverse promises of help and assistance toward
the erecting and endowing the said College he has at his own charge begun,
and well proceeded in the building, as does sufficiently appear by a good part
thereof already set up in the place appointed for the same. We therefore being
willing to favor and further so religious a work, will and require you to
write your Letters to the Bishops of your Province, signifying unto them in our
Name, that our pleasure is, they deal with the Clergy, and other of their
Diocese, to give their charitable benevolence for the perfecting of this good
work so well begun. And for the better performance of our desire, we have
given order to the said Provost and his Associates to attend you and others
unto whom it may appertain, and to certify us from time to time of their
proceeding.

Thetford the 5 of May, 1616.

These Letters my Lord Archbishop of Canturburie sends abroad to the Bishops
of his Province, and secondeth them in these terms:

NOw because it is so pious and religious a work, conducing both to GODS
glory, and the saving of many a soul within this Kingdom, I cannot but wish
that all devout and well-affected persons should by your self and the Preachers
in your Diocese, as well publicly as otherwise, be excited to contribute in
some measure to so holy an intendment now well begun. And although these and
the like motions have been frequent in these latter times, yet let not those
whom God has blessed with any wealth be weary of well-doing, that it may not
be said that the idolatrous and superstitious Papists be more forward to
advance their falsehoods, then we are to maintain Gods Truth. Whatsoever is
collected, I pray your Lordship may be carefully brought unto me; partly that
it pass not through any defrauding hand, and partly that his Majesty may be
acquainted what is done in this behalf.

Your Lordships very loving Brother G. Canterb.


The like Letters are written to my Lord Chancellor, and my Lord Mayor of
LONDON.

By these Letters it may appear, that this College is not an idle project of
any private man, but a pious work projected by the King and State, and that
all that profess Religion, and desire the continuance and advancement thereof,
yea, all that honor his Majesty, and wish the prosperity of the State, and
desire the increase of learning, have interest therein, and I hope shall
receive contentment, and good satisfaction by the same.

Being then a work of piety for the maintenance of true Religion, who can be
accounted truly pious and religious, and yet yield no help to advance it? being
a project to maintain the honor of the State, what good subject will not
contribute to set forward this project? but to touch only the point of Gods
honor, let us remember the words of the Wise man, Prove. 3. Honor the Lord
with thy substance. Let us also consider what the Lord himself says, 1 Samuel 2.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
despised. Now who can say, he honors God that suffers him by idolatry,
superstition and blasphemy to be dishonored, and will give nothing to
suppress Baals Priests, and is content that the Pope be worshipped like the
Idol Bell? can Gods honor stand with the superstition, heresy, idolatry, and
blasphemy of Papists; profaneness of Atheists, fanaticall doctrine of
Schismatickes, and idle Novelists?

It is not sufficient for true Christians to profess true Religion, but they
must with zeal maintain it, and with heart abhor, and with hand suppress
idolatry and superstition, Who will rise up with me against the wicked, says
the Prophet, Psalm. 94. And Psalm. 139. he says, He hated those that hated the
Lord with an unfeigned hatred. The Law Deuteronomy. 13. is direct against such as
entice us to serve other gods, our eye may not pity them, nor may we show
mercy unto them, no although they be our brothers, or our wives that lie in our
bosom.

An odious thing also it is, either to suffer truth to be suppressed, or lies
to be received. Saint Augustine in Epist. ad Casulanum, says, It is a fault to
hide truth, as well as to tell lies; Uterque reus est, and qui veritatem
occultat, and qui mendacium dicit. Chrysostom Homil. 25. in Matthew. does charge
him to be a Traitor unto Truth, that dare not boldly utter it or defend it; Non
ille solum est proditor veritatis qui veritatem transgrediens pro veritate
mendacium loquitur, sed etiam qui non libere veritatem pronunciat quam
pronuntiare tenetur, aut non libere veritatem defendit quam libere defendere
convenit.

Some suppose that Christianity and Popery may stand together, and themselves
as Newters stand between both, or as Mediators would reconcile both. But can
Christ be reconciled to Antichrist? there is no concord betwixt Christ and
Belial, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. Elias told us there is no halting between
two Religions: no man that honors any Creature can say he truly honors
God, for God gives not his honor to Creatures, Asa 1 King. 15. was a good
King, yet it is imputed to him that he took not down the high places. The
Bishop of the Church of Pergamus, Apocal. 2. is reproved for suffering them
that taught the doctrine of Balaam; and the Bishop of Thyatira, for permitting
Jesabel to teach and deceive the people; and shall the Church of England any
longer suffer the Romish Balaamites, and the false Priests of Baal maintained
by the Romish Jesabel and her Consorts to seduce Gods people? The false Priests
of Bell used all art and cunning practices to deceive, and now will not suffer
any religion but that of their god Bell; the Pope; and shall not true
Christians use equal diligence to maintain truth, and suppress Popery and
all other idolatrous and false Religion? Ingemui fateor (says Hierome) minus
nobis inesse voluntatis ad propugnandam veritatem, quam inesse illis
cupiditatis ad inculcandum mendacium: I sighed (says he) seeing less desire
in us to defend truth, then in our adversaries to maintain lies.

This College then being erected for maintenance of truth and Gods true
service, and a resolute opposition against errors and false worship of God, it
cannot but please God and content godly men. The same will also be a means to
increase learning, and to supply the defects of places haunted with the spi^its
of Antichrist, the Jesuits, and Mass Priests, and therefore cannot choose but
be well approved of all, that either desire a learned Ministry, or love
learning. Finally, seeing the Church has received no greater dishonor by any,
then by unsufficient and unlearned Churchmen, I hope this may be a means to
recover some part of their lost honor.

Wherefore, whether we regard the service of God, or the honor we owe to our
King, or the love we bear to our Country and the State, let us not show our
selves sparing or backward in yielding our aid to set forward a work so
religious and profitable for the Church, so honorable for the State, so
necessary in regard of the malice of our adversaries, and the defects and
discouragement of our own forces. Other collections have been either for
private persons or strangers, or places remote, or matters concerning some
particular occasions. This concerns a general good, and touches every man
both in conscience and honor. Heretofore we have endeavored to maintain
Religion, and favor others abroad, let us not therefore neglect our selves,
and our own honor, profit, and necessary service at home. Neither let any man
think it strange, that a work of such greatness should be advanced by this
weak means, or that a project so necessary should proceed so slowly.
Almighty God, albeit all sufficient, yet would have his own Tabernacle built
by the voluntary offerings of his people. Speak, says God to Moses, Exodus 25.
to the Children of Israel, that they receive an offering for me of every man
whose heart gives it freely. And Exodus 36. it follows, and they brought
still unto Moses free gifts every morning, and they ceased not until they were
stated from offering, King Solomon likewise was greatly helped in the building
of the Temple by the contribution of his Subjects, as appears by the words of
Scriptures, 1 King. 9.19. further, by voluntary offerings and contributions,
the Temple was repaired by Ioash, 2 King. 12. and by Josiah, 2. Chron. 34. and
this has been the use and practice of ancient times in building, and endowing
most famous Churches, Colleges, Schools and other monuments of Religion and
Learning, both in our own and other Countries. Our Adversaries by this course
have had means to build many Monasteries and Colleges, and Schools for
Jesuits and Friets, as it were propugnacles of Superstition, Heresy, Idolatry,
and Antichrists tyranny, to uphold and make good their own corruptions in
Religion, and usurpations upon the Magistrates government, and every Christian
man's liberty. And this have they done not only in Europe, but also in the
Indies, and not one in every Kingdom, but in the same state diverse, and almost
in every great City one. And shall not this flourishing Kingdom build and
endow one College for the maintenance of Gods true service, and the honor of
the whole State? It were a dishonor to our Nation, and the whole Church and
State to think contrary.

The work we confess has hitherto proceeded slowly: And no marvel, seeing
great works are not easily achieved. Noah's Ark, Gods Tabernacle and Temple,
and famous Schools and Colleges, albeit founded by Kings and great men, were
long in building, and do we wonder that this College is not yet finished?
Further it pleased God to deprive us of Prince Henry our principal hope, and
the chief Author of this design. Lastly, who knows whether God has
appointed these weak means to set forward a great work, that his power in
our weakness might have the whole glory?

Let us therefore, good Countrymen and Christians, hearken willingly to his
Majesty's motion and readily follow his example. Let it appear by our bounty
how zealous we are to maintain his everlasting Truth, and root out error and
idolatry. Let us by effects declare how studious we are to do good works,
and to advance our Countries honor. They that have much may give of their
abundance: the rest according to the measure of their means. God as well
accepts the Widows mite, and poor man's good will, as the rich man's
treasure.

If we honor God with our substance, he will honor us and increase our
substance. If we build a house for the maintenance of his truth, that it may
continue to our posterity, God will uphold our houses, restore to us, and
double it to our posterity. Abraham by offering his son, was made a father of
many sons, yea of Nations. And Solomon that showed his Royal magnificence in
building God a Temple, in honor and riches passed all other Kings. How then
can we excuse our selves, if we deny God a small offering, that daily
offers to us many graces, and gives us all the good things we possess? Our
souls and bodies are a sacrifice due to him: and therefore no Christian may
deny to him an offering out of his worldly goods, if Gods service require it.

As for those that draw back in this service, and refuse to concur in promoting
Gods honor, let them mark the words of our Savior, Matthew. 12. He that is not
with me is against me. And the curse of the Angel upon the people of Meros,
Judge. 5. Curse ye Meros, says the Angel, for they came not up to help the
Lord.

But we hope we shall not need many word^ to move them, that already are so
well persuaded, nor to perswad^ me^, (...) in Religion and devot^^n are so
forward. It is the duty of good Christians to advance Gods honor, and
repress Superstition, Heresy, Idolatry, Blasphemy. It is the Office of good
Subjects to defend the honor of the State, against the sycophancies of English
Fugitives, and the secret practices of foreign Enemies their adherents. The
Adversaries using all their skill, and joining their forces against Religion
and the State, it behooves us likewise to unite our forces, and to join in
consultation how to resist them. This common business requires common help,
the practices of the Adversaries provoke us to use speed, the quality of the
work being for defense of Religion and the State, will move any whose heart is
not hardened, cheerfully to give. Whosoever shall willingly give, shall receive
of God a full reward in this life, and when they dye, their works shall follow
them, and then whatsoever they have given to God on earth, they shall assuredly
find in Heaven.

Wherefore recommending the College of Chelsey to every religious Christians
devout thoughts, we cease further to press them. Only for satisfaction of
those that desire to know why this College is erected at Chelsey and not in
one of the Universities, this we thought sit to add, that this place was
thought most sit to receive directions from our Superiors, to consult with men
of best experience, to obtain Intelligence from foreign parts, to print Books,
and to disperse them; And lastly, to obtain the favor of the State and City.
Further hereby, as all emulation may be avoided, so the help of both
Universities may as well be had by intercourse of our Agents, as if the
College stood in either of the Universities. Thus all things now stand. God
bless the proceeding of this work, and give honor to his own name, and a
happy issue to this holy design. Amen.

FINIS.

