A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, DECLARING The impiety and unlawfulness of the new
COVENANT with the SCOTS.

Together with the Covenant it self.

Printed Anno Dom. 1643.

The new League and Covenant with the SCOTS.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens. Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our Eyes the Glory of God, and the Advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private Condition is included;
And calling to mind the Treacherous and Bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors
thereof, in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion; And how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption, are
of late, and at this time increased and exercised, whereof the deplorable
Estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed Estate of the
Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous Estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public Testimonies. We have now at last
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and
Sufferings) for the Preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter
ruin and destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the example of Gods People in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn
League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself,
with our hands lifted up to the most High God, do swear,

I. THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several Places and Callings, The preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches;
And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of
Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That we and our
posterity after us, may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of Persons, endeavor the
exterpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy,) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godliness, lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
Plagues; and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberries of the Kingdoms,
That the World may bear Witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no Thoughts or Intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power and
Greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction, or parties amongst the
People contrary to this League and Covenant; That they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms, respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments; We shall each one of us, according to our Place and Interest
endeavor, That they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; and that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Article.

VI. We shall also according to our Places and Callings, in this common Cause
of Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof; and shall not suffer our selves directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, perswation, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, Whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutralitie in this
Cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms and
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously, and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our Power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever: And what
we are not able to suppress, or overcome, we shall reveal and make known,
that it may be timely prevented or removed. All which we shall do, as in the
sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God and His Son lesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of
these Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel; That we have not labored for the Purity
and Power thereof; and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our
Hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other
sins and Transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and
unfeigned purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves and all others, under
our Power and Charge both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to
God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the
example of a real Reformation, That the Lord may turn away his wrath and
heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and
Peace. And this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher
of all Hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer
at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; most
humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end;
And to bless our desires and proceedings with such success, as may be
deliverance and safety to his People, and encouragement to the Christian
Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to
join in the same or like Association and Covenant, To the glory of God, the
Enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Peace and Tranquillity of
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

A brief Discourse, declaring the impiety and unlawfulness of the new
COVENANT with the Scots. Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and
be not still, O God. For lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate
thee, have lift up the head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy
people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, come, and let us
cut them off from being a nation: that the name of Israel may be no more in
remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent: they are
confederate against thee. Mine enemies reproach me all the day, and they that
are mad are sworn against me. For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine
enemies take thy name in vain.

THese were once the complaints of the Psalmist, against Gods enemies and his
in those times. But now they may be justly, alas too justly taken up by the
King and His faithful Subject; in these times, against the contrivers and
prosecutors of that monstrous Rebellion, which has been the deformed and
unnatural issue that the hellish copulation of Satan, with this wicked and
adulterous generation; the very lees and dreggs of almost exhausted time has
brought forth. It is a monster indeed, made up of many monsters, every limb or
part of it is as it were a several portent, presaging without the great mercy
of God, a general ruin to this poor nation, in all that it can style good;
laws, lives, religion, souls, government, order, plenty, safety, honor, and
that in the ruins whereof, if not the substance, yet the beauty and comfort of
all the rest must needs be buried the happy peace of this Kingdom. A monster
every day almost growing more and more monstrous, ever and anon contracting not
only more stature, but (wherein it out-does all the most gross errors of
nature, if I may so call them) new limbs, new organs, and members of
confusion, and I would it did not out strip them in one thing more. Nature does
seldom use to maintain her errors, and therefore though I know not how she
brings them forth, yet she is not wont to give them a long life, which may
seem a kind of recantation of nature; she makes have to scrape out those blots
which she has made. If they be long-lived it is as it were another wonder, and
so another multiplied error of nature, (when I speak of the error of nature,
I mean the misapplication or disordered working of second causes.) But this,
oh it has lived too too long already, and yet it appears to be still too
youthful, since it is not yet come unto its full stature. It is of so strange
a continuance, as well as of sad and uncouth importance, that we could scarce
tell whether it were a Comet or a Star; but that we discover it by it is low
region wherein it moves, and by its irregular motion, and by that blazing
train of mischiefs at the tail of it, to have no place amongst the heavenly
bodies, as some mad Astronomers of our age would persuade us: but that, as it
is raised from those foggy and unwholesome vapors, that not the earth or water,
but even hell it self has belcht forth, to the confusion and destruction of
mankind; so we are sure it will not still continue, but will at length wast
and consume it self, and fall down, though with such a stench and evil
influence, that may perhaps suffocate many thousands that are about it.

Much has been done, and by skillful hands, toward the anatomy and
description of this monster; and no wonder if some have met with damps from it
in endeavor, like those that open foul and corrupted bodies, which many times
send out those malign vapors, that are ready to poison those that have
attempted it. I my self have had my share of this mischief, and yet when the
common good calls for it, in the care we must have for the preservation of
public dangers, though to the peril of our particular safeties, we must not
desist from the work. I dare not undertake to expose unto your view all the
deformities of this strange prodigy. I doubt it has not yet all its parts and
members: whilst it still lives we can never say, we have fully decyphered it.
And though we would very feign kill it by dissection, yet as it is in the
usual practice of those that anatomize bodies, to do it when they are dead; so
you must look for the perfect work in the dissection of this when it is dead
too: it is too unquiet a monster to suffer it before, and too increasing to be
capable of it.

Besides, the horrible composure of it is so various and perplexed, that it is
very hard to undertake it.

That which I have to do at this present, is to set forth unto you the strange
language of this beast. We read of a monstrous beast in the Revelation, that
had a mouth given unto it speaking great things, and blasphemies: Revel. 13.5.
And surely such is the language of this monster, especially in this strange and
horrid Covenant and Oath, which they have of late taken upon them, and
commended unto others; for can there be any greater blasphemy then to offer God
for security unto Satan, to forge his hand and counterfeit his seal, as it
were to an obligation to bind men over to the Devil. We read of it as a
great aggravation of sin, that men frame iniquity by a Law: This they have
done too as far as in them lies, but not content with this, they have now
proceeded farther to frame iniquity by an Oath and Covenant. That as they kill
men's bodies on the one side, so they may destroy souls too on the other; as if
they would go about to confute our Savior, where he tells us, that men are
able only to destroy the body, and do no more, and show that they can in some
sense destroy both body and soul in hell. My desire is to lay open this
mischief before the people, that they may take heed how they are entrapped in
so dangerous a snare, wherein you must not look for so exact a discovery as
might have been made, but such, as I was able in great have to make of it,
being desirous to apply a speedy prevention, though with less serious
composition unto so dangerous an evil, and that plainly to the capacity of the
meanest of the people, not doubting but that those that have judgment will be
able to discover more in it of themselves: my aim is to show the impiety of
this Oath, which does appear unto us in these several heads.

First, it is unlawful in the manner of it. Secondly, in the matter of it.
Thirdly, in the end of it.
First, in the manner of undertaking it, as it is against the Authority of the
King: And as it is an entrance into a new League with a foreign Nation without
His Majesty's consent.

First it is against the Authority of the King, which we are all bound to
maintain, in that it is undertaken without His Authority; for whatsoever is
undertaken without that power which is requisite thereunto, is against that
Authority: for as that which cannot derive it self from God, who has supreme
authority in the ordering of Religion as in all other things, is against the
supreme and absolute authority of God. So that which cannot derive it self
from the King in matter of Government, when He is supreme under God, is
against the authority of the King, and so an irregular and disorderly
enterprise. For as no animal motion in the body but has its force and power
from the head in the body, so there can be no orderly public motion in the
State, that has not its force and influence from the King, who is supreme
Head under God of the body Politic. And herein it is against the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, which binds men to the observance and preservation
of the Kings authority as supreme.

Secondly, it is sinful in the manner of it, as it is an entrance into a new
League with a foreign Nation, without the consent of the King, who by the Law
and constitution of the Kingdom is of absolute and supreme power in such
matters, at least so far, that it cannot, or at least ought not to be done
without him.

Thirdly, in the manner of taking it: if it be not lawful, yet it is uncouth
and strange, performed by a ceremony of lifting up their hands unto God, as
they call it. But we may justly say by lifting up their hands against God,
since their hands are truly lift up against Gods substitute, and against that
authority that God has placed in him. But indeed this Ceremony was most fit
for their purpose, most correspondent unto their drift and purpose, and does
excellently decypher that business they have in hand, and which they meant to
strengthen and corroborate by this Covenant, even the lifting up of their hands
against the Lords anointed: which they did well not to swear to upon the
Bible or Evangelists, since it is a design directly contrary to the whole
drift of that holy Doctrine.

But in the second place it is not only peccant in the manner, either of
taking or undertaking, but much more in the importance of it.

I might say something of the strange inverted method, whereby they show us how
they mean to turn things upside down: Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of Subjects, being put before the Authority and Person of the King;
but we could pardon such (...) as these, were it not committed more in their
actions than in their expressions. But not to insist upon this.

It is peccant in the matter in three maine and principal respects.

1. As it is against reason. 2. As against Scripture. 3. As it is against their
own consciences.
1. It is against reason that they swear to maintain the Discipline and
Government of Scotland in that Church, and this is against reason in two
respects.

First, because thereby they intrude into those things that belong not unto
them, and are in aliena rep. curiosi, since they have no more power to order
and dispose of matters in the Scotch Nation, then the Scots have to order and
dispose the affairs of this. But hereby indeed the Scots and they have set up
a pretry trade and traffic of invasion; since, as the Scots by their
incitement have most unjustly and unreasonably taken upon to order matters in
this Kingdom, which has no dependence upon them, nor is any way under their
Government: so they have hereby made themselves in the tenor of the Covenant,
a kind of Moderatours and Governors of Scotland. Which notwithstanding we
verily believe that Nation will hardly admit of.

Secondly, it is against reason that they should undertake to keep that
Discipline or Government unalterable in another Nation, which all sound
Christians hold, at least in many things to be alterable, and which they
themselves (as it seems by the form of the Oath) durst not undertake to ty
themselves unto; certainly herein they are run into the self same error, of
which they themselves (if I mistake not) taxed the late Oath of the Synod, and
have tied themselves unalterably to maintain that which may and ought to be
altered upon the exigency of the Church. And so they have bound themselves by a
sacred vow, not only to a thing unnecessary, and no way acceptable to God, in
that singularity in which they are bound to it, but also to withstand the
lawful supply of the possible and probable necessities of the Church. Besides
this, they had best be well assured that all that they have sworn to maintain
in that Discipline and Government, be agreeable to Gods Word.

2. It is against Scripture, that men should bind themselves to that which is
uncertain; or join in a Covenant, the sense whereof is dubious: and wherein
they do by no means agree, and that in the conscience of their known and
palpable disagreement. This is not to swear according to Gods rule, in
justice, judgment, and truth; nor answerable to that sincere dealing which God
looks for in the taking of an Oath. They that agree upon the words, but
differ about the meaning, may be so far from being said to join in a
Covenant, that they may perhaps swear one against another in their several
and contrary expositions and acceptions.

Now such is this Oath, that it is neither certain nor clear, it being in a
part thereof set down in those stale terms which are capable of a million of
interpretations, as when they swear to promote the reformation of the Church of
England, according to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches. What
certainty I beseech you is there in this Oath? or at least, what unity is in
it? were they or are they yet all agreed that have taken it: what that
reformation is, or what Churches they are that are best reformed? Does not the
Independent mean one thing, and the Presbyterian another? Are the Anabaptists
and Brownists agreed upon this point? Nay surely, we may safely say, they have
sworn contrary one to another in their several senses: howsoever one has said
very well of them, or at least of some of them: that they agree very well in
their latitude, that is, in such terms that will serve all their turns: The
very studied trick of the holy Tridentine Counsel. But is not this arch
collusion with God, and with one another? Oh my brethren, I beseech you
remember, God is not mocked, you may muffle your selves and others, but you
cannot blind the Lord.

Thirdly and lastly it is against conscience since if the one half of those
that join in other things no more warrantable, shall or have joined in the
taking of this Covenant it is not probable that they have or can do it as they
are disposed with the consent or to the satisfaction of their consciences. Or I
would gladly know of those various Sectaries as opposite unto one another as
they are both unto the truth. Whether they all like the Scotch Discipline and
Government, which they swear to maintain in that Nation, or no, let them now
lay their hands upon their hearts, and feel how it beats, if they do like it,
why durst they not swear to introduce it here, as well as to defend it there,
but that they must be pleased and deceaved at once with these General Terms
according to the best reformed Churches. And with that limitation, as near as
may be unto the Discipline and Government of Scotland. Oh fie upon this (...),
this fond Glozing, and humouring of men in things of so sacred a nature.) But
if it be so that they do not approve of it, as it is well known they do not
many of them: with what conscience can they swear to maintain that in another
Nation, which they themselves in in their judgments disapprove and condemn as
unlawful and disagreable to the word of God? Let our independent Brethren and
others answer me this question. If any say that the Discipline and Government
of Scotland may be best for that Nation, and yet not so convenient for ours. I
confess it might so be that one kind of Discipline in some things or
circumstances might fit one Nation and yet be inconvenient for another. But
away with these refuges. Speak your consciences speak plainly and do not
complement in Covenants. Do you believe I mean all you independents,
Anabaptists, etc: that have or shall be called to take this holy bond. Do you
all believe that the Scotch Discipline and Government is the best for that
action, or do you not believe it is in it self defective if not contrary to
the word of God in your sense? I am confident you cannot deny but you do. With
what conscience then could you, if you have or can you if you have not, enter
into an oath to maintain that Discipline, and Government, any where, which
your consciences persuade you is not the best not good, not agreeable to the
word and the will of God? Is not this to partake with other men's sins, and to
join with others against that which you call the Kingdom of Christ? But here
you may see the crafty dealing of these men, that had the framing and
contriving of this covenant. They knew well enough with whom they had to do.
And whom they are to depend on for the pursuance of their designs. The Scots
on the one side, much woed, and Courted by them. The various sectaries and
disagreeing humorists on the other side. These both must be pleased, Though God
be never so much displeased. And therefore to satisfy the Scots and to draw
them into this Covenant, the Scottish discipline and government must be
maintained in Scotland, and all must swear to that there, though conscience
deny it. alas it is but to comply with their loving brethren. and yet to leave
room for the fond and enterteining hopes of their several Chimera's which the
Sectaries here have dreamed of. They must be satisfied with more General
terms here. There shall be no particular Government or discipline set down,
but according to the best Reformed Churches. which the Anabaptist may still
conceive to be for him, the Brownist for him, the Lutherane for him, The
Scottish for him, yea and the Papist for him too, were it not that they have
dashed his hopes in another clause: only indeed to please the Scotts a little
more, as those from whom they look for much benefit. This reformation of
England, according to the best Reformed Churches, must be framed as nere as may
be to the Scots, were it not so sad a business as it is, sure a man would even
laugh to see what is behind the Curtain. And yet this is the holy Covenant.

The last of all good covenants is the glory of God. This you see palpably is
to please and engage men.

The intermediate aim of a good Covenant should be the peace of Gods people.
This is like to breed no peace amongst them that take it. since in that
latitude which is allowed them they are like to find room enough, when they
have done slaughtering others, to draw their swords upon one another in the
asserting of their several best reformations against one another. And God
help the poor Church of England, if it must never have peace till they shall
be agreed. And indeed God help it howsoever. But alas this is not all, it is
most clear that the end of this covenant, is so far from peace, that it is
purposely undertaken for the maintenance of a most horrid civil war, and
rebellion, and for the engageing of a foreign nation, to help to butcher the
poor people of this land.

So gross and palpable an impiety and deceiving of the trust that the King and
people placed in those that have the maine sway of the businesses. That I
wonder they should any longer doat upon so open and profeined a design for
their ruin, an enterprise that if it should proceed, would make the Authors
and Contrivers of it infamous amongst the most barbarous Cannibals, for
exposing their own Prince and people to be a prey to be devoured by an
external fire, rather then they should any of them survive to see the defeat
of their ambitious purposes.

Surely I can think upon no better a Motto for this bloody Covenant, and the
design that hangs upon it. Then that verse of the Poet. Flectere si nequeo
superos Acheronta movebo. And yet they swear too to discover all those that
shall divide between the Prince and the people. But does any man believe that
they mean to accuse their own fellow or to arrayne themselves at the bar of
Justice?

I had like to have overseene one feature of this beutifull Covenant, And that
is one excellent and necessary limitation, that they have annexed unto that
part of the oath, wherein they ty themselves to defend the person and authority
of the King: A man would think and read no farther that some strange fit were
come on them of being good Subjects to their Prince. But they will be sure of a
Gap to get out at there.

The Liberties of Subjects, and Privileges of Parliament, must be absolutely
and peremptorily maintained, though with the Ruin of Religion and all not a
syllable of limitation there. But the Kings person and his authority must be
maintained, in preservation and defense of the true Religion, and in the
Liberties of the Kingdom (not a word of the Law in the whole oath. You may see
by that how they mean to govern) and what do you think is the meaning of
this? Surely it is no riddle that needs no O Edipus to interpret it. It Is too
clear the purpose is to leave the people at liberty, to kill the Kings person,
and to trample on his authority, whenever they shall conceive that he
opposes that religion which they shall conceive to be true, or that be
intrencheth upon any the least liberty of the Subjects. So that every error in
a Sectary may upon the point bring a Religious Kings life into question. And
every mistake in policy of the ignorant people, or misinterpration of the Kings
Actions by the malicious, may for all this Covenant pull His Crown off His
head, and let His royal blood out of his heart too, Oh what an excellent
Provision is this, and yet they will have the world to bear witness of their
loyalty. Here Is fuel for an eternal fire if it were possible of an
everlasting succession of divisions and mischeifes between the King, and the
people. Christianity teaches us to submit unto Tyrants. Yea unto heathens if
in authority, in respect of Gods ordinances, but these men are wiser and holier
then God. they are not such fools as the Apostles and Primitive Christistians
to submit upon the mere command of Christ, unto those that oppressed them, and
sought their ruin. But I pray God make us such fools as they were. The
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. I had rather be a fool with
Saint Paul then wise with the best of them.

I commend unto them the saying of Tertullian, Sapiens Deo non eris nisi
stultus saeculo fucris.

Much more might be said, but I hope this may suffice.

And so these hasty observations I Commend unto the Reader, for his caution and
conversion, upon these impressions that a single reading of this covenant left
with me, with these two rules.

If thou art not snared keep thy self free.

If thou have taken an unlawful Vow. Thou had better break it with David,
then keep it with Herod. Thy Corban will never salve thy disobedience to thy
Common-father, which is thy Prince. and so I pray God direct all our hearts,
for the glory of his name, and good of his Church and people, And discover and
defeat all contrary designs.

FINIS.

