A Brief Chronicle OF THE TURKISH WAR, From July to January, 166^ Turned out of
High Dutch.

TOGETHER With his Imperial Majesty's Reasons for the undertaking of the War,
and a Map for the better understanding of the Story.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, fo Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1664

TO THE READER.
THE Turkish War upon the Empire, being at present the Great Action of
Christendom; and that whereupon all Men's Eyes, and thoughts are fixed, who have
any Consideration, even for Christianity it self: It will perchance be a work
not unacceptable, to give the World a brief Relation of the Rise, and Progress
of the Quarrel; which is the Business of this little Treatise, being a
Narrative of the most Remarkable Passages of the last Campagnia, Written in
High Dutch by an Industrious, and Careful Hand, and turned into English, for
the Satisfaction of the English Reader. There is likewise Order taken for a
Continuation of the Story, which shall come forth in its due time, being
Committed to the Care of diverse Intelligent Persons, where the Scene lies, to
gather the Materials for it; to the End, that nothing Worthy of Observation may
be omitted. As to the Narrative in Hand; (to give the Reader a clearer Prospect
of the Matter;) We shall Usher it in, with an Account Lately delivered to the
States General by Count Zinzendorf, (his Imperial Majesty's Envoye at the
H^gue) concerning the Reasons of the War, and so proceed.

The Reasons, whereupon was grounded the Proposal from his Sacred Imperial
Majesty, to their Honorable Lordships the States General, which they may be
pleased to Weigh, and Consider.
1. THat His Sacred Majesty gave no Cause for this War; but that Perpetual, and
Irreconcilable Enemy to Christianity, provoked by no Injury; without any
Color, or Pretense of Justice, or Honesty; In the Year 1660. Seized upon
Waradine, a strong Castle on the very Borders of Hungary, which he Garrisoned
with a great party to infest the Neighboring Provinces.

2. Upon which account, his Sacred Imperial Majesty, was not only forced to
Raise a sudden Army Himself, to oppose so great an Enemy, but also to call for
aid from the other Princes and States of the Empire; as likewise to look out to
other Christian Kings and States, unless he would have exposed the whole
Kingdom of Hungary to present danger, and let those Royal Provinces of
Transylvania, Willachia, and Moldavia be rent off from Christendom, and
Enslaved to the Turkish Empire.

3. When the Enemy gave some hopes of a Friendly Composing the Business, his
Sacred Imperial Majesty was defective in nothing which upon hon st Conditions
might conduce to Peace.

4. When the last Year a Treaty was begun between his Majesty's Ambassad^ur,
and Ati Bassa, Plenipotentiary from the Turk, which afterward was by Common
Consent perfected, and in Expectation of a Ratification, then began other more
weighty Conditions to be required, and harder ^erms, with a great deal of
Perfidiousness, were almost imposed upon us: And at last having gathered a
great Number of Forces together, both out of Asia and Europe, violating the
Faith and Religion of all former Treaties, he brake into Hungary at the same
Instant, both Proclaiming, and Waging War; (His Majesty's Ambassador, contrary
to the Law of Nations, detained by force,) was proudly, and contumeliously used.

5. It Is clear, this fraudulent Enemy has taken his opportunity in a time,
when his Majesty's Hereditary Dominions have been exhausted by continual Wars,
and other Causes; as likewise almost all other Christian Princes weakened, by
Civil Discords amongst themselves.

6. Notwithstanding which, his Sacred Impeiral Majesty, and his Dominions have
omitted nothing, whereby they might sustain the burden of so great a War, by
their own strength, and hinder the progress of the Enemy until the Assistance
from the Princes of the Empire could be ready.

7. Which neither coming in time, nor with so considerable a Force as was
necessarily required, the storms spread further: Newhausel, and other Cities of
less Note were subdued by the Turks; Moravia laid wast by the Incursions of the
Tartars; many Thousand Christians carried away to perpetual Captivity, The
Faith and Constancy of Transylvania wavered; and which is most considerable,
the Ambitious Enemy took courage from his Success; So that now he does not
only promise himself the Kingdom of Hungary, but likewise publicly boasts,
that he will suddenly be Head of the Western Empire.

8. To which purpose, as we are informed from good hands, he intends to be in
the Field the next Spring, and with a greater Force then formerly, set upon his
Imperial Majesty, and the Christian Empire, resolving to carry away with him
all that he meets with from fourteen Years of Age to Sixty

9. 'I is true indeed, the danger of this War does more immediately hang over
his Imperial Majesty, and his Dominions, but then it is not less a truth, that
all other Christian Princes, both in General and Particular are concerned.

10. Not only because all professing Christianity are by that Bond united into
one Body, espeicall against him who equally detests all, taking his first Rise
from the Ruins of Christian Kingdoms; particularly the Eastern Empire it self,
and now desires nothing more then by propagating the Mahumetan Superstition, to
extinguish Christian Religion

11. But in another respect it is clear, that the Event of this War does
concern All, and every One, although they regard nothing but their own security

12. For seeing it is manifest, the Kingdom of Hungary, and other his
Majesty's Dominions have been for a long time the sole Bulwark of Christendom;
and no less manifest that, That being broke through, the rest lies open to an
Infinite Rabble of Barbarians^; Germany being in the midst of Europe, and
joining upon most Christian Kingdoms; the Consequence muct needs be this; His
Sacred Majesty, and the strength of the Empire being once over-thrown, (which
God forbid) that Cruel Enemy will lie heavy upon them all, and be equally
formidable to every one of them.

13. Neither is he only so for number of Soldiers, (which all Christian
Princes should they Muster their Forces together, would scare equal) but
likewise for Military Discipline; for in so numerous an Army there is none,
that drink Wine; are delicate in the Diet, or in any other unnecessaries: none
that maintain Charriots Feuds, Women, or any such like Impediments of War: So
that the Turks can with less charge maintain Three Hundred Thousand in Arms,
then any Christian Prince Fifty Thousand.

14. Moreover, he has this Advantage, he never regards the loss of his Men;
the Effusion of whose blood he cares not for, so he may gain his design upon
those he Warreth against; Subduing Town, and Country: the Common Soldiers
themselves, out of a strange Superstitious persuasion, voluntarily devoting
their Lives to his Service, whilst all Christian Princes are in another
Condition, there being no Victory so great, but may be purchased too dear by
Christian Blood.

15. To these, we may add, that at this time (to the great disgrace of
Christendom) the Turk has verynigh a perfect Army of Christian Rebels, and
Renegadoes; who being formerly brought up in Wars amongst Christian Princes,
by engaging themselves to the Turk, teach them the readiest way of Pitching
Battles, Besieging Towns, and ordering their Camp, heretofore not know by them.

16. In the Common cause this is the sole difference; his Imperial Majesty
cannot venture without some considerable danger, every wound given him (as the
Proverb is) goes to the heart; but other Princes may engage without any
Considerable damage, in respect of their power and strength, so that they shall
not partake of his Majesty's danger, but gain to themselves Eternal praise and
honor.

17. Six Hundred Years ago, and diverse times since, the Christian Princes
undertook a Foreign Expedition against the Turk; only out of a design to
propagate the Christian Cause; and the Common people Emulating their piety,
Contributed thereunto voluntarily upon their own account.

18. Neither is it probable any Christian Princes have so far degenerated from
the piety of their Ancestors, as not to assist the same Cause, which is now
more necessary, because to repel, not wage a War; so that that confederacy
cannot but be most acceptable to God, wherein all Christian Princes unanimously
agree to maintain the Common Cause of ^hristendom.

19. The Report of this Confederacy (for Fame makes all things sound at the
best) may not alittle Contribute toward the War, or at least-wayes take from
the Enemy that hope, which he has hitherto promised himself from the discords
of Christian Princes, by which means he will not be so far Conceited, but dread
that Power when united, which he Contemned, whilst divided into Factions.

20. However things happen, his Sacred Majesty, under the protection of Divine
Providence is resolved to venture, and Sacrifice, both to his own, and Peoples
Fortunes in defense of Himself, and the Public good.

21. But least he should seem defective in that which was his Duty, (it being a
satisfaction in misfortune to have omitted nothing, that might prevent it) he
thought fit to send some of his Chief Nobility to most Princes in Christendom,
that as well by his Entreaty, as Example, they might participate of so Glorious
and Enterprise.

22. Which thing having once purposed, He immediately thought upon their
Honorable Lordships the States General, not doubting, but that their Prudence,
and Acquaintance with such Affairs will give an answer that may be an Example
to other Princes, and let them understand that a Common danger, is to be
Engaged against by a Common Charge and Council, hoping they will give such
Assistance as shall be agreeable to the greatness of the danger, the Dignity
which they bear amongst other Christian States; the Public and Private Wealth
of those Provinces they command and that Glory which has accru'd to them both
in Peace, and War; and lastly to the True, and sincere Friendship which has
always been between them, and the Roman Empire.

23. Especially when they well know there seldom occurrs Matter for so much
Virtue and Praise, and therefore his Majesty does easily assure himself that
upon their own accord they would engage inso Holy a War, and not suffer the
Christian Cause to be Over-thrown, or stand still whilst others reap the Glory.

24. One thing more must be observed, that the Greatest Concern in the Affair,
Consists in the Expedition, which as it Commends all Courtesies; so it is
absolutely necessary to this that his Majesty may have sufficient time to
anticipate the Council of his Enemies.

25. But above all things, this must be taken notice of (viz.) how much it
concerns all men that will bear part in so Pious a work, that this Year, or as
soon as can be, the War be undertaken, that so the Enemy being frustrated of
his design of overcoming Hungary, and Subverting the Roman Empire, may be
willing to Embrace an honest Peace, which is a happiness his Majesty cannot
promise himself, unless assisted from other Christian Princes; all being little
enough, either to obtain the Victory, or continue the War.

26. But the War being prolonged for some Years, the whole Strength of the
Empire will be consumed, and by Consequence a greater necessity of requiring
Foreign Aid, which in so miserable a Condition cannot be denied, by those that
regard their own security; so that we may say, how much the less Christian
Princes contribute this Summer to the War; so much the more will they be fore't
to give for the Future, neither then will it conduce so much to their praise,
because requisite to their preservation.

27. This is all his Majesty thought fit to Enform their Lordships of, though
he might have added much more, but chose rather to omit it, least he should
seem to doubt their Lordships willingness to Embrace so Noble a Specimen of a
pious and generous a spirit, as it must needs be to aid a distressed Friend.

28. As for the form and mannerof sending the Assistance, it is very reasonable
the whole Business should be left to the prudence and discretion of their
Lordships; unless it may be thought expedient, that their Lordships
Commissioners, together with the underwritten Envoye Extra; from his Imperial
Majesty should Examine, by what means the Business may be best performed, for
the Public Good, and least to their loss and damage.

29. And as the Conscience of so Noble a Fact, is a sufficient Reward to
valiant Spirits; so his Majesty, and all the Princes of the Roman Empire shall
for ever keep in memory, the greatness of the favor, and do promise upon the
Faith of Germany, if occasion sever, they shall be willing to repay, what ever
Obligations your Lordships will lay upon them.

Imprimatur,

April 18. 1664. Roger L' Strange.

A Brief Chronicle Of the Late TVRKISH WAR.
COncerning the Grounds of the Late Turkish War, which by Many Men, both
Learned, and Unlearned, has been long since foretold, several Men are of
several Opinions: Some impute it to the Action of Ragotzi, in the Year, 1657.
in Poland; The grounds of the Turkish War.
being undertaken without the Consent of the Grand Signior: Others, to other
Causes; but the Most (with my self) look upon it as the heavy Judgment of
Heaven drawn down upon us by our multiplied Transgressions. But it is not My
Purpose to deduce the Causes of the War, I shall only acquaint the Reader
with some Remarquable Passages concerning the Proceedings of This Barbarous
Enemy against Hungary, and other Countries Bordring upon him. To recite the
Actions of Prince Rago^zi in Poland, I reckon needle^^ as being already
Breviated in my Polonian Relations.

In the Year 1657. George Ragotzi, Prince of Transylvania, finished his War in
Poland; and with much ado, made his Retreat to his Principality; where he
found, too late, the extreme misery which he had brought upon himself. For so
it was, that the Grand Signior, making the worst Construction of all Ragotzi's
Actings in Poland (which Kingdom was then in Amity with the Turk) resolved to
punish This Undertaking in his Vassal, as an Assront to the State of Turkey.
Upon the Apprehension of which Consequence, Prince Ragotzi put himself into a
Posture of Defense, to the utmost of his Power. In 1658 he was yet at Quiet;
The Turk falls upon Ragotzi.
but in 1659 the Grand Signior poured in a Numerous Army of Turk^ and Tartar^
into Transylvania; who practiced all the Insolvencies and Outrages of Burning,
Killing, Ravishing, (and the like) imaginable. This Horrid Invasion of the
Infidels was valiantly opposed by Ragotzi's Forces, Skirmishing with them at
several times very successefully, and so long as He lived, his Forts were not
Attempted. Soon after; the Grand Signior (no longer brooking this Audacity in
his Vassal) dispatched an Ambassador to the Emperor at Vienna, with Rich
Presents; Desiring his Imperial Majesty not to concern himself in Prince
Ragotzi's Affairs, the Turkish Emperor being resolved to prosecute the said
Rogatzi to the highest point of Extremity.

In 1660, the Turk lost no times; but sent a greater Power then before, into
Transylvania. In the mean whise, Prince Ragotzi marched with a Considerable
Force before Hermanstad, and it come to a Bloody Encounter, wherein Ragotzi
deported himself valiantly killing 17 men with his own hand; The Turk worsted
by Rogotzi.
and so the Infidels for That Bout were forced to quit the Field, and leave the
Victory to the Transylvanias, and 6 or 7000 Turks and Tartars upon the place.
Ragotzi in the Persuit received 5 wounds, Who dies of his wounds.
and 5 days after This Fight ( June the 6th) he was brought to Great-Waradin,
where he departed this Life.

The fall of this Prince balanced the Advantage of the Victory, and
exceedingly Animated the Turks, who pressing more and more eagerly upon the
Transylvanians, drove them every where to their strong Holds: Whereupon General
Souches by Order from Vienna, drew toward Transylvania, to make it good against
the Turks; and forthwith marched thither with a considerable Body, and
possessed himself of several Holds.

July the 14 of the same year, the Turk with 100000 Men laid close Siege to
Great-Waradin, Great Waradin Besicged.
which was stoutly defended by one Marcus Claudius, a Scotchman, the Governor
of the Town. During the Siege, the Turk sent abroad strong Parties to subdue
smaller Towns, forcing the People unto several works, as the building of
Bridges, and the Like, putting them to the Sword at last for their Reward: At
one time killing 150 Christians, and at another, Loading 20 Wagons with
Christians Heads which they carried away.

On the 6 of August, The Governor killed, and the Place yielded up.
that brave Soldier and Governor, Marcus Claudius was slain by a short, and
(the Besieged being left without any hope of Relief) This strong Place was
surrendered upon the Turk upon Accord; being a passage into Transylvania,
Hungary, and Poland.

After the death of Ragotzi, there started up One Barkay, Barkay Usurps upon
Transylvania.
a Creature of the Turks, making himself Prince of Transylvania, whom the Turk
protected and supplied with Forces, whereby he undertook to reduce several
Places, siding in pretense with General Souches (who well understood this
violence of the Turks, to be a design not only upon Transylvania, but also upon
the Empire it self) and making large Professions under hand, that whatsoever he
got by the Turkish Aid, was meant for the good of the Emperor, to whom he said
that he Intended a Just and an Honorable Restitution, reserving only Waradin
to remain under the Power of the Prince of Transylvania; but the matter proved
otherwise in the end.

Toward the Close of this Year, a Blazing Star appeared with the Tail toward
Dalmatia, and the Head toward Transylvanta, which proved but a forerunner of
the ensuing Calamityes.

Soon after This, the Labolizish Peasants Rebelled against the Christians in
Transylvania, whom they partly put to the sword, some they took Prisoners, and
others they sold to the Turk, The Right successor of Ragotzi, was Kemini
Janos, (by many Transylvanians, Kemini Janos opposes ^ar kay.
received and entertained for such) who was bitterly persecuted by Barkay and
the Turks.

Anno 1661 He fought them at Thassabat, and made a great slaughter: But at
Last, oppressed with Numbers, he left Transylvania, and retreated to Tokay. And
now it appeared that the Turks business was not to stop there, but to fall also
upon Hungary. Whereupon his Imperial Majesty granted Commissions for the
raising of an Army, which was dispatched, part of it into Hungary, and part
into Transylvania. In the Interim; Count Nicholas Serini began to look to
himself, and raised a strong Fort on the Wall over against Canisia, Naming it
Serinswar: The Building of Serinswar.
getting together a strong Body of Croats, and other Nations, that lay heavy
upon the Quarters there about: which the Turks stomach'd not a little, however
they carried it fair at present, and for a while they talked of nothing but
Peace, but at last they brake out into high expressions, that they would have
Serinswar demolished, The Pretense of the Quarrel.
Count Serini punished, and Transylvania subjected to the Power of the Turk by
way of Reparation. None of which followed; but the Christians looked upon it as
every man's Interest to do his Best to defend himself against the Ambition, and
Outrages of This Common Enemy; and there being nothing now to be expected but a
great Turkish War, which was already begun by Parties; The Christians enter
upon Turkey.
the Christians entered upon the Borders of Turkey, drawing toward
Stul-Weissenburg, and Offen: and they subdued Zamock, Warda, Erzy, and Hirt:
all these being inconsiderable Houses, and Castles, which with their Defenders
were blown up, and fired.

While this was doing, the Turks gathered together a Mighty Army Consisting of
Asicatick, African, and Europaean People; The Turks Preparations.
and from this Acheron issued those Devils in the shape of men, that have since
tormented Christendom. To this numerous Army, they had likewise provided an
incredible proportion of Victuals, Ammunition, and Artillery. Nevertheless,
several Treaties were set a foot, which the Turk so long insisted upon, till he
had gained his End, and drawn a formidable Power into the Field, to break in
upon the Christians, who labored as much as in them lay, to preserve the
Peace; but who can live longer at Peace, then his Neighbor will give him leave?

The Army of the Christians in Hungary Consisted of 40000 German Soldiers, who
had the Turks for their Open, and the Hungarians for their Private Enemies (the
animosity being so great, that many times it came to Blows betwixt the Germans
and the Hungarians.) These many Inconveniences, partly from the Hungarians, who
denied Victuals to the German Army, and partly from diseases arising from the
disagreement of the Climate, were much weakened, and diminished. Hungary is
questionless a very brave Country, and abounds in Wine, and certain Fruits,
which taken to Excess, breed dangerous Surfeits. The Hungarians in their
deportment are generally Grave, and Modest, but being Affronted by the Germans,
and others of a different Religion, they are prone to revenge, and hard to be
Reconciled.

Toward the Month of October, the Dutch Army was exceedingly pestered with
Surfeits, so that betwixt those that dyed, Many that lay sick, and others that
were carried out of the Country, it fell to a low Ebb: and moreover, being
then as far as Clausenburg, or thereabouts, they were put to some distress for
Victuals and Forage: the Enemy increasing daily more and more against them,
(for in those Parts the Turkish Power was strongest) About this time, the
Upstart Prince Barkay fell into disgrace, Barkay in disgrace, Abafiv preferred.
and the Turk preferred one Abafti to that dignity in his stead. Against Him,
Kemini Janos bore up, Kemini Janos makes head.
Opposing him, and his Promoters in the Head of 8000 men, and for tune so far
befriended him in the first Engagement, as to deliver his great Enemy Barkay
into his hands, Barkay taken and Beheaded.
whose Head he caused to be struck off, and then for a while the people flocked
in to him, and Augmented his Army; But at last, he met with a Lions Fortune,
when being surrounded rounded on all sides, and striving to clear his passage,
he seemed only careful how he might fall with Honor: for his Army through
many Skirmishes, Diseases, and great Scarcity of Provision, was melted away,
and hope of Succor there was none left; the German Army by the like Accidents
being weakened and put to a Retreat. Upon these Terms it was, that he committed
himself to places of more security, and in Zathmar, He with Others, expected
the Issue of the Treaty. But the Turks, (as has been said already) making use
of a Treaty only for their own Advantage, put themselves into a stronger
Posture: In the mean time discharging their Choler with great indignation, one
while against the Valiant Venetians (that have held them tack so long in
Candia) by and by against the divided Polonians; and now and then against the
half-Conquered Transylvanians; but not a word all this while, nor so much as a
look of displeasure against Hungary. This Fox-play of the Treaty lafted till
the Year, The War breaks out in 1663.
1663, and then the-Fury of these Infidels brake out, not only upon
Transylvania, and Hungaria; but upon the Emperors Hereditary Countries also;
yea, and upon the Roman Empire it self.

This shall serve for an Introduction to the following Narrative. What further
occurred betwixt these two Parties, is exposed and published at large, both at
Franckfort, and elsewhere: so that I shall only take notice of such Passages as
happened since July 1663. concerning the Turks Proceedings in Hungary, and upon
the Borders, and what Opposition those Infidels have met with from the
Christians.

UPon July the 17, 1663. the Grand Vizier came in great Pomp and Magnificence
to Offen, The Grand Vizier comes with 100000 men to Offen.
encamping himself in the Pesterfield, being 4. German miles in Compass. His
Army was upward of a hundred thousand men, above one hundred great Guns, and of
Wagons, and Beasts, a number not to be believed. His first work was to lay two
Ship-Bridges over the Danube; the one near to Gran and the other not far from
Parkam. His Forces being quartered about those parts in Prodigious Multitudes,
it was as yet doubtful, whether he would fall upon Newhausel, or Raab; having
his eye indifferently upon both, and lying still for a good while without
Action. But this Blood-Thirsty brute had showed himself much sooner, if a
continual fall of Rain, and the Overflow of the Danube had not hindered him:
However at length, The Turks pass the River toward Newhausel.
he passed some thousands of his Army over the Bridge near Parkam toward the
side of Newhausel; when immediately a Report was spread by some of the Pesants
that were turned to the Turk, that the River had torn their Ship-Bridges, and
that those 4000 Turks that had passed over, were now Cut off from the Main-Body.

This Rumor it was, that in veigled the Governor of Newhausel (Count Forgats)
into a Courageous but an unhappy Refolution, which was, to fall upon those 4000
Turks, upon the supposition, that the Miscarriage of the Bridge had cut off
their Retreat. It is very true, that he was earnestly dissuaded from that
Attempt, and told, that the Body was greater then he imagined, but still
persisting in his Resolve to fight them, upon the 28th of July, with his
Hungarians, Hussars and Heydukes, and 11 Troops of Germans, and 500 Musquetters
(in all 6000 strong) he marched up to them, and finding the Enemy four times
more then he expected, became sensible of the Abuse, although alas! too late:
for the Infidels having gotten certain Intelligence of the Christians design,
and of their coming, caused the Bridges presently to be Repaired, which they
had purposely disordered, and marching over with a strong Power surrounded
them. The Hungarians, and Hussars, that were appointed to stand, for a Reserve,
seeing the Enemy come on so strong, betook themselves to flight; but the
Germans, and Heyducks that gave the Onset behaved themselves stoutly, and sold
a Dear Victory to the Turks. Count gats def^ed.
At last by Multitudes they were overcome, and those that could not get away,
were miserably Cut, and Mangled, Forgats, and some few others escaped to
Newhausel. This Combat lasted 3 hours, and about 3000 of the Germans, and
Heyducks were put to the Sword.

After this Victory, the Turks being therewith encouraged, and the Christians
not a little dejected, the Enemy made ready to lay a formal Siege unto
Newhausel, The (...) lay Sie^^^ Newhausel.
with what Success will be seen in this ensuing Relation.

A Narrative of the Most Remarquable Occurrences at the Siege of Newhausel.
ON the 15th of August, a Trouper of the Walterish Regiment, who in an
Encounter had been taken Prisoner hard by Parkam, came to Newhausel, and
Affirmed that the Grand Vizier, in his Presence, caused all the Prisoners to be
put to the Sword, whereupon 40 of the Turkish Prisoners in Newhausel were
behead in requital.

On the 16th. dito, the Enemy some Guns into the Turks Camp, that did
Execution among them. Toward the Evening, the Grand Vizier summoned the Town,
giving them three days to consider of a Surrender; but being Answered
Negatively, the Enemy began to play upon the Fort.

On the 18th. the Turk, with a great Shout, and a Peal of Cannon, Approached
the Vienna Gate Posted themselves there, and presently fell to digging,
Notwithstanding the continual shot made upon them; and over against Forgats
Bulwork, they raised a Battery from beneath.

On the 19th. the Turks played their great Guns, and continued till the 23,
making every day at least 350. great Shot against the Wall, the Balls weighing
65, 48, 35, and 22. pound.

On the 21th. the Besieged made a Sally, putting some of the Turks to the
Sword, and took one Ensign from them, whereupon the Turks in their Post at the
Vienna-Gate, possessed themselves of a Roundel, in which Action, many were
slain on both sides.

On the 25th. the Turks began to Batter the Vienna-Gate.

On the 27th. there came one Turk into the Mote, who was taken Prisoner, and
confessed that he was sent to Scout, for which he was immediately knocked on
the head.

On the 29th. the Turkish Horse retired from the Fort, and drew near unto the
Island Schutt, at which time they fired twelve Guns.

On the 31th. the Enemy Attempted the Pallisado's, and began also to fill up
the Mote; and on this day, Lieutenant Colonel Mortinisa Lamberg received a
Shot, of which he dyed the day following.

September the First, at night the Besieged, vowed to stand to it with their
Officers to the last drop of their Blood.

On the 2d dito, a great Number of Janisaries came into the Mote, against whom
many shot were made, at which time it was supposed that the Enemy would give an
Assault.

On the 3d, two Corporals were condemned to dye for deserting their Post.

On the 5th 140 Auxiliaries came in from Comorra, and Lieutenant Colonel
Hagen, was touched lightly with a ball of two pound eight, and upon the same
day the Turks forced out of the Ground some of the Pallisado's hard by the
Fort, at which work, many of them were slain.

On the 6th, the Turks Approached in digging, to the middle of the Town-Mote.

On the 7th it rained, so that they could not work.

On the 9th, Nine of the Defendents were killed by shot, and our of the Turks
were slain by one Christian.

On the 10th, and Officer was Condemned to dye for leaving his Post, and giving
way to the Enemy.

On the 11th, the Turks brake down the Vienna. Gate Bridge, which was repaired,
and drawn up the next night; Many shot were this day made, and great Execution
done upon the Enemy.

On the 13th they played strongly with their great Guns, both upon the Wall,
and into the City, but without much Harm.

On the 15th the Turks made a shot just into the mouth of a great Gun in
Newhausel, which made the Gun fly, and killed one man hard by it. In the
Afternoon, 5 of the Turks that intended to pass the Mote, gave an Alarm, at
which time the Lieutenant Colonel of the Walterish Regiment was killed with a
Shot.

On the 17th, the Marquis of Grana was hurt with a Bullet below the knee; but
the Grand Captain was wounded in the Head, whereof he dyed; also between eleven
and twelve of the Clock, the Enemy made an Assault in two places, which lasted
till two, with great loss on both sides. At the Evening, the Besieged flung
lighted Pitch-Barrels among the Enemy, which drove them out of Frederick
Sconce; but at the going out of the Lights, the Turks pressed in again with two
foot Companyes.

On the 18th, the Turks were working of a Mine, but the Besieged in their
Counter-mining drove them back; However by this means, they made a Breach in
the wall sufficient for a Passage; at which time, the Besieged stood but one
pace from the Enemy, whom they forced to retreat with kindled Pitch-Barrells.

On the 20th, the Turks climbed over the Pallisado's and began to undermine
Forgats-Sconce: and about four in the afternoon they Attaqued Frederick-Scone,
and planted seventeen of their Ensigns upon it; but were beaten off
successfully, they likewise made an Assault upon Forgats-Sconce to their great
loss.

On the 21th, they came on by night in great silence, and made another Assault;
at which time an Eminent Bassa was slain, and two Captains of the Besieged; and
on both sides many Soldiers lost.

On the 22th, they made another furious assault, but they were repulsed with
loss, and kept off with flinging of kindled Pitch-Barrels among them: yet they
came on again, but to no purpose. At this Bout, the Besieged lost above forty
men, amongst whom were two Lieutenant Colonells, on whereof was a Spaniard,
the other was Hagen: On this day, Marquis Pio was wounded in his Head with an
Arrow, and in his Neck he received another wound, Marquis de Grana was wounded
also on the Head.

On the 23th, the Enemy Battered 2o furiously, that Frederick, and
Serin-Sconces were beaten to the Ground, and a Breach made Large enough for
three Horsemen to have passed a Breast. This whole night they shot, without
Intermission, and with Incredible Labor and Delving, they raised a Mount of
Earth so high, that from thence, they could Command the Town, and beat the
Besieged from the Walls.

Wherejpon the Hungarians whispered one another, to Surrender, (out of a fear
to dispute it any longer) which moved the Germans likewise to speak of an
Accord, to Marquis Pio, who telling them that the Enemy kept no Accord; one of
the Soldiers replied, that he did; and thereupon, the Marquis ran him through,
and killed him: However, presently after, they sent to the Grand Vizier,
demanding Honorable Conditions, whose Answer was, that they should set down
their own Terms, leaving only their Creat Guns in the Fort.

On the 25th, the Turks were admitted to the Gran-Gate.

On the 26th, they stayed there till twelve at Noon, and then the Christians
marched out, with 2422 sound, and Armed men, many sick Germans, four Piece of
Ordnance with Baggage, for which the Turks allowed Horses, and Wagons, and
Conducted the Garrison to Comorra. The Tartars, and some of the Turks fell to
plundering of several Houses in Newhausel, and some of the Wagons of those
that marched out; but a Bassa staid their hands, and kept them in order by
force. At this Surrender, the Enemy got seventy piece of Ordnance; great store
of Arms, Powder, Wine, Meal, and Corn; Many of the Hungarians tarrying in
Newhausel with the Turks.

THis Siege drew in many of the Tartars, Moldavians, and Wallachians, taking
their March through Transylvania (where they began their Horrid Cruelty upon
the Christians) toward the Camp before Newhausel. From Thence, September, The
Infidels pass the Waegh, and break into Moravia.
the 3d. (being increased to the Number of 20. or 30000 by the Addition of may
Turks) they sought to make their way over the Waegh, which at last, they
carried by force, putting those Christians to the Sword that guarded the Pass,
and so Crossing the Mountains, they Entered into Moravia, to Vngrishbrod,
Hollishau, and the parts about Olmitz, which Towns, together with a great
number of the Neighboring Villages, they burnt to the Ground.

Many Christians they put to the Sword; The Turks Barbarous Cruelties.
Women, and Maids, these Bruits Ravished: the strong men they tied in Couples,
and drove them along. Little Children they put into Sacks life Geese; some they
cut in two, and others they dashed against the Stones.

Let the Sun Blush, and the Rocks Weep at such Cruelty, and let the Earth open
her Mouth and swallow up these Execrable Murderers! The Number of the Slain,
and Captived Christians, is reckoned to be above ten Thousand. These
Barbarians, although Strangers to the Passes, and ways of these Parts, wanted
yet no Guides: but furnished themselves with Leaders from among the Boores of
the Country, whom they admitted likewise to their shares of the Booty: and in
particular, they made use of the Treacherous Peasants of Werbouitz, little
VVerbte, and Rutzelau, to Conduct them over the Mountains: Whither the People
about Straswitz fled for Sanctuary; but were fetched from thence with 120
Wagons, and carried into Captivity. The Count of Oppersdorff, Upper Governor
of Brunner Crayses Escaped narrowly to Brin, so sudden, and unexpected was this
Invasion.

on September, The Enemy passed the Mark.
5th. The Enemy passed the River Mark, and dispersed themselves withou
Opposition; but the strong Towns they declined, being ill Armed, and better
fitted for a Pillage than a Combat. Upon This day they took the Prince of
Dietrichstin's Secretary, together with his Lady, One Child, and his Wives
Sister, One Canonico, and others, as they were upon their flight from
Nicolasburg to Bohaun. (Situate among the Mountains) These being overtaken, the
Canonico, with his Servant were put to the Sword; the Secretary made a strange
Escape through a water; But the Lady, her Child, and her Sister, they kept in
their hands, with whom they danced at Night after their Barbarous rude manner
at Popitz; till at last (according to the Report of Eyewitnesses) Sated with
Lust, and Moravian Wine, they laid themselves to sleep; in such security, as
plainly signified the Intelligence they had, that there were none near to
revenge the Fact. While they slept, the Sister made her escape; but the Lady
her self, with quieting her Child, waked the Dancers, who presently dashed out
the Childs Brains against the Wall. My Hand trembles at the writing of it! Oh!
How many Christians are there that make this Horrid story their Sport, as if it
were but a Fiction: as if the thing could not be done at all, because they were
not at the doing of it. But I proceed,

At Auspitz there came Gallopping six Troupers, habited after the German
Fashion; and in broken Language, called for a Dinner in an Inn, and Provender
for their Horses, telling the People they would pay for it. Being demanded,
whence they came? They Answered, that they were pursued upon the way; To which
the Innkeeper replied, (as one well pleased with the Account) that if the
Masters of the Town knew it, that were then met at the Councel-House, they
would bid him welcome for his News. But before the tidings could be carried
thither, there followed into the Town a great Body of Tartars after these
scouting Troupers, who put those that were then Assembled in Council, to the
Sword, with many others; plundered the Town, Auspitz plundered and burnt
and afterward burnt it to the Ground; but the Youths, and Children were most
of them carried away for Slaves. Some of these Treacherous Scouts were after
ward brought Prisoners to Olmitz, and suffered Condign Punishment.

For Ten days This Havoc lasted in Moravia, and then they passed over the
Mark-stream into Austria (at which time, the Country People with their best
movables were fled to Vienna.) At length, having laden themselves with all
manner of Booty, they returned to the Camp at Newhausel, where they exposed the
Men, and Beasts, which they had taken up in several Places, to Common sale in
the Market: While these things were doing, the Turks busied themselves against
the Fort Serinswar, and by way of Stratagem, attempted Clausenburg in
Transylvania; but at both Places, they were repulsed, with loss and shame.
^^unt Seri^^ breaks in^^ the Turks ^^uarters.
At which time Count Serini, with a Considerable Body of Croattans, and other
Neighboring People; made a sudden Incursion into Turkey, to the great damage
of the Infidels. The Garrison of Comorra made diverse Sallyes upon the Enemies
Camp before Newhausel, and spoiled their Forage, which put the Turks upon a
Necessity of fetching it at a great distance: wihch they might well do, for
they had with them 26000 Camels; besides Horses, Buffles, Mules, etc. not to be
numbered.

General Spork made diverse Attempts in Parties, upon the Enemy, but most
commonly they were too strong for him, which cost him many a brave Soldier.
General Souches likewise, did all that was possible to way-lay the Enemy, and
defend the Passages: Principally, Those that led into Moravta; but the Infidels
marching always in greater Numbers, then was reported, were too hard for him
also.

The Hungarians were often desired to put themselves into a Body against This
Common Enemy; but it seems they had no mind to it, till at last, after great
Importunity, Count N^cholas ^er^ni made General.
Count Nicholas Serina undertook the Generalship; and was by Prince Genzaga
presented General upon September 13. at the Head of the Army near presburg. At
which time, he drew toget her his Croats, and there joining with the German
Forces, under the Command of Monteeuculi, they put themselves in a Posture
against the Turks, but too late; For the Enemy before they were ready, was
Master of Newhausel. Some Auxiliary Forces were drawn up also from the Emprie,
and took up their Quarters at Crembs, for Rest, and Refreshment.

While the Grand Vizier was repeiring Newhausel, (where the Gross of his Army
continued for sometime) the Tartars were ordered upon Excursions into Moravia,
Second ^tursion ^o Mora^.
and forcing through the Passages at Selin and Rosingkau; they destroyed the
People thereabouts, and came to W^ettin, in the way to Silesia. Wzettin they
burnt down, and Globau, and other Places adjacent; Partly Killing, and partly
carrying People away into Captivity. Both Invasions were Barbarous and Bloody;
but having staid some few days there, they went their way. Their Aim was
likewise to have broken through into Silesia, by the Pass Jablunca; but the
Silesians kept themselves upon too good a Guard for that Bout, and have never
been troubled with them since.

In all This Action the Grand Vizier has played both the Fox, and the Lion,
mingling Fair words, and Threatenings; and Publishing still before the Blow,
such promises of Liberty, and Immunity to all that would range themselves under
his protection, as he well knew most likely to work upon the People, he had to
deal with. It is true, that these Overtures of Clemency, from so barbarous an
Enemy, were looked upon by the wiser sort, rather as a trick of State, then
Good-faith; yet with the Generality, This way of dealing took effect.

The Place most in the Turks eye was Presburg; The Turks eye upon Presburg;
being the Chief City of the Nether Hungary: (wherein is laid up the Hungarian
Crown) A Place, considerable both for the Goodlinesse of the Town, and for the
Situation of it; to which advantage the Turk was no Stranger, as appears by
the frequent Alarms, he gave to that City, the gaining whereof, would have
opned him away to Vienna, on the One side, and to Raah, Comorra, and Newhausel,
on the Other: The Danube passing sing by, in Two Branches, to the Island Schut,
at the end whereof stands the Fort Comorra; and Raah not far off. Nor was it
unknown to Count Strozzi, (the Governor of Presburg) how much the safety of
the Whole, Depended upon the Security of This Part, which moved him to make
timely provision, for the Defense thereof. But the neighboring Places, that
lay open, as St. George, Posing, Modern, etc. chose rather to submit, then
expose themselves to the extremities of Fire and Sword, Neutra Ren dred.
by an unprofitable Opposition. Neutra indeed (a Place not far from Newhausel,
nor less defensible) might have resisted, but did not, and upon the Redition,
the Garrison, according to agreement, was conducted to Presburg. Tyrnaw, and
other Towns yielded also.

The Enemies next Attempt was upon Schinta, The Enemy Attempts Schinta, and is
beaten off
wherein was lodged a fair Artillery, but the Governor deported himself
valiantly, and beat them off. By this time, October was half over, and the
season, called the Turk to his Winter Quarters: who finding his time lost upon
Schinta, drew off to Newhausel; which place is now repaired, and strongly
Garrisoned, the River neutra being brought round about it. From Thence, the
Turk took his March, with a Considerable Body, to the Ship-Bridge at Gran, and
caused some of his great Guns to be passed over there, as if his purpose had
been to Vinter in his own Territories. Those of Newhausel labored hard to get
into the Schut, The Island Schut, Attempted.
and settle themselves, betwixt the Two Forts of Raah, and Comorra: whereupon
Montecuculi and Serini joined their Forces to oppose them.

And now the fortune of the War seemed a little to flatter the Christians; Two
defeats given to the Enemy by the Two Serini's.
Nicholas Serini on the 17. of Oct. defeating a Party of 300 Turks, and his
Brother Peter, near the same time falling upon a Body of about 7000 of them
near Carlstat, on the Frontiers of Stiria: where they designed and Inrode upon
the Christians; but Count Serini, and Coun Ausburg, from an Ambuscade, brake in
among them, slew 1000, and took 100 Prisoners; among which were diverse Persons
of Note, and the son of a great Bassa: The rest dispersed themselves; and the
Victorious in this Adventure got great Booty.

The Serinies have showed themselves, in This their deportment, the true Heirs
of the Honor, and Valor of that Noble Family; and they bring to mind a
memorable Action, which was performed by their Grandfather, Nicholas Serini in
the year 1566, To his Eternal Glory.

ON the 6th. of August 1566, Sigeth taken by Solomon in 1566. and the
Honorable Death of Count Nicholas Sereni.
Solomon the Magnificent laid Siege to the Fort Sigeth, wherein this great
Captain, Nicholas Serini was Governor; who made many bold Sallyes upon the
Enemy, took many Prisoners, and at one time caused 300 Turks to be beheaded;
which so far enraged Solomon, that he plied his Batteries, and Attempts, with
greater fury then before. Serini perceiving the New Town to be upon the point
of being entered, caused it to be set on sire, and retreated into the Old.

A while after, the Turks assaulted the Old-Town, but were so bravely received,
that in One storm they lost 2000 men. However they attempted it again, and
carried it; whereupon, Serini was forced to retire into the Castle, against
which the Enemy planted a Battery, and gave One furious Attaque; but were
beaten off with great loss.

While this passed, Solomon died of a Bloody Flux, (Sept. 4.) but Mahomet Bassa
laboring as much as possible to keep his death concealed from the Turks,
caused the Corpse (Embalmed, and Gloriously Clothed) to be exposed in a dark
place to the People, as sitting on his Throne, and the Bassa himself, with all
his usual Ceremonies, and Reverence, feigning some singular matter of privacy,
and business with him. At length, the Bassa went out of the Tent, wiping his
eyes as if he had been crying; which gave the Officers occasion to enquire, why
he wept? To whom he replied, that It grieved his heart to think how many brave
Soldiers would be suddenly put to the Sword: for (says he Solomon has maded a
deep and desperate Oath, that if this Place be not taken in two days, every
Colonel that hears any Charge in the Attempt, shall certainly be put to death.
Hereupon, the Janizaryes fell into a direct Rage, and gave a furious Assault;
but were repulsed with exceeding loss: they had however set fire to the
Castle, and now the Noble Defender of it, seeing his fate before his eyes,
called the small remainder of his men about him, and exhorted them to stand by
him, and resolve to dye with him. Whereupon, he Clothed himself in a
Violet-Coloured Velvet Suit, took the Key of the Castle, and some Gold in his
Pocket; caused the Gates to be opened, and the great Guns to be drawn thither,
and discharged among the Enemy: and in a Cloud of smoke, issued forth with his
Men, among the Turks, and fought till he was shot in the head. This was the end
of the Valiant Serini. It was reckoned that 20000 Turks were slain before this
Fort. No sooner was Serini fallen, but the Infidels thronging about the Corpse,
cut off his head, and set it on a Polo for one day, after which, they sent it
with a Scoff to Maximilian the Emperor. Now to return to the Story.

IN October, the Count of Hollach, The Coun^ of Hollach (...) General of the
Imperia^ Auxiliaries.
being chosen General of the Imperial Auxiliaryes, came to Vienna, his Forces
(amounting to 6 or 7000 men) being Enquarter's betwixt That and Crembs; The
Emperors Army, lying at that time near Presburg, to recruit, being much
weakened by many Inconveniences. the whole Army, (which the Hungarians,
Croatians, and Auxiliaryes, was computed to be 40000 strong; but the several
heads, of so many Nations, who at this time were almost all in Vienna, could
not (it seems) agree so well together, as not to need his Imperial Majesty's
singular Care, and Circumspection, to keep them from starting into Parties and
Passions. There was an Intent to join 7 or 8000 men that were raised in Silesia
to This Body; but the Silesian Forces would neither march out of their native
Country, nor obey any Foreign Command; so that They stayed at home to defend
their Borders, and especially, the Passage by Jablunka.

While the Christians were laying their heads, and their Forces together, to
put themselves into a Posture, the Enemy brake up with his main Body before
Newhausel, the Turk breaks up from before Newhausel.
and about the end of October, took his March toward Gran, and Offen. The
Tartars also with their Prey marched toward Tartary, carrying along with them
their Chiefest Captives in Coaches, and Wagons, driving their ordinary
Prisoners along with Whips, naked; and their hair flying about their eyes, like
so many Beasts. In Vpper-Hungary, they met with some opposition, at which time
many of the Captives were forced out of their hands, and about 2000 of these
Tartars put to the Sword. Count Nicholas Serini's Design, was to fall upopn
them, at their passing over the Ship-Bridge, and followed them close, sometime
in the Rear, other while on the Flanck, still observing their motion till he
found his opportunity to attaque them.

Upon the last day of October, he set upon the Rear, Serini falls upon their
Rear.
and took from them 5 Wagons full of Captives, that they had gotten in Moravia;
200 Oxen, and 40 Wagons with Provision. In this Action, he did not only release
the Captives, but defeated also their Drivers, which were about 600 Janissaries.
They fought stoutly for 2 hours from behind their Wagons, so that Count Serini
with his Hussars, were forced to quit their Horses, and fight them on foot:
which they did with excellent conduct, and success, giving Quarter only to
Two Persons of Note, whose lives were at their mercy.

This Campagnia seemed now to be at an end, and Count Serini, having in
appearance little to do further with the Enemy, let his men march homeward:
(wanting Fodder for their Horses) the Enemy in the mean while steering their
Course toward Gran, Offen, The Ar^^ draw to their Winter Quarters.
and Weissenburg, as to their Winter Quarters. The Turks left a Garrison of
4000 in Newhausel, under the Command of Two Bassaes; and 10000 about the Fort,
partly to defend the Place, and partly to repair the Fortifications. In Neutra,
the Enemy left 1500 men, which Place was plundered before the Army marched
away. The Earls Cochary, and Tekelly, with a Body of near 15000 men raised in
the Upper and Nether-Hungary, came In to Count Serini; which Conjunction the
Turks mightily endeavored to hinder, but could not effect it. These Forces
arre likewise drawn out of the Field, since that time.

The Auxiliaryes, That is to say; the Hessen, Brunswick, Lunenburg, Munster
Forces; and Others from the Rhyne (some of which, namely Those from Hessen
Darmstadt perished upon the Danube) are put into Winter Quarters on the side of
that River; but the Saxon, and Brandenburg Auxiliaryes, are to lie in Bohemia,
and Moravia; and the Silesian Forces to tarry in their own Country: For the
Council of War at Vienna, did not hold it Advisable, to Quarter all the
Auxiliaryes near together, for fear of Surfeits upon the Fruits; beside that
they would have wanted Fodder for their Horse, and in the foul deep ways they
would have found great trouble to have fetched it.

Another Consideration was, the Easing of the Hungarians, who were already
sufficiently weary of Billeting Soldiers. In Fine; there is no great Noise of
Arms, and Action, at present, but how the Enemy may be opposed next Spring, is
the Consultation, and the Question; who threatens Vienna, and the Empire, with
no less then 3 or 400000 Men at the Next Campagnia.

It was now Resolved by his Imperial Majesty, to go to Regenspurg about the
end of November following; there to Advise about the Relief of the Empire, and
indeed of Christendom: and his Imperial Majesty did likewise Resolve to send
Ambassadors to the Pope, Spain, France, etc. To Solicit Succor. From the
Pope, Moneys are expected; France proffers Men (but who dares receive them?)
Swede is willing to Assist in respect of their Interest in Germany, and they
have sent already 700 well mounted that came from Bremen: So that the Instant
Business of the Empire seems to be rather Preparation, then Present Defense;
and to look forward toward the Spring: The Grand Signior having already
dispersed his Letters of Menace, and Defyance to all Christendom throughout the
Emperors Hereditary Countries.

UPon the turks withdrawing the Gross of his Army, from about Newhausel, over
the Danube, with a Countenance of Disposing himself to his Winter Quarter; Men's
minds began to be a little Composed and Quiet; till Abafti, Abafti troubles the
Imperialists in this Tur^^ Absence.
the Grant Signiors Creature in Transylvania undertook the Turks Aftergame,
with those Forces that stayed behind; Laboring his Utmost to possess himself
of the Berg, or Mine-Towns, (whence comes the Hungarian Gold) and other
Frontier Places, and Houses belonging of Right to his Imperial Majesty: which
Perfidious Design the Christians Army could not conveniently either prevent,
or oppose, being already dispersed for want of Necessaries both for Man, and
Beast.

This same Abafti; passed in of Common Esteem, Abfti's manner of ^roceeding.
for a Person well affected to the Christians, and as One that waited only a
fair Opportunity to draw his Sword against the Turk; but his Actions have now
discovered him: for perceiving what Reputation, Presents, and other Popular
Advantages, have accrued to the Grand Vizier, and and the Chief Officers of the
Turkish Army, upon the Gayning of Newhausel; He likewise turned his Study, and
Endeavors the same way, not doubting by his interests, and Services, to draw
from the Turkish Emperor as fair a Reward; undertaking not only to keep, what
was already gotten, but to Enlarge the Conquest by a Considerable Addition.

It being found neither Commodious, nor Beneificiall to expose the Turks, and
other Asiatick, and African Forces (whose Bodies have been used to a Temperate
warm Air) to the cold Winter-Blasts of Hungary: (which are sharp, though not
long) the Hardship of the Winter-Warre was rather Committed to the
Mountaineers; That is; to the Abaftish Transylvanians, Moldavians, Wallachians,
etc. whose part it is, to Mainteyn the Turks Ground at least, if not carry the
Victory further; and in Brief, to hold the Imperialists in Play, till the
Ottoman Army, may conveniently take the Field again toward the Spring. And
least the Town Neutra should be left Naked; instead of about six hundred Turks,
and Janizaryes, that were taken out of That Garrison, Others, that could better
endure the Air of the Place, were put in, and a Garrison of one hundred and
fifteen Janizaryes into the Castle, (a Sort of People which are of great Credit
with the Turk in Martial Affayrs; And in truth, These were the Men that
ventured the hardest before Newhausel.)

Janizaryes are Christians Children, Janizaryes, what they are.
which were either taken Captive, or given in the way of Tribute, by such
Christians as have done Homage to the Turks, These Children are tryan'd up from
their Childhood, in the Mahumetan Belief, and Inured to Military Exercises.
They are very Numerous and Valiant; and doubtless the best Support of the
Turkish Empire. As their Power is of great Use, and Service to the Ottoman
Emperor in some Cases, so is it in others not less dangerous, their Revolts
and Tumults being seldom laid, or quieted without Horrible Rapine, and
Effusion of Blood. Misery of Miseryes! That the Children of Christians should
be thus engaged in so Implacable an Enmity to the Dictates both of Christ and
Nature!

About This Time; News was brought that a Young Son was born to Mahomet; upon
which Tidings, such a Face was set upon the Business, as if it had been a
Material Part of their Religion to welcome this young Idol into the world with
the Sacrifice of more Christian Blood.

Abafti's Aim, (as we have said before) was to work himself in among the
Mine-Towns. The two first considerable Blocks in his way were Lewents, and
Novigrad; (beside others of less Importance.) In Lewents were good Fighting
men, Backed with a Castle that was well Fortifyed with Thick Walls, and Firm
Turrets. In This Place, the Enemy found Stout Opposition, and Lost many Men
before it; Lewents Rendered upon Accord.
but at last, pressing upon it with greater Numbers, and no Relief appearing
within distance, they took it upon Accord. Those that Marched out were in no
sort Injured, and Those that stayed behind were disarmed, and did Homage.

After Lewents, followed Novigrad, that lies deeper in the Vpper-Hungary; which
although a strong Place, and environed with a Morasse; yet after a stout
Resistance was forced to Render to the Enemy. Novigrad Renders to the Turk.
The Forces in it were Conducted to Waitzen, where they betook themselves to
work for their Living, as the Rest of the Peasants, and are enjoined to be ever
in Readiness with their Arms. The Governor of it, by Name, Ledami, got leave
from Abafti to go to his Country House in Transylvania, and to dwell there,
which soon after he did.

On the Christians side, there was no good will wanting toward the Relief of
any of these Places; but all their Attempts fell short, by Reason of many
Faralities, and Accidents Intervening.

These Successes Encouraged the Enemy to draw nearer to the Mine-Towns, and to
Endeavor the making of their Winter-Quarter thereabouts, and in Vpper-Hungary.
A Rumor was then dispersed, that the Great Vizier had Commanded the
Magistrates of Frystadt, and the Neighboring Parts, upon pain of Death to make
a Ship-Bridge over the VVaegh with all speed, and to provide Victuals and
Fodder to entertain him at his coming back. Thus did new Cares and Troubles
come on, in a Season, when every man flattered himself with some hopes of
Respit and Repose.

Count Serini, that till now, staid in the Isle of Schutt, put himself
Instantly into Motion, and now and then, met with some Parties, and took good
Booty from them; But alas! This would not serve to set the Balance even. Upon
November 12. He took, in a Moorish Place, betwixt Raab, and Comorra, ten
Camels, and as many Mules, laden with Truncks full of Gold and Silver-Plate;
together with the Conductours, who were bound for Constantinople with this
Booty.

In Comorra (where the Officers were at that time under Question, and came off
well, about the Surrender of Newhausel) there were great Complaints of Scarcity
of Provision; the Country being so miserably wasted round about it. Whereupon,
at Vienna it was taken into thought, how those out-lying Garrisons might be
supplied, and the Enemy disappointed of their Aim, who knew full well the
State of their Necessities. It is certain, that the Auxiliaries, and other
Forces that were Quartered in Comorra, would much rather have kept the Field,
if all other Circumstances would have permitted it; but those Auxiliaries, who
by too liberal Feeding on the Austrian and Moravian Fruits, had Contracted
Diseases, neither could, nor would stir; beside that their General, Count
Hohenlo, a Prudent, Expert, and Judicious Commander, gave many weighty Reasons
against it. No sooner had this Lord made an Acquaintance in Vienna; But ill
Fortune met with him, Count Hohenlo's Chamber Robbed.
his Chamber being Robbed of Writings, Moneys, and Jewels, to the value of
betwixt twenty and thirty thousands Rix Dollars.

The Swedish Auxiliaries were not yet come up; but by Advice from Leipsick,
they were then upon their March, not far from Thuringen, (about the midst of
November) and 150. horse were likewise to come from Pomerania, which Forces
became the Ground of great Mistakes happening to be in Motion just upon that
Nick of time, when the Erfordians (being then Outlawed) were in expectation of
the Mentzish Troops: Upon whom they Issued forth, and in their Return left two
Carpenters behind them, whom they hanged upon a Wagon, which did much inflame
the tumult: but the Swedish Troops, which had so much troubled the heads of
diverse People, proved to be a Force of another design, and quality.

The Rumor of the Return of the Turkish Army, (now so late in November)
increased more and more; at which time Filleck (some ten Mile from Cassaw) was
given for lost; So that certain Regiments were immediately sent to make good
the other Mine-Towns, which the Enemy had particularly in their Eye for a
Winter-Quarter. Those Christians which about this time ransomed themselves from
the Turks, speak much of the Stupendous Preparations, which are now in hand
against Christendom; Affirming it for a certainty, that the Grand Signior is
resolved to take the Field next Spring, with an Army of three hundred thousand
Men, which causes great perplexities in Poland, Hungary, Moravia, Silesia, and
Bohemia; but the Polanders, being at peace with the Turks, conceived themselves
in some measure secured by virtue of that Agreement; but in the Tartars,
Moldavians, and Wallachians, they have not much confidence: Especially, when
they are upon their Excursions. Many were of opinion, that the Turks were
forced upon an irregular and precipitate Retreat for want of Provisions, and
that their attempts so late in the year, upon Moravia, and the neighboring
Provinces, were caused partly by the Inviting plenty of all necessaries, which
those Countries afford; and in part, by the encouragement they received from
their correspondents in those Quarters; beside the scarcity, which their
longer continuance, upon the Danube would infallibly have produced thereabouts,
to the great inconvenience of their Armies next Spring.

Hungary lay now groaning under the burden of the Turkish Power, and longing
for aid; the Infidels over-spreading it like a dismal Cloud, charged with Hail
and Thunder: all men's thoughts being sollicitous for deliverance, and in
continual expectation where the storm would fall. Many were of opinion, that
submission was the best expedient in this extremity; but betwixt the sense of
their Allegiance sworn to the Emperor, and the distrust they had of the Turks
Justice to his word, diverse held off.

The Enemy (who did nothing rashly, though as is generally supposed, rather
acting by Instigation then choice) counted it most advisable to draw toward
Cassaw the head City of Vpper-Hungary; knowing full well that when ever the
Christians should Unite, they would make this place the Seat of War, and Settle
themselves there: Wherefore the Infidels went roundly to work, removing
whatsoever might hinder their Progress, before any succor could come up to
them, which succor would however at last signify not much against so Potent
an Enemy.

About this time, the Polanders were a little Frighted with the Tartars, who
though returning homeward with their booty already gotten, might yet be tempted
by their greediness after more to break into the Cracovian Waywood-ship; and
from thence, to advance into Silesia, according to the old saying, Si Turca
veniet in Germaniam, Ibit per Poloniam. If the Turk comes into Germany, he
shall pass through Poland. These Incarnat and Rapacious Devils, however kept
off yet, and carried their prey to their Caverns there to divide it. One thing
is, that Cham, being the Head and Sovereign of these Tartars which had been in
Moravia, was a friend to Poland, and about this time his Forces went in
abundance with the King of Poland, (in person) and the Army, together with a
great number of Cossacks, against the Muscovite, marching over the River
Nieper, otherwise called Boristhenes. The Turks however went on in their
proceeding, subduing Shemniz, Cremniz, and other Mine towns, and sending
threatening Letters to the Magistrates thereabout, who being over-awed by the
Terror of Menaces, moved the People under them to do Homage to these Infidels.
The taking of the Fort Navigrad, (upon the strength whereof the People so much
depended) did not a little conduce to the Subjecting of the rest. And now they
made their excursions toward Tokay, (where their noblest Wines grow) a strong
Hold, Moted round about, and always reputed as invincible. Upon this place
they practiced both subtilty and force, Tokay attempted.
as they had done before Novigrad; but honest men had the keeping of it, and so
they were forced to pass it by.

About this time the Turks caused the late subdued Lewents to be demolished,
Lewents demolished.
as not liking the manner of the Fortification, and sent a threatening Order to
those of Frystadt, to dispatch out of hand two Bridges over the Waegh larger
then the former, and to make them broad enough for whole Squadrons to pass a
Breast; And now they began to talk loud of another Invasion into Moravia; to
which end, many thousands of the Tawny-Tartars thronged into the Camp, as if
those of the other complexion, had not yet played the Devils sufficiently in
the Country; Whereupon to prevent that Inrode, a Counter-mand was sent to most
of those forces, that were now marched, or marching off to their
Winter Quarters; and Order given them to bend their Course toward the Waegh.
Although this Countenance of the Turks design gained not much Credit, in regard
of the season of the Year, it was however held for good discretion, not to be
too secure.

Near the end of November, came to Vienna diverse of the servants of Baron de
Goes, (who had been long employed as the Emperors Agent toward the intended
treaty for Peace) Affirming that the Grand Signior with the Tartar Cham, have
resolved, with an Incredible Force, to come personally into the Field next
spring; and join the utmost of their power against Christendom.

Upon the taking of which Resolution, vast Quantities of Rice and Corn were
ordered at Adrianople, and Philippopoli to be carried to Greek-Weissenberg, and
from thence to Offen. This determination and proceeding, engaged the Christians
to use their utmost Endeavors possible, for the bringing of a considerable
body into the Field next Spring; and to this purpose, his Imperial Majesty
having first given Audience to the Report of the said Baron, gives immediate
Order for Preparations; taking his Journey to the Diet at Regenspurg, The
Emperor goes to the Diet.
to stir up the Princes of the Empire to a General Conjunction against the
Turk. In the Interim, the Archduke Charles Joseph, being designed to keep his
Residence in Vienna, put himself upon the way thither from Lintz; but fell into
such a weakness upon the Journey, that he was enforced to go back. The Chief
Officers appointed to stay behind in Vienna, applied themselves with all
diligence to the putting their Orders in Execution.

Schinta was now provided afresh with Ammunition and Provision, and the Great
Artillery removed from thence, the Montecuculish Army, which for a long time
had been Quartered near the Presburg Ship-Bridg, moving likewise toward
Moravia. The Count de Souches conceived some hopes of recovering Neutra, and
prepared accordingly; the loss of that place being reputed not much inferior
to the loss of Newhausel: Neutra being an Episcopal Seat, New-hausel only a
Quarter for Soldiers, which begat a greater Zeal, and Earnestness toward the
Recovery of the Place.

This Fort (in Latin, Nitria) lies upon the River Neutra, Neutra described.
which encloses the Fort like an Island, together with the high and low Town;
and from hence it takes it is denomination. The River is pretty large, but not
Navigable, although of a strong and deep stream, abounding with variety of
Excellent Fish: The Castle stands upon the top of a Craggy Rock, and the
Prospect from it, is fair and large, upon a spacious Level; without any
Mountain or high place, within distance to command or endanger it. The Town
under it is built upon the side of the Hill, declining by degrees, till it
comes to the River, which parts the upper and the lower Town.

Within this Castle stands an Eminent Minster, of a strong and goodly
Structure, overtopping all the rest of the Buildings abou it. There is also a
Princely Palace, which has been formerly famous for Rich Furniture, and
choice curiosities of Paintings, Hangings, and the like. From without, it is
encompassed with a brave wood: So that in fine, This Place considered within it
self, together with it is Situation and Prospect, cannot be said to want any
thing requisite, to the accomplishment of a most delicious Habitation.

The Vpper-Town below the Castle, contains a new-raised Franciscan Cloister,
and many other fair Fabrics, and Houses lately Erected. In this Town were
gathered together many Rarities, not only of strange Birds and Beasts, but
also of Mechanical and Artificial Works. Now albeit, that this Fort, in respect
of it is Site and Fortification, might well enough Style it self Impregnable, as
in former times it has ever been reputed, (nor indeed was it ever Assaulted
till now) yet were not all these advantages sufficient to Maintain it, against
the Malice and Treachery of a single Person, who without any Opposition, or the
least color of necessity, delivered up this Episcopal Seat, into the Hands of
Blood-thirsty Infidels: the Places of so many Religious Persons, and other
Christians, being at present supplied by seven or eight hundred Janissaries,
among, and with the rest, which the Grand Vizier has put in for a Garrison. To
conclude, in outward appearance it was plain enough, that the taking of this
Place, was no Winter-Work.

When it was too late, the Succor above mentioned drew near to the Mine-Towns,
and punished some of those that were too forward in going over, and submitting
to the Turk: as particularly in Bugans, which in truth brought great misery
upon the poor Country people; who amongst so many coming and going Parties,
were in a great straight how to behave themselves. Count Peter Serini, with
some of the Auxiliary forces attempted a visit upon those in Bosnia, and the
other Turkish Troops, which he had lately ruffled near to Carlstadt. Count
Nicholas Serini likewise, did all that was possible by several ways and means,
to gall and weaken the Enemy: Nor were the Garrisons of Raab and Comorra less
Vigilant and Active; but every day looking abroad, and many times returning
with Prisoners, and good Booty. The Silesians also stood ready upon the
Borders, with a Body of Nine or Ten Thousand Men, to prevent the Turks breaking
in upon them; but about this time, there passed not any Action of great Import:
The Enemy toward the Month of December, lying close and quiet about Gran,
Offen, and Greek-Weissenburg, to which last place the Grand Vizier betook
himself in Person, taking along with him Baron de Goes, his Imperial Majesty's
Resident at the Ottoman Court.

On the other side, Abafti, with his Agents, were close at work in
Vpper-Hungary, trying what good might be done there, either by force or
surprise, and using their utmost endeavors to dispose the Hungarians to a
general Revolt; Abafti tampers with the Hungarians.
Abafti in the mean time chalking out the way to the Grand Vizier, which he
thought most conducing to his purpose, telling him, that the Hungarians were
most likely to be wrought upon by mild and gentle means, which might be so
propounded, and represented to them, that of two Evils, they might look upon
submission to be the least.

In this Injuncture, Prince Ragotzi's Widow began sensibly to perceive, that
Hungary would be no place for her to abide in: Whereupon, She and her Son
addressed themselves to his Majesty of Poland, making Suit, that in this their
distress, some place of Retreat might be afforded them within that Crowns
Dominions; but to this Request of Hers, the King of Poland demurred; not only
out of particular respects to Her Husbands demerits from that Crown; but for
fear also of disobliging the Turk, by allowing her Entertainment: Beside that
the Cracovian Waywood-ship, by reason of the Turks drawing that way, was now in
greater care and fear then ever, and with all speed sent a Messenger to the
Crown-Marshal, to solicit the Court to consider of it: The Waywood himself
refusing to go in Person to Vkrain, and to attend other peoples business, to
the hazard of his own: Whereupon he not only obtained leave to stay at home,
and look to his Charge; but also to write an amicable Letter to the Grand
Vizier, desiring that a fair understanding might be continued, and inviolably
preserved betwixt him and Poland.

About this time, in December, his Imperial Majesty began his Journey toward
Regensburg; The Emperor begins his Journey toward Regensburg.
and in his Absence, the direction of the Frivy-Council at Vienna, was
committed to the Count of Swartzenburg; and now were several Rumors (how
unlikely soever) raised at Vienna. First, as if the Polanders intended to
confer that Crown upon young Ragotzi; to the end, to Incorporate Transylvania
with Poland; and the young Prince was then to Marry into the House of Inspruck.
It was bruited in the next place, that the Turkish Chiaux, who came along with
Baron de Goes, brought with him Plenipotence to propound a new Treaty, and to
offer new Conditions of Peace; but this was a Story that gained little credit;
for who could be so simple as to believe, that so Crafty, Powerful, and so
Insolent an Enemy, should in the full course of his Victories, entertain any
thought of admitting, much less of propounding an Agreement with a People, whom
at this time, he did equally both hate and despise. The Christians (one would
think) had suffered too much, by their former Credulity, to trust him again:
And yet the late Governor of Novigrad ( Ledami by Name) was so easy, as to
rely upon the Turks word, and to persuade himself, that by the surrendry of
Novigrad, he might compound for the full enjoyment of his goods in
Transylvania; but he found himself deceived; being not only bereaved of his
Fortune, but effectually of his Life too, by the Barbarous usage of those
perfidious Insidels: The Turks it seems, not having as yet forgotten the
faithful services in time past, which he had rendered to Prince Ragotzi, and
that this Ledami had had a hand in putting Barkay to Death: (the Grand Signiors
Creature, and who had formerly Usurped upon that Principality, under the
protection of the Turk.)

The Strong-Hold Filleck was hard put to it, and suffered much; but has
hitherto nevertheless stood firm, and defended it self to the utmost. The Fort
Sentshai indeed, in which one Rochart commanded, yielded unworthily. True it
is, that the Ottoman Army in the Field, was not now so numerous, as it was said
to be: It was yet strong enough however to oppose the Country, and to keep many
Strong Hold, and several Provinces, in continual Apprehensions and Allarmes.

The Various Motions, and Counter-Changes of the Turkish Army, had now for a
good while amused the Christians, giving them occasion several times to draw to
their Quarters, and then back again, till at last, the Enemies design
discovered it self to be directly upon new Serinswar. In this Interim, little
past of Moment, only now and then the Free-Heydukes Issued out from Comorra,
and sometime met with a Purchase betwixt Gran and Newhausel.

About the Sixth of December, some Thousand Turks and Tartars moved toward the
River Mur, The Turks design upon Serinswar.
(which encloses the Fort Serinswar) with design to gain a Passage that way,
and fall upon Count Serini; not much doubting by that means to make themselves
Masters of the Fort. They pass the Mur.
A matter of two Thousand of them had the fortune to pass the River, but it
proved their Ruin: For Count Serini ( forewarned, forearmed, and) finding his
Life and Fortune at stake; with his small, but Valiant Party, fell upon the two
Thousand Infidels with such a Prodigious Fury and Courage, that they quickly
turned Head, and by their flight, east the rest of the Party into such a
confusion, that they lost at once, both the use of their Reason, and
Resolution; And are Worsted.
and more of them perished in the Retreat, then in the Combat: During this
Action, Serini received hourly supplies, without which, it had not been
possible for him to have maintained the fight so long: A fuller view whereof,
may be gathered from what follows.

The Copy of a Letter from Count Nicholas Serini to His Imperial Majesty.
THe Providence of God did never more signally appear then Yesterday, in the
preservation not only of my self, and the Forces uner my Command, but likewise
of all the Neighboring Countries hereabouts: At which time the Turks and
Tartars with a mighty Power, and in the open day, advanced toward us, bringing
with them an orderly well-framed Ship-Bridge, with all things appertaining
thereunto; and two thousand Tartars were sent before, to lay it, and make it
ready for the rest of the Forces. The little strength I had, I disposed here,
and there, as I thought most for my advantage, and kept Guard my self with
three Hundred Horse. About break of day, notice was given me by a
Warning-Piece, of the Infidels approach: Whereupon I instantly moved into
sight, and found that two thousand of the Enemy were already over the water;
our condition was now desperate, it being neither possible for me to make a
fair Retreat, nor indeed advisable to think of one; in this straight we took
up a resolution, and Charged into the middle of their Body, where we were
wholly encompassed; but God Almighty, out of his Love to Christendom, took
away the Enemies Strength and Courage: for after the first shower of Arrows,
(that looked as if it would have buried us, although doing very little
Execution upon us) such a consternation seized them all, that they presently
fled toward the Mur, where Encountering their Fellows that were coming over to
their assistance, they fell into such a distraction and amazement, that they
could neither Advance, nor Retire, nor Swim, nor save themselves by Resisting.
In fine, the face of the River was quite covered with Horse and Men; and of
this opportunity, I made what use I could, taking not so much as one Prisoner;
so that betwixt killing and drowning, not many of them escaped: Above a
thousand of their empty Horses we took coming out of the River, but the rest,
together with their Riders (saving a very few) sank to the bottom.

Hereupon, they sent immediately for their foot, (being not far from the place)
but before they could come on, two hundred of my own Foot came up to me with
two Fieldpieces, and with these we maintained our Ground till the rest of my
men came in likewise from other Parts; and when we had fought out the whole
Day, and into the Night, the Enemy drew off before Morning in great Silence and
Indignation. This Yesterdayes Deliverance and Victory must never be forgotten,
either by us, or our Neighbors; and yet how it may go hereafter with us, in
the condition we now stand; no man is able to determine; the Turk lying still
in a great Body about Canisia; and only waiting for an Opportunity of taking
his Revenge. Touching the strength of their Army, and who Commands it, I cannot
render your Imperial Majesty any warrantable Account, having taken no
Prisoners; but common Report speaks them to be 40000 strong; although I must
confess, that to my Eye, from the other side of the Water, they did not appear
to be above 10000 Men. Their drift was undoubtedly to quit scores for the
Mischief my men had done them near Comorra; to Plunder, and Destroy the Island;
to enter into Steir-Mark, where they might have Ravaged, as far as Gratz,
without any Opposition: After which, to pass the Mur; and again to March about
to Count Budiani's Territorries; and so to lie upon the Frontiers.

This Enformation, according to the best of my Knowledge, I do present most
Dutifully to Your Imperial Majesty, with my humble Request, that You will
Graciously be pleased, to Order some further provision of Men, Artillery,
Ammunition, and other Necessaries for these Parts; or we must all yet be Ruined
at last. God preserve your Majesty in a good Government.

Seredin, November. 29. 1663. Your Imperial Majesty's most Obedient, and Loyal
Servant, NICHOLAS SERINI.


Upon this Rout abovementioned, Serini with his Croats about a Thousand strong,
pressed the Enemy so hard in the Rear, that at this Bout, there were slain and
drowned of them at least three Thousand: The Soldiers got good Booty, beside
three Piece of Ordnance, one Morter-Piece, many Ammunition-Wagons, and other
things that their have would not give them leave to stay for; and so they
Retired to Canisia.

The Turks were at this time Strong and Numerous about that Quarter, intending,
as is already said, an attempt upon Serinswar: The ten Thousand
beforementioned being reckoned only as their Van. This disappointment galled
the Grand Vizier to the Heart, and minded him of his late Disaster at
Carlstadt, where Peter Serini had treated him much at the same Rate, which made
him threaten Count Nich. Serini, and his Fort, with the bitterest Expressions
imaginable of Indignation and Revenge: Whereupon the Count Solicited his
Imperial Majesty for Aid, and at his Request, the Earl of Hohenlo was ordered
with six Thousand men to be at hand to Second him.

While these beaten Dogs were licking their Wounds at Canisia, contenting
themselves for a while to Bark, where they could not Bite. General Souches in
Conjunction with the Forces of Saxe, Brandenburg, Bohemia, and Moravia, Marched
fourteen Thousand strong toward the Mine-Towns, to make all good against
Abafti. In their March, they passed as far as Neutra and Newhausel, without any
Encounter; no Enemy appearing in the Field, and the Houses and Castles along
the way, which the Turks a while before had Garrisoned, were now found Empty;
into which the Count put Garrisons to keep all open behind him. Lewents, he
took by Assault, being but weakly Manned, and put about four Hundred that were
in it to the Sword.

While these things were doing, Abafti played his Game another way; laboring by
Craft and Insinuations, to bring over the Provincial-States, which were
assembled at Cashaw, to his Party; and so to Unite those Corporations unto
Transylvania.

December, Baron de Goes comes to Vienna.
10. Baron de Goes came to Vienna, and confirmed the Report of the Enemies
mighty Preparations; further intimating, that the Grand Signior was resolved to
Prosecute the War; unless Transylvania should be wholly Surrendered to him;
Serinswar Demolished, and Hungary submit to pay him a yearly Tribute. At his
last Audience, the Great Vizier said little more, then (smilingly) that he
might go to his Emperor; and that he himself intended within a while to wait
upon him with three or four Hundred Thousand Men, The Great Vizier's Bravado.
to Talk with the Croatians, and give the Germans a Visit.

When his Imperial Majesty was come almost to Regenspurg, the Baron made Ready
to follow him, to give his Majesty an Account of his Errand; together with a
Missive from the Turkish Emperor, sealed up in a Red Velvet Bag. It Is said,
that three Hundred Turkish Horse had Waylaid him, upon his Passage from Offen;
and it was suspected to have been done by Order; but an Overruling Providence
preserved him from the Ambush. Of all the Discourses, that passed from him; the
saddest was, the Relation he made of about Thirty Thousand Naked Christians, A
sad Spectacle.
in Fetters, and Chains, Whipped, and driven along before his Face; and so
carried away (less Regarded then Beasts) into Perpetual Slavery: Which Hideous
Outrages, were not yet committed, without a pretended Impulse of Piety, and
Conscience, as may appear by one of their Blasphemous Prayers against the
Christians.

THE TVRKS PRAYER.
THou God of all things, and thou divine Prophet Mahomet! Although we do not in
the least, fear the Christians (who believe in their dead God, and like mad
Dogs Worry one another) because that we in Strength and Force are much above
them, through thy Assistance and Power. We do however beseech thee, to stretch
forth thy mighty hand against those thy Enemies; and to help us suddenly to
Destroy them: to root out the whole Race of them, with their Wives and
Children; to lay waste their Lands, and to break their Weapons in pieces; that
these mad People may become yet more like unto mad Dogs, Amazing and
Confounding one another; deliver them into our Hands according to our long and
earnest desire; to the end, that we may every where advance thy Incorruptible
Kingdom. Make thy Crown Glorious, and thy Temples Famous throughout the world,
Adorning them with the Oblation of many Heads. Blow us like a whirlwind into
their Countries, and let them be to us, but as a small Prey. Fling Fire among
them to Consume them, and Dust into their Eyes to make them Blind. Devour them
in thy Wrath; Tear them with thy Teeth; Let them drink their own Blood, and
take thou away their Flesh from the Earth; because they despise thy Offering
and Circumcision. Hang them on the Cross; Let them be sprinkled with Water till
they grow Mad, because they make a Son to God without a Mother. Now let their
Ruin hasten, and take them away from the Face of the Earth, that thy Name may
not fall into Contempt for their sakes.

It was now about the middle of December, and the Enemy made great Preparations
to take the Benefit of the first hard Frost: Whereupon, strong Guards were set
upon the Rivers; and Vienna was at that time much troubled, with a Discourse of
pulling down a good part of the Suburbs, to make the place Defensible. The
Enemy had his Eye now upon Moravia; and for Prevention, the New-raised Forces
in Vienna, were Ordered to the River Mark, to keep a constant Watch upon the
Infidels. Presburg was also carefully provided for, and a Subterranean Retreat
made from the City, to the Castle, for an After-game, in case the Town should
come to be Taken. About the beginning of December, Three Suns.
there had been seen three Suns (some say five) with several Rain-Bows, that
appeared over the famous Fort of Dreisden, which began now to work upon the
People: So that men's Minds were filled with Perplexity, both from Above, and
Beneath. Some would have it, that the three Suns portended so many mighty
Princes, that should come to be Rulers over Germany; and briefly, every man had
his Guess. (God grant Peace and Comfort to Christendom.) It was now daily
expected, that the Turkish Army should attempt something in Revenge of the Blow
they had lately received near Canisia; and Prince Abasty was on the other side
observed to aspire more directly to the Crown of Hungary; but the Vigilance of
Counts Serini, Hohenlo, Souches, etc. still found means, either to divert, or
disappoint the most dangerous part of their designs. They kept however in a
Body near Canisia, making many proffers upon the Christians Territories;
although to little purpose; Heaven and Earth conspiring to frustrate their
Intents, by a mild and open Winter, and the Conjunction of so many brave
Commnanders, keeping a Watch, and check upon their passage. On the other sides;
those Turks which lay near to Offen, and along the Danube, (even as far as the
Save) took great care to maintain themselves in a Body, and to provide before
hand for the next Campagnia; furnishing Newhausel, and Newtra, with Ammunition,
Provision, and all other things whereof they had need; and in particular with
40000. Suits of Cloths, for the supply of their tattered Troops: But Providence
disposed otherwise of a good part of these Turkish Providings, by casting them
into the hands of theGarrison at Comorra, which upon several Sallies had the
better of the Enemy, and many times brought off considerable Booty into the
Castle. As for instance, on the 15th of December, they snapt a prize of 60
Wagons (drawn by 400 Oxen) laden with Ammunition, and coming from Gran for
Newhausel, which they carried off safely to Comorra; the Purchase being valued
at 16000. Rix-dollars. Those Carriages were committed to the Convoy of 300 men,
whom they surprised, and Routed, distributing the Oxen amnong the Garrison.

About this time, Tidings were brought from Adrianople, that 50000 of the
Asiatick Forces were come thither, and to the Parts thereabouts, to take up
their Winter Quarters; and that there was a Monstrous Tax laid upon all the
Turkish Dominions, in order to the carrying on the War against the Christians.
The Turks and Tartars were now at Five-kirk, and elsewhere waiting for a Frost,
in great Bodies, having furnished themselves with many Thousands of Sleds, for
the furtherance of the Design; but the Season was so gentle, that they could
make nothing on it. As on the other side of the Danube, toward Croatia, there
passed not any thing considerable at this time: So not much of Action neither,
by the Forces of General Souches, which drew toward the Mine-Townes. A Party of
Christians, in Turkish habits, adventured into Neutra, and killed some of the
Turks; but the Castle presently took the Alarm, and put them to a Retreat,
wherein they saved themselves, and carried away 20. considerable Prisoners; but
a Turkish Party from Newhausel to Schinta come not so well off; who supposing
that the Garrison, as well as the Artillery was removed; advanced so near the
Place, that what with he Guns from the Wall, and after that, a Sally out of the
Town, 150. of them were killed upon the Spot, and the rest fled for their
lives. They were now busy in Vienna, upon Mounting and fitting the Artillery
that came from Schinta, and casting of Grenades, and Fieldpieces, keeping an
eye in the mean while upon Vpper-Hungary, where indeed the greatest danger lay,
by reason of the Practices, and Insinuations of Abafti: for prevention whereof,
the Counts of Rothal, and Nadasti were employed to endeavor the upholding of
the People in their Obedience. To which purpose, the Forces under the command
of General Souches, where very serviceable: There was good hope likewise, that
the Hungarian Palatine at Newsol, might have done some good upon them, against
the flatteries of Abafti; but he excused himself in regard that he was neither
in health; nor if he were, could he pretend to so much Interest as to prevail
upon them; beside, that he mistrusted Cashaw, and other places in Hungary would
take it ill at his hand: So that the Counts before mentioned, were forced to
return, and seek their way through Poland, into Vpper-Hungary: Neither were the
Inhabitants of the Mine Towns any kinder to the Forces that were sent to their
Relief; but partly, by the ill usage they found among the Hungarians; and
partly, upon necessity they were forced to go back, leaving many of their
Companions behind them, that dyed of Surfets, and Hungarian Feavours. In fine,
the Germans, and Hungarians could not set their Horses together; and Ahafti
making use of their Divisions, betwixt fear, and persuasion, drew a great Party
to his side. These heart-burnings among the Christians, were of great service
to the Infidels; Especially being encouraged by Letters from Zekelheit, giving
Advice that the Garrison had already Revolted, and Expelled their Commander,
with all the chief Officers out of the Castle, upon pretense, that they had
received thirteen Months Pay, that was then due to them, and kept it from them;
openly declaring, that if they could get nothing where they were, they would
serve another Master; (aiming no doubt at Abafty.) This Example had so great an
influence upon other places, that toward the end of this year, the whole
Vpper-Hungary seemed to be upon a desperate Pin.

By this time his Imperial Majesty was safely arived at Regenspurg, where all
diligence was used in preparations, and dispatches for the Relief of the
Empire; Especially, for sending of Aid to Count Serini, whose wants of Military
Provisions, were drawn out to the last point of expectation. It was also taken
into thought, how to raise 10000. men in Hungary, without charging the Gentry,
out of a desire to spare them, till the utmost Exigent of a Field expedition
should require it. At this time also were designed the Respective Imperial
Ambassadors, to be Employed to all Christian Princes, and States, on the
behalf of the Cause of Christendom, against the Common Enemy; who threatens
Hungary with 150000. men, and the Grand Signior in the head of them. The Great
Vizier with 100000. men, to break into Croatia; and Aly Bassa with 50000. men
to command in Vpper-Hungary; the sooner to bring Hungary, Austria, Moravia, and
Silesia, under Subjection to the Turk.

Beside the loss of Zekelheit, and the wavering of all Vpper-Hungary; about
this time was brought the ill news of 200. Sporkish Horse going over to
Newhausel, for want of pay; and of the defeat of a Party of a matter of 120.
that in their return from about Weissenburg, where they had seized good Booty,
were ovrtaken by 400. Turks, 12. of them killed, 20. made Prisoners, and the
rest dispersed; Neither as yet did Matters go much better toward the Frontiers
of Croaetia, the Grand Vizier summoning all the Borders upon miserable
Penalties, to provide for the numerous Tartarian forces, which had those Parts
Assigned them for their Quarter; but Count Serini thereupon commanded
immediately 600. Croatians to endeavor the breaking of their design, who
persued their Orders effectually, Burning all the Barns and Forage for 12
miles round: So that the Enemy was forced to dis-lodge, and Retire.

Thus far the Dutch Relation of the last Campagnia; reserving what has passed
since, for another occasion; to begin from the breaking off of this: wherein
the Reader may expect, over and above the scattered particulars of the more
Ordinary Chances, and Encounters of the War, an exact and punctual Narration
apart, of Count Serini's late Inrode into Turkey; together with whatever else
Remarkabel shall hereafter occur.

FINIS.
Mouse. Mus.
^^most every where, in houses and barnes, etc. (...) bread, cheese, corn, and
tallow, etc. ^^s. Heb. Achar. Arab. Phir. Chald. Acbe.
^^se. Arnold. T. The flesh eaten causes oblivion, and cor^^^ the meat; yet
those of Calechut eat them; it is hot, so^^ ^^^tish, and expels melancholy,
so Rhas. and Albert. yet (...) doubts therein. V. Plin. A Mouse dissected and
applied, (...) out reeds, darts, and other things that stick in the flesh.
^^cel. After being flead: and helps the wounds of Serpents. (...) Gal. Avic.
Rhas. Albert. The same helps the wounds of ^^^ons. Plin. Applied fresh it
helps the bitings of the shrew; (...) it self applied. It kills warts, so
Rhas. and Albert. Some (...) satt thereof roasted in a Goose against the
scirrhus. Young ^^uised, and reduced to the consistence of an acopon with old
(...) cause hair on the eyebrows. Diosc. Rhas. Avic. Alber^. ^^aten by
children when roasted, they dry up their spittle. The Magicians eat them twice
in a month against the pains ^^eth. Marcel. The water in which they have been
boiled against the quinsey. Plin. So boiled with vervain. Boiled ^^ile and
salt, they help the vices of the lungs, and spitting of Being boiled and eaten,
they help childrens pissing in bed: So the ashes with wine or Goats milk. Being
dissected^ ^^ied they help the gout. Plin. The ashes help burnings, (...) and
the falling off of the hair, with that of cypress balls, ^ose of a Mule,
mnyrtle oil, that of a hedg-hog, sandaracha, (...), and tar: the same with
oil help the tetter. Archig^ (...) daily plaister-wise with axunge, it helps
the alope^ng first rubbed with garlic. R^asis and Albertu^ add oil the
pains of the ears. Marcel. Plin. with honey rubbed on ^eeth, they sweeten the
breath; but some add the roots of ^el Gal. The flesh stamped with the yolk of
an egg, to the c^^^ence of a cerot, and applied with a linen cloth, helps the
^^ose inflammation of the cornea. Plin. Marcel. Gal. Avi^. (...) blood kills
wa^ts Gal. With the gall of a Cock, and (...) ^milk an. it mightily helps
suffusion. Plin. The a^^^ ^he skin, applied with vinegar help the pains of
the head. (...) ^^bert. The head worn in a cloth, helps the headache and ep^y.
Gal. The ashes of the head with honey help the alo^^^ Some se them with
hellebore and pepper after cantharides, (...) and nitre; as also flies
torrified. Sext. The ashes with honey (...) ^^^en days, clear the eyes. With
that of a hare, and spike ^^hey sweeten the breath. Marcel. The brain being
steeped in (...) and applied to the forehead helps the headache. Used with ^er
it cures the phrensey. Sext. The heart taken out of a (...) when alive, worn
about the arm of a Woman, causes no (...) ^^ption. Seren. The filler of the
liver drunk with austere (...) helps quartans. Gal. The liver roasted in the
new of the (...) ^rie^^^ the epilepsy. Plin. Marcel. Seren. The gall with v^^
dropped into the ear, brings out living creatures in the Plin. The dung is
corrosive. AEt. It is mixed with remedies (...) ^ingworms. Plin. With vinegar
it helps lichens in the face, (...) ^^rst fomented with nitre and vinegar.
Marcel. So it helps (...) ^^reps. With earthworms, white pepper; and myrrh
an. un^ mixed with vinegar, and applied it helps the hemicrania. With
frankincense and sandaracha it discusseht the pani. (...) Seven of the pills
applied to the forehead or temples, with ger, help the pain thereof: Marcel.
Stamped with the ^tru^nus, and applied to the forehead with vinegar, it
pr^^^e^peth the pain of the hemicrania. With vinegar it helps (...) (...) Var
It helps the alopecia. Diosc. So with vinegar, so (...) and Gal. some add tar
also. Rhas. Albert. Some add the^ of r^^ket, cresses, onions or garlic. Avic.
And honey, (...) frankincense, white hellebore, and pepper, with tosted (...)
applied with that of a Goat and honey they help bald eye (...)


