AN HISTORICAL VINDICATION OF THE Government of the Church of Scotland, From
the manifold base calumnies which the most Malignant of the Prelates did invent
of old, and now lately have been published with great industry in two Pamphlets
at LONDON.

The one entitled Issachars burden, etc. written and published at Oxford by
John Maxwell, a Scottish Prelate, Excommunicate by the Church of Scotland, and
declared an unpardonable Incendiary by the Parliaments of both KINGDOMS.

The other falsely entitled A Declaration made by King James in Scotland,
concerning Church Government and Presbyteries; but indeed written by Patrick
Alamson, pretended Archbishop of St. Andrews, contrary to his own conscience,
as himself on his Deathbed did confess and subscribe before many Witnesses
in a Write hereunto annexed.

By ROBERT BAYLIE Minister at Glasgow.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand at the Brasen-Serpent in
Pauls-Churchyard, 1646.

For his Reverend and well beloved Brother Master ROBERT BLAIRE, Minister of St.
Andrews.
THat I give to you an account of this my present task, it is no more then
what often I have done in my other studies with your good acceptance and my
great profit. When I look back (as frequently I do with a delightful
remembrance) toward those years of my childhood and youth, wherein I did sit
under your Discipline, my heart blesses the goodness of God, who in a very
rich mercy to me, did put almost the white and razed table of my spirit under
your hand, after my domestic instructions which were from mine infancy, to be
engraven by your labors and example with my first most sensible and remaining
impressions, whether of piety or of good letters, or of moral virtue: What
little portion in any of these, it has pleased the Lord of his high and
undeserved favor to bestow upon me; I were ungrateful if I should not
acknowledge you after my Parents, the first and principal instrument thereof.
I cannot deny, that since the eleventh year of mine age to this day, in my
inmost sense, I have always found my self more in your debt, then in any
other man's upon earth.

Among the many blessings wherein God kath made you isntrumental toward me,
this was one not the least, that by your gracious and most loving discourses,
you so seasoned my childish heart with an early love toward the ancient
oppressed Discipline of our Church and the Patrons thereof, that no after
tentations were ever able totally to extinguish it: You did so replenish me
with narrations of the more then ordinary graces of many both in Scotland and
England, who had lived and dyed in opposition to Episcopal usurpations, that
my spirit was ever thereafter kept in a reluctance and a kind of averseness
from the Prelaticall ways.

I confess, after you, to my exceeding great grief and loss, were taken away
from my head, and I came to be set at the feet of other Masters, especally Mr.
Cameron and Mr. Struthers, my very singular friends and excellent Divines as
our Nation has bred, I was gained by them to some parts of conformity, which if
the Lords mercy had not prevented, might have led me, as many my betters; to
have run on in all the errors and defections of these bad times: but thanks to
his glorious name, who held me by the hand, and stopped me at the beginning and
first entry of that unlucky course; who before I had put my hand to any
subscription, or was engaged in any promise, or had practiced any the least
Ceremony in my Flock, did call me to a retreat.

The remainder of your ancient instructions, and the sight of your sufferings:
the happy fellowship and sweet society of that most precious man Master
Dickson, of old yours, and now my most gracious Colleague, were to me strong
retractives and wholesome antidotes against all the infections of the air,
wherein I did live; till the Lord sent to me and many others, that sovereign
remedy of all the Episcopal Gangreen, the gracious ungracious Service Book: So
soon as that came into my lands, together with some late writs of the
Canterburian and Court Divines, which I did carefully look into as the true and
just Commentaries both of that Book, and all the rest of the proceedings of
that party, which then did manage the public Counsels both Ecclesiastic and
Civil of Britain: I did conclude, that their Design was wicked, that their
intentions were clear to corrupt the Church, and to enslave the State, that all
their former innovations were but introductory means and adminicles for these
ends: Whereupon I resolved by the grace of God upon all hazards, to contradict
and oppose (so far as it was lawful for me to move in my sphere) all not
only their late grosser, but also their former more subtle and plausible
corruptions. This ever since has been the greatest part of my labor, and
thanks to God, not without some fruit, especially to such who had stumbled more
or less upon the block of conconformity, which was the condition, as you know
of the far most part in the whole Isle.

At this time I did not think of any farther contest with that party; the hand
of God by the Counsels and Forces of the Parliaments, and by the labors of
many gracious Divines of both Kingdoms, having so broken and defeated that
enemy, that there was no more fear, and scarce any thought of him among us,
yet behold an unexpected necessity of one bout more with him.

The woeful Anarchy wherein the perverseness of some few men, by the permission
and heavy plague of God, has for too many years kept the Church of England, has
produced such a multitude of heresies and schisms, as no heart in the which is
the least sparkle of love to God, or of zeal to his truth, can behold without
a great deal of grief and compassion, and now also with some piece of
indignation. For to many of those seduced souls, upon their fear and presage
of some controlement and restraint of their liberty to believe what they list,
and preach what they believe, if once any government were set up in the Church;
they become angry with all whose conscience pousses them after so long
patience, to press for some settling of our so great and unheard of confusions:
And because in this desire the Scots are with the first, according to their
interest which they have bought at a very dear rate, there ore upon them with
the first, the passions of those misled people does oftentimes break out.

It were long to tell you of the manisold, not only unexpected unkindnesses,
but very injurious contumelies which from this fountain have flowed out upon
our whole Nation; all which we have entertained with so great wisdom and
meekness, as the Lord did furnish; so much the rather that we did find this
folly and unjustice as much resented by the wiser of their own Countrymen as
we could have wished: Beside, that this generation of men have served the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster the Common-Counsell of London, the Houses of
Parliament, the Kings Majesty himself, and whosoever else lies cross in their
way, large as uncivilly as they have done us; the companions we have in our
sufferings, make our other ways insupportable injuries the more tolerable.

But of all the kinds of injustice whereby they have been pleased to deal
against us, this now in hand seems to be most strange: they rest not satisfied
with all they are able of themselves to speak, write or print for the disgrace
of our Church, unless they scrape together, and with their own hands cast
upon our face the falsest of the most wicked calumnies which our common enemies
the Prelates, either of old or of late have invented against us. We esteemed our
selves secure of this kind of dealing from those whom we knew to have solemnly
sworn the defense of our Church Government against the common enemy: I
profess I cannot deny myamazement to see men who pretend to more then ordinary
piety, fall upon their wel-deserving Brethren so openly before the Sun in
contempt of God and his solemn Oath, to enforce upon them old rotten calumnies,
which cannot but fall back upon the head, not only of the first Authors, but
also with increase of shame upon the face of the malicious repeaters so much
against all piety, charity and wisdom.

You know that one of the most false and wicked pieces that of old was written
against the Church of Scotland, was Adamsons Declaration in the year 1584. it
was so vile, that the Author was brought to an ingenuous confession of the
shameful and wicked lies, whereof it was full; King James at that very time
did disclaim it under his hand, diverse of our Parliaments did condemn the
matter of it as erroneous and wrong: That pestiferous carcass which with all
possible infamy was buried so soon as borne, and did lie quiet in its grave of
shame till a full Climaterick of three score and three years; our good friends
have been so wise for themselves, and kind to us, as to dig up its stinking
bones, and to carry it from house to house, from shire to shire over all
England, and where over else a printed pamphlet can go, serving their Brethren
of Scotland with this courtesy according to their Covenant.

And least the antic face of so long buried a body, should not have been
looked upon by the multitude with any contentment, they did choice to be at the
cost of putting it in a fine new English dress, and setting upon its head the
Cape of a royal title: All to draw the eyes of the vulgar upon it, who
otherwise might have passed by it wi^h neglect and disdain. In this they have
put themselves to a piece of pains which I never knew or heard used with any
other book: they do print it first in Master Adamsons own old Scottish
language, and thereafter translated it in good modern English, setting before
both the Title of A Declaration made by King James in Scotland concerning
Church Government and Presbyters. When all this was told us, we made our
address to the worshipful Lycenser, entreating that a Pamphlet so extremely
injurious to our whole Church and Nation, might be smothered upon the Press,
and returned to its pit where so long it had lain in infamy; we were told by
him that diverse persons of eminency, at least for their place and present
Station had strongly moved him with great importunity to give his License for
its reprinting: Yet that upon our so just and reasonable desires he would do
his best to stop it: hereupon we rested satisfied, being assured of its
suppression; notwithstanding, within two days after this promise it came
abroad, the importunity and eminency of the persons who had drawn from the
Licenser his Imprimatur, with greater ease did draw from the Press some
thousands of the printed Copies, and made them to be sold publicly, to our
small contentment.

While this not very pleasant morsel is lying in our stomach scarce half
digested, behold a second dish is presented to us for to help our concoction
of the first; Master Jo. Maxwell, late Bishop of Rosse, Excommunicate by our
general Assembly, declared Incendiary by our Parliament, and made unpardonable
in the Propositions of Peace; did write in the gall of his bitterness a wicked
Satyr against all the parts of the Government of our Church. This some three
years ago the Author did print at Oxford, under the Title of an Answer by
Letter, showing how inconsistent Presbyteriall government is with Monarchy. The
Cavaliers there received it with great joy, being extremely satisfactory to
their spite and revengefull humor against Scotland, which they did ordinarily
damn and curse, as the first and greatest Fountain of all their woes. In this
the Lord gave testimony for us against them; for by a sudden and unexpected
fire almost all the Copies of that wicked Book were destroyed before they were
brought from the Printers Shop, by the strange and remarkable accident, the
mouth of the Author, and of his malignant friends at Oxford were so stopped,
that we heard very little more of that Book from them. But behold our
Covenanting Brethren at London, I mean some of our Antipresbyterian friends,
took the courage and charity to pluck out of the fire the remainder of the
Prelates labors, and misregarding not only the sentence of men, the Acts of
the general Assembly of Scotland, and of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms,
making the man an excommunicate and unpardonable Incendiary; but also the
judgment of God from Heaven, who to their knowledge, had burnt the most of
that Impression to ashes, notwithstanding they will gather what was left out of
the fire as a holy relict, and hug it in their bosom, till by a new Impression
at London of some thousand copies, they be enabled to make it run over all the
Kingdom, and so much farther as a Pamphlet hugely cried up by their voices
could flee. Our diligence to search and find out the Press, the Licenser, and
if we had pleased, the Solicitors of their former Writ, made them a little more
cautious in the reprinting and publishing of this; but for all their wariness
it was visible enough, by whose industry the Books were dispersed to the
Members of Parliament, and over all the City; it was known, by whose serious
recommendations, wings were set to the sides of that Foul, that it might flee
with all diligence, much farther and more quickly then the art and malice of
the Malignants at Oxford were able to have carried it.

For my part, all the revenge I wish of so grievous a wrong, all the penance I
would put upon the Authors and Actors therein, beside the weight of that sin
and shame which they have drawn upon themselves by spreading so false and so
wicked lies of them who by solemn oath they were obliged to have defended
against such injuries, shall be only to collation at their convenience, my
subsequent Answer with their own beloved Writs; when they have compared page
with page, if they find not a satisfactory reply to every material passage,
then with my good leave let them rejoice in their work, and go on to recommend
to more hands the serious perusal of these two notable pieces; but if so it
fall out that they find it demonstrate to their own hearts satisfaction, that
these imputations whereby they esteemed the honor of the Scottish Presbytery
to be most grievously and irrecoverably wounded, to be nothing but most
impudent calumnies, then I trust they will be entreated to repent of their
rashness, and hereafter to be more slow in publishing or recommending infamous
Libels against Nations and Churches (to whom justice, though piety and charity
had both been lost, did oblige them to be friendly) before they have tried from
some who can inform what truth may be in these things, which only enemies in
the heat of their rage and revenge of supposed and mis-apprehended wrongs, have
invented and spread.

It had indeed been convenient that this Answer had come sooner abroad, and
followed the liars closer at the heels, but the delay was none of my fault: The
Work for some time was in another far fitter hand, when necessary diversions
had hindered it there to be so much as begun, and I was called unto it before I
could purchase and cast over a good many Writs whereupon my discourse was
necessarily to be grounded, time did slide over: and when I came to be ready, I
found the Press so much in work, or the workmen in idleness, that I was much
dis-appointed of my hopes of so quick a dispatch as sometimes I have found; but
if what I have done be well, it will not I hope come so late as to be quite out
of season.

I may confess to you, to whom I was wont to communicate the greatest of my
secrets, that although at the beginning I was much averse from meddling at all
with this task, yet when once I entered upon it, it became to me a very
pleasant labor not only in regard of the pregnant occasion it put in my hand
to make the lies and malice of the malignants, the impudence and rashness of
the Sectaries against us clear as the noon day, but specially for the
opportunity which divine providence did offer so fair as I could have wished,
of bringing to light before the whole Isle the oppressed innocence of many most
precious Divines, who had been half martyred in Scotland and lay still buried
too much in oblivion under their sufferings: also of rectifying the
mis-apprehensions which the Prelaticall party had bred in many well meaning
minds both in this Isle and over Sea by their gross mis-representations of all
the opposition which in the Church of Scotland had heen made to their tyrannous
oppressions. I was glad to be drawn by unadvisednesse of adversaries, to let
the world know the plain truth of that 17. day of December, of the Assembly at
Aberdeen 1505. of the tumult at Edinborough 1637. and of many more remarkable
passages of our Ecclesiastic History, which the Prelates during their Reign,
and lately also in their rage for their ruin, were wont to set out in no other
habit then of monstrous tragedies.

I was also glad of this nick of time when the Presbyteriall Government was
coming to be set up over all England, and when a little stumbling block was
apt to make many fall, to be put to the clearing of a number of practical
passages in all the parts of that government, wherein the experience of
Scotland cannot but give light to all who will follow, not them so much as the
Word of God, and sound reason which first led them into their way of
Presbytery, and still has kept them therein notwithstanding of all the fraud,
of all the force which the Court and clergy has employed sometime to cheat,
sometime to beat them out of that path.

It was to me a pleasant service, and abundantly recompensive of it self to
open the prisons wherein the unjustice of Prelates had too too long enclosed the
names and reputations of the most gracious instruments in our Church,
condemning them so far as was in their power to lie in darkness and stink unto
the worlds end. I was not a little glad to be employed in bringing forth and
ushering up to the stage of this vast theater whereupon now we stand, those
great and noble names of John Knox, John Willock, Andrew and James Melvils,
Robert Bruce John Welsh, Thomas Smeiton, James Lauson, David Black, and diverse
others, from whose saces a great light does shine, and from their fame a most
fragrant odor for the refreshing of all that comes near them, whose senses are
not either very dull, or much corrupted. I was also content with another part
of my task, to throw down to the dust of just contempt and wel-deserved
disgrace, the unhappy and infamous wretches Adamson, Spotswood, Maxwell,
Balcanquell and others, who by the steps of very evil actions and great
disservices to their mother Church and Country, had all of them at least in
hope, perked themselves up upon the pinacles of the highest honors both of our
Church and State, that in the indignation of God, whom they had greatly
provoked, they might be tumbled down into the more fearful and exemplary pits
of ruin.

Many of these stories I learned from your loving and kind discourse in my very
childhood; of late I have endeavored to my power to increase and make certain
that part of my knowledge by searching the chief Fountains thereof as I had
opportunity; for all that I say in my answer, I believe if I be put to it, I
can give good enough authorities, and if any more be needful to be said, if I
were beside you, and that living magazine of our whole Ecclesiastic History,
most Reverend Master Catherwood, I know whence I should be abundantly
furnished; however, what here I subjoine out of the little store I had at hand,
I submit it to your judgment, and rest

Your most deservedly loving Brother and Scholar, R. BAILY.
Worster-House July 29. 1646.
The Contents of the first Treatise.
Issachars Burden will stumble no solid and advised mind, p. 1. The Author of
it is an excommunicate Prelat and Incendiary, obstinate in wickedness, p. 2.
The most malicious enemy to the Parliament of England that ever yet has
written, p. 3. A favourer of gross Popery and Arminianisme, p. 4, 5, 6.
Scotlands old Obligations to England, p. 7. Englands late Obligations to
Scotland, p. 8, 9. The Independents and Erastians in publishing this Book are
many ways faulty, p. 10. The Title Issachars Burden, is a doltish reproach of
this present Parliament, p. 11. the groundless calumnies of the title Page, p.
12. the discordall concord of Prelates, Erastians and Independents in the point
of Supremacy, ibid. the publishing of this Book is a grievous injury to the
Parliament, p. 13. a false and mad prophecy, p. 14. the whole Treatise is but
an extract of the most false and venomous parts of Spotswoods Story, Ibid. The
Church of Scotland, gives no more power to Congregationall Elderships then the
Independents and Erastians do allow, p. 15. the Prelates give much more
ecclesiastical power to Laymen then we to ruling Elders, p. 16 We give to
Deacons no power of jurisdiction, we wish there were Doctors in all populous
Congregations, Elders in some few Congregations for a time have a Dispensation,
p. 17. No Eldership inflicts any civil punishment, Ibid. the Prelates confound
miserably the spiritual and civil Offices, p. 18. Princes plead not for
exemption from Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, p. 19. No Presbytery did ever enter
in any process with the supreme Magistrate, p. 20. the Moderators of our
Assembly are Preachers, p. 21. Our expectants are not Lay-Preachers, p. 22. the
Presbytery of Edinborough usurps no power over any other, Ibid. King James
aversion from Presbytery, and affection to Episcopacy, makes not this the
better, nor that the worse, Ibid. No Presbytery did ever keep any State with
the King, p. 23 The Presbytery does not enquire in secret faults, but known
crimes it does not pass by, p. 24. The Presbytery meddles not with matter of
trade or debt, or any thing civil, p. 25. they never did dilapidat any
Benefice, p. 26. nor favor Gentlemen in their wickedness, they never did
countenance any feud, all these were the Prelates crimes, p. 26, 27. Ministers
generally were ever and still are, honored more in Scotland then anywhere
else, p. 29. Master Robert Bruce vindicated, p. 30, 31. The reason of the
Authors malice against the general Assembly, p. 32. His false and railing
slanders against it, p. 33. The general Assembly exercises no power, but what
the King and the Laws have authorized, Ibid. the Commissioners of Buroughs
and Universities are Elders, Ibid. we a cribe to the King so much power in the
Assembly as the Laws allow, p. 34. the Assembly alters no Law, only it
supplicates the King and Parliament to alter such Laws as confirm evident
errors, p. 35. the Prelates quarrelling against ruling Elders is absurd, Ibid.
The Assembly and Parliament in Scotland use not to differ, p. 36. The
vindication of J. Knox and the first reformers from base calumnies, p. 37 The
suspention of the Queen Regents authority was an Act merely of the State which
did nothing prejudge the Sovereignty, p. 38. The Presbyterians have often
supported, but never hurt royalty, p. 39. John Knox did never preach for the
pulling down of any Church, p. 40. The arms of Scotland against the tyranny
of the French were necessary and just, p. 41. the Author very wicked and
popish, Ibid. Cardinal Beton by all Law and reason deserved death, p. 42. An
account of the tumult at Edinborough for the Service Book, p. 43, 44. Our
Assemblies did ever defer all loyal subjection to the King, p. 45. Master
Henderson was ever free from all disloyal and Papal humors, Ibid. Our first
reformation was authorized by Parliament, p. 46. Episcopacy was never approved
by any lawful Assembly in Scotland, p. 47. the short confession of faith was
subscribed by King James in the year 1580 the Presbyterial Government was fully
agreed unto before that time, ibid. the King and his Counsel did set up the
Presbyteries over all the Land at the same time, p. 48. The general Assembly
did never approve of Abbots and Pryors, ibid. The Ministers of Scotland were
wont to preach to the King and State free and seasonable Doctrine, but in all
wisdom and humility, p. 49. Preachers of treason are censurable both by the
Church and State, p, 50. The Erastian and Prelaticall principles brought great
trouble on the Ministers of Scotland, p. 51. The case of James Gibson, p. 52.
Mr. David Black his case, ibid. A clear vindication of the Assembly at Aberdeen
in the year 1605. p. 53, 54, 55. Mr. Welsh and Mr. Forbes pitifully oppressed,
p. 56. Bancroft a persecutor of the Scottish Presbyterians, ibid. Mr. Andrew
and Mr. James Melvils oppressed, p. 57. The Scottish Discipline is far from all
rigor and tyranny. p. 58. A Narration of the Roads of Ruthen and Stirling, p.
60. The Assembly meddles not with Laws, nor with any civil Courts, p. 61. Mr.
John Graham his case, p. 62, 63. The great controversy betwixt the Church and
the King was the infinite extent of the Prerogative, p. 64. the Presbytery is a
great bar to keep out Democracy and tyranny both from Church and State; it is a
singular help both to Kings and Parliaments, p. 65. Mr. Catherwoods
vindication, p. 66. The Commissioners of the general assembly unjustly
slandered, p. 67. A full account of the 17. day of December, p. 68, 69, 70, 71.
Mr. James Melvile vindicated from assisting of Bothwell against the King, p.
72. A Declaration upon all the twelve Articles imputed to us, p. 73, 74, 75,
76. No shadow of Episcopacy remains in any well reformed Church, p. 77, 78.
The Dutch Superintendents are very far from the English Bishps, p. 79.
The Contents of the second Treatise.
THe Opposites of Presbytery blinded with malice, have hurt themselves and no
other by the reprinting of this false Declaration, p. 1. Adamson confesses
himself to be the Author thereof, but King James did disclaim it, p. 2.
whatever in it is contrary to Presbytery, is condemned by the Parliament of
Scotland, p. 3. It is hazardous for a Prince to take upon himself the faults
of his Officers, p. 4. the indignation of the people in Scotland was never
against King James, but often against his Court, and that upon just grounds, p.
5. King James was far from Erastianisme, p. 7. Clear grounds for Mr. Melvils
justification, p. 9. his flight no argument of guiltiness, p. 11. A great
cause of the rooting out of Episcopacy, ibid. Mr. Melvils Declinator and
Protestation cleared, p. 12. What supremacy is lawful, p. 13. the Erastian
supremacy is more then a Turkish tyranny, p. 14. if either King or Parliament
admit of it, it will overthrow both, and the whole Nation with them, p. 15.
King James revoked what here is published, and King Charles also, p. 17. The
Presbyteriall Government was established in Scotland on a divine right, with
the allowance of K. James and K. Charles in diverse Parliaments, p. 18 The
reprinters of this Declaration seem to be contemners of Oaths, Laws and all
rights divine and bumane, p. 20. A full account of the French Banquet, p. 21.
The Prelates and Erastians extremely unjust against the Presbytery, p. 24. The
general Assemblies approbation of the Road of Ruthven very innocent, p. 25 The
Road of Stirling cleared, p. 27. Episcopacy was not established at the
Conference of Leeth, 1572. p. 16. It was lawful for the Assemblies to call to
fasting, p. 28. The reprinters of this Declaration make no conscience of their
Covenant; p. 29. King James his full and honest Declaration against
Erastianisme, p. 31. The pretended intentions were not the Kings but the
Prelates, p. 32. The reprinters of this Writ are either hypocrites or Apostates,
ibid. Caesaro papisme is an Antichristianisme, worse then that of the Pope, p.
33. Prelates and Erastians their Sympathy and Antipathy, p. 34. King James
against all toleration of heresies or schisms, p. 35. Also much contrary to
our present Anarchy, p. 36. The retarders of government are enemies to
themselves and to the welfare of England p. 37. The Recanta^ion of Patrick
Adamson pretended Archbi. of St. Andrews, p. 37 Mr. Patrick Adamson's own
Answer and refutation of the Book falsely called The Kings Declaration, p. 41.
Two pious and prophetical Letters of Mr. Jo. Welsh, which he wrote out of his
prison after the sentence of death was pronounced against him and other
gracious Ministers for their testimony against Erastianisme and Prelacy, p. 45.
The Authors out of which the chief testimonies of the subsequent Vindication
are taken.
The Acts of Parliament printed at Edinborough by Robert Walgrave in the year
1597. The Acts of the second Parliament of King Charles printed at Edinborough
by Robert Young, 1641. The Acts of the general Assembly at Edinborough 1632.
printed at Edinborough by Evan Tyler 1642. One of the Registers of the Church
of Scotland, Manuscript. A collection out of the Registers of the Church of
Scotland by Mr. David Catherwood, wherein, beside other things, are Mr. Andrew
Melvils process, the Animadversions of the Commissioners of the general
Assembly upon Adamsons Declaration delivered to the King; Also a Reverend
Divines censure at that time upon the same Declaration; Also King James his
true Declaration. Knox History. Altar Damascenum. Adamsons Recantation. Mr.
Welsh his Letters. The Ecclesiastic History of Scotland written by John
Spotswood, pretended Archbishop of St. Andrews, licensed for the Press under
the hands of Secretary Stirling and Windebank. Issachars Burden, under the name
of an Answer to a Letter, etc. Also Sacr^ Sancta Regum Majestas, both printed
at Oxford 1644. by Mr. John Max well pretended Bishop of Rosse.
THE UNLOADING OF ISSACHARS BURDEN.
WHen from diverse good hands it was brought to me, Iss^chars burden will
stu^ble no solid and advised mind.
that Presbyteriall Government began to be evil spoken of by many, and to be
suspected by some who hitherto had not been unfriends to it, through the
occasion of a late Pamphlet Entitled Issachars burden; which some Sectaries
with all care and diligence do put in the hands of the prime Members of both
Houses of Parliament, and others whom they conceive to have any influence in
the affairs either of Church or State, either of City or Country: The word of
the old Philosopher came in my mind, a short sighted man, is a quick judge; who
sees few things, does soon and rashly give out his sentence.

That this namelesse Pamphlet printed by a Malignant at Oxford, and reprinted
by the industry of Sectaries at London, should be able to open the mouth, or
touch the heart of any considerate man with the least suspicion against the
Government of the Reformed Churches, seems to me a little strange, and will
do so, as I suppose, to others who shall be pleased to consider with me some
circumstances of that writ; first the Author, secondly, those whom he professes
to tax, thirdly, its Publishers, fourthly, the matters contained therein. The
Author of it is a man infamous, an Excommunicate Prelate and in^endiagy.


The Author, as uncontroverted fame since its first publication at Oxford makes
manifest, is Mr John Maxwell late Bishop of Rosse, from whose gracious pen a
little after this, did drop another piece of the like benign quality,
Sacro-Sancta-Regum majestas; they must be of a greater then ordinary credulity,
who can admit this man's testimony-against the Church of Scotland; for by the
most solemn judicatories of that Land, he is declared infamous: by the general
Assembly for many grievous offenses he with some other Prelates were delivered
into the hands of Satan, but for more treasonable crimes this man by the
Parliament of that Kingdom was declared an incendiary: a Censure put upon no
other Prelate but him alone.

These no more heavy then just sentences were so far from bringing him to
any show of repentance, A man obstinate and obdured in wickedness.
that they filled his heart with bitterness and rage, to do, speak, and write
what ever masice, hightned to the uttermost, could dictate.

In that most scurrilous and invenomed Satyr Lysimachus Nicanor, his pen was
thought to be principal; for this he got a warning from heaven so distinct and
loud as any uses to be given upon earth, to reclaim him from his former
errors: with his eyes did he see the miserable man John Corbet, who took upon
him the shame of penning that rabble of contumelious lies against his Mother
Church, hewed in pieces in the very arms of his poor wife; this Prelate
himself in the mean time was stricken down and left with many wounds as dead
by the hand of the Irish, with whom he had been but too familiar: All this did
not humble his stout spirit; so dangerous is it to be put in the hands of the
Devil by the servants of God according to their Masters warrant; for no sooner
did he recover of his wounds, but he went for Oxford of purpose to cast ^oyl in
that flame, in the first kindling whereof he had been a prime instrument.

How little faith ought to be given to this man I might show by seven years old
Stories; A man very corrupt in doctrine.
its well known that he above all men living did move and encourage Canterbury
to force upon Scotland the Liturgy and Canons; what ever Popery or Tyranny is
found in either, he was a prime Author and full consenter thereto: the
erroneous Tenants of the Canterburian party, especially their gross Popery in
the heads of Transubstantiation, Justification and Purgatory, were according to
his mind, as the supplement of Ladensium Autocatacrisis demonstrates: how
near he and his two most intimate friends Forbes and Synserfe were to the open
profession of Popery, does appear by the avowed defection to Rome of their
chief Scholars and most familiar dependents, Forbes his Son, Synserfe his
brother, Menteith the great Achates of all the three Bishops.

But leaving these elder stories, The most malicious enemy to the Parliament of
England that ever yet has written.
behold what new stuff he lays out in his two Pamphlets; in matters of State
these are his maxims; all resistance to Kings in any imaginable case of the
most extreme Tyranny is simply unlawful, though the Religion. Laws,
Liberties of whole Kingdoms were totally subverted. Let Princes do what ever
miseniese can come in the heart of the worst men, subjects are to suffer all,
and have no right allowed by God to make any opposition farther then by tears
and prayers Sacro-Sanct. p. 19. All opposition by force, resisting of Kings by
Arms, whether in a defensive or offensive way, is against God, and unlawful,
ibid. p. 66. They commit the highest Treasons against God and man, and make
poor people die Traitors to both ibid. p. 68. fancying to themselves that they
fight the Lords battles for Religion and Liberties, they dream they die Martyrs
when they die Traitors to God and his Anointed, ibid. p. 132. They set the
simple people upon Rebellion against God and his Anointed to the destruction of
State, soul and body temporally and eternally.
. That the defensive war of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms is a most real
Rebellion and Treason; that all who have dyed in that quared are certainly
damned; that the Covenant is a damnable Conspiracy; that all Covenanters are
Traitors and Rebels both to God and the King; that their Covenant puts them
upon the principles of Ravtitack and Faux, to kill Kings and blow up
Parliaments Vide supra. a. also ibid. 63. This Covenant makes every man to be
armed with power, and the way left to himself, for ought we know, it may be
Raviliacks way or Guido Faux his way ibid, p. 7. For as bad as the Jesuit is,
in my conceiving the Puritan is worse.
. That the Arms of the Irish Rebels were no more unjust, then these of the
British who opposed them; that the Irish Cessation was lawful and commendable
Ibid. Preface to Ormond, you were assaulted with two of the worst extremes of
opinions, enraged both of them with the same degrees of madness.
. That the Marquess of Ormond for piety and prudence has not his match upon
earth Ibid. You whose piety is admirable, whose wisdom and prudence is above
the ordinary, and all your equals, so experienced in matters of State, that it
is a wonder to them who know you, and incredible to them who have not been eye
witnesses.
. That for military virtue he is equal to Scipio, Hannibal, and Caesar. Ibid.
Your heroical Acts are worthy of the greatest Caesar, you gained so much as
their valiant Hannib^s and Scipios.
That the Legislative power is in the King alone: That his Monarchy makes him
above all Laws, and lets him be tied to none, but gives him power to alter and
abolish them at his pleasure Sacro Sanct. p. 180. One of the Sectaries
principles whereby they intoxicate the Vulgar, is that in a Monarchy the
Legislative power is communicable to the subject, ibid. p. 94. At the
admittance of Saul God gives to the subject Legem parendi; Soveraignity is an
undivided entity, how can you share it among more?
. To diminish any thing of this Pretogative is to destroy Monarchy, to dethrone
the King and to take his Crown from him. Ibid p. 141. You totally destroy
Monarchy, and must say down right our gracious Soveragne is no Monarch, p. 142.
An impotent King is the same with no King.
For Parliam^n^s to meddle with any part of this power is a sacrilege which
God will revenge Ibid. p. 144. The worst bargain ever subject made, was at any
rate to purchase a possession of the sacred Rights of Kings; till these
Kingdoms be purged of sacrilege so highly committed against God, by wronging
his Anointed and he be restored to his sacred Rights, we need look for no
effectual blessings of God.
. When through weakness or imprudence, a Prince is cheated or enforced to give
away to his Parliament any part of his power, himself or any of his posterity,
when ever occasion offers, may lawfully take it back, notwithstanding of any
promise, oath or law made to the contrary Ibid p. 142. I doubt not to affirm,
but if any good Prince or his Royal Ancestors have been or are cheated, out of
their sacred Right by fraud or force, he may at the first opportunity when God
in his wise providence offers occasion resume it.
.

You see with what a Statesman we have to do, A favorer of ^rosse Popery and
Arminia^isme.
for his Religion hear a part of it, Episcopacy is a necessary and
fundamental truth, of Divine. Institution and Commandment Issachar, p. 1. In
the Edition of Oxford, Episcopacy is the true necessary and perpetual
Government of the Church institute by Christ; we deceive our selves to expect
deliverance from our troubles if we subordinate fundamentals in Religion,
necessary truths to our civil good.
. All Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction belongs to the Bishops alone by Divine
Right, no Presbyter ought to be a member so much as of a Provincial Assembly
Ibid. p. 31. Now is forgotten that of the council of Chalcedon, concilium est
Episcoporum, and that old barbarous but Christian enough verse, Ite for as
laici, non est vobis locus ici.
. That the Kings consent to the abolition of Episcopacy in Scotland, is the
true and great cause of all the troubles which since that time has befallen
him and his subjects Ibid. p. 2. What peace has King or Kingdom enjoyed here
or in Ireland since Episcopacy by Law in Scotland was damned?
. That Abots, Priors and their Religious Houses of Monks and Friars are lawful
in the Church Ibid. p. 49. Abbots and Priors to Melvils time were nominate and
admitted to Abbeys and Priories as Church men: but this great Doctor found out
another Divinity, that for Abbots and Priors there was none such in the Word of
God.
. That Patriarcks and Cardina's are Church Dignities highly to be reverenced
Ibid p. 43. Cardinal Beton a Priest and Archbishop of so high Dignity
. That the Pope by Divine Right is as true a Bishop as any other Bishop in the
world, but by humane Ecclesiastic Right he is greater then any other Sacro.
Sanct. p. 58. The Pope the Bishop of Rome has no more by Divine Right, except
it be in extent then the meanest Bishop in his Diocese; what he may have by
positive Ecclesiastical right, its not pertinent for us now to examine.
Hierome compares three of the meanest Bishops with three of the greatest
Patriarcks, Privileged at that time by Ecclesiastical Canons.
. That Presbytery is worie then Popery and Iesuitisme, that it were much better
for any King to put his Dominions under the yoke of the Pope and Jesuits, then
of Presbyteries and Synods Issachar: Edition Oxford, p. 30. The ^ing is in a
worse condition under this sovereignty, then under the Pope, ibid p. 45. The
Presbytery it or may be in time a mother of as much rebellion and treason as
any Iesuitisme of the highest die; if not more: certainly Rome, although a
whore, is not so bad, nor so abominable.
. That the first Reformation in Scotland, France, Holland, Germany, and where
ever the supreme Magistrate was not the Author and Actor of the work, was
unorderly and sin ull, an action seditious and treasonable, a great cause of
all the mischiefs that from that time to this have come upon the Churches,
Ibid. p. 36. This gave life to that tumultuary Reformation, we will never wrong
Reformed Religion so much as to count of that as an orderly Reformation; We
doubt not but it was attended with much sedition, faction and Rebellion: p. 41.
I daily heartily bewail that too too much idolized Reformation; if Knox and his
accomplices had kept in the way of the old Martyrs, we had bin more happy; sure I
am the great and more then ordinary sins in them and us, and our forefathers,
have brought us to be plunged in these miseries, God so punishing the sins of
that first Reformation, by this second spurious Reformation.
All controversies of Religion, ought to be decided by the writs of the
fathers, Sacro sanct. p. 59. Would God both sides in this and other
controversies, would submit to the judgment and determination of the holy
Fathers.
It is but precise Puritanisme to refuse the Apocrypha books, p. 39. If our
strait, laced brethren would be pleased to cast an eye upon Apocrypha, I refer
them to Ecclesiasticus.
It is presumption for any man upon earth to meddle with the questions of
Election and Predestination. Sacro sanct. p. 105. These Seraphicall Doctors
make so bold with almighty God, as to unfold the secrets of Predestination, and
to define who are the Elect, and who the Reprobate.
All necessity takes away Freedom from the Will. Ibid. p. 91. The first act of
man's will necessarily, fertur in summum bonum, this is actus necessarius non
liber, not so free as it may choose or reject, it is elicited by force,
constraint, or necessity.
the Schoolmen do rightly teach that the Sacraments confer grace by some
extrinsecall supervenient power, Ibid. p. 121. Schoolmen do confess, that the
Sacraments do not confer grace, vi naturali physica and inhaerente, but vi
morali supernaturali and superveniente.
men's sins are washed away by doing of Penance, Ibid. p. He was forced to flee
and with 40. years penance and repentance wash away that guiltiness,
Ministers are Priests, Its high time for Prince and Priest to strengthen one
another,
all who have adhered to the Parliament are Sectaries and mad ones, Ibid. p.
38. No moderate Sectary if any such be, p. 68. People thus madded by mad
Sectaries and Shebaes.
.

By this little taste of the man's Spirit, we may see their wisdom who bring
in such a witness to testify against the Reformed Churches; It is strange
that any gracious Englishman should be apt to hear slanders against the Church
of Scotland.
and how good friends they are either to the Parliament or to the true
Religion, who recommend this writer with so loud praises to the diligent
perusal of simple people.

The 2d circumstance I offered was, the object of this calumnious writ, whom
does it undertake to defame? the Church of Scotland; It is possible for any
gracious Englishman to applaud this injury.

Who did so heartily concur and so much assist the first planting of the
Church of Scotland as that renounced Queen Elizabeth and the state of England?
Scotlands old obligations to England.
our History tells us that in all the assaults of that Church from the Popish
and Prelaticall party, we were not only comforted by the encouragements of the
English Anti-episcopall Divines, Cartwright, Hildersham and all the rest of the
old Non-conformists cordially sympathizing with us, but also the Queen and
State by continual Letters, and many gracious Embassages, did ever support our
cause, and assist us when we needed both with Armies and Moneys: knowing that
notwithstanding of all our differences with the Prelates, yet we were most
firm for the Protestant cause and welfare of England, against all Enemies both
at home and abroad.

When lately the Canterburian designs were on foot to change the Religion,
Englands late of ligations to Scotland.
and inslave the state of all the three Kingdoms to an absolute and Turkish
Monarchy, or at least such a tyranny as this day is exercised by the French and
Spanish Kings, did not Scotland at that time (when no party at all in England,
nor Ireland would or durst appear) take their lives in their hands, and with
courage for the liberty of the whole Isle set their f^ces against these Popish
Tyrants? did they not with such piety, prudence, moderation and valor manage
that common cause, that the blessings of all England and of all Protestants,
yea of all in Europe of what ever profession, who loved the just liberty of the
subject, did rest upon their heads?

Thereafter when that wicked faction glad to be rid of them, and to give them
all their desires according as they were pleased to d^mand them, did turn
their Arms from them upon the good subjects of England and Ireland, and in
both, had well near accomplished their design: Ireland having no considerable
Army to oppose the barbarous murderers, and the Army that was after some faint
opposition, joining with the Rebels against the Parliament. In England the
North and West being totally lost, the Kings great and victorious Armies ready
to swallow up the remnant, no friend upon earth appearing for the gracious
party, their lamentable and desperate condition was by their Commissioners with
sighs and tears represented to Scotland. Where their Brethren were so touched
with compassion, that laying aside all thoughts of hazard which was extremely
great, they resolved to engage all they had, life, wealth peace, and what else
is dear, for to rescue the English out of the pit of their visible, imminent
and otherwise unavoidable ruin. They sent to Ireland an Army of ten thousand
well appointed men, who banished the Barbars out of Vlster, where they were
strongest, and out of the most of Conaught, keeping so much of that Isle in
possession of the English, as made it easy for them when ever they thought fit
to regaine the rest.

They sent into England a gallant well-armed and governed company of twenty
thousand effective, who by Gods blessing, themselves alone, did ruin the Kings
main and greatest Army under New Castle, and joining with others of the
Parliaments forces at Long-Marston, did so break and defeat the prime of all
the rest of the Kings forces met together, that they were never afterable to
bring to the fields any Army very considerable, either for number or courage.
Much occasion of action was not thereafter afforded, yet the keeping quiet of
all the new conquests by North Trent, and the holding the neighboring
Associations in awe til the Parliaments forces at their leisure did take up the
rest of the country, was no small service.

In these actions the Scots did spend very much precious blood, many of them
did endure much hardship both in England and Ireland, and at home by the
Pestilence; by a prevailing Enemy, by intestine discouragements and divisions,
all flowing from their friendship with England, they were overwhelmed with
greater miseries then their fathers had seen for many hundred years, and which
grieved them more then all things else, they were entertained by too many of
them for whom they suffered all these evils with so great unkindnesse, they
were loadned with so many calumnious and contumelious aspersions, the
Reformation of Religion their greatest aim went so far back before their
eyes, that their provocations were great, to provide at last for themselves
while something yet at home did remain to them to be preserved. But beholding
visibly in their retreat and provision for themselves, the certain ruin of
their unadvised friends, they chused rather to put up with patience all their
sufferings and quietly to wait on till the ruin of the Enemy, and settling of
their brethrens estate by their help, might open the eyes of all, and bring the
most perverse to Repentance for their misbehaviour toward the instruments of
their welfare; especially when they did see the invincible fidelity of the
Scots unbrangled with the greatest temptations.

Though in all their late unexpressible extremities they had received no
assistance at all from England, nor much importuned them for it, though to
their greatest grief they did see the Gangren of Heresy and Schism without
the application of any true remedy, overspreading all England so fast, that the
infection of Scotland with this Pestilence seemed unavoidable, though the
current of affairs did seem to run in that channel, that the person and
family of the King, the authority of the Parliament, the Liberties of the City
and Kingdom might be cast ere long into no mall hazard; our Army also and
Nation for no other cause but their constant resolutions to keep to their first
principles, did seem to stand in a very near possibility to be to ally
destroyed; yet for all this they were far from any rash or unjust conclusion,
their eyes were toward the Lord, they did wait for his deliverance, and when
by him an opportunity was put in their hands to right themselves with the
disadvantage of others, yet they did manage that occasion with so much
justice, wisdom, dexterity and success, that all the world they hope is
satisfied with their honesty, as of men who minded nothing more then the saving
of the whole Isle from these calamities that visibly were imminent; the
re-establishing of the King in his throne, the confirming of the Parliament,
City, and Country in all their rights, the settling of Religion and peace
according to the word of God, and the Laws of the Land, and their own quick
return to their homes in very easy and equitable terms, enriched with
nothing so much a with a conscience of well deserving, with the blessings of
all England, with the commendation of Neighbor nations, and with the hopes of
the Posterities favorable construction of their whole deportment in this great
action. That such a people as this should be traduced and defamed by
contumelious Libels in England, and that at London with the contentment or
patience of any, it would seem a matter very strange, if the most absurd and
strange things were not here long ago become common.

The third circumstance considerable, The Independents and Erastians in
printing and publishing this book are many ways faulty.
is the instruments and present publishers of this writ^. That a Bishop at
Oxford should have been countenanced in writing a Satyr against the Scots,
whom all the Malignants did hare as the chief and first Authors of the
miscarriage of their great design, we do not marvel: but that at London our
sworn and covenanted Brethren should be avowed proclaimers of Scotlands
disgrace, it is a piece of singular and unexpected unkindnesse: Our Brethren
whether Independents, or Erastians or both who have procured this Edition, and
with so much sedulity make it pass from hand to hand, though they had been
pleased to cast behind their backs all the good offices which this last century
of years have past betwixt the Kingdoms, though they had banished all
gratitude toward the Scots for their late actions and sufferings: though their
conscience had permitted them to have trod under foot all the Oaths and
Covenants whereby they stand expressly tied to defend the Reformation of the
Church of Scotland against the common Enemy: Yet I would know of them how they
are become thus unadvised to let their indignation against the Scottish
Presbytery swell up so high, as for their hatred thereunto, to venture the
destruction of the Parliament of England, to declare all the Members of both
Houses at Westminster damnable Traitors, because dying in the act of Rebellion
without Repentance; but all who have perished on the Malignant side to be a
kind of Martyrs as being unjustly killed for their duty to God and the King;
to bring back Bishops to the house of Lords, to put into their hands alone, and
that by Divine Right all the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the whole Church
of England. And if they were resolute in their hatred of Presbytery, thus far
to miscarry, I would further know if either the Erastians or Independents have
any principles for the reduction of Poperty, for the re-erection in England of
Abbots Cardinals and Popes: And if men against their own principles must needs
run thus mad, yet that they should be permitted to act according to their
madness in the daylight, under the eye and nose of so wise, just and prudent a
Parliament, it is and will be long hereafter a matter of very great admiration,
especially to them who at the same time did behold some other writs for much
smaller reflections, purged with the hand of the Hangman by fire in many
public places, and their publishers how well deserving soever otherwise both
of Church and State, stigmatized with notes of high infamy.

These three considerations are but proemicall, the fourth concerning the
particular matter of the Treatise is the principal: If I should examine every
thing it would be tedious, yet shall I touch upon every passage that I conceive
to be material.

This second Edition has a new Title Page, The title Issachars burden is a
doltish reproach of this present Paliament.
and some additions in the Preface: In the very inscription Issachars burden,
there is a salt Gybe at the present Government; that which the Proverb wont to
appropriate to the Peasants of France, that they were strong Asses willing to
bear all Burdens so they might live in peace in that fat soil, by this good
Patriot is contumeliously applied to England; it now is the Ass, crouching
under two burdens, if Presbytery be the one, the Parliament must be the
other; these be the two unsupportable burdens pointed at along all the Authors
Writs: the two light burdens which he every where cries up are Monarchy scrued
up to the highest pin of Tyrannical Prerogative and Episcopacy in all its
Papal Privileges, both well fastened upon the Asses back by the cords of a
Divine Right: who ever for the love of peace in a plentiful Land will set
their shoulders under this double burden, are Issachars Asses indeed; but
truly the Scots have not merited this commendation, for their Land is not among
the most plentiful, nor have their backs been very patient of such burdens,
but rather then to crouch under them, they have kicked at their drivers, and
have taught their riders to be more wary then they were wont in overloading
their poor Asses.

What is added in the Title, The ground^esse calumnies of the title page
con^emptible.
that the Presbyteriall Government of Scotland is Tyrannical, and inconsistant
with Monarchy, that it is so much worse then Episcopacy, as the bite of a
Scorpion is worse then a Rod, we shall believe it when the subsequent Treatise
makes it good, which doubtless shall be done when the Author has demonstrate
his assertion, that Popery and Jesuitisme are burdens much more easy and
rather to be chosen then the Scottish Presbytery, in the mean while till the
proofs come, just men will allow us to take all this, but for the bellows of
a stomach overcharged with fiery and enraged humors.

In the Preface, All the Liber^y he grants to people is to be ^aves to Ty^ants.
to show his skill in the Politics, he first sets down as two most friendly
Companions, the Royal Prerogative and the Liberty of the People: but behold
wherein here he insinuats, and elsewhere at length proclaims the knot and bond
of their concord to consist: The King by his Prerogative is the only Lawgiver
both for Church and State, The people for all their Liberty, by Divine
Institution, are appointed to obey and do their services, though both Church
and State were never so injuriously oppressed by the cruellest Tyrants. So our
Parliaments, our Church Assemblies, our defensive Arms must all be buried
together in one Pit. This is the first ease that Issachars Ass gets of its
burden, by the hand of this merciful driver.

In the next two Paragraphs he advances the Royal Prerogative to an external
Episcopacy, The discord a^t ^oncord of relates, Era^tians, and Inde^endents, in
^e point of ^upremacy.
no man I know, in this is his opposite; but while he makes this external
Episcopacy no less then a true headship over the Church, and the denial of it
in this sense to be a dethroning, an uncrowning, a stabbing, a trampling under
foot of Kings, I know no living man agreeing with him herein. It is certain,
Queen Elizabeth and King James and their Bishops did reject this odious and
Papal Prerogative of headship over the Church; also how far either your
Erastian or Independent friends will go along with you in the present
discourse, you will reckon at your leisure among your selves. You tell the
Erastians that Kings for all their Prerogative, yet have no more power of
Excommunication and Ecclesiastic censures, then of preaching the Word and
Administering the Sacraments; you tell them also that the Royal Prerogative
reaches not to the making of a Church Canon, nor to the degrading or silencing
of a Preacher, but only to the calling of an Assembly of Divines for these
works which are part of their proper and spiritual charge. You tell your
Independent friends that the Magistrate has power assigned to him by God, to
imprison and punish all, who either by their Heretical or Schismatic
Tenants trouble the peace of the Church: It is like these morsells will not be
a food of very easy digestion to their tender stomachs.

The next three Paragraphs are but mere invectives (as justly you style your
own language,) The pubishing of this book is a grievous injury to the
Parliament.
against the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, for abolishing Episcopacy, for
defending their own lives and liberties against your Malignant Faction; you
make them all to be men without any conscience, without all faith, all
Religion, all honesty, wicked and Rebellious Hypocrites, shedders of innocent
blood, destroyers of many brave spirits and Ancient Families, Authors of
Massacres, murders, rapines; Villains more cru^ll and bloody then Turks or
Infidels, whom God will destroy as he did Core and his Accomplices for their
insurrection against Moses and Aron.

May we not here marvel at your partiality, who having seen with your eyes,
the practices of the Rebels in Ireland, and of the Malignants at Oxford, you
should yet have the conscience to bestow all this good language upon us and no
word of it in all your Writs upon them; or shall we marvel at the Independents
and Erastians wisdom, who think it fit upon some mal contentment with their
friends to make themselves blazers of such railing and cursed calumnies against
themselves and their whole party: or shall we marvel at the Parliament
partence, who permits the Rabshakehs of Oxford to walk peaceably upon the
Streets of London, and to be welcomed within every door though openly they
cast upon all our faces the excrements of the worst of their passions.

In the last two Sections of the Preface, A Petition extremly unreasonable, to
believe an infamous man's word without any proefe.
there is a Prayer and a Prophecy, we are prayed to believe and that without
probations, that all the following Histories are mere Gospel, all most true
and certain: of this so modest a desire, we have a good reason given us fides
non extorquetur vi, sed ratione and exemplis suadetur, Ergo we must give up our
belief, and sorce our faith to assent to all that hereafter shall be said,
though neither Scripture, Reason, nor Authority be so much as alleged for it;
I take this Logic to be none of the best.

What is spoken of the Authors Gravity and Learning, we shall take it as we
find it, he is as others of the faction for learning, neither with the first
nor with the last, but for effronted boldness he is second I dare say to none
of them all; as for piety none that ever knew him young or old, will swear him
guilty of any such imputation. That he was an eye witness of the Stories he
relates is evidently falfe, for all except a very few of his Relations, are of
things past before his birth, at least before the years of his discretion, and
what he reports of our late troubles he did not see, for then was he busy
executing Canterburies commands in his Diocese of Rosse, an out corner of our
Kingdom, and so soon as that storm began to blow a little loud, he quickly
fled out of the Land, whither he never yet returned, being conscious of his
deservings, for of all the Scots Clergy, he alone was declared Incendiary, and
him only did the justice of the Parliament of Scotland appoint to tread in the
last footsteps of William Laud, as he had done in the former with great joy.

The Prophecy is a Prediction of Englands total destruction, A false and mad
prophesy.
if Episcopacy be not restored the warrant of this Prophecy is as good as the
former prayer a Bishops jest in the Counsel of Trent, and one of Esops Fables,
upon such grounds alone, does this severe Prophet pronounce from the heaven,
Englands destruction, were not a Scottish bit, as he calls it very fit for the
mouth, The whole Treatise is but an extract of the most false and venomous
parts of Spoiswoods story.
and an English rod or spur for the sides of such a presumptuous Prophet? we
shall say no more to the Preface.

In the Treatise it self you draw your discourse to four heads, the Church
Session or Congregationall Eldership, the Classical Presbytery, Provincial
Synod, and general Assembly, upon some of these four you draw in what ever
disgraceful Story you have either heard or read of any Churchmen of Scotland
opposite to your way. The great fountain of all your bitter waters, is that
cistern which Spotswood of St Andrews did endeavor all his life time to
gather together; in that Collection the Authors great intention was to heap up
all things he conceived might make the Presbyteriall Government hateful, and
the Episcopal lovely; but being certain of great contradiction from many who
knew as much in affairs as himself, and were much more willing to speak truth
without disguise, he kept in this book while he lived, that it might not see
the light till after his death, when he was not to be argued with for any of
his lying and malicious Narrations. This Manuscript falling in your hands, you
draw out of it what is most venomous, and or that stuff make up this present
book. There are long ago in Scotland prepared, sufficient Antidotes against
the poison of the whole story, whereby any man may be furnished without
difficulty toward the full confutation of your extracts; but the grossness
of your Lies did cry so loud at this time for an answer, that the patience of
many good people admitted not of so long a delay as that I could be furnished
from a far with any materials; yet out of the small store of my knowledge and
memory of the affairs you speak of, and by some few helps which my present
accomodations do furnish, I will venture to give you a sudden answer, which I
hope shall prove satisfactory enough to all ingenuous Readers, who will not
affect to cavil, if there shall be found any material defect, reply when you
will, you shall have a rejoinder.

Upon your first head of Church Sessions you spend your first three pages,
wherein you make us ascribe to our Congregationall Elderships much undue and
tyrannick power. Page 1. The Church of Scotland gives no more power to
congregationall Elderships then both the Independents and Erastians do allow.


To this I answer in general; First, That we give no more power to
congregationall Elderships then the Churches of France, or Holland, of
New England ascribe to them, both in their doctrine and daily practice.
Secondly, the power we ascribe to them cannot be challenged either by
Independents or Erastians for the Independents great plea with us, is about the
defect, that we give not power enough to that Court, with our excess herein
they were never offended; as for the Erastians they will not question with us
about any power which the Parliament will be pleased to allow unto that
Eldership; now your self does know that our Church Sessions practice not any
power, but that which the Acts of our Parliament do warrant, our liberty there
is not astricted to any certain enumerate cases, but I dare say that in many
years we will not have occasion in our Congregationall Elderships to meddle in
any case; which even this Parliament has not already allowed, or will not (as
I conceive) be willing upon the first Emergency to allow.

I grant you Prelates are here our opposites, The ground of the Prelates
quarrel is absurd.
but how justly, let equitable men judge; you tell us that congregationall
Elderships ought to have no power at all, because forsooth, the whole power of
all spiritual jurisdiction, must reside in the Bishop alone: It is your
principle that in all the Preachers and in all the Congregations of the whole
Diocese yea of the whole Kingdom, there is not so much power as to give to
any man for what ever crime, a public admonition; yet any Lay man in the
Kingdom or out of the Kingdom, whom the Bishop is pleased to make his Official
or Chancellor, may keep a Court in any part of the Diocese, and therein pass
a sentence of Excommunication against the best Pastors and chief Members of
any Congregation; because the Scots since their first Reformation could never
by any Art, nor by any Force, be gotten inslaved to such a Tyranny; therefore
it is, that you, your Colleagues, and your Fathers, have been offended with
them, and in your anger have invented these calumnies which here you are
pleased to object.

The first particular crime which ye lay to our charge is, The Prelates give
much more Ecclesiastical power to Laymen, then we to ruling ^lders
That we do give some power of spiritual jurisdiction to ruling Elders and
that by a Divine Right; We grant the charge, and think it easy to demonstrate
the warrant of our Tenet both from Scripture, and the practice of all the
ancient, and all the reformed Churches; but it is needless here to digress
into that debate, for this is not your maine quarrel with us that we give some
power or jurisdiction to those you call Lay Elders, but that we ascribe any
part of jurisdiction to any at all beside the Bishop, for you know it is an
Article of the Prelaticall Creed, That a preaching Elder has no more interest
in jurisdiction then a lay Elder, that for this kind of power, Priest and
people are all alike; That neither of them of themselves by virtue of their
office have any dram thereof, yet by virtue of a Commission from the Bishop
either of them is capable of a pleni-potency, and are able to do the acts of
the highest spiritual jurisdiction; what the Jesuits were wont to ascribe
unto the Pope in the Church universal, That the Bishop takes to himself in his
own Diocese: he, and he alone, by Divine right, is the head, the sun, the
fountain, the only receptacle of all spiritual jurisdiction which he keeps
to himself, or communicates to be execute by others; for the time, the
measure, the persons, according to his own good pleasure. The Erastian
principle is only different in this, that they pull the Pope and the Bishop out
of the chair, that there may be room to set down the Magistrate in their
place.

What you speak of the Deacons, it is a mistake; We grant to Deacons no power
of jurisdicton, we wish there were Doctors in populous congregations page 2. In
some few congregations Elders have a dispensation for a time.
for albeit they be present in the Eldership to receive their directions for
the poor, yet they do not voice in any well governed Eldership, nor do they
claim any power in jurisdiction: Concerning Doctors, that populous
Congregations wants them, it comes not from any design, but for want either of
means or of Idoneous and willing persons.

What you speak of the yearly election of Elders, the matter is this; There
is not in any Congregation of Scotland which I do know, a yearly election of
Elders, but in populous Cities, where the Elders are many and diverse of them
unable to attend that charge, without the hurt of their estate, the most of
them being Merchants and Tradesmen, who must travel for their livelihood; they
have a liberty to be free from that service every two year, if so they be
content to attend upon a call every third year, the Levites attended the
service of the Temple but a few months in the year: What is right or wrong in
this custom of some few of our Congregations, we are willing to debate it, and
as it shall be found just or unjust, to keep or change that practice, for in
such things we love not to be contentious.

In your three last Sections ye do cast upon the Eldership in hand, a rabble
of incongruous practices; Page 3. No Eldership inflicts any civil punishment
although the Magistrate in the Eldership does so sometimes.
what you bring of pecuniary mulcts, imprisonments, banishments, jogges,
cutting of hair, and such like, it becomes neither you to charge, nor us to be
charged with any such matters: No Church-assembly in Scotland assumes the least
degree of power, to inflict the smallest civil punishment upon any person; the
General Assembly it self bath no power to fine any creature so much as in one
groat: It is true, the Laws of the Land, appoint ^ecuniary mulcts,
imprisonment, joggs, pillories, and banishment for some odious crimes, and the
power of putting these Laws in execution is placed by the Parliament in the
hands of the in^eriour Magistrates in Buroughs or Shires, or of others to whom
the Counsel Table gives a special Commission for that end; ordinarily some of
these civil persons are ruling Elders, and sit with the Eldership: So when the
Eldership have cognosced upon the scandal alone of criminal persons, and have
used their spiritual censures only to bring the party to Repentance, some of
the Ruling Elders, by virtue of their civil office or commission will impose a
Mulct, or send to Prison or stocks or banish out of the bounds of some little
circuit, according as the Acts of Parliament or counsel do appoint it. But
that the Eldership should employ its Eccclesiastick and Spiritual power for
any such end, none of us do defend. That either in Scotland or any where else
in the world, the hair of any person is commanded to be cut by any Church
judicatory for disgrace and punishment, is (as I take it) but a foolish fable.
That any person truly penitent is threatened in Scotland, with Church censures
for non-payment of Moneys, is in the former Category of calumnies.

But suppose that all your alleagations were true, Bishops confound miserably
the spiritual and civil office.
yet how congruously does a challenge of this kind come from your mouth? do you
think that all civil employments are incompatible with spiritual offices? How
many Ministers did you get to be Justices of Peace? you your self were a judge
of Common Pleas; your colleague S. Andrews, was Chancellor of the Kingdom; you
know the Treasurers white staff was very near to your hands, and for the
missing of it what stir you made: Many of you were Lords of Council, and all of
you Lords both of Parliament, and temporal Lordships and Regalities, where
your Baylies kept Court in your names, diverse of your Coat with your good
liking, have been Secretaries of State, Keepers of the Privy Seal, Ledger
Ambassadors with foreign Princes: your brethren over Sea in France, and
Spain, Germany and Italy, are Admirals of Royal Navies, are Generals of Land
forces, are Princes of Temporal Estates, according to these principles that I
think you do approve, according to your Cannons in Scotland, and your
ordinary practice in England. Great sums of money were exacted in your
spiritual Courts, and pocketed up for private uses; how many have been
excommunicate there, for non-payment of a shilling, and refused absolution,
till their fine was paid with increase? what do you speak to us of a pecuniary
mulct, of a very small and unconsiderable value taken up by the Magistrate, and
employed only in pious uses? Why do you speak to us of cutting of Beards, when
your Prelates do burn the cheeks; how many gracious souls have been starved
to death in your Episcopal dungeous? how many thousands have you banished out
of Bricaine, out of Europe, for no fault at all but their zeal to the truth of
God? how many hundred thousand has your pride and obstinacy in error, caused
to be slain within these seven years; in the next age ignorant men may be
pardoned to deny these things, but it were great impudence this day to deny
them, when yet we do stick in the Pit of these troubles, wherein the madness
of you Prelates has cast us.

Your objection about the Baptism of Bastards is vain; We refuse Baptism to no
insant where either of the Parents will undertake for Christian education.
for we refuse not that Sacrament to any of them, if either of the Parents
profesie Repentance, and undertake for the Christian education of their child,
but the ground of your quarrelling in this Point is, that we cannot follow your
Popish Doctrine, that we refute to profess the actual regeneration of all
baptized Infants, and that we dare not put all unbaptized persons in the state
of unregeneration and damnation.

Your next head concerns the Classical Presbytery; Page 4, 5. No Prince pleads
for any exemption from Ecclesiastic jurisdiction.
your first Objection against it, which a little thereafter, and often elsewhere
you do ingeminate, is, That the King and his family are subject to its
Jurisdiction: I would gladly know if among the rest of the Prelaticall absurd
ties this were one: That Christian Princes and Magistrates are fully exempted
from all Ecclesiastic jurisdiction; sometimes your party would seem to speak
so, as if every Magistrate, at least every Prince were such a God upon earth
that none might say to any of them, Sir, what are you doing, though they were
running to hell themselves, and drawing at their heels, all they were able:
This is so gross a flattery, that all advised Princes abhor it, and confess
themselves to be subject to Ecclesiastical Discipline as well as others; for
they know if they should exempt themselves from this part of Christian
religion, they should presently be in hazard or loosing the benefit of all the
rest; for Christianity is a body of Articles so straightly joined, that either
all must be received or none.

You your self (though among the absurdest of all your faction) do confess so
much as any Presbyterian in the world did ever think of: you say that the
Crown and Scepter is subject, not only to the directive power of the Church
(expound the Church as you will, for a Congregationall Classical or National
Eldership, it is alike for the present Question) but also to the authoritative
power of the same whereby the Church does proceed not only in foro interiori
conscientsae but also exteriori ^ccl^siae to censure as it finds cause.

Thus far you and the most Monarchik of the Prelates go; No Presbytery did
ever enter in any process with a supreme Magistrate.
that in doctrine any Presbyterian Divine went ever further, I do not know,
but in practice never one of them went so far: Some Bishops have actually
excommunicate the best of the Emperors upon their enormous Scandalls; but that
any Presbyterian did ever so much as begin a process with any Prince, when
they had the greatest provocations thereto, it cannot be showed to this day.
The Church of Scotland notwithstanding all the cross actions of King James or
King Charles against them, in overturning not only the accidentalls, but many
of the substantials of their Religion, and in persecuting them without all
cause, with fire and sword, and all the calamities of a bloody war, yet did
they never so much as bethink themselves of drawing against any of them, or any
of their kindred or special servants, the sword of Church censures. The Church
of France always wholly Presbyterian, when Henry the fourth one of their
Members apostatised from them to the Pope, did never so much as enter into a
consultation of delivering him into the hands of Satan. Without all
peradventure, Presbyterians are much more tender then any other Christians of
what ever name, to meddle with Magistrates by the censures of the Church.

In the next Paragraph you flee out again upon the ruling Elders, as if it
were absurd for any of their coat to sit in Ecclesiastical Judicatories; all
the ground of your quarrel is, their want of an Episcopal Commission; with
this qualification you can admit any Layman not only to sit in
Ecclesiastical Iudicatories, but to sit there as sole and only judge; you can
make them your Vicar generals before whom all the Clergy of your Diocese must
stand to be examined and judged, for the discharge of their duty in all
Ecclesiastic administrations. The Prelates have no question with the
Presbyterians about the persons of Laymen as they call them, whether they may
be Members of Spiritual Courts, but about their calling, both grant the
lawfulness of the thing, but the Prelates do found it upon a Commission from
themselves, The Presbyterians press their calling from God and the Church
according to Scripture.

What you object of Lay men moderating our Presbyteries and Assemblies, All the
moderat is of (...) ^^^embly are preachers.
is no more then the ordinary practice of our Prelates; how often has Sir
Nathaniel Brent and other Gentlemen merely Civilians, sitting not only as
Prolocutors, but a^ Vicar generals, and so only Judges, before whom the whole
Clergy of the Diocese of London or of Canterbury, have appeared as my Lord
Bishops subjects for their trial and censure: albeit in Scotland we never had
any such custom as you object; for the Moderators of our Church meetings do
begin and end with solemn prayers, now ruling Elders have not a calling to pray
publicly in the Church; also they are but assistants in Discipline, the
principal charge lies upon the laborers in the Word and Doctrine; we do not
allow to an Assistant the place of the Principal.

As for the men whom you name, we grant none of them was in the Orders you
speak of, neither of Deacon, Priest, nor Bishop, you mean preaching Deacons;
Orthodox men in Scotland, as now in England, do reject all these Orders as
Popish; further I did never hear that any of the three persons you name, did
ever moderate any of our Assemblies; their is no reason that for this or any
thing else, we should take your bare assertion or the word of any of your
Coleagues for a sufficient proof: but giving all you allege to be true, the
first man you name, you confess was a Reader, now ye know at the beginning of
our Reformation, our Readers were Ordained to be truly Ministers, to be Priests
in your dialect; for they did exhort and preach as they were able and celebrate
the Sacraments. The second man you name Mr Melvil, was a Doctor of Divinity and
so long as Episcopal persecution permitted, did sit with great renoune in the
prime chair we had of that faculty: George Buchanan had sometimes as I have
heard, been a Preacher at St Andrews, after his long travells, he was
employed by our Church and State to be a Teacher to King James and his Family:
of his saithfu nesse in this charge, he lest I believe to the world good
andisati factory tokens: the eminency of this person was so great, that no
society of men need be ashamed to have been moderated by his wised me.

Your next exception against the Presbytery is for their Expectants, Expectants
are not Lay-Preachers.
these be the Sons of the Prophers who in their preparations for the
Ministry, at their first exercises for assay and trial are heard in the
Presbytery; with this practice no reasonable man can find fault; it is
naturally impossible for any without a miracle, to attain the habit of
preaching but by diverse Initiall and preparatory actions; where can these be so
fitly performed as in the Classes? The Expectants are present in the Classes
for their training not as Members, for they do not voice in any matters of
Discipline. The true mystery of this controversy is that the Expectants are
permitted to preach before the holy hands of a Bishop have conferred upon them
the Order of a Deacon, and so power to preach and baptize: The Church of
Scotland did always reject this corruption as clearly contrary to Scripture.

Your gird at the Presbytery of Edinburgh is weak and unconsiderable; The
Presbytery of Edingburgh usurp no power over any other.
for that meeting has no power at all above the meanest Presbytery in the
Kingdom, notwithstanding of all the service which the gifts of the Members
thereof may perform to any who are pleased to crave their advice. Its not to
be supposed but men of eminent gifts where ever they live must have an
influence upon many others; we do remember it to our grief, that you and your
Companions while you lived in that Presbytery which you mock, did send forth
your Episcopal, Arminian and Popish poison to all the corners of the Land,
East, West, South and North.

That King James at Hampton Court, Page 6. King James aversion from Presbytery
and affliction to Episcopacy makes not this the better not that the worse.
and elsewhere did speak his pleasure of the Presbytery, makes it nothing the
worse: his resolution to keep up Eiscopacy in England for his own ends, moved
him to discountenance what ever opposed it; yet so, that in his Basilicon doron
and at diverse other occasions he gave luculent Testimonies to many Presbyterian
Divines of his own acquaintance, preferring them for grace and honesty before
all those whom he could make willing to accept of Bishoprics.

The best Princes are not void of Errors, the greatest mistake of this wise
Prince was in his too great affection toward Episcopacy, the Presbyterian
Nobles and Divines in Scotland set him in his Infancy upon his Throne, when his
life and Crown without their cordial assistance was given by all men for gone;
in all his great fears from Spain, or any where else at home or abroad, so
long as he remained in Scotland, his recourse was only to them, and
notwithstanding of the very hard measure which often they had received and still
feared from him, yet did they never fail to support him in his need, neither
ever had they any difference with him but that which flowed from the unhappy
fountain in hand. Had it been the will of God, that this, otherwise very wise
Prince, at his first coming into England had cast over the hedge of that
Church, the evil weed of Bishops and their Ceremonies, he had certainly
procured much greater peace to his own mind, and in all probability prevented
the huge mischiefs which from this neglect above all other causes do this day
overwhelme his house and all his Kingdoms.

What here you subjoyn to prove the pride of the Presbytery and the state it
kept with King James, is an ill conceived bob; Page 7, 8. No Presbytery did
ever keep any state with the King.
when the Prince was pleased to honor them with a Message, was it not better
manners and greater civility for them to return an answer by some of their
own number, then by his Majesty's own Messengers; had they sent their minds
otherwise, how much more would the Prelatick Courtiers have cried out upon
their sauciness and pedantick Rusticity.

The next Tale you tell us is, The Presbytery is very tender of the fame of all
persons, though the Magistrate punish strumpets.
of the Presbyteries severity and unjustice in bringing shame upon many young
women on groundless suspicions, of putting them in prison till they confess
their secret sins, in forcing them to clear themselves by oaths in the
Congregation, of needless jealousies: This tale is delated with many odious
circumstances; but consider first that you shoot your Arrows at the wrong
Butt: You may remember the Classical Presbytery uses not to meddle with any
such matters; its true, the Congregationall Eldership by clear Divine Right,
and consent of all differing parties, take notice of the manners of the whole
flock, if pregnant presumptions of fornication be delated to the Eldership by
any Officer, they will send to admonish the parties deferred, but first in
private with all discretion and tenderness; if secret admonitions be
contemned, and persons wilfully will continue in a scandalous behavior, then
will they call them before the Eldership, and after earnest request, if nothing
else can do it, will at last ordain them to eschew conversing together in
private and suspect places: but for calling of any before the Eldership upon
light presumptions, for prisons, for feeding with bread and water, for
troubling of families, its but a Prelatical calumny. This indeed is true, some
known whores and strumpets when they have brought forth children in
fornication, and refuse absolutely to name the Father, or when they give up
such men as all know to be innocent; the Magistrate will put them in prison for
some time: and if a flagrant scandal of fornication arise upon persons who
desire themselves to be cleared, they will be admitted to purge themselves by
their oath in the Eldership or in the Congregation as the flagrancy of the
Scandal, or the parties themselves do require, but what is all this to these
odious fables here related? it seems you were angry at another matter, which I
will here speak out for you.

Scotland however subject to many sins, It does not curiously inquire in secret
faults but known crimes it does not pass by.
yet I dare say is much more free of fornications and adulteries among people
of any fashion, then any Nation I know or have heard of, this makes the
conversation of persons there to be free and without all su^picion except on
very good ground; but if such crimes be clear, there is no sparing of any
person of what ever quality, all are called to an account; that is the matter
which seems to burn you: Your bosom companion Mr. Menteth having deboshed a
prime Lady in his flock, when no secret advertisement could break off that
wickedness, though a child or two were brought forth, the honorable friends
of the Knight who was wronged, could keep no longer patience, but did openly
crave justice, whereby Menteth was cast out of the Church and Kingdom, and the
Adulteress di^^^ced from her Husband; at this and the like procedure you are
grieved, your meekness would have all such abominations covered, and remedied
only by Auricular confession. That this Epi^copa l indulgence flows from no
merciful disposition, it app ars well by their ordinary rigor, pressing the
most gracious Minister and others, for the smal^est opposition to any of their
Traditions, with their Oaths ex Officio, and casting them upon their mere
pleasure into the closest prisons and greatest afflictions; well may the
malevolence of Enemies declame against the severity of Presbyteries and paint
them out as most cruel and intolerable inquisitions; but believe it they that
know and have seen them either in France, Holland, or Scotland, can assure that
the fault if any be, falls upon the other hand of too great indulgence; no man
is called before them but for a notorious fault, persons of any tolerable
civility or circumspection, use not to be called all their life time to any
account of their behavior; if the Presbytery were able to give so satisfactory
an answer for its to great meekness unto the Sectaries challenge, as it can to
the Prelates for its too great strictness, I should be very glad.

What is subjoynd of the Presbyteries meddling with Trade and commerce, of
dischargeing men to pursue for their debts, Page 9, 10. The Presbyteries meddle
not with matters of trade or debt.
and Landlords to sue for their Rents, are stories so true, as the father of
lies is wont to dite to his obedient children: Possibly in the eighty eight
year of God when the Spaniards were coming to destroy the Land, some godly
persons had dissuaded their Neighbors, to carry victuals to Spain at that
time; and some men may have had scruple of conscience for sending of wax, and
furnishing of immediate materials for Idolatry; I believe also that gracious
Ministers have given private counsel to rigorous exacters of their Rents, and
unmercifull persuers of their debts; But that ever any Presbytery in Scotland
did take cognizance of any such matters to the uttermost of my best knowledge,
is an Episcopal, that is a manifest and malicious untruth.

The same I say of your next story; They never took upon them to change a
Market day.
the Monday markets in some chief Towns were an evident occasion of profaning
the Lords holy Sabbath; this to all the godly was a matter of grief; both
particular persons, and whole Presbyteries have often regrated it, and offered
their Petitions to the Council and Parliament for the remedying thereof; but
that they ever of themselves did attempt to make any change of Market days, it
is so false as any thing can be; you our Prelates as you were taught by your
Fathers in England were always passionately desirous to have Sunday counted no
Sabbath, both by your doctrine and example, you labored to seduce the people
to profane that day with all kind of public pastimes, all strictness about
the Sabbath you cried down, as Puritanick Iudaisme, so long as your Kingdom
stood, this evil was remediless; but so soon as we got your chaires and
thrones as you call them overturned, the first General Assembly thereafter
made it one of their chief cares to cause draw a humble petition to the next
ensuing Parliament for translating of the Markets of the chief Buroughs from
Monday to Wednesday: The Parliament being purged of Episcopal, Popish and
Malignant Members, who often before had obstructed this gracious work,
unanimously did agree to the Petition; so that now, blessed be God, with the
good liking of all, and to the prejudice of none, these market days are
changed.

What follows of the Presbyteries violent transporting of Ministers from better
places to worse at the pleasure of Noblemen, Nor to transport Ministers at any
man's pleasure.
I have known this done by Bishops and their High Commission, (for no men ever
in Scotland did so much flatter the Nobles and assist them, if they were
resolved to oppress a Minister, as the Prelates) but while the Presbyteriall
government had any vigor, that every man was in this fashion transported, I
take it to be exceeding false; for by the Laws and practice of the Presbyrery,
disgraceful Transportations are of so great difficulty, that since the Bishops
were cast out from among us, I did never hear of any; for no man with us can be
put from a better place to a worse but for a fault, which as it puts him from
one place, so readily it will keep him from all others.

The knavish example he brings of this practice in the Presbytery of Couper,
They ^ever did dilapidate any benefice.
I take it to be a mere Episcopal invention, no man with whom I have conferred
ever heard of any such matter; Spotswood the fountain of his fables is here
mute, I am confirmed in this opinion by that which he makes the maine scope of
the tale, the Presbyteries consent to the dilapidation of a Personage; such an
action is so far contrary to the rules of all our Presbyteries, and to any
practice that ever I heard, that it makes me take all the rest but for a tale
of Robin Hood. The Bishops indeed when they professed their greatest zeal to
recover all the Church rents out of the hand of the Laity, were found to be but
too ready to dilapidate unto Noblemen and others too much of the remnant of the
Churches patrimony; your self may remember what bargain you made as I think
with the Earl of Seaforth, which you know was the first occasion of
diminishing your reputation with your great Patron Land of Canterbury: I am
sure your Colleague Spotswood did sell the whole Abacy of Killwinning to the
Noblemen and Gentlemen of Cuningham, to the great prejudice and grief of the
University of Glasgow, and the Ministers of the bounds who had great interest
therein.

At the Parliament of Lithgow 1606. our good Bishops for their own base ends
did consent in the name of the Church, though they had never so much as
consulted here in that business, to the greatest dilapidation that ever was
heard of in Scotland, the impropriation to Noblemen and Gentlemen at one time,
of no fewer then sixteen Abbacies, every one whereof had incorporate the rents
of a number of Parish Churches. Too many pranks of this kind have been played
by the Prelates and Clergy men of their way, but that ever any Presbytery was
guilty of such sacrilegious tricks, it will never as I imagine be proved.

What you speak of a Gentleman's confession in Testament of his grief, for
deceiving good Ministers, is to no purpose; Page 12. Nor favor Gentlemen in
their wickedness.
did not Hypocrites deceive the Apostles? but that Ministers did keep him from
Church censures for his known uncleanness, you know there is no reason to
believe you upon your bare word; the Gentleman's hypocrisy was but small, if
his villainies were so open that justly he could be challenged for them.

For your last imputation I know that feuds in Scotland were frequent and
lamentable; They never did countenance any feud; all these were the Prelates
crimes.
also that King James labors in suppressing them were happy and successful;
but that any Presbytery did ever entertain them, its a lie so gross that for
all your Cretian Art, you are not able to bring so much as the color of on
instance to prove it. I find in Spotswood, Letters of King James to
Presbyteries and Synods for their assistance in that gracious work; and it is
certain that all the Kings in Christendom had never been able to have
abolished these feuds without the help of the Ministry. Can you tell me of any
Bishop that either did endeavor or had such power in the heart of any people,
as to promove that work one hairs breadth? I know that the chief Bishops for
all their open fauning, were yet ever esteemed so great haters of the Nobility
and prime Gentry, that they did little regard how many of them perished; your
self I think knows that in the feud betwixt the Grahams and the Sandilands,
none was a better swordman, then your Metropolitan Spotswood.

Your last Paragraph is but a recapitulation of these things which I hope I
have demonstrate to be clear untruths.

Your next head is of Provincial Synods; Page 13. Prelaticall principles take
away the very being of Elderships and Assemblies.
upon these you are brief, and yet might have spared much of that you bring;
for the most has no more relation to Provincial Synods, then to any other
Church meeting. In the beginning you make the Provincial Synod to be an apish
imitation of an ancient Provincial Council, consisting of the Metropolitan
and his suffragane Bishops, intimating hereby what elsewhere you have
published, and in your declinator of the Assembly at Glasgow subscribed, That
the very constitution of all our Synods is vicious, as consisting of Members
whom reason and Antiquity does exclude; all Jurisdiction belongs to Bishops, a
preaching Presbyter has no more to do with it then a ruling Presbyter, without
an Episcopal commission; by virtue hereof a man of any coat, may sit and voice
in a Synod; without this none but Bishops themselves may have place there.

That which you make the politic stratagem of the Gamaliels as you call them
of our Land, Presbytetians would not use wicks to cor^upt the Assembly;
therefor Bishops were se^^p to (...).
is nothing but that which in all societies Ecclesiastic and civil, nature
makes necessary: in every multitude some men by their gifts and diligence will
fall to be leading; but that the most leading men among us, had ever any
authority to command the weakest of their Brethren, you dare not allege it,
though every Prelate by virtue of his office pretend to a power of commanding
all his Clergy. That the most eminent men among us could ever carry an Assembly
after them, farther then their reason did persuade the minds of their Brethren,
it is very untrue.

How little able Noblemen have been to sway the Votes of a Synod to their own
desires, you and your Brethren know as well as any others: for the difficulty
and impossibility of this practice was the maine ground whereupon your
Antichristian order behoved to be brought back again from Rome to Scotland:
When King James by many experiments, had found that neither himself nor all
the Noblemen of the Land were able either by Art, or allurements, or terrors to
sway the Assemblies of the Church to their own appetites, the resolution was
taken to destroy these meetings, to overturne their orders, to spoil them of
their power, to put all in the hand of Bishops upon this confidence, wherein
they were not deceived, that although they had found it impossible to make the
multitude of the Ministers so long as their Assemblies enjoyed their old and
just privileges, obsequious to the will of the Court; Yet if once that order
of Synods were overturned, and their power settled in the Bishops hands, it
would be an easy matter to make the whole Clergy very tractable and obnoxious.
What therefore here you object of the Synods serving the lusts of great men,
was neither true nor possible, so long as the Presbyteriall government stood
entire; but so soon as that was overthrown and changed into Episcopacy, that
game was gained. We never knew any Bishop oppose himself in any thing to the
Court, nor to the desires of any Nobleman how unreasonable so ever, if the
Court was for him.

What here you subjoyn of the great honor deferred to some of the Ministry,
Page 14. Ministers generally were ever and still are more honored in Scotland
then any where else.
however your exaggerations be invidious and Satyricall, yet we are not ashamed
to profess that no where in the World, the Nobility and Gentry carry greater
respect to Ministers then in Scotland. The Bishops did much envy this; for how
ever the King and Courtiers did countenance them, yet the whole Country where
ever they went, did justly despise them: but the Ministers, those especially
who with any zeal did oppose their evil courses, were always by the greatest
of the Land before their faces highly honored. It is true, Ministers of the
Episcopal cut were no more prized then their Masters; but this I may affirm
that the poorest and weakest Minister of what ever side, was ever more honored
by the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland then by the best of the Bishops, even
those who made it their glory to be the Patrons of poor Ministers against the
Nobilities oppression. Though our Scottish Bishops were not come to the height
of the English Prelates grandour; and the poorest of the Scots Ministers that
ever I knew, were of a much better fashion then many hundreds of the English
Curates and Priests; yet I have often seen the meanest of the Scottish
preachers get more respect from the prime Earls of that Land, then the chief
and best deserving Ministers could have from their ordinary Bishops, either
within their private walls or in the face of their Provincial meetings. So
what you object of the contempt of the Ministers in Scotland, if it be
understood from their Brethren or from the Nobility or Gentry, it is very
false; but if from you and your Colleagues it was too too visible.

Your next Story concerns Mr. Robert Bruce Minister of Edinburgh, P. 15, 16,
17. Mr. Robert Bruce vindicated.
a gracious and Heroic Divine as Scotland ever bred. Though the quarrel of
Episcopacy did at last alter King James countenance toward him, yet all the
Bishops of the three Kingdoms had never so much respect from that Prince as
this man. What you speak of his great attendance, is either a very ignorant, or
a very malicious mistake; neither he nor any Minister of Scotland, though nobly
borne and of good Estates, used ever to be attended by any more servants then
one at most, but in their journeying to Presbyteries, Synods or Visitations,
the Noblemen and Gentlemen members of these meetings, were always glad of the
Ministers company, and when their way fell to be one, they were wont to travel
together; does it from hence follow, that the Noblemen and all the Gentlemen of
their Train, were the Ministers attendants?

The long relation you make of King James conference with Mr. Bruce anent the
Earl of Huntly, you take it out of the story of Spotswood, who at first was a
domestic servant but thereafter a great unfriend to Mr. Bruce; The tale of your
Author you do much enlarge, and add unto it many circumstances whereof you
have no warrant; the matter as I gather it, out of your own Author was thus.
The Earl of Huntly all his life time was the head of the Popish faction in
Scotland, he was often excommunicate, and often he gave satisfaction to the Church,
abjuring his Popery, and joining to our Church, but always he played the
Hypocrite or Apostate; when the Catholic league was first framed in France,
betwixt the Pope, King Philip of Spain and the Guizians for the rooting out of
all Protestants, this man made himself quickly of that party: When in the
eighty eight the Spanish Armada came to conquer this whole Isle, no man was so
ready as he with his whole strength to have joined with them, when after the
miscarriage of that Navy, the enterprise was renewed, diverse times he sent his
Messengers to the Prince of Parme at Brussels, and to Philip at Madrid,
assuring his readiness to concur for the destruction of Queen Elizabeth and
all the Protestants in the Isle; though all these horrible Treasons were proved
under his own hand, and acknowledged, and all were pardoned, yet nothing could
amend his evil nature, he was still sound plotting the delivery of the Isle,
into the Spaniards hands; and when all hope of foreign invasion was past, yet
he could not give over, but was proved to have new plots upon the Kings person,
for making of him prisoner, and killing before his face Chancellor Maitland,
his prime and best Counselor: This also was pardoned, notwithstanding he
remained the same man, and quickly thereafter in the sight of the Court, and
all the Town of Edinburgh, he burnt the Earl of Murrays house above his head,
( Murray was a prime Noble man of the Land, the Kings near Kinsman, the heir
of the good Regent, the best Governor that any King of Scotland did ever
enjoy) this man did Huntly kill without any cause at all, but his own mere
envy and malice; for these crimes he was again excommunicate; the Earl of
Argile at the Kings entreaty and direction persued him with an Army of ten
thousand men; many hundreds of these good subjects were killed by that Rebel,
when after Argiles deseat, the King himself with his prime Nobles went out
against him, he with displayed banner went to the fields against the King; all
this Spotswood reports at length. Let any conscientious man here be judge, King
James for his own respects requires a conscientious Minister to consent and
concur with him, to obtain from the next ensuing Assembly, the absolution of
such a man from the censure of Excommunication, for this was the main question;
the honest Minister could not be persuaded to consent unto the relaxation of
such a bloody obstinate Apostate, confessed by all to be still imponitent, from
the censures either of Church or State: As for the inconveniences, his Majesty
did allege the dangers from the Papists of England, if Huntly and the Popish
party in Scotland were too much irritate; was it any great crime for Mr. Bruce
to differ in this from his Majesty, and to tell him plainly that which was the
opinion of all the good Ministers of Scotland, though the ground of the Kings
quarrel with them, That it would prove his best policy to make fast with the
Protestant party of England and over-sea, renouncing all correspondency either
with Papists or Prelates, that if he walked upon this ground, God and his right
would carry him through all, both seen and imagined difficulties? The world
long ago is satisfied with the wisdom of this advice; for it was quickly
found that too much connivence and compliance with Papists, did bring that
Prince upon the very brinke of ruin; for the Popish party of England finding
themselves disappointed of their great hopes did run to the desperate attempts
of the Powder Plot and other Treasons: Also the keeping up of the Bishops was a
great cause of all the mischiefs which since that time to this day have fallen
either upon our Church or State; It is true, the words you ascribe to Mr. Bruce
are very unmannerly; but who will believe that ever any such phrases proceeded
from the mouth of so grave and wise a man? your only Author is Spotswood, His
testimony in this case ought not to be trusted; but if you will look to the
matter of Mr. Bruce his counsel, I subject it to the touchstone of the
severest censurers.

Upon the fourth head of General Assemblies, Page 18, 19, 20, 21. The reason
of the Authors malice against the general Assembly.
you spew out the whole remnant of your gall; the wrath of a child does kindle
against the whip that scourges him; I will not remember you of the dogs
snarling at the stone that has hit him: The General Assembly for just causes
did chastise you with their sharpest rod of Excommunication, they did deliver
you into the hands of the Father of lies and Blasphemies; if there were no more
then what here you write, it is a demonstration that the sentence of that
Reverend Assembly against you is ratified in heaven, and that God in his
justice according to the word of his faithful servant, has delivered your
obstinate soul to be acted by that evil spirit? who else could move you to
blaspheme the crown of Christ, and the holy One of Israel by name, and to make
the holy Scriptures the ordinary channel through which your profane girds at
the General Assembly must run: What you bring, the most of it is so
impertinent, and so remote from all relation to any Assembly, and set down in
such confusion, that the very effects, though the cause were not known, may
evidence the distraction of your Spirit. I shall handle the fieryest of your
darts as they come from your furious hands.

You make us to ascribe to our General Assembly, False and railing slanders
against the general Assembly.
a jurisdiction universal and infallible, you will have it to meddle with all
affairs both Spiritual and Temporal, you would make the world believe that
all disobedience thereto is censured with excommunication, and that it commands
the King to punish i^ estate, body and life all who disobey; otherwise that it
causes the King himself to be dethroned and killed, this often you repeat;
moreover you call this Assembly an untamed furious Beast, you advise the King
much rather to submit himself to the Pope then to be in the reverence thereof;
what spirit makes you break out into such discourses, your self will see, if
ever God give you repentance; however it is evident, that lies and malice do
here strive which shall predominate.

The General Assembly in Scotland has no more power then what the Parliaments
since the first Reformation have heartily allowed unto them, they meddle with
no temporal case at all; It exercises no power but what the King and the Laws
authorize.
and all the spiritual cases which to this day they have touched, may be
reduced to a few heads: That every disobedience brings with it Excommunication,
is a wide slander, we do not excommunicate but for a grievous transgression
joined with extraordinary obstinacy; This censure is so rare with us, that a
man may live long and before his death never be witness to it. What civil
punishment the State in their wisdom finds meet to impose on a person who
contemnes the Ordinances of God, let themselves be answerable: But that the
Assembly medles with any man's life or goods, is like the rest of your
Assertions, and yet no more false then the other lie you have here. That ever
any Assembly of the reformed Churches upon the highest provocations did take it
so much as in debate to excommunicate, much less to dethrone any King, its
most false; but the Spirit that leads you must be permitted to breath out his
natural air, and to lie according to his very ancient custom.

You object it once and again that the Commissioners of Buroughs and
Universities are received as Members in our general Assemblies; behold the
greatness of this crime, The Commissioners of Buroughs and Universities are
all Elders.
out of every Classical Presbytery we allow one ruling Elder, to go as
Commissioner to that National meeting, and if there be a royal Burgh within
the bounds, we allow two, and three if there be an University: What would you
say to the Parliament of England who appoints four ruling Elders out of every
Classis, to accompany two Ministers to the Assembly, though there be neither
Borough not University in the bounds? of this we are careful, that whoever
comes either from Cities or Universities, be not only ruling Elders, but also
have an express approbation from the Eldership.

What you speak of the Kings presence in our Assemblies: We ascribe to the King
so much power in the Assemblies as the Laws allow, albeit not such a Tyranny
as Prelates would flatter him into.
it is true, it was ever our wish, and often our happiness to have the King or
his Commissioner amongst us at these meetings, we never did dispute their
capacity; no more was craved then the place of a civil President, and this no
man did ever deny either to him or them, nor a power to propound what ever they
thought expedient; but some of your flattering Prelates do ascribe to the
Prince a power which neither we nor our Laws may own. You give him a power to
call so many as he will, without all Commission from any Church, to voice in
all Assemblies, and by the multitude of their voices to carry all: You give him
also a power to hinder the Assembly to debate any matter which he mislikes,
were it never so necessary for the very being of the Church: You give him a
Negative Vote to stop any conclusion, were it never so consonant to the Word of
God; yea, an affirmative Vote to carry all things in the Assembly, absolutely
according to his own mind, The Assembly being but his Arbitrary Court in
things spiritual, by whose advice the Prince who is the supreme judge in all
causes does determine as he finds it expedient; sometimes according, sometimes
contrary to their judgment. Such a power, no ordinary either Erastian or
Prelate will willingly grant to any Prince upon earth; but this was one of the
late Canterburian extravagancies, wherein your singular zeal did much help you
to your Bishopric.

What you add of our pressing the King to execute all our Acts under the pain
of Excommunication, we have often told you it is a great untruth; for all
Scotland knows that the furthest we went ever with any Prince in our Assembly
Acts, was, humbly to supplicate for their civil Sanction; i^ we obtain it, we
bless God and them; if we cannot by any prayers persuade, we sit down in grief
and wait patiently upon their good pleasure.

Our taking in of all things temporal upon some spiritual relation, The
Assembly alters no Laws, but only supplicates the King and Parliament to alter
such ^aws as confirm evident errors,
and forcing the King to change his Laws though never so prejudicial to the
State, your report in this will be believed, when you have gotten grace to
forsake in some measure the Spirit that now leads you. The matter here you aim
at, but keeps it in the clouds is the proceeding of the Assembly at Glasgow
against your offices and persons. According to the Laws of Popi^^ times, The
Bishops were Lords of Parliament, of Council, of Exchequer, of Session: The
Assembly did find all this contrary to the Word of God and therefore did
discharge under the pain of the censures of the Church, any Minister of the
Word, to take upon him these civil employments; I hope the hindering of
persons merely Ecclesiastic to drown themselves in a sea of temporal
affairs, is not to take cognizance of all things temporal, in ordine ad
spiritualia. The Assembly did supplicate the King and Parliament for the
abolition of the Popish and corrupt Laws which did countenance the ambition of
the Clergy; the Parliament finding the Assemblies supplication just, joined
with them to deal with the King to pass it, his Majesty for a time misled by
the flattery of Prelates refused; but at last seeing the earnestness and clear
equity of the Assembly and Parliament their desires, he was persuaded to
consent to these Acts, wherein all Churchmen are forbidden to take upon them
civil places. This is it that you call the forcing of the King and Parliament
to change the Laws for the great trouble of the State; this is all the
Assemblies tyranizing over the King and Parliament, a mere supplication to
alter Popish and corrupt Laws, which both the King and the State, after a
little debate did find necessary to be done.

To the absurdities which you call monstrously gross, Your oftrepeated
quarrel against ruling E^ders is absurd.
p. 21.22. we have spoken already, you are impatient that any ruling Elder,
that any Commissioner from Buroughs or Universities should voice in Church.
Assemblies; your express reason is because concilium est Episcoporum; see the
man's absurdity, no Minister more then a ruling Elder must voice at any
Assembly; the decisive voice there belongs only to Bishops; yet any Lay men
vested with the Bishops commission, may very lawfully exercise all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the whole Clergy of the Diocese; neither is
there any Gentleman of the Shire, not any Burgess of the City, nor any Student
in the University to whom a Prelate can purchase a Letter from the King, but he
may sit and voice decisively in all spiritual causes as a constituent Member
of the General Assembly as well as the Bishop himself; this is the doctrine
and was the practice of our Prelates in Scotland.

You are angry p. 22. Page 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. The Assembly and Parliament with
us, use not to differ.
that the acts of our Assemblies should get so ready obedience, but the matters
themselves are so clear, that none uses to refuse them, and it is the Law of
the kingdom that the Assemblies determination in matters proper to its
cognizance should be obeyed; if any thing new be acted, which requires a civil
sanction, the Commissioners of the Assembly supplicate the next ensuing
Parliament for their ratification, which for common is easily obtained, the
clear equity of the matter purchases a ready grant. If there happen to be cause
why the Parliament should not be satisfied, the Aslembly by their reasons is
persuaded to be of the Parliaments mind; no such unanimous Courts in the
Universe, as the Parliament and General Assembly of Scotland, they never had
any difference, but what bad Courtiers and Prelates procured for their own
interests: put these pests of the Church and State to a corner, the King,
Parliament and Assembly shall never differ, but always concur for the
strengthening and comforting one another.

From your 22. page to 31. Your invectives against our first Reformation are
wicked.
you heap together what ever extreme malice can invent, to bring disgrace upon
the first and chief resormers of Religion from Popery; you openly avow your
dislike of the first Reformation in Scotland, you are not ashamed to proclaim
all the Reformation both of Scotland, France, Holland, and Germany, and
wheresoever the work was not done by the hand of the Sovereign Prince, to have
been Sedition and Rebellion.

The first thing you undertake to prove, is, That we give our Assemblies power
to depose and kill Kings; The Vindication of John Kno^, and the first Reformers
of Scotland, from base calumnies.
for this you allege Martin mar Prelate, whoyet says no such thing, and though
hedid what is that to us? then you cite a number of passages out of John Knox
his writings; but is it just that John Knox Assertions, long before any
Assemblies were in Scotland, should be laid to their charge? But what may those
absurd asserions of John Knox be? he says as you allege, that the Nobility of
Scotland who are borne Counselors of the Kingdom, and by the Laws have great
privileges may repress the fury and madness of a misled Prince; I grant this
to you must be a great Heresy who makes it one of the Articles of your faith,
that though Princes were as mad as ever Nero, and should openly avow their
desires to overturn all the sworn Laws of their State, and to kill without any
cause all their Subjects, yet for the Nobility or whole States of Parliament to
make the smallest opposition or to go one hairs breadth beyond a naked
supplication were no less then a damnable Rebellion and Treason; but believe
it, the subjects of Scotland will not take off your hand such maxims, without
some Argument for their truth.

John Knox is alleged to say that the Commonalty may bridle the cruel beasts
and resorme Religion, but what does it concern the general Assembly whatever
power the Lords or Commons have by the Law, or usurp against the Law? The
matter whereof John Knox is speaking is this, The body of Scotland in the year
1557. were true and zealous Protestants, the Mass and Images were to them
Idols: long before the governor and protector of the Kingdom Duke Hamilton was
for the Religion, At his first Parliament he did authorize some good beginnings
of Reformation, the Cardinal and Clergy at this grew mad, and found means to
translate the government from the Duke to the Queens Mother, sister to the Duke
of Guize, and Cardinal of Lorain; in the time both of the Duke and Queen
Mothers Regency, the cruelty of the Bishops was unsufferable. They took diverse
of the most zealous Preachers and Professors, men and women, and publicly
without any Commission from the Magistrate, only for their zeal to the truth
of God, did burn them quick as Heretics: After many years patience, the
people at last seeing no end of the Prelates fury, did cause write Letters to
some of their most wicked persecutors, telling them that if they gave not over
to murder their Brethren, themselves should taste of that Cup, of which they
forced others to drink. All the Reformation which the people at that time
practiced, was to keep themselves pure from most vile Idolatry, and in private
to hear the Word of God purely preached: They made no public Reformation till
first they had openly supplicated the Queen and gotten her allowance, and a
promise of an Act of Parliament in the year 1558. which promise when the
Protestant Nobility, Gentry and Commons did press in face of Parliament, it
was not denied by the Queen, but cunningly put off, upon assurance that all
their desires at the first convenience should be granted: in the mean time she
received their Protestation for a Liberty to live in their reformed Churches
separate from Popish Idolaters, and promised in due time to give to the
Protesters full satisfaction. Though you have brought together all the
malicious a persions which your predecestors the Popish Prelates and Priests
were wont at these very times to heap upon the heads of our blessed Reformers;
yet shall you never be able to leave any stain upon that happy work, though
here and elsewhere you spue out your dispight against it.

The Reformation of Scotland was begun by public Authority in the first
Parliament of Queen Mary, the year 1542. holden by the Governor the Earl of
Arran a Protestant for the time; the setting up of it in public was avowed,
and protested for in face of Parliament 1558. with the Queen Regents evident
allowance, and without the opposition of any; but in the next Pa^liament 1560.
the whole Estates without the contradiction of any, but three Popish Lords, did
set up by Law the whole body of that Religion, which since by Gods mercy we
have ever peaceably possessed, except so far as wicked Prelates have troubled
us.

It is true, The suspension of the Queen Regen^s authority was an act of the
State which did nothing I rejudice the Sovereignty.
that Queen Regent notwithstanding of her good countenance and fair promises,
was forced by the privy Instructions of her wicked Brethren, Guize and the
Cardinal of Loraine, to oppose Reformation; wherein fore against her own
mind, as at her death she professed, she went so far as to bring in many
thousands of the French to conquer and subdue the Land. They began to the
terror of the whole Isle, to fortify Leith, and other Maritime places; they
exercised an evident tyranny both in Church and State, and overthrew the Laws
and liberties of the Nation, which forced the cheise of the Nobility for the
casting off of this yoke of stavery from the Church and State, and preventing
the danger which threatened the whole Isle to enter in a covenant of defense
both among themselves and with the Queen of England, but without the least
prejudice to the just authority of their Sovereign then Queen of France, as it
after appeared: for when by the blessing of God and the help of the English,
they had ejected the French usurpers, they did heartily receive and obey the
Queen so soon as she came from France. For the justification of all this I
could bring formal testimonies out of Spotswood himself.

What you say of the deposition of Queen Regent from her Authority, it is false
that any Church Assembly did ever meddle with it less or more; it was the Act
of the three Estates; how just let any judge. She was the first woman as I
remember that ever in Britain had the government of the State; it belonged not
to her by any right, the Laws provided that charge for Duke Hamilton; but she
and the Prelates couzend him out of his right and long possession; she became
not only a violent persecuter of all the faithful against the Law and her own
promises but also went about evidently by violence and force of Arms to subdue
the land to the tyranny of strangers: much of this she did, albeit at the
direction of her Brethren of Loraine, yet without all commission from our
Sovereign her daughter. When no supplication nor remonstrance could stop her,
the Estates of the Land being all denounced Rebels, and Traitors by her, did
pass an Act not for depriving her of her Regency, but for the suspending of
her Authority till the next Parliament; or till she altered the course of her
tyrannous government with an express protestation that the authority and power
of the King and Queen of France their Sovereigns should remain to them sacred
and inviolable.

This act of the Statewhether right or wrong, what does it concern the
general Assembly of the Church? be it so that a Minister or two being called
for advice, did give their assent to this action which is the furthest our
Enemies allege, yet what has this to do with our Church government? it seems
the conscience of the Queen did approve of this sentence against her; for she
did much repent of all those actions which did procure it, as she did evidence
in that conference which a little before her death she required and did obtain
with the prime Protestant Nobles, and the Minister Mr. Willocks, whose hand in
her suspension was alleged to be chief. The Presbyterians have often
supported but never hurt ^oyalty.


That abominable calumny which continually you fall upon, as if our doctrine
did tend to the killing of Kings, demonstrates the superfluity of your naughty
malice, whereby your fellows and you above any one, were wont to poison the
ears and heart of the King, while you were about him, till at last you did
precipitate him in these dangers that very readily might have taken away from
him both his life and his crown. I desire to know of you who charges us with
this abominable crime of destroying Kings who were the men that saved the life
and authority of King James so long as he was in Scotland? and who be these who
have preserved King Charles from utter ruin, wherein your wicked companions
and your self with the first, by your pernicious ways did cast him, and would
hold him still therein, if you might be heard? Did either of these Kings in the
days of their danger have their recourse to any but to Presbyterians, or was
any other party either able or willing to preserve them?

What you speak of Mr. Knox preaching for the pulling down of Churches, Knox
did never preach for the pulling down of any Church.
is like the rest of your lies, he did indeed often times preach down the
worshipping of Images, and the idle bellies of the profane Monks: one day after
his Sermon the people in Perth being stirred by the injurious violence of an
idolatrous Priest, did pull down the Images which daily were worshipped, and
from that action did run to the casting down of two or three dens of Friars,
which your Orthodox pen styles religious houses; but that Mr. Knox or any
Preacher was the Author of these actions, it is so false that the day
thereafter when the Bishop of Murrays son by his mischievous insolency had
provoked the people against the Monastery of Scoon, John Knox in person with
all the Nobility he could persuade went out to save those irreligious walls to
his power from all violence. Some few Monasteries and two or three Cathedral
Churches, were cast down by the idle provocations of some Popish Priests, who
were so mad upon their Idolatry that they would keep these places to be Castles
and forts to preserve and propagate their abominations; But quickly that fury
of the Priests was gotten suppressed and the Churches peaceably purged, so that I
have not heard that in all our Land, above three or four Churches were cast
down.

I should be very tedious if I went through all the odious narrations of this
enraged Prelate; Page 17, 28.
I must touch but upon some of his principal passages: in his 27 page, he
makes the Reformers to disclaim Sovereign Authority, to denounce war, to
enter it to a covenant for mutual defense, to command the Nobility to join
with them under the pain of excommunication, etc. A waspe out of the sweetest
herbs sucks venom, the matter as all our Historians relate, was this.

When Queen Regent was marching with the French Army to Perth, to kill as she
had openly vowed, The Arms of Scotland against the Tyranny of the French were
necessary and just.
men women and children; to raze unto the ground that ancient City and to sow
it with salt, only for the pulling down of some images and some Monks dens:
the Nobillity did meet to stop that Horrible rage, they did deprecate violence
with humble supplications, and when these were in vain, they stood upon their
defense against the French Bands: this is that which you call the disclaiming
of Sovereignty. They write a threatening Letter to the Bishops and Priests, the
great Incendiaries of the time, to kindle the Queens wrath against her best
Subjects: this you call denouncing of War. Some members of their own
Congregation did come with the Queen against them, namely the Earls of Argyle
and Murrey, Them they entreated not to shed their Brethrens blood, otherwise
they showed them their deserving to be excommunicate out of that society, which
without cause they did persecute; The seasonablenes of this reproof did
quickly appear, both the Noblemen beholding the Loyalty of their Brethren and
their unjust oppression by others, did leave the Queen and join with the
Protestant party. A demonstration of their Loyalty wa^ given to the world at
that very instant, when they came to such strength that the French and the
Prelates and all their opposits, could scarce have been a Breackfast to them,
they were content to let them all go in peace and upon the Queens word did
dissolve their Army only suspecting, which did fall out, that no promises would
be made conscience of to Heretics, before they disbanded they gave assurances
of mutual defense, if by their Treacherous enemies contrary to promises they
should again for their Religion be invaded: was such a Covenant any more then
nature requires of every society of men for their own necessary preservation.
As for your invectives against the first reformation and that which you
profess is the cause of your anger, The (...) very wicked and Popish.
the removal of the beauty and order of the Church, that is the putting away
of the mass with all its ornaments, the removal of the Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, the Monks and Friars, for all this you must be dispensed with: for
herein you but follow your Canterburian principles. Yet I cannot but marvel
that your passion toward these trinckets of Popery should be so great, as to
make you affirm that all our present troubles are, but Gods judgments upon us
for their removeall, and to prophecy that those evils cannot end, except we
return to that vomit: our condition is hard if we must redeem peace with the
reimbracing of the Mass Book and all its ornaments, if for the right ordering
of our Church, we must take back our Bishops, Patriarchs, Cardinals, and
Popes (for non of all these you do scruple) if all our Abacies and Nunneries
must again be peopled, and which is worst of all, if we must resolve never more
to permit the whole estates of a land or a Parliament to oppose a Prince when
seduced by a popish Prelate or a Turkish darvisch, he takes a conceit to set up
the whole body of popery or of Mahometisme in all his Dominions: this is the
divinity which your piety and orthodoxie here insinuates.

Your long discourse of the General Assemblies Sovereignty above the King is
closed with two other stories, P. 29.30.
the killing of Cardinal Beton, and the tumult in the Church of Edinburrough
at the reading of the Liturgy. What belongs these things to the General
Assembly, were these actions either decreed or allowed by any Church meeting;
but the truth is, you are gathering together a confused mass of all the odious
fables which you can either find or invent to the prejudice of Protestant
Religion since it came first in Scotland to this day.

As for the Cardinals slaughter, Cardinal Beton by all Law and reason
deserved death, yet Knox did not defend the way of his slaughter.
all good men who heard it did heartily rejoice at the judgment of God in
taking away that cruel persecuter, a most vicious wretch: as Spotswood
himself relates the story, his crimes were many for which his life by all Law
and reason was forfeit: the suborning of a false Testament to King James the
fifth, for his own advancement, the burning quick by his own Ecclesiastic
authority the most holy Martyrs, the marring with all his might the Reformation
of Religion: that such a man was removed in the indignation of God, according
to Mr. Wisheard the martyrs prophecy, the whole Land did greatly rejoice. As
for the manner of his slaughter, that it was by the hands of private men and not
of the public executiooner, this no man did defend: of Mr. Knox disallowing
thereof, Spotswood testifies expressly: but that which troubles you, is not the
killing of a man, but as you speak, of a Priest, of an Archbishop of high
dignity, that is a Cardinal of Rome, these circumstances are but poor
agravations of that fact.

The other horrible fact at Edinburgh, how detestable it was, P. 31. An account
of the tumult at Edinburgh for the Service-booke.
Let all the Isle judge. When a company of base men were come to that height of
insolency, as to tread on the necks of the whole Kingdom, as to make it an Act
of high treason for the greatest of the Nobility to keep, albeit very secretly
in their Cabins, a Copy of a Petition presented to his Majesty in person, Vide
the large Declaration.
against some new illegal usurpations of the Prelates: to get Noblemen
condemned to lose their heads only for this action and to avow in print the
great Justice of such a sentence, and the extraordinary favor in pardoning so
high and treasonable an attempt: When they became so extremely malapert without
so much as once acquainting the Church to bring in three or four whole books
full of Novations in Religion, and withal to proclaim the absolute
unlawfulness for the whole Land to make the smallest opposition if to morrow
they should bring in, upon the back of their former Novations, the Mass in
Latin, or the A coran in Arabic; when they came with a high hand to put in
practice this their lawless Tyranny, that good zealous people (whom you
maliciously and falsely style whoores and coal stealers) should have their
patience so far tempted as to break out in violence against you was it any
wonder? when atrocious injuries are multiplied upon a Nation, and by a few
openly vicious and corrupt persons, the current of Justice is stopped, all the
world will not be able to hold the passions of a people not totally subdued,
from breaking out into unjustifiable insolences, which a little Justice might
easily have prevented What ever wrong might accompany the zeal of that very
good people, the reverend Answerers to the corrupt Doctors of Aberdeen do
openly disavow it, and all of us were ever very well content, that the whole
action of that famous infamous day might have come to a perfect trial, That
all persons according to their demerits, might have suffered legal
punishments. That you and your associats, the professed Authors of these popish
books, and violent introducers of them in our Church against all our Laws and
Customs might have been brought to answer, before your Judge competent, a
lawful general Assembly: also that the interrupters of your shameful
usurpation might have come to an account for all their words and deeds that
day: but you and your Colleagues knowing well your legal deserts would never
be pleased to come to any trial. You pressed very hard for some days, that a
number of very honest men and women might have bin put to bodily tortures, and
that all your abominable Novations might have been quietly without any scruple
every where thereafter received: upon these conditions your clemency was
content to intercede with his Majesty, That the horrible and monstrous uprore
might be pardoned; but when this your overture was not hearkened unto, your
Antichristian fury broke out so high, that nothing could satiate your rage,
but the destruction (with an English Army) of all your opposites in the whole
Nation, and the fastening upon the neck of the Country with undissoluble bands,
the yoke of a perpetual slavery. Though in opposition to this your horrid
design, many thousands in both Nations be already destroyed, though the King
himself be brought in extreme danger, both of his Crown and person: yet so
matchless is your rage, and that of your friends, that unless your pride,
avarice, and errors may be satisfied except Bishops, books, and a Turkish
royalty may be gotten established: you are willing the King, his Family, the
remnant of his people should all be destroyed with you, and turned into water,
to quench the fire of your ashes. It Is a great mercy of God to these Lands,
that such unparalelled furies are not buried below the ground, or beaten off to
so remote corners, that they may no more be seen in the societies of men,
either of Church or State.

From your 32. page, P. 32. Our Assemblies did ever defer all loyal
subjection to the King.
as a man distracted ye ramble up and down, backward and forward you rayell in
so many things old and new, that to follow you with any orderly, clear and
distinct answer, I think it impossible. Your first gybe is, at the power of the
General Assembly, which the King and Parliament has allowed unto it, and
whereof they are in a quiet possession: to wit, that in matters merely
Spiritual, they are the last ordinary Judges: but if they should miscarry,
that the King and Parliament should not have power to make them reform their
errors, it never came in any of our minds. Your next calumny is, that we
count it but a courtesy, and no necessary duty to Petition for the civil
sanction to our Acts, and that if our Petitions be not granted, we are ready
by Excommunication and rebellion, to force the King and the State to our will;
These are but Symptoms of a spirit in which Excommunication has wrought its
first effect, I wish it might work farther for your repentance and salvation.

For proof of the Assemblies usurping over the King, Mr. Hinderson is far
from all disloyal and papal humors.
you allege first the late Sermon of the Scottish Pope at Westminister, and
then you run back upon our first reformation. It is true, that Scottish Pope
was the man whom the General Assembly made their instrument, to deliver you
over to the Devil and therefore your rage against him for that necessary and
good service is great: out of his Sermon you dare cite nothing, and it is well
known, that no or thodox Divine in any of the reformed Churches, is more
willing to give to Sovereign Princes all their due, then that most worthy man
is, and ever has been. In your scoff of a Scottish Pope the smoke of ignorance
goes up, with the fire of malice: these many years, for your old stinging, you
have bin removed to dark Cavernes, though sometimes for a Breathing you have
cropen out to Oxford and Dublin: but had your crimes permitted you to have
walked a little, either at Land. or Edinburgh, or any where in this Isle, where
the Sun of Truth and Justice did shine, or any where over Sea, where the
affairs of this Isle with any ingenuity use to be represented: you would not
have called that most gracious man a Pope. For how ever you have declared your
self for Scottish Cardinals, and a Pope over the whole Church Catholic
through all the world: and all who know you, will bear you witness, that in
Scotland so proud and arrogant a Prelate, did not breath in our days: yet the
venerable divine whom you slander is so far from the note you would put upon
him that a more modest and humble spirit of so great parts, and deserved
authority with all the greatest of the Isle, lives not this day in the reformed
Churches.

But it is our first Reformation that chiefly grieves you, Our first
reformation was authorized by Parliament.
you continually break out upon that, and repeat very often the same most
bitter slanders. The reformation in Scotland, as has been said, began long
before the year 1558. when the Queens Mother was not yet come to the
government, in the year 1542. the Protestant Regent, Duke Hamilton, with the
consent of Parliament did then authorize it, and set it on foot; albeit the
complete and public Reformation of the whole Land, was not till the year
1560. when the Parliament convened by the authority of our Sovereign, and
after ratified by her, did authorize it fully. Her delay for a little to
ratify that Parliament makes nothing against its validity, especially since
now for fourscore and five years it has stood firm, as one of our most happy
Parliaments, not questioned by any, but some few eminently malignant Papists,
and Prelates.

That which here you scorn in Knox, is a truth uncontroverted by any
reasonable man: that Religion has its own proper intrinsecall strength from
God, its only Author; that Princes and states may and ought as servants to God
their Lord, make way for it in their Dominions by their good Laws; but this
does not add any more internal truth and strength to Religion then it has of
it self, before the Magistrate confirmed it, and which it cannot lose although
the Magistrate do cry it down, and persecute it for error.

Concerning the debates in the years 1558. and 1559. betwixt Queen Regent and
the States, for the just Liberties of the Kingdom, for both agreed that this
was the chief quarrel, we repeat not what we have said before.

What you being from the thirty third p. to 39. P. 33.34.35. Episcopa^^e was
never ^pproved by any lawful Assembly in Scotland.
I have met with it a most all in my answer to the other Treatise. In the year
1571. a Committee of the general Assembly at Leeth, deceived by some prime
Courtiers, too much engaged unto the Prelates of England, did advise to set up
Bishops in the Church of Scotland, with the name, and some shadow of the things
which then were in England: but the thing it self, a sole power of Ordination,
and Jurisdiction over the whole Diocese in one man's hand, they never dreamed
of. Yea, the very name and shadow whereto that Committee was drawn, was never
allowed of by any act of a lawful general Assembly: for the very next
Assembly did disclaim it, and ever after the matter was in debate till both
name and thing was totally exploded.

Your discourse of the Negative confession, and Churchgovernment, in the year
1580. and 1581. and of the platform of Presbiteries, as set up by Mr. Melvil
without the Kings Authority with much stuff of this kind, demonstrates your
mind, to calumniate with a great deal either of ignorance of the times, or
malicious resolution to lie.

In the year 1580. some prime Courtiers, The short confession of Faith was
subscribed by King James (...) the year 1 (...).
and others truly popish in their heart yet for their own ends was content to
dissemble, and to abjure popery with their own equivocations and mental
reservations. The King desiring to stop all starting holes, caused Mr. Craige
the Pastor of his Family to draw up a confession, every particular, rejecting
expressly the most of the Romish errors: this King James himself did Sign,
and permitted none to live at his Court, who did not swear it, he ordained it
also to go through the whole Land. Toward this confession scornfully called
negative, the Prelaticall party did ever carry an evil eye, for it was a
stronger bar against popery, and their intended innovations, then their
designs could well admit.

The whole six years before that Confession, The Presbiterian government was
fully agreed to before that (...).
the General and provincial Assemblies were much exercised, in perfiting the
second book of discipline, wherein the whole body of the Presbiterian
Government is fully set down: nothing in our Church did ever pass with so
great deliberation nor with greater unanimity. In the year 1578. it was all
agreed unto in the General Assembly: Mr. Melvill was a gracious instrument in
that work, but all the Divines of the Kingdom did join with him therein.
With the states they had some controversy, but not for the matter of
Government, in this the Harmony betwixt the Church and State was full, but for
the Church Patrimony, wherein the King did join heartily with the Assembly
against the Court, and wherein your self cannot but bear witness to the
honesty of the Divines at that time. For it was their mind that Church rents
ought not to be impropriat to Courtiers nor given to Prelates, nor serve the
ambition and avarice of any Churchmen, but ought to be employed for the
Honorable and comfortable maintenance of all that served at the Altar, and for
the relief of the poor and strangers, and what was above, to go to the
public uses of the state. But in this gracious design, the cunning first of
the Court, and after of the Prelates, did Cross both the King and the
Assembly, so that for peace they behoved to yield, albeit upon occasion both
his Majesty and the Church did often protest for their rights. The King and his
Counsel did set up the Presbyteries over all the Land at the same time.


But for any parts of the Presbiteriall Government which in that Book of
discipline was set down, there was no controversy in the year 1580 betwixt
the Church and the Court: The privy counsel had subscribed all that book with
some reservation about Church rents; the General Assemblies often did agree to
it without any exception, his Majesty himself in the fore named year did send
to the Assembly with an express commissioner the platform of all the
Presbiteries, which thereafter were erected over all Scotland, and which against
all the Prelates assaults have ever stood firm to this day; so your
alleagencies are exceeding false, that the Presbiteries were erected without
the Kings authority and that in the year 1580 the Government of our Church was
Episcopal, these are putide thredbare lies.

The General Assembly did never allow of Abbots and Priors as Churchmen and
though they pressed the great unjustice that Popish Bishops and lay Abbots
should (...) in Parliament in name of the Church to vote as the third estate
The General Assembly did never approve of Abbots and Priors.
Estate without any Commission from the Church, yet it was never their
intention to have any of their own number appointed by themselves to vote in
Parliament, in name of the Church of Scotland, For when King James a little
before his going to England was very earnest with the general Assembly to
accept of that as a favor, they forseeing the snare did resolutely reject it,
ever til his Maje. by very great dealing, did draw a plurality of an unadvised
Assembly to embrace that power of voting in Parliament, but with a number of
Caveats, which wise men foresaw would never be kept.

That Master Melvil, or any Presbitery of that Land had ever any hand in
impropriating or disapidating any part of the Church Rent, is far from truth:
But that your good Colleagues, the Prelates, in the Parliament, 1606. made a
bargain for alienating from the Church for ever, no fewer then 16. Abbays at
one time, I declared before.

About that time what the practices of the disciplinarians a^ London might be,
I do not know: but this is certain, that Mr. Cartwright and all the old
nonconformists in England, were our dear Brethren and made a ways the
Government of the Church of Scotland the measure of their desires, that betwixt
us and the Antiepiscopall party here, was never any difference, till the
unhappy Separatists, and their Children the Independents did make it.

Your invenomed invective against the present Reformation of both Kingdoms as
a monstrous deformation we let it lie in your own bosom to keep you warm,
till you be p^eased to bring all of it abroad in that Anatomy which here you
promise but we expect no performance till you first have had leisure (as
likewise you stand engaged by your word) to put the four Limbs unto that
Gorgons head of your Turkish Monarchy which some years ago you set up at
Oxford. P. 36. The Ministers in Scotland were wont to give the King seasonable
Counsel, but in all wisdom and humility.


In your 36. p. you run upon our Assemblies for appointing Ministers to Preach
pertinent doctrine, and advising them who did Preach to the King and State to
speak a word in season for the weell of Sion, at that time as I show before
their was a mighty design to advance the Catholic League, for the overthrow
of Queen Elizabeth and all Protestants, the prime Courtiers were diligent
Agents herein, the men who were trusted to be watchmen to the Kings person and
Family, if at such a time they should have been silent, they could not have
answered it either to God or man: You and your gracious companions, who never
had a mouth to divert a Prince from any evil course, were yet loud trumpets of
fury in the most of your Sermons and Prayers to inflame him against his two
Puritan Parliaments of Britain, but to calm him toward his innocent and
Catholic trusty Subjects of Ireland.

That any Assembly in Scotland ever challenged the sole power of indicting
fasts is in the ordinary predicament of your assertions under the spece of
palpable untruths. P. 37.38. No affront was offered to the King by the fast at
Edinburgh.
Of the feast at Edinburgh p. 37. I have given in the other Treatise a full
account, only I add here that in this your relation you makeit more false then
any other of your friends who write thereof: the King was neither invited nor
present; the original of the motion was not from the King, but the French
Merchants, for their own ends; the Magistrates of Edinburgh did not
countenance the feast, for of their four Bailies three kept the fast: the
appointers of that abstinence were not the Ministers, but the Magistrates and
the Congregationall Eldership, not the supreme, but the lowest judicatory of
the Church: the Process against the Magistrates and the Kings great
Solicitation that it might be Superceeded ar merely fabulous.

I have also given a large account of your next calumny in the other Treatis:
If any should Preach Treason with us he is censurable both by Church and state.
no man in Scotland did ever maintain that a Minister Preaching Treason might
not be conveened and punished by the Magistrate according to the Laws. All Mr.
Melvils plea was that a Minister of the Church of Scotland, and a member of the
University of St. Andrews being privileged by the ancient and late Laws of
the Kingdom, was not necessitate at the first instance to answer before the
privy counsel for a passage of his Sermon, which most falsely was said to be
treasonable. The whole case I have opened at large else where.

The acts of Parliament you speak of warranting an unreasonable Supremacy were
procured in the year 1584. by that insolent Tyrant Captain James, and the
Declaration upon them was penned by Bishop Adamson, also both the Acts and the
Declaration were recalled by the King and Parliament, That any invectives
against his Majesty's person for these acts were spread abroad we do deny it:
we think it very possible that much might both have been spoken and written
against the matter of these acts, but that any man was so unmannerly as to fall
upon the King himself before we believe it, we must have a greater evidence
then a Prelates Testimony.

What you say of the fugitive Ministers, The Erastian and Prelaticall
principles brought great trouble on the Ministers of Scotland.
as Spotswood relates it, was thus. The acts of that Parliament 1584. were so
bitter and grievous to all the gracious Ministers of Scotland, that many of
them fled out of the Kingdom, and diverse of the prime laid down their life,
as it seems of mere grief, Mr. Smeeton Principal Mr. of the Uniuersity of
Glasgow, and Mr. Arbuthnot, of the University of Aberdeen both dyed that year;
all the Ministers of Edinburgh fled to England, and the chief of them Mr.
Lawson went to London: Adamson Archbishop of St. Andrews at that time kept
great correspondence with the Bishops of England, who without any complaint of
the Scottish Ambassador were able easily to get an affront put upon a
Presbiterian fugitive: but if ye will believe Spotswood, Mr. Lawson was a man
so eminent both for piety and prudence, that it can hardly be supposed any
thing could escape him in preaching which might deserve the Queens
displeasure: how ever, that excellent man did dye at that time in London, as it
seems martyred by the injuries of the Scottish and English Prelates, which
doubtless did help to bring down that vengeance upon the Prelaticall State in
England, which our eyes now do behold.

For the further evincing of the intolerable miscarriages of the General
Assemby, P. 39. The case of James Gibson.
you bring three other stories p. 39.40. all are faults alleged against
single Mininisters which were they never so great and true, ought not to be
laid upon the Assembly; but see how all are misreported the first concerns
James Gibson a zealous Country Minister, who Preaching in a very troublesome
time, spoke more rashly of the King then became him, the words that you ascribe
to him, we may not take them at your hand for in the same matter by Spotswoods
own Testimony, you are gui^ty of a great untruth you avow that the King caused
complaint to be made to the Assembly of this man, But by no entreaty could
obtain any punishment to be inflicted upon him: Spotswood says the contrary,
that the Assembly did pro^ounce the man's words to be slanderous and therefore
suspended him from his Ministry, and while they were in further agitation of
his cause, that he fled into England, doubtless for fear of his life: what
became of him thereafter I know not, only I have read in a good Author, that
what here you insinuate of his favoring Hacket and Copinger is a very false
calumny.

The next you speak of is Mr. Master David Black his case.
David Black, Minister of St. Andrews, a man of great piety and prudence, his
name is yet very savoury in that Town: though there be in it some three or
four thousand people, yet so great was the zeal, wisdom, and diligence of
Mr. Black, that during all the time of his Ministry there, no person was seen
either to beg or profane the Sabbath day, in all that Congregation. This man
being delated to the secret counsel by a very naughty person, that in a Sermon
he had spoken disgracefully of the King was willing to have appeared, and
cleared himself of that calumny; but finding that it was not his person which
was aimed at, but a quarrel with the whole Church in him, sought for by the
misleaders of the Court, he thought meet to appeal not simply from the King
but from the King and secret counsel to the King and General Assembly: as to
the proper and competent Judge appointed by the Law for matters of Doctrine.
While this question is in agitation, a great storm did fall upon the Church
from the seventeenth day of December, which made Mr. Blacks cause be laid aside
yet a little thereafter for to please the King the Commissioners of the
general Assembly did pass upon that gracious man a sentence severe enough,
removing him from St. Andrews to some obscure corner where he passed the rest
of his days. P. 40. A clea^e vindication of the assembly at Aberdeen in the
year 1605.


Your third story is of the Ministers who went to Aberdeen the year 1605. upon
them you make a tragic Narration a gu^^ty of the most treasonable rebellion.
Your rashness is great, at these times to bring up to the sight these things
which for the honor of many, did lie long buried: but since it is your wisdom
to make the world know, whereof with your friends advantage they might have
been ignorant, the matter was this. It was the custom of Scotland, ever from
the Reformation, to keep general Assemblies twice, or at least once every
year; After some debates in the year 1592. it became a Law, and an Act of
Parliament, agreed to unanimously by the King and States, and accordingly it
was practiced without any interruption, that the General Assembly should meet
at least once a year, and appoint when all other actions were ended, the day
and place for the next years meeting. In the year 1602. the Assembly in the
Kings presence, and with his advice did appoint the day and place of their next
meeting, in the year 1603. His Majesty at that time going to England, took
upon him to prorogat the Assembly, till the same day and place of the year
following 1604. of this prorogation there could be no necessity, but his
Majesty's mere pleasure. When the Diet of the year 1604. did come the
affairs of the Church did greatly call for an Assembly yet it was his
Majesty's will to make a second prorogation (...) the fifth of July, 1605. This
was much to the hurt grief, and fear of all the godly, yet they endured it,
but when the Diet of the year 1605. was come. His Majesty did not only
prorogate the third time, but also made the day of the next meeting ^^tertaine
and inderinite. This gave an alarm to the whole Kingdom, all the world did
see the Kings design to bring the English E^iscopacie and all their Ceremonies
upon the Church of Scotland: also the mystery of popery was then working
vehemently, a mighty faction of popish Lords were still countenanced among us,
immediate correspondence with the Pope by the chief Statesmen was much
surmised, and afterward was found to be too true. Scotland had no considerable
B^ warke either against English or Romish corruptions, but their general
Assemblies: if these were removed, the poor Church lay open to the inundation
of what ever Antichristianisme the Court was pleased to send in. The general
Assembly besides its divine right, was grounded upon so good Laws as Scotlana
could afford; but ^o that at the end of the present Assembly, the Diet of the
next should always be appointed, however his Majesty's design to put down
the general Assembly was evidently seen by a^ intelligent men, yet so long as
he prorogate it to a certain day, men were quiet: but so soon as he commanded
the third diet, to be deserted and that to an uncertain and infinite time they
to whom the welfare of the Church was dear, did awaken and found it necessary
to keep the Diet appointed in the second prorogation at Aberdeen July 2. or 5.
1605. The Commissioners of the Presbiteries in their way to Aberdeen advised
with Chancellor Seaton the prime Magistrate of the Kingdom in the Kings
absence, and were encouraged by him to go on, yet so soon as any of them came
to the place, A Gentleman the Lord of Lauristone, came to them with a warrant
from the King and privy Counsel and discharged them to keep any Assembly
there: yet the will of the King and Counsel was not intimated to them in
convenient time, for when the King and Counsels Letter was presented, they
show they were not in a capacity to receave it, till once they were an
Assembly, so with Lauristons good liking they did pray and chose their
Moderator and Clerk: thereafter they did receive and read the Letters
discharging the Assembly, to which they gave present obedience, and did no more
at all but appointed the next meeting according to the express act of
Parliament. Lauriston after the Assembly was dissolved, was so officious as by
a Lion herald with a public Proclamation to command them to be gone; this
Proclamation most falsely he did antidate as if it had been used before the
Ministers sat down, hereupon the Ministers were convened before the secret
Counsel for keeping of a Conventicle contrary to the Kings command, they
answered as Spotswood says, that they had done nothing but according to the
Laws both divine and humane, That the General Assembly had right to meet in
the great necessities of the Church, and the Laws of Scotland gave them
express warrant to meet: Lauriston told them that the King might delay all
meetings both of Church and State, Parliaments and Assemblies so long as he
pleased, they replied that they could do nothing against the Kings mind so
long as they followed the express order of his standing Laws. When the King
and state has past an act for Trienniall Parliaments, and the Commissioners of
shires do meet at the day appointed to fence a Par^iament according to Law and
long uncontroverted custom, if by evil Counsel the King should not only
delay but by a Proclamation put of the meeting to an uncertain and infinite
time, ought these Commissioners for following the instructions of their shires
according to Law and custom, be liable to any censure: the case now in hand is
just the same.

The Ministers did plead further, that the privy Council was not a competent
Judicatorie to the question, what was a lawful, or unlawful Assembly: that by
the Laws of the Kingdom such questions were to be decided by a lawful
General Assembly, and not elsewhere.

At that time Doctor Bancroft was Patron to the naughty Preacher of Scotland,
who were panting for Bishoprics, and as after the conference at Hampton Court,
he had moved the King to crush the most of the gracious Brethren of England,
who could not submit to Episcopacie, and its Ceremonies; So then did he hasten
a Message to the Council of Scotland, for the condemning all who adhered to
the Assembly of Aberdeen, of high Treason. To maintain a power in the Church
to keep an Assembly, or in the State, to keep a Parliament whether to begin, or
to continue it, when the King did discharge (though the Law did expressly
warrant it) was to oppose the Royal prerogative and could be no less then the
highest treason, especially if any did decline the Judgment of the Privy
Counsel, or any other Judicatorie, to which the King was pleased to refer
the decision of this case: though the nature of the thing and the Law, did
require the question to be determined in another Court.

For this plea a number of gracious Ministers were condemned by an Assize to be
executed as Traitors, but thereafter as it were of great favor, and special
grace their lives were spared, yet were they all presently banished, never to
return to any of the Kings Dominions while they lived. All the godly and wise
in the Land did cry out upon this Act of the Candidats of Episcopacie, as of
the highest unjustice and Tyranny.

All the sufferers were men exceedingly beloved, Mr. Welsh, and Master Forbes,
their oppression.
but some of them were very eminent, Master Forbes was a man of so great
learning and prudence, that in Germany both higher and lower, yea with King
James himself, and King Charles he was held while he lived in singular
reputation. Master Welsh was a man altogether Apostolic, of rare both learning
and piety. The fame of this man's zeal was so great, that not only the
Protestants of France, but the very Popish Priests and Soldiers, yea, the
prophanest of the Court and King Lewis himself, at the very time of his
hottest persecutions, did much prize and reverence him: yet so great was the
rage of the Bishops against him, that when in his old age and great sickness
he came over to England, and according to the direction of his Physicians did
supplicate to be permitted to breath a little in his natural air, though he
was altogether unable for preaching, or making any more stir in the world, it
was peremptorily denied him unless he should give assurance of putting his
neck under the Episcopal yoke: not being able to do this, he was forced to
dye out of h^^ Country, a banished man.

Who would not have th^^^ht that the ruin of so many gracious men might ha^^
^^lly satiate the malice of a few ambitious persons, Bancroft a persecutor of
the Scottish Presbiterians.
bu^^^ they were not content: they proceeded farther in their cruelty, they
moved the King to call up to London a number of more Divines, who for piety,
zeal and learning, were of greatest reputation. The pretext was fair and his
Majesty's Letter to them courteous, he required them to come up to give him
their best advice how the Church of Scotland might best be settled in peace,
but behold Bancrofts, and the Scottish Episcopaturians fraud they are brought
before the King and Council, and there are posed with a number of dangerous
and insnaring questions to which they declined to answer, yet being much
pressed, they gave in their mind in writing so humbly and prudently as was
possible: no quarrel could be picked against any of their words, yet were they
all arrested to stay at London, till contrary to Law and the order of the
Church, and the heart of all the godly, their adversaries were set down in
Scotland, upon their Episcopal Thrones.

Mr. Andrew Melvil, The undoing of Mr. Andrew and Mr. James Melvils.
a great Light to the Scottish Nation, for his free speeches after great
provocation, against the English Bishops and Ceremonies, to which he (a
stranger called up by the Kings friendly Letter) did owe no subjection, was
kept prisoner three whole years, and then was sent over to Sedan, where he
lived to his death a banished man. His Nephew Mr. James Melvil, for his
excellent parts in great favor with the King, but unable to comply with
Episcopal designs, was kept out of Scotland till his dying day; the rest were
at last sent home, but all of them as Prisoners, confined to certain places.
These were the first fruits of the English Prelacie in Scotland, but yearly
thereafter that tree did bring forth such grapes of Gomorrha among us, that the
Land could be at no peace, till it was cut down, yea plucked up by the roots.

It might have satisfied the unnatural malice of a very wicked child, P. 41.
Prelaticall calumnies.
to have bespattered the face of his innocent mother, with the half of the
former very injurious and false calumnies, yet you the worst of all your
Mothers children, must have leave to pour more of your excrements upon her
head. From your page 41. to the 46. you would make the world believe, that the
Church of Scotland does excommunicate good men, and tender consciences for a
dissent in the smallest points of Religion, and does persecute for such
differences with all the rigor of temporal afflictions. Secondly you affirm
that the Assemblies of that Church, take upon them to make Traitors whom they
will, and to cast out of the Court, whether the King will or not the greatest
and best men, with whom they are displeased. Thirdly, that these Assemblies do
alter the Laws of the Kingdom at their pleasure; Surely if strangers who know
not the Constitution and customs of that Church, were disposed to believe all
you say, they could not but by your relations he brought to a very evil
opinion of your mother whom you an unnatural son so vildly slander: but it is
good that men here are so rational, as not to take upon trust the naked
assertions of a malicious enemy. The discipline of Scotland is far from all
rigor and Tyranny.


For the first, a complaint of rash Excommunication, and persecution thereupon,
is very impertinent from your mouth: it is not so long that yet it can be
forgotten, since you and your Colleagues did allow your Officialls and others
to excommunicate good people for trifles, yea, for no offense at all, but their
zeal to God, and the good of their Country: your Cannons in all the three
Kingdoms are extant, your cruelties are fresh, in imprisoning, banishing,
Pilloring, stigmatizing the worthiest men for contradicting you in any one of
your numerous ceremonies and traditions.

As for the Church of Scotland, that it did ever meddle to trouble any in their
goods, Liberties, or persons, it is very false: what civil penalties the
Parliament of a Kingdom thinks meet to inflict upon those who are refractory,
and unamendable by the censures of a Church, the state from whom alone these
punishments do come, are answerable, and not the Church.

That Excommunication in Scotland, is inflicted upon those who cannot assent to
every point of Religion determined in their confession, there is nothing more
untrue, for we know it well, that never any person in Scotland, was
Excommunicate only for his difference of opinion in a Theologick tenet,
Excommunication there, is a very dreadful sentence, and therefore very rare:
these last forty years, so far as I have either seen or heard, there has
none at all been Excommunicate in Scotland, but some few trafficking Papists,
and some very few notoriously flagitious persons, and five or six of you the
Prelates for your obstinate impenitency, after your overturning the foundations
both of our Church and State, and one most rigid and pragmatick Brownist, who
for all that could be done or said, would needs make it his work to persuade
all he was able by discourse, Letters, and spreading of books, that in Scotland
there was neither a Church, nor any Ministry nor any Ordinance.

In Scotland we count the spiritual Judgment of Excommunication most heavy,
but any temporal inconvenience that follows upon it, is not very considerable:
for first there is not any civil hazard at all to any excommunicate man, who
will suffer himself to be brought to any measure of repentance. Secondly, were
they never so impenitent, there is no harm can come to them (as I remember) a
whole year after the long process and final sentence of Excommunication.
Thirdly after a years co^tumacy, though the Letter of the Act of Parliament be
heavy, yet I appeal to any who has lived in Scotland, among the very few whom
they have known Excommunicate, how many did they ever hear to have been hurt
in their goods, imprisoned, or banished. I am sure that Huntly, Arrole, and
Angus, and the other popish Lords, though for their plotting to undermine the
State, their persons after Excommunication have been secured, yet no penny of
their estates went to the Kings Exchequer, or to the hands of any of their
unfriends: but as the ordinary custom is, upon the pretext of a small
composition, what ever the Letter of the Law takes from them, it is all put in
the hand of such of their friends whom they do most trust; Scotlands guilt may
well be too much indulgence, but of any excessive rigor toward spiritual
oftenders, they will be condemned by none that knows them. P. 42.43.44. A
narration of the roads of Ruthven and Stirling.


Your other imputation, that our general Assembly takes upon it to be judge
what is Treason, and who are fit to be Counselors, nothing is more false.
But here you do us the favor to prove your Allegiance by a long story, to
which I have given a full answer in the other Treatise: At that time of King
James minority, Spotswood himself being witness our State was miserably
misguided, the Tyranny of Captain James, supported too much by the favor of
the Earl of Lennex, was very grievous, both to Church and State: I touch but
upon one instance. The greatest subject of the Kingdom, and at that time
nearest to the King in blood was James Hamilton Earl of Arran, a very gracious
and most brave man before his sickness: without any fault at all, so much as
alleged for he was incapable at that time of any crime, being vinted with a
distemper that made him keep his house, and hindered him from meddling with any
affairs of State, yet was he spoiled by the fraud and violence of Captain
James Stewart, of all his Lands and honor. This violent oppressor was made
Earl of Arran, and Chancelour of the Kingdom. At that time the design was
clear and confessed, to bring Queen Mary out of her prison in England, to set
her again upon her Throne, to advance the Catholic League which then was
newly made, betwixt the Guises, King James his grand Uncles and the King of
Spain^, for the destroying Queen Elizabeth and the whole Protestant party; For
the preventing of these mischiefs, the prime Nobility found it absolutely
necessary, to have the advancers of these counsels removed from the minor King.
What ever fault was in this action, the Assembly is unjustly charged therewith.
Their advice was never sought thereto, only half a year after it was done,
his Majesty sent a special Command to the Assembly for their approbation
thereof: for as by diverse of his Letters to all the neighbor Princes, he did
signify his good liking of that action, so in all the great Courts of the
Kingdom he required it to be approved. The privy Council, the convention of
Estates, the general Assembly by his Majesty's express Commission did all
assent to his will. It is true Captain James, so soon as he crept in again
into Court, did change the young Kings mind, but the event of that alteration
was a more horrible confusion both of Church and State. The Earl of Gowry was
beheaded; as a litt^e before the Earl of Morton, sundry Gentlemen of good
quality, most innocent, were hanged; many of the prime Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
Ministers, were forced to flee for their lives out of the Kingdom; till all of
them joining together did ride in Arms to Stirling, and by violence. though
without hurt to any man's person, did the second time remove those Courtiers,
and for ever after kept them from the King, to the full quieting both of Church
and State. This Rode of Stirling was much more cried out upon by the wicked
Prelates and Courtiers, then the former of Ruthven, yet was it approved for
good service to the King and State, not only as the former by the privy
Counse^l, and convention of States, but also by the ensuing Parliament and so
it remains unquarrelled unto this day.

Your third complaint is, P. 45. The Assembly repeales no laws, but
supplicates the Parliament to recall their ratifications of Ecclesiastical
corruptions.
that the general Assemblies do alter what the Law has established: all your
examples hereof are, The Votes of the late general Assembly at Glasgow,
condemning the civil places of Churchmen, pronouncing the very office it
self of Bishops to be unlawful in the Church, and crying down the high
Commission Court. Here you fall upon the Parliament of England as fools and
Traitors for letting themselves be persuaded by the Scots to swallow down
their wicked Covenant. To all this, our Apology is brief, what ever power our
general Assembly possesses, is all well allowed by the King and Parliament.
The acts of that Assembly you complain of, are all ratified by the State: the
order of our proceeding is appointed by Law, all matters Spiritual and
Ecclesiastic, are first determined by the general Assembly, if the nature of
the things require a civil Sanction, the Votes of the Assembly are transmitted
to the Parliament, if a General Assembly have voted an Error, or any thing
that is wrong, and that corruption has been ratified by an Act of Parliament: a
Posterior general Assembly recognosces the matter, and finding an error in
Religion, notwithstanding of the prior votes both of the Assembly and
Parliament, does condemn it, and appoints Commissioners to represent the
reasons of their vote to the next Parliament with an humble supplication to
annull these Acts and Laws which did confirm the condemned corruption. This
has been the method of proceeding in Scotland, since the first erection of a
general Assembly: in this way were all the Errors of Popery first condemned
in the Assembly before the Parliament did recall their old Laws whi^^
^^nfirmed them. The form of this proceeding established by the Parliament it
self, does not import any subordination either of the laws, or the Parliament
to the Assembly. P. 46. It meddles with no civil Courts.


At this place p. 46. you bring us another story whereupon you make tragic
outcries of the Assemblies insolent usurpations, it seems, you thought that
this your book should never have come from Oxford into the hands of any
Scottish man, who knew the Custom of the Judicatories of Scotland: I do
marvel much at your impudence, that you should speak of the Assemblies
incroaching upon the Lords of Session, or meddling with any Civil cause, which
the Law commits to any temporal Judicatory; there is no better harmony in the
world, then always has been in Scotland between the civil and Ecclesiastical
Judicatories; no interfeiring was ever among them, but what the Bishops made.
You indeed in your high Commission did take causes both civil and
Ecclesiastical to your Cognizance from all the Courts of the Kingdom, and did
at your pleasure, without, and contrary to all known Laws, finally determine
them, without any appeal, but to the King, by whom you were sure ever to be
best be^eeved.

For the story in hand, The case of Mr. John Graham.
I am content Spotswood be Judge, as he relates it, the matter was thus, Mr.
John Graham, one of the Lords of Session, or Judges of the Common Pleas, a very
false and dishonest man, intended an action against some poor men, to put them
from their Lands; for to effectuate his purpose, he seduced a public Notary
dwelling at Stirling, and persuaded him to subscribe a false Writ, upon the
which the poor men by a decree of the Lords of Session were removed from their
possessions. The oppressed souls cried out of their injury, and intended
action against the Notary for his false Writ; they got him arrested and
imprisoned: The Minister of the bounds, Mr. Patrick Simpson, whom King James
and all Scotland knew to be a most learned, zealous, and pious Pastor as was in
the whole Isle, dealt with the Prisoner to confess the truth; after some
conference, he confessed all, and declared how Mr. John Graham had sent his
Brother to him, with a false Writ, which he did subscribe; an assize was
called, the poor Notary upon his own cousession was condemned and hanged. Mr.
John Graham, as covetous and false, so a most proud man would not rest
satisfied, but presently summoned Master Patrick Simpson to appear before the
Lords of Session, as a seducer of the honest Notary to lie against his own
life; Mr. Patrick was ready to clear his own innocence, whereof all were well
persuaded, but shamefully wronged by an impudent man in his good name, he
caused cite him before the Assembly, as a slanderer of a Minister in the work
of his calling: the Lords of Session not content that any of their number
should be called before the Assembly for any action depending in their Court,
did send some of their number to the Assembly for to debate the whole matter.
The Assembly told them that they would not meddle with any thing that was
civil, nor which belonged to their Court; that they intended to take no notice
of their decrees, at Mr. John Grahams instance to cast the poor (...) out of
their Land, whether it was right or wrong: nor the notaries Instrument
wherefore he was hanged, whether it was true or false. They told them also,
that whatsoever they had to say to Mr. Patrick Simpson, he was to answer them
as they should think fit, in due time and place; the Assemblies question was
alone about the slander of one of their Members whom Mr. John Graham did openly
challenge as a Seducer, of a Notary to bear false witness; They had cited Mr.
John Graham before them to make this good, that so they might censure Mr.
Patrick Simpson, as a man unworthy of the Ministry, or if Mr. John Graham's
challenge was found a mere calumny, that he might be brought to repentance
for it in acknowledging of his wrong. Let any equitable man judge how insolent
the Assemblies proceeding in this action was; for a time there was some
controversy about this matter betwixt the Assembly and the Session, but at
last all was amicably composed, and God decided the question with the violent
death, and public disgrace of Mr. John Graham.

What ye subjoyne of King James trouble to the shedding of tears, I take it
for your mere invention: P. 47. The great controversy betwixt the King and
the Church, was about the infinite extent of the Prerogative.
for Spotswood the fountain of all your stories, who never fails to relate to
the full, what ever is meet to draw any envy upon the good Ministers, who
opposed the Episcopal designs, makes no mention at all of King James tears.
I grant he reports that advice of the Chancellor, and some such reply to it as
you speak of, but how t^uly I cannot tell, only this is most certain that
what ever difference King James had with the Ministers, it was alone about the
great Idol of his Prerogative, to do as a Monarch in Church and State what he
thought convenient, with his prerogative in matters of State they did never
meddle, but his design to bring Bishops and Ceremonies in the Church as they
conceived, against law and reason, the most honest of the Ministry did ever
oppose it to their power, albeit in a humble and warrantable way: others for
their own gain and advancement, did yield to his desires, and assisted him with
all their power, to advance his Prerogative so high, as to do, without any
resistance, all his pleasure both in Church and State. But the Lord now has
cleared that controversy, and has made the righteousness of these oppressed
men shine as the light, and the baseness of these flatterers appear, in its
own base and vile colors.

Concerning his Majesty's discourses at the Conference of Hampton Court, The
Presbiterie is a great bar to keep out Democracy and Tyranny, both from
Church and State.
we confess they cannot be very favorable to any who opposed Episcopacy,
which these of your Coat long before that time had made him believe was the
maine pillar of his Throne, and had persuaded him to look upon all, that was
disaffected thereunto, as enemies to his Crown. But how far you are here
mistaken in fastening upon Presbiteriall government any furtherance of
Democracy, not reason alone, but now also ample experience makes it evident,
there is not such a bar this day, as both friends and foes do well know
against the Sectaries designs to bring in a popular government in the Church,
as Presbitery: And if your rules be right enemies to Democracie in the Church,
will never be instruments to bring it in to the State.

If Presbitery could be partial toward any one civil Government more then
another, It is (...) singular help both to Parliaments and Just Monarchy.
its similitude and consanguinity with the constitution of a Parliament might
make it suspected to be inclinable to the rights of that Court, more then a
Prince or the multitude could desire: but the truth is it medles not to the
prejudice of any civil Government which it finds established by Law, but what
ever that be, it supports it to its power, and how serviceable it has ever been
to Monarchy in Scotland, examples both of old and late do demonstrate. Who
were the prime instruments of settling King James in his infancy upon his
Throne, who kept him into his Throne against all the assaults of his potent
enemies? to whom in all his great straits had he ever his recourse during his
abode in Scotland? to no other but to the Presbiterian Nobles, Gentry and
Ministers if these had been disposed to have changed the government of the
state there was often no considerable impediments upon earth to have opposed
them; but such a desire never entered into their thoughts. And of later times
when the Presbitery in Scotland has attained its highest aims, and is in
capacity as you say to make what factions it will, when its provocations to
a^ger were as great as readily can be again and the madness of you Malignant
Prelates had laid the Crown in Scotland very low at such a season did the
least disloyalty appear in any of the Presbiterian side, were not they and
they only the men which set^ed that throne which you had caused to shake and
astened the Crown upon that head from whence you hands by your extreme
unjustice pride and folly had we^ nere pulled it away? And at this very hour
when you and all your friends are able to make no help at all to relieve not
only the King and his house but the Royalty it self from that extreme hazard
of ruin wherein you alone both have cast them, and with all your hearts would
still continue them upon some fantastic hope which yet you have of attaining
all your former desires, or else to revenge your disappointments though all the
world should perish: At this time when you have cast the Crown, the Throne and
Scepter in the dust who is able who now is willing to save the King or to keep
Monarchy on foot? I hope albeit your dementation be great yet even you must
see and confess that it is the Presbiterians and these alone by whose hearts
and hands this work must be done which indeed your goodness and wisdom has
made extremely difficult and well nere unfeasible.

You fall very needlessly on Mr. Catherwood the Author of that Book altar
darna scenum, P. 18. Mr. Catherwoods vindication.
a man of greater worth then all the Prelates that ever Scotland bred, put them
all in one. Durst ever any or all of you look that man or his Book, in the
face? you had long twenty years leisure to answer, but was ever the courage
among you all to assay it? I do not love to speak, or when it is spoken by
others, to defend any thing that may rub upon authority, yet when
sycophanticall Prelates make it their work to bring most honest and gracious
men in disgrace with Princes for some incomodious phrases which in the heat and
current of large discourses have escaped their pens, who shall but vindicate
their innocence from such flaterers accusations.

Is it a crime for Master Catherwood to write, that in all Kings naturally
their is a hatred to Christ; what do you here intend to censure? are not all
men naturally enemies to God? unto this natural Corruption that is Common to
all flesh does not great places in the world especially Crowns and Throns, add
many provocations, from which poverty and meannes gives exemption; what would
you here reprove? speak out plainly your Pelagian tenet, deny original sin,
make it one of the Royal Prerogatives in virtue of the Crown, to be naturally
gracious and an advancer of Christ's Kingdom.

The other word you make your adversary to say (albeit you profess you speak
per cur) is, that King James was a most insense enemy to the purity of
Religion: If such terms were ever expressed, of what think you must they be
understood, what is the subject of that speech and of the whole Book wherein
you say it stands? Is it not of the Government of the Church and the English
Ceremonies alone? to say that King James was a great friend to these, and
agreat opposite to the contrary, which yet the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
now, and the rest of the reformed Churches ever did profess was truth, and a
part of the purity of Religion: the affirmation of so much I hope will not be
found a very monstrous crime, P. 48.49. The Commissioners of the general
Assembly unjustly slandered.
though you believe Episcopacy to be so fundamental a truth that all its
opposits must needs be most properly Heretics.

In the remnant of your Book from the page 48. to the 53. you make your
declamatio^s against the Commisioners of the General Assembly, you will have
them to be the fountain of all the Treasons, Seditions, Rebellions of the
Land; but you should do well to prove this rather then to say it, for you know
that your assertions have no faith and deserve none in Scotland: reason you can
have none in the nature of the thing, for all established Courts either in
Church or State have naturally a power in themselves to make Committees for the
furthering of that work which the Laws of the Kingdom put in their hands. It
is true, Committees under that name, were not early known in Scotland, the
name and a part of the thing we learned from our Neighbors of England, but so
soon as the General Assemblies did think meet to appoint some of their number
to be a standing Committee to their next meeting, the expedient was unanimously
embraced and liked of by none so well after a little trial, as by King James
and the State. I did never hear any hurt charged upon these Committees but
one, that by the Kings extraordinary diligence with some of them, they were
seduced to lay some ground stones, whereupon Episcopal Chaires were afterward
set down; but what here you lay to their charge is evidently false. Queen
Regent was suspended from her authority by the state before there was any
General Assembly in Scotland, Queen Mary was put from the Government and King
James established therein by the Parliament; the Nobility at Ruthven did
persuade King James to send the Duke of Lenox back to France, and remove
Captain James from Court before any Commissioners of a General Assembly were
so much as thought upon: Being of necessity must precede all operation, It is
folly to charge crimes upon a Committee before it had any existence, but all
these your discourses are used as a preface and introduction to that grand
Common place of the bitterest invectives of all your friends, the 17. day of
December which you make the topstone and close of all your calumnies.

That much tossed matter, P. 50.51.52. A full account of the 17. day of
December.
as I find it in Spotswood and others much more worthy Authors, was this. After
the miscarriage of the Spanish design upon this Isle in 88. the Popish faction
of Scotland did still keep correspondence with Philip and his Ministers both in
Spain and West Flanders: Agents, Letters, Moneys were ever going betwixt them;
great hopes yearly of a new Navy, which failing, the Jesuits moved Huntly and
his accomplices to enterprise by themselves; these things were all discovered.
Queen Elizabeth, who in all the popish designs was primely aimed at, did send
frequent advertisements of their plots, which by intelligencers in Rome and
Spain, she came to understand. The General Assembly did excommunicate Huntly,
the head of that turbulent faction, The King denounced him Rebel, he was often
relaxed from the sentence both civil and Ecclesiastic, yet he ever relapsed
and entered in new conspiracys for the overthrow of the Religion and Kingdom.
The man was very bloody powerful and active.

After Chancellor Maitlands death the prime Courtiers were known Papists, and
drew the Kings mind to receive Huntly again into favor, contrary to the
Supplications of all his well-affected Subjects, and the manifold Letters of
the Queen of England; these same Courtiers under pretense of mannaging the
Kings rent, did graspe into their hands all the Offices of State, and favors
of the Prince, to the extreme discontent of the most of their fellow
Courtiers: Besides all this, they made it their chief design to kindle the
Kings wrath against the most zealous of the Ministry; they brought matters to
such a pass in the beginning of December 1596. that the King in displeasure
did Command by Proclamation the Commissioners of the General Assembly to
dissolve, and go out of Edinborough, they presently obeyed the charge; So what
ever followed thereafter is unjustly charged upon that Committee, which long
before the seventeenth day was dissolved and gone out of Town.

On the sixteenth day, Huntly, who had killed the Earl of Murray, had defeat
Argyles Army, had come to the fields against the King in person, conspired with
the Spaniard to bring in the Armado, solicited often the Prince of Farma for a
new Navy, plotted the taking of the King, and killing of the Chancellor in his
presence, This man though both banished and excommunicate, coming boldly to
Court, put all Edinburgh in a just fear. So much the more, as in the morning
o^ the sevententh day, some of the Kings chief Servants and Bedchamber men
(who it seems indeed had a real intention to raise some trouble against the
Octavians, by whom they were spoiled of their places and means) did inform
the Ministers and others, of Huntlies privy conference with the King the
evening before, till midnight: this afterward was found to be but feigned by
them; yet it was most true, that by these men's misinformations, that very night
the King by Proclamation as he had done before with the Commissioners of the
Gene^all Assembly commanded in the morning of the 17 Twenty four of the chief
and most zealous Citizens of Edinburgh to depart the Town. All these things
falling out together put the people in extreme fear of a present Massacre by
the hands of Huntly, of the popish Courtiers and their faction. To prevent this
mischief Mr. Balcanquall whom it fell to preach that day, after Sermon desired
the chief of them who were present to stay for advisement what was needful to
be done for their own safety: in the meeting, nothing at all was resolved
upon, but a humble supplication to his Majesty that they might be in security
from the dangerous plotts of the Papists, That the Lady Huntly, an
excommunicate Papist, might be removed from Court and sent home, That three of
the Counselors known papists and correspondents with Rome, (as their Letters
thereafter found with the Pope did prove) might not vote at the Counsel Table
in the causes of Ministers, That the Citizens banished out of Edinburgh without
the allegiance of any cause might be returned to their houses. This most
innocent Petition was sent to his Majesty by two noble men, Lindsay and
Forbes, two Barons, Bargeny and Blachan, and two Ministers, Master Robert
Bruce, and Master William Watson. Master Robert Bruce did speak to his
Majesty so humbly and with so much reason that he gave no offense, but when
his Majesty did enquire at the Noblemen how they durst conveene without his
express warrant; Lindsay, by kind a zealous Spirit, but ever most Loyal,
being in passion at this, question, that when their Lives and Religion (as they
conceaved) were in extreme and present hazard, they should be quarrelled for
meeting in a peaceable manner, only to draw a modest supplication, did say,
that they durst do more then meet, to supplicate; with these words his
Majesty was offended but not in that degree as to cast down his countenance
on the Noble man therefore; only he went away without giving any answer to
their petition.

What here you add of your own, of craving justice against the Counselors, of
laying hold upon some of their garments, all is grossly false even Spotswood
being Judge; who had much better reason to know the Acts of that day then you,
who then was scarce borne, but he was one of the most diligent of all the
company, to arm himself and all others he could, especially his pat^on
Tarfichen.

The Messengers returning to them that sent them, reported the matter as it
was, that his Majesty had not deigned them with any answer at all this did
much increase the fear of the whole company, while they are in consultation
what to do, some without the doors suborned by the malecontent Courtiers did
cry, that Huntly and the Popish Lords were coming upon them to make a
massacre: Master Robert Bruce did what he was able to compose the people, but
amazement had stopped their ears, all got to their Arms, in which they did not
continue a full half hour: for before the Sermon ended it behoved to be nere
ten, and before they could conveene draw up their supplication, go to the King
and return, doubtless it was more then eleven, and long before twelve all the
tumult was quieted, the King on foot went down the streets in peace, to his
dinner in the Abbey, and came up again to Counsel, before two of the clock,
no violence at all was so much as offered to any man. The people being
frighted, and apprehending upon very probable grounds a present surprise of
their town and persons, run to their Arms for defense, but finding no Enemy
to appear, presently they laid aside their weapons without any compulsion
either from the Hammer men or any other: for such a poor resistance, as all
their opposits were able then to have made, could have saved no man out of
their hand, to whom they had intended any real harm. No tumult in the world
was ever more harmeles in the effects, nor more innocent in the causes, if you
consider all those who did openly act therein.

What you speak of a Letter to Hamilton, you are extremely malicious therein:
when you have told us two great untruths, first that the result of the
Ministers deliberation was to go to arms: Secondly that they did conclude to
pull the Counseliours from His Majesty's side, in both which, Spo^swood who was
present at all these Counsels is against you; you will contradict him in this
third also: for he tells us that there was no word of any Letter to any man
that day of the tumult: but to morrow, when at Court their was nothing heard,
but hanging of Ministers and Citizens, heading of Noblemen and Barons, razeing
of the Town of Edinburgh, and plowing of it to be sown with Salt: then some
Letters were appointed to be sent to Hamilton, Bacleugh and others to come and
countenance their Brethren, that Religion might not be ruined, this was all the
direction as your Author setts it down. He says indeed that Master Robert
Bruce wrote some more to my Lord Hamilton, but who dare trust a Prelates word
when his design is to disgrace his enemy, or if all were true, what does the
Letter of any particular Minister concern the Church of Scotland or the
General Assembly.

This was the 17. day of December, the Courtiers and Prelaticall faction did
exaggerate it to the most horrid rebellion that ever was upon the earth, but
how unjustly. Queen Elizabeth by her wise Letters recorded by Spe^swood, does
well declare. It was indeed a most sad day to all the Godly; but most joyful
to all their enemies; for as they did insolently but too truly boast, it paved
them a very fair way, to bring Prerogative to its Throne, yea to set it up
upon the highest pinnacle of power they could desire, and withal to make
Bishops get upon their kicking horse which before would never receave them; It
put into the hand of the Prince a facility without any hazard of future
resistance, to do in the Church and State what ever seemed good in his eyes.
Such advantages are exceeding sweet in the mouth, and are swallowed down with
a great deal of greediness by those who long have been lying in wait to
catch them; but ere all be done, they become in the belly wormwood and gall,
as the royal family to our grief, but the Prelates and Malignant Courtiers to
our good enough liking, do feel this day.

We are come at last to the end of your Calumnious stories which your self
upon very good reason confesses to be wearisome. Mr. James Melvil vindicated
from assisting of Bothuel against the King.
But yet before you can be drawn off, you must hint at on another as false and
malicious as any of the former. Your Author in this and the rest of your
narrations, is only Spotswood, whom in this wicked fable though you and he both
would swear it, no intelligent Scotsman would believe.

Who will believe that Master James Melvil, a most gracious and wife man very
much in favor with the King, more then any of those who then were hunting
after Bishoprics; that this faithful man having in his hands the religious
aims and charitable contribution of the Country, to the distressed town of
Geneva, the City in the whole world, which Scotland at that time loved best
should send it to the Earl Bothwell to raise an Army against the King at a
time when his Majesty was in so good terms with the Church as ever either
after or before: when the Town of Edinborough, was most ready for one word of
the Kings mouth to run out presently with him and fight with Bothwell, who then
was much hated by all the god^y for his adulteries and other personal crimes,
and was known to be confederate with the popish Lords against the Church, and
who lately in the eighty eight, had been a forward perswader to invade England
by Land, as the Spaniards did by Sea that such a man should be assisted against
the King and Town of Edinborough, by any moneys much less by the alms
gathered for Geneva, and that all this should be done by Master James Melvil, is
such a calumny, as Satan could not fancy a falser, but a far more foolish
liar then either you or Spotswood, might easily have contrived a more probable
fable, this is like the Tale of Beza's conversion to popery, of Calvin's
consultation to change the Sabbath day; of Luthers conference with the Devil.

When you have over-wearied both your self and us, P. 53.54. A Declaration
upon all the 12. Articles imputed to us.
you will yet add as a mantissa and appendix, two other points, first you set
down the twelve Articles of our Creed, Since you are so good at the confessing
of your Neighbors, I would gladly know what your own faith may be: what you
ascribe here to us, ye do it without any ground, either of reason or
Authority: your simple assertions must be the very Articles of your Creed.
Some years ago we did see a book called Ladonsium Autocatacrisis, wherein by
formal and express testimonies, not the articles of your faith, for you are
an avowed paucifidian, but such opinions as you and your companions did preach
and print, are set down at large. Wherein it was demonstrate, that you and your
bosom friends in Aberdeen and Edinburgh, did hold grosser Arminianisme, Popery
and Tyranny then the worst of the Canterburians in England: also in the
beginning of this Treatise, we did see under your own hand, such a confession
of your faith, as few of the most malignant of your party will have the
impudence to subscribe it with you.

But be your faith what it may, for it is like that times and occasions may
make you hide or open, yea, vary and change, as you find it most convenient for
your purpose: I am content freely to tell you my mind, in all these Articles
(as you style them) of our Creed. I never heard of the first, but in your
Pamphlet; no Presbiterian ever dreamed of any necessity, to change the
government of the State, that it might be conform to the Church; but many
Episcopal and all Erastians do hold the government of the Church to be a
matter of so indifferent arbitrary and changeable a nature, that it may well
comply, and ought to be conformed to the model of every State wherein it
requires to be entertained. The true tenet of all approved among us, so far
as I know is, that the government of the Church and State are two really
distinct policies, both ordained of God, which without his displeasure may not
be confounded, nor ought not to encroach one upon another. That the wrath of
God will be on that Church, and on these Churchmen, who for any advantage they
apprehend, can come either to the Church, or to themselves, will go to trouble
or change any civil State, be it Monarchy, Aristocracie, Democracy, or what
ever else, which by the just laws of any people is settled in a Land; on the
other side that God will be angry with every State, and all those Statesmen who
for the advancement of their own, or the States interest, will go to impede,
trouble, or change that government of the Church, which Christ in his Testament
has left to his servants unto his second coming.

For the second we do maintain a parity among Ministers, courting it an
Antichristian ambition for any one, to make himself Lord Bishop over the rest,
but this is far from any Democracy, for we put all the Ministers of a
Kingdom under the jurisdiction of a National Assembly, the rules whereof use
to be so just and exact, that where they are reverenced, there is no danger of
any popular confusion, much less then where Episcopal either Tyranny, or
Obligarchy does prevail.

For the third to our Consistories we give no Independent power, these with us
are all subordinate to Classical Presbiteries, and to our National Assemblies
we give no power to meddle with any temporal things at all, nor any
Legislative power about things spiritual. When they have past their Votes upon
a matter spiritual according to the rules of the word of God. If any Law or
civil Sanction be needful, they supplicate the Magistrate whom they never
presume to command to be an executioner of their Decrees, (these be but your
calumnies) only they entreat him to make such Laws as he finds the equity of
the matter in his own conscience to require. You indeed profess an
inthronization of Bishops, and give to them not only a directive power over the
King, but an authoritative to excommunicate him, and if he to save his Crown
will be content that his Parliaments do with your Thrones and Myters what they
think expedient; you print to the world, that this shall bring a remediless
and perpetual ruin both on the King and his people, themselves and their
posterities.

For the fourth, the Laws of Scotland allow to the General Assembly a power
to Judge of all divine truths and heresies, so that if they find popish,
Episcopal or what ever Errors established by Acts of Parliament, yet they are
authorized to proceed to give their sentence from the word of God, not of the
Law, but of the Error, to which Churchmen in their ignorance have procured a
Sanction; as for the Law, the Parliament when they sit, take it into their own
consideration; never any Assembly of the reformed Church, dealt either with
Prince or Parliament, for the reclaiming of a Law otherwise then by humble
supplication. What you speak of a corrective power, the Church of Scotland did
ever disclaim it, all compulsion by outward inconvenients they remitted ever
to the State. As for the censures of the Church, no faction ever has been more
prodigal of them both in doctrine and practice, then you and your gracious
Brethren the Prelates.

For the fifth, we exeem no Minister who preaches Treason, from the cognizance
and punishment of the Magistrate, only by the Laws of our Kingdom, the
judgment of Ministers doctrine in the first instance, belongs to the
Ecclesiastich Judicatory.

For the sixth, we pretend no power to make the Magistrate add the civil
Sanction to any of our Assemblies Decrees, further then his own conscience, the
Justice of the thing, the former Laws of the Land, the humble and earnest
desire of the Subjects does plead for: but you before your Tippets and Rotchets
be laid aside, will permit three Kingdoms to be consumed with fire and sword,
without any remedy: unless your thrones may be re-established, King and
people must be destroyed for ever; And this you tell us must be and shall be,
but in many things we have found you false prophets, and fear not your
causeless curses.

For the seventh, we maintain no power of the Church to reform and preserve
Religion, but such as does well consist with that duty which God has laid upon
the Magistrate, both for the reformation of Religion, and preservation of it
when it is reformed.

For the eight, we maintain that the sins of the Magistrate does not excuse
the people for their neglect of any duty that God has laid upon them, and when
Superiors are resolved to live and dye in Idolatry, we think that every
inferior Magistrate, and every person is obliged to keep himself free of
corruption, and so far as he is able, to reform his own soul, but not to
be a public reformer of a Country without a lawful calling.

For the ninth, all the Covenants of our Land are warranted by Acts of
Parliament, and how ever by the misinformation of Prelates, the King for a time
judged them illegal, yet at last he found them just and necessary, according
to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; we indeed do maintain, when a
handful of wicked Prelates do seduce a Prince to destroy himself and whole
Kingdoms, that in that case it is lawful for the Nobles and States of a Land
to stand upon their guard, and we cannot subscribe to these prime fundamental
Articles of your faith, That the Supremacy of Britain is so far exalted
above all Law divine and humane, that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms for
their most necessary defensive Arms, are to be condemned by God and all men,
for Traitors and Rebels, yet your good friends, the Idolatrous murderers of
Ireland, must be registered to posterity for good Catholic subjects. No marvel
you believe all this, when you profess your advice to all Princes, rather to
admit of the worst whordomes of Rome, the very Jesuitisme of Raviliack and
Faux, then of the Presbiteriall government. Behold whither despite may carry
the spirit of an excommunicate Prelate.

For the tenth, our Assemblies meddle not with questions of State, if the
original of royalty be so from heaven, that men on earth had never any hand in
making of a King: if in any immaginable case, a King be censurable such
questions were never proposed so much as for debate in any Assembly of
Scotland; unhappy Bishops, who must needs profane the Crowns of Kings, by
making their Sovereignty and mysterious Prerogatives, their ordinary quodlibets
to be tossed as Tennis balls in their common discourse, Sermons and Pamphets.
It was a very unhappy day for the Kings of Britain, when the feet of Prelates
got first leave to touch the threshold of the Court, and their evil eyes to
behold the Jewels of the Crown, or their soul hands to touch the hemme of the
royal Robes: such infaust harppies polute all things though most sacred, to
which they approach.

For the eleventh, though it never came to be scanned in any Assembly, yet I
know no honest man of Scotland that makes question of the thing. The King and
Parliament has inacted the lawfulness of our late defensive Arms; but the
Acts of that Parliament are not much to your mind, for they cast you out of
your native Country, as a prime incendiary unfit to breath more in that Air.

The twelfth is, but to make up the number, being the same with the former.

The conclusion of your Articles, is but a malicious railing invective, very
suitable to your mouth: it is contrary to reason and experience, as often we have
said before, but you cannot spare Tauttologies.

The second part of your Appendix is your Postscript, P. 55.56. No shadow of
Episcopacie remains in any well reformed Church.
wherein you make a large muster of your Episcopal Territories and tell us
that the major part of the reformed Churches in Christendom, do retain
Episcopacie also that the removal thereof from England, is the fountain of
all our present Sects: you may know that all our Heresies and Sects, did breed
under the wings of Episcopacie, the reason why now they appear so thick in
public, is not the removal of Episcopacie, but the retarding of Presbiteriall
government, and the plague of our too too long annarchie.

That your Episcopacie is to be found in any reformed Church, is a great
untruth, we grant it is to be seen in your Eastern and Western Churches, the
first of your Catalogue: but you would speak a little more plainly, that
people may understand your mind, what Western Church is this that you propone
unto us for a pattern of Episcopacy? is it any other then the good old Mother
Church of Rome, which many of you cry up for so true a Church, that all
Protestants are Shismaticks, for their needless separation-there-from, and
that among Princes those are most happy, who shall heal that breach, and once
again make us all to be one: under our holy Father the Pope, the first Bishop
of Christendom, whom all the Bishops in Britain, and in the whole world,
ought by a good Ecclesiastic right, to reverence as the first Patriarch, the
constant moderator of all Oecumenick Counsels.

Your Eastern Churches are those of Greece and Asia, whose corruptions, albeit
not like to these of Rome, yet are so many and gross, as none, but such as you
will propone them for patterns of imitation.

In the rest of you^ Catalogue you are pleased to play the Herald and
Cosmographer, of purpose to terrify simple people, by the many names of your
large territories. You know the world scorns the Rodomontades of Spain, their
King must not be styled as his neighbors of France, and great Britain: but he
will be called the King of Castile, the King of Arragon, the King of Portugal,
the King of Leon, and a large and caetera of many Kingdoms, yet all in Spain.
Might you not have said that Episcopacie was continued in all the Lutheran
Churches of Germany, which will not make the third part of that Country,
deducing the Calvinists and Papists.

In your great vanity you reckon up the Earldome of Henneberg, Lenning, and
these that follow to the number of Thirteen, as if they were all great, and
considerable Provinces: and yet put them all together, they will scarce make up
one fifth part of some English shires.

But for the matter, are the Lutheran Churches esteemed by any well advised
Protestants the best reformed, whereof our Covenant speaks; It seems, the worse
Churches be reformed you like them the better, for they are so much nearer to
your best beloved in Rome, but true Covenanters are not of your mind.

Further, what you speak of the Lutheran Churches is altogether false: That in
Germany, or any where else among Protestants, any thing which you call
Episcopacie is to be sound, I marvel if you should believe it: for I pray
wherever, except in England, did any Protestants spoil all Pastors of all
power, both of Ordination and Jurisdiction to put it in the hand of one Prelat:
to be exercised either by himself, or by any depute Ecclesiastic, or civil,
as he thought fittest.

The Dutch Superintendens are as like to English Bishops, as an Emperor in the
days of Fabius Maximus, The Dutch Superintendents are very far from the
English Bishops.
when the Senate ruled all, to an Emperor in the days of Tiberius or Nero,
when an absolute Prince, I will not say a Tirant, did govern all at his
pleasure. The name is one, but the things are essentially different, and so
far distant as the East is from the West.

While you cast your self upon the Smectymnians, and will still rail upon our
Covenant, we desiderate your piety, but while you appeal to Calvin and Beza
for your Episcopacie, we miss your Common sense. All the Episcopacie, which
ever you had or ever aimed at, was most immoderate, and the most moderate
Episcopacie that can be conceived, is a mere human invention, which has no
ground at all in the word of God; which in all times and places has proved
unhappy to the Church, and which at this time is talked of by some for no other
end, but to be a new beginning and step to such a Prelacie as may be
serviceable to the Prince as before, for the advanceing of his Prerogative in
Church and State, above all Law and reason. How ridiculous is it to hear most
immoderate spirits talk of moderation: to speak of a moderate Episcopacie, a
moderate Popedom, a moderate Tyranny, is to tell us of a chaste Bordell an
honest cousinage a meek murder, and such like repugnancies: men now are no
more childish to be couzened by your distinctions out of their Covenant.

FINIS.
Good Reader,
BE entreated to pardon sundry literal faults, and many mispunctations, and
some other grosser typographicall faults which corrupt the sense.

An ANSWER to the DECLARATION.
AS Every passion when too much stirred, The opposites of Presbytery blinded
with malice, have hurt themselves and no others, by the reprinting of this
Declaration.
has a power to send up vapors and mists for darkning the light of the mind,
so especially anger and malice do dazzle and blind the eye of reason: Too much
wrath devests men so far of understanding, as to make them take up such Arms
against an Enemy, which cannot hurt him, but fail not to pierce themselves and
their best friends with dangerous wounds.

The opposites of Presbyteriall government (be they Independents, or Erastians,
or who ever) when after all other devices, they think fit for the help of
their cause, to reprint here, and put in the hand of people, the old and
forgotten calumnies formerly invented, and spread, by the SCOTS excommunicate
Prelates, by such weapons they will not be able to effect what they intend; yet
by such practices, they cannot fail (in the heart of intelligent beholders) to
wound their own reputation, proclaiming either gross ignorance, or very
malicious fraud in this their offer to abuse the simplicity of people, with
writs, which are fraughted with most notorious lies.

Concerning the Title; This writ of Adamsons is parallel to Balcanquals large
Declaration.
A Declaration made by King JAMES in Scotland: They who have acquaintance with
the SCOTS affairs of that time, do know this writ to have no more relation
unto King JAMES, then the late large Declaration had to King CHARLES; both
carry the name of Kings, but the specious pretense of a royal title was not
able to save the true Authors of either, from the just censure which they
deserved, by such false and malicious slandering of their Mother Church and
native Country. Doctor Balcanquall, for his wicked service in penning that
large Declaration, in King CHARLE's name, was condemned as a Liar, and
Incendiary, and so stands registered, both in that general Assembly The
General Assembly at Edinburgh, 1639. p. 9. the Assembly resenting the great
dishonor done to God, our King, this Church, and ^^^ole Kingdom, by the Book
called A larg Declaration, have collected some amongst many, of its false,
gross^ and absurd passages. They did supplicate to have To^^or Balcanquall, the
known Author cited, for exemplary punishment.
and Parliament of Scotland The secord Parliament of Kin, Charles, p. 29. the
Book called Al arge D^craration was found to be full of lies and known
untruths, and therefore the Parliament ordaines the Autho^s and spreaders
thereof to be most severely punished, to discourage all such underminers of his
Majesty's throne, and abusers of his royal name, by prefixing the same to such
scandalous and dishonorable Treatises, ibi. p. 126. the Act against the five
incendiaries Doctor Walter Balcanquall, etc.
, which King CHARLES by the advice of his Houses here, did lately ratify
Second Parliament of King Charles, p. 72. whereunto it was an wered by the
English Commissioners, that his Majesty does in the name of a King promise to
publish the said Acts, as is above specified.
.

The Bishop Adamsor, for the like disservice in King James pretended
Declaration, does not also remain in the Records of the Assemblies and
Parliaments of Scotland, ^ignmatized with the same Note of perpetual infamy,
nothing impeded, but his public Declaration of repentance.

That King James, Adamson confesses himself to be the Author.
notwithstanding of all his favor to Episcopacy, was neither the Author nor
approver of this Declaration, I demonstrate thus: First, Master Patricke
Adamson, upon his deathbed, put it under his hand with a solemn Oath, that he
himself was the Author of that Wryt, which he had drawn by the direction of
the Chancellor and Secretary (two very wicked Courtiers) The recantation of
Patrick Adamson, Bishop of St. Andrews; Whereas I am burdened to be the setter
forth of the Book called the Kings Declaration; wherein the whole order of the
Church is condemned and traduced; I protest before God that I was commanded to
write the same, by the Chancellor for the time, but chiefly by the Secretary,
another great Courtier.
contrary to the mind of the King. King James did disclaim it
Secondly, when the Commissioners of the general Assembly, the very next year
at the Parliament of Lithgow, did complain to the King, of the many false and
wicked aspersions of that Declaration. His Majesty did take such notice of
their grievances, that with his own hand he did write a new Declaration, much
differing from the former, which he told them was not his, but the Archbishops
These animadversions and supplications being presented to his Majesty by the
Ministers, the King took pains himself, by the space of four and twenty
hours, to take him to his Cabinet, and with his own hand, both wrote and
penned this Declaration following, word by word. Ibid. the Bishop of St.
Andrews his own Declaration, etc.
.

Thirdly, What ever in it is contrary to Presbytery is condemned by posterior
Parliaments.
the Acts of Parliament upon which this Declaration is grounded, and which it
does interpret, were all annulled some few years thereafter; and the
Presbiterian government, which this writ tends to disgrace, was completely
set up by the King, and States of Parliament, to the great joy of the whole
Land Twelfth Parli. of King James the 6. 1592. Act 1. our Sovereign Lord and
Estates of this present Parliament, ratifies and approves the general Assembly
appointed by the said Kirk, and declares that it shall be lawful to the Kirk
and Ministers every year at the least, and ofter pro re nata, as occasion and
necessity shall require, to hold and keep general Assemblies, and also
ratifies and approves the Synodall and Provincial Assemblies, to be holden by
the said Kirk and Ministers, twice every year, as they have been and are
presently in use to do, within every Province of this Realm; as also ratifies
and approves the Presbyteries and particular Sessions appointed by the said
Kirk, with the whole Jurisdiction and discipline of the same Kirk agreed upon
by his Majesty in conference had by his Highness with certain of the
Ministers conveened to that effect: also determines and declares the said
Assemblies, Presbiteries and Sessions, their jurisdiction and discipline, to be
in all times coming most just and good, notwithstanding of whatsomever
Statutes, Acts, Canons civil or municipall Laws, made in the contrary. Item,
the Kings Majesty and Estates declares, that the 129. Act of the Parliament
holden at Edinbrough, the 22. of May 1584. shall no ways be prejudicial, nor
derogate any thing to the privilege that God has given to the Spiritual
Officers in the Kirk, concerning heads of Religion, matters of Heresy,
Ezcommunication, collation, deprivation of Ministers, or any such like
essential Censures, specially grounded and having warrant of the Word of God.
Also abrogates, Cassis and Annuls, the Act of the same Parliament 1584. year,
granting Commission to Bishops and other Judges constitute in Ecclesiastical
causes to receive his Highness Presentations to Benefices, to give collation
hereupon, and to put order in all Ecclesiastical causes; his Majesty and
Estates declares this Act to be expired, and in time coming to be null; and
therefore ordains all Presentations to be directed to the particular
Presbiteries.
.

More needs not be said for the confounding and filling with shame the faces of
them, No more is needful for a satisfactory Answer.
who in the reprinting of this Pamphlet could have no other intention, but to
grieve and disgrace them, whom by word they call Brethren; but in heart and
works, they evidently malign as enemies, without any cause. Adamson (the true
Father) confesses it to be a Bastard, and supposititious birth wholly composed
of lies and slanders. King James disclaimes it, and puts a new Declaration in
its place; the States of Parliament in King James his presence, and with his
open allowance, abolished the Acts whereupon it was founded; rooting out
Episcopacy, which it dothplant, and building up Presbyteries and Synods, which
it professes to demolish.

Yet for more abundant satisfaction, The points of the wryt.
let us consider its particular parts: It contains first a Preface: Secondly,
an explanation of four Acts of the Parliament at Edinbrough, Page 1. It is
hazardous for a (...) Prince to take upon himself ^the faults of ^his Officers.
1584. Thirdly, an enumeration of some fourteen intentions ascribed to the
King.

In the Preface, there is a narrative of the causes of the subsequent
Declaration; all resolves upon the alleged Lies of some evil affected
persons, laboring to impair his Majesty's honor and fame: Upon this we
remark that the late unhappy trick of Courtiers and Prel^tes, is no less
ancient then this Declaration; it was the ordinary custom of these ungrate and
imprudent men, to charge the back of the King with their own faults; the
bones of Kings are supposed by Sycophants to be so strong, that no burden is
able to bow, much less to break them. As King Charles has ever been ^^o ready
and willing to take upon himself the guilt of his servants, upon what ever
hazard; the same was his Fathers condition, yet with this difference, King
James was willing to bear his Servants burdens, till he found they pinched,
but so soon as they began to press him any thing sore, he was so wise and
just to himself and others, that he laid them always over upon the neck of
those whom in reason it concerned to bear them. The people had an high esteem
of Ki. James his virtues.


About that time, the fame of Kings James his Learning, Piety, and personal
virtues did flourish at home and abroad; the well-affected, who chiefly are aimed
at, were so far from impairing his personal reputation, that in their very
censure of this Declaration, they give unto him an excellent testimony Vide An
Answer to the Declaration. Their indignation was only against the Court, and
upon just grounds.
. But at that same time, his Court was so exceedingly corrupted, that the good
men in the whole Isle, both English and Scots did lament it; Captain James
Stuart by his cunning crept up to be Chancellor, became so insolent a Tyrant,
that neither the greatest nor the most innocent had security either of their
life or Estate Spotswoods History, lib. 6, p. 179. ^eere 1584. this severity
was universally disliked, but that which shortly ensued, was much more
hateful! Ibid. Maines and Drumwhassill were hanged the same day in the public
street of Edenborough, the Gentlemen's case was much pitied, Maines his case
especially; all that were present, in their hearts did pronounce him innocent;
these cruel and rigorous proceedings caused such a fear, as all fami^iar
society was in a manner left, no man knowing to whom be might safely speak:
Arran in the mean time went on, drawing into his own hand the managing of
affairs, for he would be sole and supreme over all. Ibid. p. 177. Master Andrew
Pullert, Master Patrick Galloway, Master James Carmichal Ministers, were
denounced Rebels, and fled into England, Master Andrew Hay compeered, and
nothing being qualified against him, was upon suspicion confined to the North;
the Ministers sent Master David Lindsay to the King, with their supplication,
but Arran sent him prisoner to Blackness, where he was detained forty seven
weeks: The Ministers of Edenborough hearing of this, for sook their charge and
fled into England, so as Edenbrugh was left without any Preachers; Master
Robert Pont likewise flying, was denounced Rebel.
. The best Ministers were forced to leave the Kingdom. The Duke of Lennox,
whose power with the King was greatest, had lately come over from the Guisians
in France, though the man himself was of a very good and meek nature, yet he
had his instructions and dependence from the Authors and instruments of the
French Massacres; he made it his work to further the interest of France, to
the prejudice of England: he corresponded with the French and Scots Traffiquers
for Queen Mary's deliverance out of prison; yea, for her return to the throne
of Scotland in an association with her Son The Collection, Sir Esme Stuart was
sent by Queen Mother of France and the Guisians to seduce the young King, to
subvert Religion, violate the amity between England and Scotland, to procure an
invasion for the delivery of the Queen of Scots then in captivity, to make the
King content to be associate with her in the government, to alienate his heart
from the Ministry: he had his continual intelligence and instructions from
France.
. These things which all the Writers of that time do record, did so fill the
hearts of all good people with fears, for changes both of Religion and Laws,
that neither English nor Scots did spare to express them in their ordinary
discourses Vide supra h.
. Unto this frightment of the people, the Acts of Parliament, procured by the
forenamed Masters of the Court, did much add; for the allaying whereof, this
Declaration was penned, but to no purpose, as Spotswood himself tells us
Spotswoods Story, lib. 6. p. 177. This Declaration gave not much satisfaction,
so great was the discontent.
.

For no satisfaction was ever taken, till both the Duke, Chancellor, Secretary
and Archbishop Adamson were banished the Court, and the acts of Parliament of
their invention abolished as noxious and evil. There was never any Warrant for
Printing of this Writ.


What is here said of King James his command to publish this Declaration, I do
not find it verified in any Register, either of the Church or Kingdom of
Scotland that has fallen in my hand; but if any such command did come from him
at that time of his minority and great tentation* through the continual evil
offices of them that then managed his Counsels, it were a case no more strange
then these which often since we have seen in both Kingdoms: many Proclamations
and Declarations by false and wicked informations, have been drawn from King
James and King Charles, and many other Princes, which upon better advisement
have been called in and buried; the Proclamation concerning sports and plays
upon the Sabbath, the Service Book and Book of Canons, the Declarations of the
Rebellion of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, we all know. For my part, I
love not to rake out ^f the grave, the carcases of these buried Writs, for the
infamy of the Prince, or the prejudice of the Subject.

We shall s^y no more to the preface, Page 2.
come to the interpretation of these offensive Acts of that Parliament at
Edinburgh, 1584. As for the first Act, the explanation here made upon it did no
way remove its offense, for both the Act and its explanation attribute to the
Ministers only the administation of the Word and Sacraments, without any
mention at all of any discipline; this seems to have been one chief cause why
the worshipful Licenser was pressed with so much importunity, to give his
Imprimatur to this Writ, as if this passage had been a demonstration of King
James his Erastianisme; but let the world take notice of the grossness of
this mistake by this short information.

The Commissioners of the general Assembly, King James was far from
Erastianisme.
were required by his Majesty at the Parliament of Lithgou, 1585. to give him
in the grounds of their grievances against the Acts of the Parliament at
Edenbrugh, 1584. here explained Collection, Master Andrew Melvill had been
plain with the King diverse days; at length the King desired the Ministers to
exhibit in writ, what exceptions they had against the Parliament held in Anno
1584. whereupon they exhibit to the King these animadversions following.
: In their Animadversion upon the Act now in hand, they did show his Majesty
that the power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Church Censures, did belong
to them by divine right, no less then the power of preaching the Word, and
Celebrating the Sacraments Animadversions: The power of the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, consists not only in preaching and administration of the
Sacraments but also in jurisdiction and removing of offenses out of the Kirk of
God, and excommunication of the disobedient, to be pronounced by these that are
officers of the Church: our warrants out of the Word of God, for this part of
the liberty of the Church we are to bring forth when your Majesty pleases.
.

Also that the Laws of the Kingdom, ever fince the Reformation, did ratify
that their right Ibid. This Act restricted the liberty granted byother Acts of
Parliament of before, concerning discipline and correction of manners, which
were established by a Law in the first year of your Majesty's Reign.
; and that hitherto they had bin in peaceable possession thereof Ibid. There is
a spiritual jurisdiction, where of the Office-bearers within the Kirk in this
Realm, have been in peaceable possession and use these twenty four year by
past, whereof followed no trouble, but great quietness in the Kirk and
Commonwealth.
: The King in his Reply to this animadversion, does not deny any of these
Alleageances. yea, he declares under his hand, that he did not intend to take
from Church Officers any part of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but only so
to regulate the execution of Discipline, that some part thereof might be put in
the hand of Prelates, this was the only point in controversy The Kings
Declaration, the first Act makes only mention of the preaching of the Word
and Sacraments, not thereby to abrogate any good further policy and
jurisdiction in the Kirk, but allanerly to remit a part thereof to the Acts
ensuing, and the most which as yet are not agreed upon nor concluded, I intend
God willing, to cause to be perfected by a godly general Assembly.
: Whence it appears, how far his Majesty was from all Erastianisme, though his
affection to prelacy at that time was too great, which yet he changed quickly
thereafter as we shall see anon.

The explanation of the second Act, The sum of the next Paragraph.
consists of a Narrative and Ordinance builded thereupon: the Narrative has the
alleged misbehaviours of some Ministers; Master Andrew Melvile alone is named,
as joining in conspiracies with Rebels against the King, as Preaching seditious
Doctrine, and disclaining the King and Counsel of State, for his Judges. The
Ordinance is concerning the Kings Supremacy; diverse things are here jumbled
together confusedly and odiously, to these two purposes, by the Abbot of
Dunfermeling (Secretary for the time) the Penner of this passage, as Adamson
the writer of the rest confesses Adamsons recantation, The Secretary himself
penned the second Act of Parliament concerning the power of Judicatories to be
absolutely in the King; and that it should not be lawful for any Subject to
reclame from the same, under the penalty of the Act, which I suppose was
treason.
.

Concerning the first, Master Melvill his worth.
Master Andrew Melvils case, the Narrative is most untrue, as I shall make good
by undeniable evidence. Master Melvil was an excellent Divine, the principal
professor of Divinity in the University first of Glasgow, and then of S.
Andrews, full of piety, eloquence and learning of all sorts; so eminent in
zeal for the truth, that his remembrance is yet very precious, not in Scotland
alone, but in other reformed Churches; his heroicke courage made him an
eyesore to the Masters of the Court, whose wickedness he and his Scholars,
according to their place and duty, did masculously oppose. From this it was,
and nothing else, that an Accusation was invented against him, as for seditious
and treasonable words against the Kings Mother Queen Mary, then prisoner in
England.

When he came to his Answer upon his solemn Oath, Clear grounds for his
justification.
he denied his Charge; The Collection: I Master Andrew Melvill protest before
God and his elect Angels, that I spoke nothing in that Sermon, or any other
Sermon made by me, tending to the slander or dishonor of the Kings Majesty, my
Sovereigne, any ways, but in the contrary, exhorted always all his highness
Subjects to obedience and reverence of his Majesty, whom God in his mercy has
placed lawful King and supreme Magistrate in the Civil government of the
Country, and most earnestly have prayed at all times, and specially in the
foresaid Sermon, for the preservation and prosperous estate of his Majesty;
also I protest before God, that neither in that Sermon, nor any other, I spoke
these words, [the King is unlawfully promoted to the Crown] or any words
sounding thereunto, for I put never in question his Majesty's lawful Authority.
and for his clearing, he produced three famous testificats; the first under
the hand of all the Masters and Regents of the University; the second under the
hand of all the Magistrates and Common counsel of Saint Andrews; the third
under the hands of the whole Classical Presbytery of the bounds, who all were
his frequent hearers, and the most of them had been present at the challenged
Sermon, all of them did testify the Charge to be a vile calumny, and that he
had spoken no such words as were alleged; The Collection, Whatsoever is laid
to our Brothers charge, as it is false and fained of it self, so it is forged
of the Devil and his instruments, to bring the faithful servants of God in
contempt, for as we were continual and diligent Auditors of his Doctrine, so
we bear him faithful record in God and in conscience, that we heard nothing
out of his mouth, neither in Doctrine nor Application, which tended not
directly to the glory of God, and to the establishment of your Majesty's
Crown, and whenever the occasion offered it self in special to speak of
your Majesty, we heard him never but in great zeal and earnest prayer,
recommend your Majesty unto his protection, exhorting always all manner of
Subjects to acknowledge their obedience even to the meanest Magistrate.
also that both in his Pulpit and Chair and ordinary discouse, it was his
custom to press so much loyalty and obedience, as any duty did require Vide
supra w.
.

The witness brought in against him did depose nothing to his prejudice,
though the Chancellor, Captain James, his spightfull enemy did sit in the
Counsel as his Judge.

Yea, if Spotswood may be trusted, he was not found guilty of any the least
part of his challeng, but the sentence against him proceeded alone upon some
alleged rash words to the King in the heat of his defense Spotswoods History,
year 1583. fol. 175. be burst forth in undutifull speeches, which unreverend
words did greatly offend the Counsel, thereupon was he charged to enter his
person in Blackness.
.

As for his conscience of any conspiracy, he denied it upon Oath, neither was
any witness brought in to say any thing upon that allegiance; if any more
were needful for the clearing of his innocence, Adamsous Oath and Subscription
is extant, wherein he condemns this part of the Narative of falsehood, and
justifies Master Melvill, as a most just and honest man; Adamsons Recantation,
in the second Act there is mention made of Master Andrew Melvill and his Sermon
wrongfully condemned, as factious and seditious, albeit his Majesty has had a
lively trial of that man's fidelity from time to time; true it is, he is
earnest and zealous, and can abide no corruption (which most unadvisedly I
attribute to a fiery and salt humor) which his Majesty finds by experience
to be true; for he allows well of him, and knows the things that were
alleged upon him to have been false and contrived treacheries.
His flight no Argument of guiltiness.
yea King James himself when the Commisssioners of the Church did complain to
him of these slanderous imputations, did promise them under his hand, that they
should be rescinded: Kings Declaration, always how soon the whole Ministers of
Scotland shall amend their manners the foresaid Act shall be rescinded.
It is true, that Master Melvill when he was sentenced, did flee to England for
his life, the time being so evil, that according to Spotswoods Relation, the
King by the practices of the Courtiers in his minority, was forced Spotswoods
Story, lib. 6. fol. 244. year 1600. Your Father (said the King) I was not the
cause of his death, it was done in my minority, and by a form of justice.
to permit and oversee too often the execution of diverse good and innocent men,
yet how little displeasing Master Melvils flight was to the King, a short time
did declare, for within a few months he returned, and was restored both to his
Charge and the Kings favor, Vide supra, the Collection and Recantation z.
wherein he did constantly continue, till the death of Queen Elizabeth did call
his Majesty to the Throne of England, A maine cause of the extirpation of
Prelacyin England
a day very joyful to both Kingdoms, but most sorrowful to the Church of
Scotland; for so soon as the English Prelates got King James amongst them, they
did not rest till Master Melvill and the prime of the Scots Divines were called
up to London, and only for their necessary and just defense of the truth of
God and liberties of the Church of Scotland, against Episcopal usurpations,
were either banished or confined, or so sore oppressed, that grief did break
their heart, and brought the most of them to their graves with sorrow; the
whole Discipline of the Church of Scotland was overthrown, to the very great
trouble and disquieting of the Church and Kingdom: This violence did lie
silent under the Prelates Chaires for many years, but at last, blessed be God,
it has spoken to purpose, it has moved the Heavens and shaken the earth, to the
tumbling of all these Antichristian Tyrants in the three Kingdoms, with their
seats of pride, into the gulf of ruin, whence we hope there shall be no more
emersion. Master Melvils Declinator and Protestation clee^ed.


The last thing objected to Master Mervill, is his declinator of the King; when
the state of the Question is known, this will appear no great crime; for the
Question was not, Whether Ministers be exempt from the Magistrates
jurisdiction, nor, Whether the Pulpit puts men in a liberty to teach treason
without any civil cognizance and punishment, since the Reformation of
Religion, Second Book of Discipline, cap. 1. The Ministers should assist their
Princes in all things agreeable to the Word; Ministers are subject to the
judgment and punishment of the Magistrate in external things, if they offend;
The Answer to the Declaration, whereas it is said, it is his Majesty's
intention to correct and punish such as seditiously abuse the Chair of truth,
and factiously apply the Scripture to the disturbing of the Commonwealth,
surely his Majesty's intention is good, providing, true trial go before,
unlawful correction follow after according to the Word of God.
no man in Scotland did ever assert such things; but the Question was, as
Spotswood himself states it, Whether the Counsel was a competent Judge to
Malter Melvils doctrine in prima instantia, these were the express terms;
Spotswoods Story fol. 175. year 1583. l. 6. he affirmed that what was spoken in
Pulpit, ought first to be tried by the Presbytery and that neither the King nor
Counsel might in prima instantia meddle therewith.
Master Melvill did protest for the liberties of the Church ratified by law
avowing that as civil actions could not be called from before the ordinary
Judicato ies to the Counsel Table, though the King by his Letters should
command it; so causes merely Ecclesiastical should not be brought from the
Presbyteries and Synods, at least in the first instance: He did also protest,
that the liberties of the University should not be violate, for it was a
privilege of old, conferred and very lately confirmed both by King and
Parliament, that no member of the University should be called before any
Judicatory, to the time their cause was heard and discussed within the
University it self; Second Book of Discipline p. 25. Although Kings and
Princes that be godly, sometimes by their own authority, when the Kirk is
corrupted, and all things out of order, place Ministers, and restore the true
service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of Juda, and diverse
godly Emperors and Kings also, in the light of the new Testament, yet where
the Ministry, etc.
whether these Protestations were treasonable and dissonant from the Laws and
constant practice of Scotland, will appear more anon; so much of the narrative.

The Ordinance pretended to be made upon occasion of Master Melvils
misbehaviour, What Supremacy is Irwfull.
was the Act of the Kings Supremacy over all persons, That none should decline
his Highness Authority: Where it is to be observed, that the contrivers of
this Declaration, while they endeavor to show the occasion and rise of that
second Act from Master Meloil and other Ministers, their stirring up of people
to Rebellion against their native King, and their refuling to acknowledge the
Sovereign judgment for a godly quietness and order in the Commonwealth, to
appertain to his Highness care and solicitude: And it being professed in the
same Declaration concerning that Act, that his Majesty's intention was only to
repress that immunity, privilege and exemption invented by the Pope to exempt
himself and his Clergy from all judgment of Princes: Yea, the Declaration
expressy waveth th Question of the Kings Supremacy in judging of cause
Ecclesiastical, as not belonging to that present condition of affairs, the
Question being neither concerning heresies, interpretation of Scripture, the
lawful and ordinary Ecclesiastical Judgment for preserving and maintaining
Church Discipline; nor concerning the power of Synods, but concerning some of
the Ministry joining themselves (as is there pretended) to Rebels, and
disquieting the State: These things considered, it will appear, that as this
Declaration infinitely wrongeth these learned and godly Ministers (who were far
from any disloyal doctrines or popish tenants, concerning the immunity of
Ministers from all judgment of Princes, in matters belonging to quietness and
order in the Commonwealth, so it does not clearly hold forth that which
peradventure was intended and is endeavored (in point of the Magistrate his
supremacy in Ecclesiasticis) by some who were very solicitous to have this
Declaration reprinted; whose principles suffer them not to rest satisfied with
that measure of power, which in a reformed and well constructed Church does (by
the Word of God, and by the Doctrine of the ancient and reformed Churches)
belong to the civil Magistrate in reference to Religion and causes
Ecclesiastical (wherein also their power is further enlarged in extraordinary
cases, when the ordinary ways and means of reformation cannot be had: Some
hopes (it seems) there were to find in this Declaration another kind of
Supremacy, which is now the idol of many mifinformed minds, which is also
hightned far above the moderate interpretations which were given by Doctor
Bilson and Doctor Usher.

I mean such a supremacy, The Erastian Supremacy is more then a Turkish
tyranny.
as makes the Magistrate the head and fountain of all Jurisdiction Civil and
Ecclesiastic, which makes all powers within His Dominions to be but rivolets
and streams derived from his Ocean, making all the members of all Courts
Spiritual and Civil to be but Commissioners at pleasure of the Prince,
putting all Laws under his arbitrament, and the Legislative power in his breast
alone, changing Parliaments into his arbitrary Counsels for matters of State,
as general Assemblies for matters of the Church: putting it in his free will
to lay aside for ever both Parliaments and Assemblies, and to set up in their
places, what Courts they think expedient, for all causes of all persons, that
they may (if so it be their pleasure, commit the final decision of all
Ecclesiastic causes to some few Church and Statesmen of their own nomination,
under the title of a High Commission, or to two or three either of the Church
or State, under the name of Delegats, or to any one Gentleman alone, under the
name of a Vicar general; also they may devolve the last determination of all
civil causes upon a few favorites, whether of the long or short Robe, under
the style of a Star Chamber, or Counsel Table, or Cabinet counsel, or private
Juncto.

If this be the supremacy which the reprinters of the Declaration aim at, we
grant that many Prelates and Courtiers have always been of their mind; but I
assure them, the Scots Divines did ever abhor such slavish maxims; such a
supremacy has always been the fundamental Law in the grand Segniors Port at
Constantinople, it has been for many years the possessed Prerogative of the
French and Spanish Monarchs; also from their example, it has been the aim and
endeavor not only of other Kings, but almost of all Princes and Sovereign
States, how petty soever; so much is a sovereigne despotick and uncontroleable
Domination, naturally beloved by all who are in any neernesse or hope to
attain it: But it is a morsel that has stuck with so many in the swallowing,
and poisoned so many in the digestion, though swallowed down, that few who are
wise, will adventure any more to taste of it; notwithstanding if the appetite
of the publishers of this Writ will not be satisfied with any thing less then
such a Supremacy, let them be pleased to consider:

First, If either King or Parliament admit of it, it will overthrow both, and
the whole Nation with them.
that this kind of supremacy will fall upon a subject where their hearts will be
loath it should lodge, it will be found rather a part of the royal Prerogative,
then any Privilege of Parliament; and although according to their good friends
last warning to the City, the Crown were broken in pieces, and the whole
royal Prerogative devolved upon the head of the Parliament, yet the
aforementioned supremacy is so high an injustice, that no gracious member of
either House would ever be persuaded to touch it though it were put in their
fingers; for beside the everting of all the Laws whereupon Monarchy since the
first foundation has stood, it would so shake the groundstones of all the Laws
of the Kingdom, as would hazard the overthrow no less of the Parliament, then
of the King, and with them all the Judicatories and rights of the Land, our
unhappy Brovilons, fit for nothing so much as to confound all things, would be
in a fair way to bring the whole Church and State to such a Chaos and hodge
podge, as no creature without Gods extraordinary assistance, should ever again
be able to bring their confusions to any tolerable order.

Secondly, The Supremacy here mentioned favors Episcopacy, but not
Erastianisme.
they should do well to consider, that whatever supremacy is aimed at in the
Writ, yet the Erastian design will not be much helped thereby, for it is
expressly provided therein, that the ordinary Ecclesiastic Judicatories shall
cognosce all Ecclesiasticke causes, Printed Declaration, p. 3. Neiis it his
Majesty's intention to take away the lawful and ordinary judgment of the
Church, but rather to preserve, increase, and maintain the same; and as there
is in the Realm Justices, Constables, Sheriffs, Provosts, Bailiffes, and
other Judges in temporal matters, so his Majesty allows that all things may
be done in order, and a godly order may be preserved in the whole Estate; the
Synodall Assemblies by the Bishops or Commissioners for the places vacand, to
be convened twice in the year, to have the Ordering of matters belonging to
the Ministry and their estate.
no word at all to import that any civil Commissioners may determine upon any
affairs merely Ecclesiastical; it is true, that the ordinary Judicatories
here named, are put under the foul feet of the Prelates; and this seems to have
been the maine aim both of the Act and of its interpretation, yet hereby the
Erastian principles are nothing furthered; for as by the Covenant and Laws of
both Kingdoms the roots of Episcopacy are now pluked up, so its well known
that neither Presbiterians nor Independents were ever more zealous for the
establishing of Ecclesiastic jurisdiction by a divine right in the hand of
Church Officers, then the Episcopal party, at least those of them who
understood and minded their own principles.

Thirdly, King James against the Erastians.
if all this will not satisfy, we desire those who hold out this passage as
advantageous for the Ecclesiastic power of the Magistrate in prejudice of the
Presbytery, to know that when the Ministers did complain to King James of this
seeming prejudice, he gave them his own Declaration which he promised should
be as authentic as that Act of Parliament Kings Declaration: Now I say and
declare, which Declaration shall be as authentic as the Act it self; that I
for my part shall never, neither my Posterity, ought ever cite, summon or
apprehend any Pastor or Preacher for matters of Doctrine in Religion,
salvation, beresies, or true interpretation of the Scriptures, but according to
my first Act, which confirms the liberty of Preaching the Word, Ministration
of the Sacraments; I avow the same to be a matter mere Ecclesiastical and
altogether impertinent to my calling, therefore never shall I, nor never ought
they, I mean my Posterity, to acclaime any power of jurisdiction of the
foresaid.
which caused their grief, and much more authentic then Adamsons
Interpretation of that Act; assuring them that neither himself nor any of his
successors should ever claim the Cognizance nor the power to determine in any
cause merely Ecclesiastical, Vide sapra hh.
avowing that Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction did belong only to the Church
officers, which neither himself nor any of his heirs should ever crave nor
ever ought to crave as belonging to them. King James revoked what here is
published.


Finally, we desire them to know, if Princes promises and Declarations under
their hands seem not to them sufficient security, that whatever in the present
passage does appear, to spoil the Church Assemblies of a full and plenary
Jurisdiction, was all recalled and past from by King James the very next year
for he did consent unto that transaction of Archbishop Adamsons, whereby the
Arch-prelate devests himself of all jurisdiction, and submits himself to the
authority of the Assembly, renouncing all liberty of appeal to any other
person or Judicatory in the earth Spotswoods History, lib. 6. p. 184. year
1586. A transaction was made in this sort, That the Bishop by his hand writing
should labor to carry himself as a moderate Pastor ought, laboring to be the
Bishop described by Saint Paul, submitting his life and Doctrine to the
Judgment and censure of the general Assembly, without any reclamation,
provocation or appellation from the same in any time coming, what should have
moved the King to hearken to a mediation so prejudicial both to his own
authority and the Episcopal jurisdiction cannot well be conjectured;
whatsoever the reason was, the Bishop did set his hand to the things proposed
by the Assembly.
.

But to stop all mouths which from Scotland would bring any color of warrant
King Charles also.
for an Erastian Supremacy, in the last Parliament of Scotland, which was
ratified by King Charles, with the hearty consent of his good Subjects of
England; the final determination of all Ecclesiasticke Causes whatsoever is
referred to the National Assembly as to the only proper and competent Judge;
Second Parliament of K. Charles Act 4. p. 6. and 8. The Kings Majesty having
graciously declared that it is his royal will and pleasure that all questions
about Religion and matters Ecclesiastical, be determined by the Assemblies of
the Church, and that for preservation of Religion, general Assemblies rightly
constitute, as the proper and competent judge of all matters Ecclesiastical
hereafter be kept yearly, and oftener pro renata; as also that Kirk Sessions,
Presbyteries and Synodall Assemblies be constitute and observed, according to
the order of this Kirk; which Act, the estates now convened by his Majesty's
indiction, ra^ifies, approves and confirms in all points, and gives thereunto
the strength of a Law and Act of Parliament.
whoever will call this Act of Parliament into question must be content to have
the King and his Parliaments of both Kingdoms for their first and chief
opposites.

The explanation of the next Act is also large and confused, The sum of. the
next Paragraph.
it contains a discharge of all Church Assemblies and meetings not authorized
by Law; particularly, it discharges the National Assembly, and Classical
Presbytery upon the allegiance of some enormous practices of these two
meetings: Consider first the discharge, and then its reasons. Church Assemblies
established in Scotland on a Divine Right, with the allowance of King James and
K. Charles in diverse Parliaments.


Concerning the discharge of Church meetings not authorized by Law, the
Commissioners did show the King that Church meetings were necessary to be kept,
being Animadversions we offer Us to prove by good Warrants of the Word of God,
that it is lawful to the Ecclesiastiall Estate, to Convocate Assemblies, and
to hold the same, and to appoint and order place and time for convening of the
same, to troat upon such matters as concern the Kirk affairs, which no ways
impaireth your Majesty's civil and royal jurisdiction, but rather fortifieth
and decoreth the fame.
commanded of God; and being such means without which the Churches and
societies of the Saints could not subsist in their necessary purity and order:
in the time of the greatest persecutions Christians did meet in their
Assemblies both for worship and discipline, though the imperial Laws did
discharge such conventions: In France and Poland where the Princes are enemies
to Religion, yet the Protestants are permitted to keep their Assemblies for
Discipline, greater and smaller, of all sorts as they have occasion, no less
then their meetings for the Word and Sacraments: His Majesty in his reply does
not deny the Commissioners allegiance, only he required a intermission of the
named meetings for a short time, till the whole plat-forme of Church government
according to the Word of God, might be finished; hereby The Kings Declaration:
My meaning and Declaration is, that they shall cease while a settled Policy and
Jurisdiction be established according to the Commission and line of Gods Word.
yielding that he believed the Church ought to have its own government,
according to the prescription of the holy Scripture, to which he purposed to
submit and agree, as indeed he did the year following, agreeing to that course
which the Assembly at Saint Andrews took with Bishop Adamson without all
contradiction, and ever thereafter permitting the Ministers without any
interruption, to enjoy all their Ecclesiastic meetings in peace; yea some few
years after (as often I have said) he did establish by Act of Parliament the
whole plat-forme of government according to their mind, which abode untouched
till the evil advice of the English Prelates moved him to make some breaches in
that wall, which (thanks be to God) are now fully repaired; King Charles in
person having lately ratified in Parliament the meeting of all our Assemblies,
from the lowest to the highest, so fully as our hearts could wish.

Beside the divine right of our Church meetings for Discipline, the
Commishoners did demonstrate to the King the good humane right thereof in
Scotland, producing to him an Act of his own first Parliament, for the
national Assembly and final determination of all Ecclesiastical appeals
therein; Anamadversions concerning the general Assembly of the Kirk, there is
an Act the first year of your highness reign, ratifying the authority
thereof, and decerning appellations to be devolved thereto, as to the last
judgment of matters concerning the Kirk.
his Majesty likewise could not but well remember that the whole model of
Presbyteries and their proceedings had been often in debate before him and the
Counsel Table; also, that some few years before he had sent to the general
Assembly at Clasgow, his express order for the erection of Presbyteries in all
the Shires of the Kingdom; The Acts of the general Assembly Instructions to
our trusty and welbeloved William Cunningham of Caprinton, directed by us with
the advice of the Lords of our secret Counsel to the general Assembly
conveend at Gasgow, April 20. 1581. follows the List of 50. Presbiteries, 12.
Parishes or thereabouts, making up one Presbitry.
whence the Church came to be in a very peaceable possession of all her
Assemblies national, provincial, classical and congregationall, without any
controlment; only in that hour of darkness (as generally then it was called)
there was a short eclipse, but that did quickly pass over; neither did any
interruption of these Church meetings come thereupon.

However, The reprinters of this Declaration seem to be contemners of Oaths
Laws, and al rights divine and humane.
we cannot but observe the disposition of those who with so great care and
zeal, set out in this paper to the world for imitation, the example of a
Prince (although in the hour of tentation, out of the which he was immediately
delivered) for pulling down and discharging of Presbyteries and Assemblies,
when established by Law, and quietly possessed by a clear Right both divine
and humane: We trust the honorable Houses of Parliament are far from their
mind, else we should have but small comfort, though we should see the Ghurch
government here settled both by Law and possession; for it seems that the
publishers of this Writ would have us to despair of any security to keep
whatever now may be gotten; Oaths, Covenants, Laws, Possessions must be no
stronger then bonds of flax and ropes of straw, which the fire of these men's
wrath, when ever it comes upon them, will easily burn and burst asunder; but
it is well that Princes and Parliaments are not capable to be miscarried by the
private passions of so unconstant and perfidious persons.

The reasons of the Act do follow, for the putting down of the Classical
Presbytery, a great misbehaviour is alleged; The Presbytery of Edinburgh took
upon them to diswade the Feasting of the French Ambassador, and did enter in
Process with the Magistrates, who at the Kings desire contrary to their advice
did keep that Feast; a long and odious story of that matter is here deduced
and borrowed from hence, both by Spotswood in his History, and Maxwell in his
Issachars burden; but the truth is this, A full account of the French Banquet.
as I find it extracted out of the Records of the Church of Scotland, by a
very reverend and faithful hand: That time was one of the most sad and
dangerous seasons, that this Isse has seen; it was but a little after the
Massacres of France, and a little before the Spanish Armada, about the very
instant when the Catholic League was hatched, for the rooting out of
Protestant Religion, and all Protestant Princes, especially Queen Elizabeth.
At this time it was when two or three French Ambassadors one after another
came over from France to Scotland, with Instructions from the chief contrivers
of that unholy League. Vide supra: Also Spotswoods history lib. 6. fo. 180.
year 1585. then came that holy League, as they called it, to be discovered,
which the Pope, the Spanish King, with the Guises and others had made to
extirpate reformed Religion; the Queen of England understanding her self to
be principally aimed at, etc. Also the Collection Monsieur de la Motfenellon
and Maningvill were sent from the King of France to strengthen the Kings
faction to procure Lenox his return, to withdraw the King from the Lords.
The Court was then very corrupt, exceeding tyrannous and oppressive both of
the Nobility and Ministers; Jesuits and Priests did flock from beyond Sea, in
greater numbers then ever; Collection: he procured Protections for Jesuits
and trafficking Papists, St. Andrews story, li. 3. fol. 165. year 1579. this
dissension betwixt the King and the Church brought with it many evils; for upon
the notice of it, diverse Jesuits and Priests did resort into the Country, and
at home such as were Popishly affected, began openly to avow their profession.
the professed negotiation of the French Agents was to restore Queen Mary; the
trafiquers in that business were received with extraordinary curtefies: All
this did fill the hearts of the people both with grief and fear, for the
undermining of their Religion, for the destruction of their King, and ruin of
the Kingdom. These passions increased when they did see the English
Ambassadors at that same time used in a much diverse fashion; railed upon by
rascals in the streets, vexed with infamous Libels fixed upon the doors of
their Lodgings, endangered in their persons by Pistols shot in at their
windows; Spotswoods History, lib. 6. fol. 173. year 1582. La Mot came by
England, having the same Instructions to renew the purpose of the Association
which was set on foot the year before, and almost concluded in this sort, that
the Queen of Scots should communicate the Crown with her Son, and both be
joined in the administration of affairs; but upon the Dukes sequestring from
Court, it was left off, and not mentioned again till now: The Collection; The
Queen of Englands Ambassador, Master Randall, was abused with infamous Libels
affixed upon the door of his Lodging, the chief Courtiers withdrew their
countenance from him, such as resorted to him were observed, an Harquebus
charged with two bullets, was shot in at his chamber window, where he usually
sat.
and all this without any punishment upon the authors of such atrocious
contumilies: In this posture of affairs, to tempt yet further the patience of
honest people, some French Merchants did move the King to desire the
Magistrates of Edenborough to invite the French Agent to a public Feast;
Collection: While La Mot is thus practicing, some French Merchants in
Edenborough for their own commodity, caused it to be motioned to the King to
send one to the Counsel of Edenborough, to give the French Ambassador a
Banquet; the Counsel refusing, the King was offended, and alleged the motion
came from themselves; the matter was again debated in Counsel, in end the
best part of the Counsel contradicting, it was concluded, the Banquet should
be made; whereupon the Session of the Kirk resolved upon a Fast, or rather
abstinence that day; the Presbytery knew nothing of it.
the unseasonablenesse of the time made the desire grievous to the Magistrates,
and therefore they declined it with a fair excuse; yet the King was moved to
press them again; the motion being brought to the Common Counsel of the Town
the Plurality yielded, though the most of the Magistrates and best part of the
Counselors were dissenting: Vide supra tt.
This matter being offensive to the Church Session, or Congregational
Eldership, the day of the French Festival by the joint advice of the
Magistrates, Ministers, and the rest who were present, was appointed to be a
day of Preaching and prayer; The Censure: The Allegiance that the Presbytery of
Edenbrough did appoint a Fast to be kept upon the day that the French
Ambassador was Banqueted by the Town of Edenborough is false, for not the
Town, but some French factioners in the Town Banqueted the Ambassadors,
three Bailies, the greatest part of the Counsel, and some of the Kings Privy
Counsel were in the Church in the time of the Banquet, not the Presbytery, but
the particular Session of the Kirk of Edinborough, with the advice of so many
Magistrates and Counselors, as were not contrivers of the Banquet, appointed
a voluntary abstinence.
this was thought to be the fairest way, with the least offense to hinder (if
it might be) that offensive and unseasonable Banquet; as for any process of
excommunication intended against them, who choosed rather to feast with the
French, then to pray with the City and most of the Magistrates, I take it but
for a mere fable; for albeit the Author thereof, Adamson, had not acknowledged
his Narration of the Banquet to be false (as he does expressly Adamsons
Recantation: My good will was, I protest, to have condemned every point, yea
even to the false Narration of the Banquet, and all the rest contained in that
little Treatise, called the Declaration of the Kings Majesty's intentions, as I
acknowledge they deserve to be condemned by the censure and judgment of the
Kirk.
) yet why should we have taken it in any other sense, then the other passages
of the same Pamphlet; wherein he avowes the Presbyteries to have put out
innumerable Orders directly opposite to the King, and have sent Laws and
Commands to his Majesty, under the pain of Excommunication Vide the printed
Declaration.
; which all the world sees (setting aside the Authors confession) to be mere
lies, and notorious calumnies The Censure: that the Assembly was accustomed to
prescribe Laws to the King and Counsel, under pain of Excommunication: to
appoint no Bishops in time to come: such calumnies are not worthy to be
answered; for to draw out of the pure fountains of Gods word an
Ecclesiastical Canon agreeable to the same, and to suit like humble
Suppliants, the approbation of the same, is the duty of the Kirk: this is not
a prescribing of Laws to the King and Estates.
.

But suppose that all the alleged circumstances of that sad festival: The
extreme unjustice of the Prelates of old, and Era(...) now against the
Presbytery.
had been all true, yet could this trespass be no otherwise expiate then by
the very abolition, not only of that Judicatory, whence the overture did
proceed; but also of all the Judicatories of that kind in the whole Kingdom,
being altogether ignorant and innocent of the transgression: and though the
Episcopal rigor should have been thus transcendent: yet what shadow of reason
could be brought for the overthrow of the Classes, for the trespass of the
Congregadonall Eldership. It was not the Classical Presbytery of Edinborough,
but the Town Session that was alleged to be the delinquent: We wonder not
when Prelates are Counselors to see strange and unheard of rules of Justice;
but of this we marvel, that the Leaders of the Independent or Erastian party
should be so well pleased with such patterns, as not to have patience to have
them at this time concealed, but will needs have them brought forth of the
grave of oblivion where long they lay buried, to be looked upon by the State at
this time, as ruled cases for their imitation.

As for the abolition of the general Assembly, three of their offenses are
named, their approbation of the road of Ruthven, their abolishing of
Episcopacy, their indicting of solemn Fasts; the desert of these crimes we
will see when the particulars are opened.

The Road of Ruthven was a Remonstrance made to his Majesty by a number of the
prime and best affected of the Nobility, The general Assemblies approbation of
the Road of Ruthven, very innocent.
against the insupportable tyrannies of some few Courtiers, to the extreme
hazard of the Kings person, the Church and whole Kingdom. His Majesty, yet
minor, was content to follow the Remonstrants advice; the men complained of,
were removed from Court, the action of the Noblemen was declared by the King
and his Counsel to have been good and acceptable service; Collection: His
Majesty seemed to be well pleased, and gave sundry significations of his good
liking of that action, as of good service done to him, by attestations in his
Princely word, they should never be challenged, by Act of Privy Counsel, by
Act of solemn convention of Estates, by public Proclamations at Market Crosses
needful, by desiring the English Ambassadors to testify to the Queen his
own and his Estates good liking, by two legations sent to her Majesty signed
by his own hand and the Counsels, by his command to the Ministers in chief
places, to signify his consent and apprsbation to the people.
the convention of estates made that same Declaration: Vide supra bbb.
the Kings, the Counsels, the States approbation of this fact was solemnly
proclaimed in the next Market places of the chief Buroughs Vide supra bbb.
at his Majesty's desire, the Ambassadors of England and France did write so
much to their Masters Vide supra bbb.
: and it was also promised that the next general Assembly and Parliament (for
the Noblemens greater security) should give their ample approbations. When the
general Assembly came the Noblemen petitioned them for their approbation; at
the first the Assembly declined to meddle with that matter, Collection: When
the Authors of the enterprise sought the approbation of the general Assembly,
it was answered, that the matter was civil, nothing pertaining to them: It was
replied, that the King and Counsel and Estates had approved it, and that the
King had agreed an Act of approbation should be made in the Assembly; whereupon
Master James Lauson and Master David Lindsay were directed to his Majesty; who
after conference with his Majesty and Counsel, reported their approbation and
the Kings contentment that an Act should pass as was desired
but when the Petitioners insisted, alleging it was the Kings pleasure they
should take that matter into consideration, they sent two of their number to
the King to understand his mind, his Majesty did not only fignifie to those
Messengers his defire, that the Assembly should declare their approbation of
that Action at Ruthven, Vide fff.
but also he did send two Commissioners of his own to require the Assembly in
his name to declare so much The Collection: The Tutor of Pitcur and Colonel
Stuart, Commissioners from the King, reported, that they had special command
to assent in his name; and so the Assembly approved, but not till approved
before, and desired to approve.
.

Could the Assemblies obedience to the Kings express command be a treason of
so high a nature, as did merit not only the persecution of their persons, but
the abolition of the Court it self for ever, yet the Prelates and Courtiers
rage did intend no less; for when Captain James had got again into the
Court, whence he had been banished, he wrought so upon the minor King, that the
Noblemen and Gentlemen who had procured his removal at Ruthven, were some of
them executed as Traitors, others forfeit and banished, many of the best
Ministers were forced to flee for their life, not one Pastor durst stay in
Edenborough, but all fled out of the Kingdom Vide supra.
.

Such storms has Satan often stirred up in Scotland by his instruments, yet
gracious men there by faith and patience, by wisdom and active courage, did
wrestle through and always in the end prevailed, they got the Church, the
Kingdom, the person of the Prince, ever at last rescued from the bonds and
snares of oppressing Sycophants. The memory of our Predecessors sufferings and
successes does much encourage us in these evil days, and permits us not in
the greatest tempests to faint, but makes us to walk with hope in the midst of
despair for the like glorious issue; however this was the sad condition of
Scotland for some time, till the oppressed Nobility did come to Stirling, in a
greater number, and with a sharper Remonstrance then they had used at Ruthven.

At their first appearing before the Town, The Road of Stirling.
the instruments of mischief did flee, the King and his good people, Noblemen
Gentlemen Ministers and others, were presently reconciled, though the authors
of these frequent misunderstandings did escape by flight the sword of public
Justice, yet did the private judgments of God quickly find them out, and sweep
them off the face of the earth: with their ruin, peace and prosperity did flow
in both upon Church and Kingdom.

The other great crime imputed to the general Assembly, It could be necrime in
the general Assembly to vote down Episcopacy.
is, That they had voted down Episcopacy, and had professed the unlawfulness
of prelaticall Jurisdiction both in the Church and State, which prior
Assemblies had approved of. To this I answer, that the crime cannot be very
great, for any Church meeting, especially a general Assembly, to declare their
judgment in a point of Religion of great and general concernment; and whether
this their judgment was erroneous when they condemned the office of
Episcopacy, affirming it to be unlawful for a Minister of the Gospel to be a
Lord of Parliament and Counsel, to be a Chancellor, Secretary, Treasurer of a
Kingdom, or any Officer of State, or to take upon him alone the power of
Ordination and spiritual Jurisdiction (which the Word of God never gives to
one ordinary Officer, but always to a number joined in a Presbytery) the whole
Isle (thanks be to God) now does clearly see.

That ever the Church of Scotland or any lawful Assembly thereof did approve
of Episcopal jurisdiction, What favor the Earl of Morton procured to
Episcopacy at the conference at L^eth, 1572. was by the general Assemblies
disclaimed.
it is alleged without any ground: We grant the Earl of Morton in that
necessary correspondence which he did always keep with Queen Elizabeth, was
entangled in a greater familiarity and affection to the English Prelates, then
was convenient, and at their desire did assay, in a conference of some
Statesmen and Ministers of his special acquaintance, in the year 1572, at
Leeth to have set up in Scotland a kind of Episcopacy, but that plant was so
strange to our climate, that it could take no root in our ground, for so much
offense was taken in the very next general Assembly after that conference, at
the name of Episcopacy, The Acts of the Assembly, third Session of the Assembly
at Perth 1572.

In the heads agreed upon at Leeth are found certain names, as Archbishop,
etc. which were thought scandalous and offensive to the ears of many of the
Brethren, appearing to sound toward Popery, therefore the whole Assembly with
one voice protests, that they intend not by the using of any such names, to
consent to any kind of Popery or Superstition, and wishes rather the said names
to be changed into others that are not slanderous nor offensive: And likewise
protests, That the said heads agreed upon, be only received as an interim,
till further and more perfect Order may be obtained at the hands of the Kings
Majesty, Regent and Nobility, for the which they will press as occasion shall
serve.


and ever after at any shadow of the thing, that the following Assemblies did
not rest till both ^^e name and thing, till both the shadow and all the parts
of the substance were disavowed. They had indeed for a time some wrestling with
the Court about this matter; yet at last (as I have said) in the year 1592.
they got the King and Parliament persuaded to pass such Acts, as did cast out
of our Church and State, Episcopacy both root and branch, substance and shadow.
As these Acts of Parliament were first made by King James, and the States of
Scotland, and now also ratified by King Charles, so both the Houses of the
Parliament of England cannot but approve thereof, having joined themselves by
Oath and Covenant with Scotland, to extirpate the unhappy root of Episcopacy,
which has been the great cause of the most mischiefs which in this last Age
has befallen Britain.

The third crime for which the general Assembly behoved to be put down, It was
no fault in the Assemblies that they called to Fasting.
was their indicting of soleme Fasts; in which, seditions and tumults against
the King were promoved; consider that the quarrel is not simply for the Fasts,
but their evil use, to raise seditions and tumults; certainly that custom of
our Church, whereby from the beginning of the Reformation to this day, every
Church meeting from the general Assembly to the smallest Congregationall
Eldership, had power as they found cause, to indict a public Fast within their
own bounds, is very innocent and necessary for the well being of the Church.

As for the alleged abuse of these Fasts to sedition and tumults, Guilty
Consciences hate Fasts without cause.
it is a mere calumny; the matter I believe was this: About the time of the
penning of this Writ, the ^^alous Ministers in all their exercises, especially
in the day^^ of public Fasting, did make mention in their Sermons and Prayers,
of the wickedness of the Land, for which the wrath of God was much feared by
the godly; the Leaders of the Court conscious of their own guiltiness, took
themselves to be particularly pointed at, and for this did hate extremely every
zealous Preacher, as if all their Sermons and Prayers had been invectives for
stirring up of the people against them, while in truth these gracious men did
nothing but their duty, containing themselves within the lines of all needful
moderation; but to wicked men in their pride and impatience, the least touch of
the Word of God is an intolerable wound.

The explanation of the last Act, The sum of the next Paragraph.
contains the maintenance of Episcopacy in the highest degree, it puts in the
hand of the Bishop, the whole spiritual Jurisdiction of his Diocese to be
exercised by him alone, although with the advice of some few whom he shall
please to choose for his Counselors; it imports, that all his Jurisdiction
flows from the King, and in the exercise thereof, it makes the Bishop
answerable only to the King, and them whom his Majesty shall appoint in an
Assembly of his own framing; it makes the Bishops also Lords of Counsel and
Parliament.

Upon this passage I mark first, The Reprinters of this De claration make no
conscience of their Covenant.
the conscience and honor of these men, who with so great importunity required
the reprinting of this Declaration, and to make its operation the more
effectual in the hearts of simple people, would be at the cost to change the
language thereof, to set it down first in Scotch and then in English, a piece
of pains so far as I know never taken with any other Writ; this diligence
demonstrates the men's humor; I can hardly say, whether more scornful of the
Scots and their language, or passionately desirous to disgrace that Church,
though it were with the exalting of Episcopacy; and if (as I suppose) they have
taken the Covenant, this increases my wonder, how any who have solemnly sworn
to defend the reformation of the Church of Scotland, and to endeavor the
extirpation of Prelacy, can in a sudden become so zealous and put themselves to
so great pains, in disgrace of the Scottish reformation to advance Presacy. If
either Independency or Erastianisme have power to let loose the Reins of
conscience so far; we confess the Scots have been too simple, in believing
that Oaths and Covenants in plain matters, which admit no ambiguity nor
plurality of senses, had been far straiter bonds among all who had the
estimation of honest men, and in whom there could be found the least sparkle of
any ingenuity or truth.

Consider secondly, that King James (as I have said) did give it under his hand
to the Commissioners of the Church the year following, that this Declaration
was none of his, but the work of Adamson of Saint Andrews, Vide supra.
and that this man at last was convinced of his error, confessing upon Oath
and subscription, Episcopacy to be a gross corruption, a stirrup for the Pope
to ascend to his Antichristian saddle, an error which he had learned, and
wherein from time to time, he was entertained by the English Prelates Adamsons
Recantation: The last Article contained the establishing of a Bishop, which
has no warrant in the Word of God, but is grounded upon the policy and
invention of man, whereupon the primacy of the Pope or Antichrist is risen,
which is worthy to be disallowed and and forbidden.
.

Thirdly, whatever here is said of Bishops, is not now controverted in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, and in the solemn League of both Nations, it is
expressly condemned, as all do confess; if any anti-covenanting Malignant
require a further debate, when they will, they may have a hearing and an answer.

Fourthly, when the Commissioners of the church did declare to King James, King
James his full and honest Declaration against Erastianisme.
that the government of the Church was not a Matter civil, which did belong to
the Magistrate to exercise, and that it was unlawful for his Majesty to
appoint any of his Commissioners to govern the House of God, that this were
with the Pope to take in his hand both the Swords; Animadversions; To confound
the Jurisdiction Civil and Ecclesiastical, is that thing wherein all men of
good judgment have justly found fault with the Pope of Rome, who claims to
himself the power of both the swords, which is as great a fault to a Civil
Magistrate to claim or usurp, and especially to judge upon doctrine, errors
and heresies, he not being placed in Ecclesiastical function, to interpret the
Scriptures: the warrant hereof out of the Word of God, we are ready to bring
forth.
his Majesty did put it under his own hand, that these things were far from his
thoughts, that he was no Judge either of doctrine or heresy, or of the
interpretation of Scripture, that neither he nor his Parliament did meddle with
Excommunication, that they had pronounced the excommunication of Mountgomery to
be null, not as Judges of the cause, but as witnesses of the informality of the
process, he confessed that Jesus Christ was the only head and Lawgiver of
his Church, and that if he should claim to himself or his heirs any thing
merely Ecclefiastick, which the Word of God has put in the hands of Church
officers, that if he or any man should suspend or alter any thing which the
Word of God did remit only to them, he avowed that these attempts in himself
or any other, would be nothing else but (as he speaks) the sin of Idolatry,
and a transgression against all the three Persons of the Trinity; against the
Father, in not trusting the words of his Son; against the Son, in not obeying
him, but taking his place over his head; Kings Declaration: Never shall I, nor
ever ought my Posterity acclaime any power or Jurisdiction in a matter merely
Ecclesiastical, as to the Commissioners not Ecclesiastical, they are joined
to give their advices, and not to interpose their authority, while Christ says
Dic Ecclefias, and one only man did steal that dint against the Bishop of
Glasgow, in a quiet holl, the Act of Parliament reduces the sentence for
informality and nullity of process, not as Judges, whether the excommunication
was grounded on good and just causes or not, but as witnesses that it was
unformally proceeded; and to end shortly this my Declaration, I mind not to cut
away any liberty granted by God to his Church, I acclaime not to my self to be
judge of doctrine or true interpretation of Scripture, my intention is not to
discharge any Jurisdiction in the Kirk, that is conform to Gods Word, nor to
discharge any Assembly but only that these shall be holden by my License and
Counselors; my intention is not to meddle with excommunication, neither
acclaime I to my self or my heirs, power in any thing that is mere
Ecclesiastical and not adiaphoron, nor with any thing that Gods Word has
simply devolved in the hands of his Ecclesiastical Kirk; and to conclude, I
confess and acknowledge Christ Jesus to be head of his Church and Lawgiver to
the same; and whatsoever persons do attribute to themselves as head of the
Church, and not as members to suspend or alter any thing that the Word of God
has only remitted to them; That man, I say, commits manifest Idolatry, and
sins against the Father, in not trusting the words of his Son; against the
Son, in not obeying him, and taking his place; against the holy Ghost, the said
holy spirit bearing the contrary record to his conscience.
against the holy Ghost, because against the Spirits Testimony in his own
conscience. I hope they who are so earnest to have King James heard in this
cause, though in a false and suppositious Writ, will be content to hear him in
his true Declaration under his own hand.

The third part of the Writ contains an enumeration of his Majesty's
intentions; The pretended intentions were not the Kings, but the Prelates.
concerning them we need add little to what is said, only consider, first,
that Adamson the Author of the Writ, assures us, that there is nothing or
little here of the Kings intentions, Recantation: I have enterprized of mere
remorse of conscience, to write against a Book, called, The Declaration of the
Kings Majesty's intentions; albeit it contains little or nothing of the Kings
intentions, but of my own, in the time of the writing thereof, and the corrupt
intentions of such as for the time were about the King, and abused his
minority; in the whole Book is nothing contained but assertions of lies,
ascribing to the Kings Majesty that whereof he was not culpable; I grant I was
more busy with some Bishops in England, in prejudice of the discipline of our
Kirk, partly when I was there, and partly since, by mutual intelligence then
became a good Christian, much less a faithful Pastor.
being that he did here set down only his own intentions, and these of the
Courtiers and Prelates, at that time of their highest pride and greatest
oppression of the religious party.

Secondly, The Reprinters of this Writ seem to be perjured men, and either
hypocrites or Apostates.
the errors and faults that appear in these intentio^s are of two kinds,
Prelaticall and Erastian: For the first, not only the Author did recant them,
but also as we have now often said, King James with the States Assembled in
Parliament, did expressly condemn them, and at this time they stand condemned
in the whole Isle by King Charles in his Parliament of Scotland, and by both
the Houses of the Parliament of England, who ever now will tak the patrociny of
the Prelaticall war, does set his face against the King and Parliaments of both
Nations; and if he be a member of Parlia. in either Nation (whoaccording to his
place must needs have sworn the National Covenant) for his endeavor to
establish what by his Covenant he was bound to his power, to have extirpated;
Let him be cast with ignominy out of these honorable Senates as a false and
perjured hypocrite, planting by deed what by Oath and Covenant he promised to
eradicat; or else an Apostate, repenting and retracting while now he is set in
Parliament, what at his entry upon oath he promised, that he might be permitted
to sit down; such perjured, whether hypocrisy or apostasy, cannot but be
abominable both to God and all ingenuous men.

As for the Erastianisme of these intentions, Cesaro-Papisme is
Antichristianisme worse then that of the Pope.
whereby the Bishops are made pleni-potentiaries in the Church, by virtue of a
Commission from the Magistrate, we have showed at length how far King James
disclaimed this error as a grievous sin against the Father, Son and holy
Ghost; for the thing it self makes the Magistrate head of the Church, and
fountain of all Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction: This Cesaropapisme is an
Antichristianisme, so much worse then that of the Pope, as more uncontrolable
and remediless; the servants of God in their wrastlings against the
Antichistianisme of the Pope and Prelates, had often times great assistance, and
were ever in a possibility to be assisted by their Princes and Magistrates; but
if the Magistrate himself will turn Pope, and take upon him to dispense the
spiritual Jurisdiction, one part thereof to civil Commissioners, another part
to the Congregationall Eldership, a third to the Classis, a fourth to whom he
will, and in the end, as all did flow from him, make all again to return by a
final appeal to himself, when the servants of Christ are necessitate to
oppose and preach against this usurpation of their Masters royal Prerogative,
and for their labor are persecute as opposers of the Magistrate, to whom shall
they flee for defense?

Thirdly, The simpathy and antipathy of Bishops and Erastians.
consider how in these intentions Prelacy and Erastianism are linked together;
it is true, the genuine principles of Episcopacy do overturne Erastianisme,
and Prelates where ever they conceive themselves bottomed and rooted in a Land,
will be loath to fetch their pedigree from any Princes will and Commission, but
will stand upon a divine institution, or at least such an Ecclesiasticke right,
as depends not upon the Magistrates pleasure; this was the case of the English
Hierarchy of late: Yet where Episcopacy is not so firmly grounded as it
conceives it self immovable and secure, it is a very devout handmaid to
Erastianisme; and this was the condition of Prelacy in England, when these
intentions were written, for at that time the Bishops were glad to keep not
only their Civil, but all their Ecclesiastic Courts in the name and by the
Commission only of the Prince, deriving all their Jurisdiction, and whatever
they had peculiar, above and differing from any Minister of their Diocese,
from the Prince only, ascribing to him not only an Architectonick, but a
truly Ecclesiastic power, as a chief part of the royal Supremacy and
Prerogative of the Crown.

Adamson the very year before he wrote his intentions, learned these Lessons in
England from the Prelates and Courtiers of the Queen; with whom, he confessed at
last to his grief, he had been too intimate; albeit when he came to Scotland,
he thought it not expedient to vent to that people, or possibly he was not
persuaded in his own mind of the whole body either of the Erastian or of the
Episcopal maxims; for in this Writ the Presbyterian, Erastian and Episcopal
maxims are so inconsiderately intermixed, that the man seems not to have been
very careful, how their contrary qualities should be so contemperated as the
whole lump might not be dissolved by repugnancies. It can be pretty well
demonstrate how Episcopacy, as it was for a long time in England, may well
stand upon an Erastian bottom: also how handsomely the Erastian principles may
in a short time bring back the Bishops, Deanes and Chapters from their
banishment; Both agree against the Presbyterians.
but how a true and solid Apostolic Presbytery is compatible either with
Episcopacy, or a Magistraticall Popedom (though there were not a Covenant) I
do not conceive.

Our last remark upon the intentions is, King James against all toleration
either of heresy or schism.
that however they be spotted with many and gross both Prelaticall and
Erastian errors, yet they demonstrate so much orthodoxie and zeal remaining
in these worst times among the Courtiers and Prelates of Scotland, as will bear
witness if it be not imitate, against our times where much more piety, and
that upon stronger obligations, is professed; for first, the King is made to avow
his resolution to set up in the whole Kingdom Ecclesiastical Assemblies for
the suppressing of whatever by the Word of God should be found either heresy
or schism; Kings Declaration, p. 22. His Majesty's intention is, if any
question of faith and doctrine arise to convocate the most learned, godly, wise
and experimented Pastors, that by conference of Scriptures the verity may be
tried, and all heresy and schism by that means be repressed.
but how many years shall we see both begin and end, before the pitiful
complaints of the godly, both here and abroad shall procure the least restraint
to heresies or schisms which now in this Kingdom are become more gross and
impudent then ever in any Kingdom before, or at this day in all the Kingdoms
of the earth together. This monstrous toleration cannot eschew to draw the
displeasure of the God of truth upon the Authors, fomenters and favorers
thereof; such a long indifferency and lukewarmnesse, such a misregard of the
truth of God, such a connivence and compliance with errors of all kind in a
people, ever before famous for zeal, is most mervailous.

Secondly, Also contrary to our present hateful Anatchy.
the King in that very hour of his darkness is made to profess his intention
to countenance all the ordinary Judicatories of the Church, and in no wise to
hinder any good order which from the Word of God in these meetings, should be
established; Ibid. His Majesty's intention is not to derogate unto the ordinary
judgment of matters of the Church by the ordinary Bishops, their Counsels and
Synods, nor to hinder or stay any godly solid order grounded upon the Word of
God.
Why then in our days of so great light, should the whole Church lie still in
a total Anarchy? did ever any Christian Nation for seven years without any
compulsion, abide without all Ecclesiastic government? If men had taken a
Commission from the Father of lies, and author of wickedness, to be his avowed
agents in propagating errors, vice and all mischiefs, could they for their
life invent a better means for furthering these designs, then to continue
this Anarchy, then to be pragmatick and pregnantly isntrumental in putting one
impediment after another in the way; I hope there are many in the Parliament,
Assembly and Kingdom, whose heart bleeds in their breast to see their hands so
long tied, that they cannot get the hedge of the Church set up, to keep out the
devouring Beasts from the flock.

Thirdly, Further he promises all assistance and ^untenance (...)
Church Assemblies.
by these intentions we may see King James his resolution, which so long as he
was in Scotland, he did indeed perform. Not only was he content that
Ecclesiastic judicatories should proceed in all spiritual causes, as the Word
of God did warrant them, but also he promises to countenance the superior
Assemblies of the Church, with his own royal presence, and allows to the
meanest Church-meetings the assistance of the inferior Magistrates and Church
officers, that their religious and just orders might not be contemned without
deserved punishment Ibid. It is his Majesty's intention to assist this Assembly
himself, or by a Noble man of his Counsel, his Deputy, and for the keeping of
good order in every Parish, there shall be certain appointed to be Censors of
the manners of the rest, who shall have his Majesty's authority and Officers of
Arms concurring for the punishment of vice.
.

These men are afraid of their own happiness, who retard and impedit the
erection of such a government, The retarders of government are enemies to
themselves and welfare of England.
nothing will more conduce for the honor and welfare of the Land, no mean will
be more effectual to keep all people in peace and obedience to the Laws; to
promove the comfort of all who are truly pious, then the hearty concurrence of
the Church and State, in setting up at last, and maintaining the government of
the reformed Churches according to the Word of God: Believe it, this discipline
is neither hateful nor terrible to any, but to these alone, who know it not,
or else are conscious to themselves of a wilful and obstinate resolution to
abide in some error or vice without the controlement of any censure.

The Recantation of PATRICK ADAMSON sometime pretended Bishop of St. Andrews,
directed to the Synod conveened at St. Andrews, April 8. 1591.
BRETHREN,
UNderstanding the proceedings of the Assembly in my contrair, and being now
withheld by sickness from presenting my self before you, that I might give
confession of that Doctrine wherein I hope God shall call me: And that at his
pleasure I might depart in the unity of Christian Faith; I thought good by Writ
to utter the same unto your wisdoms, and to crave your godly wisdoms
assistance, not for the restitution of any worldly pomp or pre-eminence, which
I little respect; but to remove from me the slanders which are raised in this
Country concerning the variance of Doctrine, especially on my part; wherein I
protest before God, that I have only a single respect to his glory, and by his
grace I shall abide herein unto my lives end.

First, I confess the true Doctrine of Christian Religion to be publicly
taught and rightly announced within this Realm, and detest all Popery and
Superstition: Like as (blessed be God) I have detested the same in my heart the
space of thirty years, since it pleased God to give me the knowledge of the
truth, wherein I have walked uprightly as well here as in other Countries, as
the Lord bears me record, until these last days, wherein partly for
Ambition and vainglory to be preferred before my Brethren, and partly for
Covetousness, to possess the pelf of the Kirk, I did undertake this Office
of an Archbishop, wherewith justly the fincerest Professors of the Word have
found fault, and have condemned the same as impertinent to the office of a
sincere Pastor of Gods Word. And albeit men would color the same and
imperfections thereof with diverse cloaks, yet the same cannot be concealed from
the spiritual eyes of the faithful; neither yet can the men of God, when they
are put to their conscience, dissemble the same.

Next, I confess that I was in an erroneous opinion, that I believed the
Government of the Kirk to be like unto the Kingdoms of the earth, plain
contrary to the command of our Master Christ, and the Monarchy whereby the Kirk
is Governed; not only to be in the person of our Savior Christ (as it is) but
in the Ministers, who are nothing but vassals under him, in an equality amongst
themselves.

Thirdly, that I married the Earl of Huntlie contrary to the command of the
Kirk, without the confession of his Faith and profession of the sincere
Doctrine of the Word: I repent, and crave pardon of God.

That I traveled both by reasoning and otherwise, to subject the Kirk-men to
the Kings Ordinance in things that appertain unto Ecclesiastical matters, and
things of conscience: I ask God mercy; whereupon great enormities have fallen
forth in this Country.

That I believed, and so taught, the Presbyteries to be a foolish invention,
and so would have it esteemed of all men; which is an Ordinance of Christ: I
crave God mercy.

Further, I submit my self to the mercy of God, and judgment of the Assembly,
not measuring my offenses by my own self, nor by the infirmities of my own
ingyne; but by the good judgment of the Kirk, to the which always I subject
my self, and beseech you to make intercession to God for me, and to the King,
that I may have some means to live and consume the rest of this my wretched
time; for winning of whose favors (which foolishly I thought thereby to
obtain) I committed all these errors.

As where I am burdened to be the setter forth of the Book called The Kings
Declaration, wherein the whole order of the Kirk is condemned and traduced; I
protest before God that I was commanded to write the same by the Chancellor
for the time, but chiefly by the Secretary, another great Courtier, who
himself penned the second Act of Parliament concerning the Power and Authority
of Judicature to be absolutely in the King; and that it should not be lawful
for any Subject to reclaim from the same under the penalty of the Act: which I
suppose was treason.

Item, Where it is alleged, that I should have condemned the Doctrine anounced
and taught by the Ministry of Edinbrough, concerning obedience to the Prince: I
confess and protest before God, that I never understood nor yet knew any
thing, but sincerity and uprightness in the Doctrine of the Ministry of
Edinbrough, in that point nor in any other.

Further, I confess I was the Author of the Act discharging the Ministers
Stipends that did not Subscribe these Acts of Parliament, wherewith God has
justly recompensed my self.

As for any violent course, it is known well enough who was the Author
thereof, and my part was tried at the imprisonment of Master Nicholl Dalgleish,
Master Thomas Jack, and others.

Moreover, I grant I was more busy with some Bishops in England, in prejudice
of the Discipline of our Kirk; partly when I was there, and partly by our
mutual intelligence since, then became a good Christian, much less a faithful
Pastor. Neither is there any thing that more ashameth me, then my often
deceiving and abusing of the Kirk heretofore by Confessions, Subscriptions,
Protestations, etc. which be far from me now and ever hereafter, Amen.

Sic subscribitur Your brother in the Lord, M. PATRICK ADAMSON.

As where your wisdoms desire to have my own opinion concerning the Book of
the Declaration of the Kings intentions; the same is at more length declared in
the Confession, which I have exhibited already; wherein I have condemned all
the whole Articles therein contained: like as by these presents I do condemn
them.

As where ye require what became of the Books of the Assembly, all which I had
preserved whole unto the returning of the Lords and Ministry out of England:
And if I had not preserved them, my Lord Arran intended to have made them be
cast into the fire; and upon a certain day in Falkland they were delivered to
the Kings Majesty; the Bishop of N. accompanied with Master Henry Hamilton rent
out some leaves, and destroyed such things as made against our Estate, and that
not without my own special allowance.

As for the Books which I have set forth; I have set forth nothing except a
Commentary upon the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy, which I did direct to the
Kings Majesty, and kept no example beside me, and understand that Master John
Geddy got the same from the King, and lent it to Master Robert Hepburne.

Further, I wrote nothing, but only made mention in my Preface upon the
Apocalips; that I should write a Book called Psyllas, which (being prevented
by disease) God would not suffer me to finish; and the little thing that was
done, I caused to destroy it. And likewise I have set forth the Book of Job
with the Apocalypse, and the Lamentations of Jeremy, all in Verse to be printed
in English.

As for my intention, I am not disposed or in ability to write any thing at
this time; and if it please God I were restored to my health, I would change my
Style, as Cajetanus did at the Council of Trent.

As for Sutlivins Book against the form and order of the Presbyteries, so far
am I from being partner in that work, that as I know not the Man, nor ever had
any intelligence of the Work, before it was done; so, if it please God to give
me days, I will write in his contrary, to the maintenance of the contrary
confession.

Prays the Brethren to be at unity and peace with me; and in token of their
forgiveness, because health suffers me not to go over to the College where
presently ye are assembled, which I would gladly do, to ask God and you
forgiveness, that it would please you to repair hither that I may do it here.

Moreover I condemn by this my subscription, whatsoever is contained in the
Epistle Dedicatory to the Kings Majesty, before my Book on the Revelation, that
is either slanderous or offensive to the Brethren: Also, I promise to satisfy
the Brethren of Edinborough, or any other Kirk within this Realm, according to
good conscience in whatsoever they find themselves justly offended, and for
what is contrary to the Word of God, in any speeches, actions or proceedings
which have past from me.

And concerning the Commentary upon the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy,
because there are diverse things therein contained offensive, and that tend to
allow of the estate of Bishops, otherwise then Gods Word can suffer, I condemn
the same.

The pages before written directed by me Mr Patrick Adamson, and written at my
commandment by my servant Mr Samuel Cunninghame, and by his hand drawn in the
blanks, I subscribe with my own hand, as acknowledged by me in sincerity of
conscience as in the presence of God, before these witnesses, directed to me
from the Synodall Assembly, because of my inability to repair toward them;
James Monypenny younger of Pitmilly, Andrew Wood of Strawthy, David Murray
Portioner of Ardet, Mr David Russell, Mr William Murray Minister of Dysart, Mr
Robert Wilkie, David Forgison, with diverse others.

Sic subscribitur Mr PATRICK ADAMSON. David Forgison witness. Master Nicol
Dalgleish. James Monypenny of Pitmilly witness. Andrew Wood witness. Master
To. Wilkie witness. David Murray witness. Master David Russell. Master David
Spence. Master John Caldcleuch. Master William Murray.



Master Patricks own Answer and Refutation of the Bookfalsly called, The Kings
Declaration.
I Have enterprized of mere remorse of conscience to write against a Book
called, A Declaration of the Kings Majesty's intentions; Albeit it contains
little or nothing of the Kings intentions, but my own, at the time of the
writing thereof, and the corrupt intentions of such as were for the time about
the King, and abused his Minority: Of the which Book and contents thereof
compiled by me, at the command of some chief Courtiers for the time (as is
before written.) I shall shortly declare my opinion, as the infirmity of
sickness and weakness of Memory will permit.

First, in the whole book is nothing contained but assertions of lies,
ascribing to the Kings Majesty that, whereof he was not culpable; For albeit,
as the times went, his Majesty could have suffered these things to have been
published in his Realm; yet his Majesty was never of that nature to have
reviled any man's person, or to upbraid any man with calumnies, whereof there is
a number contained in that Book

Secondly, in the Declaration of the second Act of Parliament there is mention
made of Master Andrew Melvill and his preaching wrongfully condemned, in
special as factious and seditious, albeit his Majesty has had a lively trial
of that man's fidelity and truth in all proceedings from time to time: True it
is, he is earnest and zealous who can abide no corruption (which most
unadvisedly I attribute to a fiery and salt humor) which his Majesty finds
by experience to be most true, for he allows well of him, and knows things
that were alleged upon him to have been false and contrived treacheries.

There are contained in that second Act of Parliament diverse other false
inventions for to defame the Ministry, and to bring the Kirk of God in hatred
and envy with their Prince and Nobility, burthening and accusing the Ministers
falsely of sedition and other crimes, whereof they were innocent: As likewise it
is written in the same act and Declaration thereof, that sovereign and
supreme power pertains to the King in matters Ecclesiastical, which is
worthy to be condemned and not to be contained among Christian acts, where the
power of the Word is to be extolled above all the power of Princes, and they to
be brought under subjection to the same.

The fourth act condemned the Presbyteries, as a judgment not allowed by the
Kings Laws, which is a very slender argument; for as concerning the authority
of the Presbytery, we have the same expressed in the Gospel of Matthew, chap.
18. where Christ commands to show the Kirk, which authority being commanded
by Christ, and the Acts of Parliament forbidding it, we should rather obey God
then man; and yet the Presbytery lacked never the Kings authority for the
allowance thereof from the beginning, save only in that hour of darkness when
he was abused through evil company.

As for any other thing that is contained in this Act against any Order or
proceedings of the Presbytery, it is to be esteemed that nothing was done by
the Presbytery without wisdom, judgment and discretion. And so has received
approbation again by the Kirk, whereunto also I understand, his Majesty has
given allowance, ratifyed, and approved the same, which should be a sufficient
reason to repress all men's curiosity that either have or would yet find fault
with the same.

The last Article contains the establishing of Bishops, which has no warrant
of the Word of God, but is grounded upon the Policy of the invention of Man;
whereupon the Primacy of the Pope or Antichrist has risen, which is worthy to
be disallowed and forbidden, because the number of Elderships that have
jurisdiction and oversight as well of visitation as admission, will do the
same far more Authentickly, godly, and with greater zeal then a Bishop,
whose care commonly is not upon God and and his duty, but upon the world,
whereupon his chief attendance is. Consider how that Office has been used
these five hundredth years by gone, with what cruelty and tyranny it has been
exercised; ye shall find it to have been the chief cause that has in every
Country suppressed the Word of God, which shall be evident to all that read
the History of the Kirk. As for my own opinion, it seems to be nearest the
truth, and farthest from all kind of ambition, that the Brethren in equal
degree assemble themselves under their Head Christ; and there every man
discharge his Office carefully, as he is commanded. And because weakness of
memory and sickness suffers me not at length to discourse on these matters
as I would, I must request the good Reader to assure himself, that I have
written this without co^^pulsion or persuasion of any Man, with an upright
heart, and have delivered the same with a perfect fincerity of mind, so far as
infirmity of flesh and blood did suffer; As God shall judge me at the latter
day. And that the same Reader account of whatsoever things are omitted, that
they are to be imputed to my imbecility of memory and the present ficknesse and
not to any good will, which was (I protest) to have condemned every point, yea,
even to the false Narration of the Banquet, and all the rest contained in that
little Treatise, called, The Declar tion of the Kings Majesty's intentions. As
(I acknowledge) they deserve to be condemned by the censure and judgment of
the Kick, to the which also I submit my self in whatsomever thing I have
either in word or writ attempted either in that foresaid Declaration or
otherwise, by these presents subscribed with my hand at St. Andrews the 12. of
May 1591. before these witnesses, Master Davi^ Blake Minister at St. Andrews,
Master Robert Wilkie Principal of St. Leonards College, Master John Aiton of
Enmath, Master William Rufiell.

Sic Subseribitur PATRICK ADAMSON. Master David Black witness. George Ramsay.
Mr. John Auchinfleck. William Lermonth. Patrick Guthrie. Charles Watson Scribe.

I Master Patrick Adamson declare, that this Confession and Declaration before
written, is my own Confession; given with my heart, and subscribed with my
hand, before the witnesses underwritten, underscribing with me at my request
and desire at St. Andrews the 10. day of June 1591.

M. PATRICK ADAMSON. David Carnegie of Colluthie witness. William Scott of
Abbotshall witness Alexander Bruce of Earleshall witness. Borthick of
Gordounshall witness. William Bussell. William Lermouth. Thomas King. Mr. Robert
Wilkie. Mr. Andro Moncreif. Mr. David Black. Mr. Andro Hunter, Scribe of the
Provincial Assembly.





Two pious and Prophetical LETTERS of Master Jo. Welsh, which he wrote out of
his Prison, after the sentence of Death was pronounced against him; only for
his testimony against Erastianisme and Prelacy.
The first to the Lady Flemming This was Dame I^alias Graham Countess of
Wigton one of the most gracious souls of that Age.
.
The consolation of the holy Ghost be multiplied upon you in Christ.
OFten and many times, Christian and Elect Lady, have I desired the opportunity
to be comforted and refreshed with that consolation wherewith it has pleased
God of his free grace and mercy to fill and furnish you.

Your rememberance is very sweet and comfortable to my soul, since the first
time I knew you in Christ, I have ever been mindful of you to the Lord; and
now not being able to refrain any longer, I could not omit this occasion; not
knowing how long it may please the Lord to continue my being in this
Tabernacle, or give me further occasion of writing to any.

Although I have not great matter at this time; yet in the remembrance of your
labor of Love, Hope and Patience, I must needs salute your Ladyship; knowing
assuredly ye are the chosen of God, set apart before ever the world was, to
that glorious and eternal inheritance. Being thus comforted in your Faith and
Hope, I am fully assured, though we never have the occasion of meeting here,
yet we shall reign together in the world to come.

My desire to remain here is not great, knowing that so long as I am in this
house of clay, I am absent from God; 2 Cor. 5.
and if it were dissolved, I look for a building not made with hands, eternal
in the heavens. In this I groan, deftering to he clothed upon with my house
which is in heaven; if so be that being clothed, I shall not found naked; for
I that am within this tabernacle, do oft-times groan and sigh within my
self, being oftentimes burdened, not that I would be uncloathed, but clothed
upon that mortality might be swallowed up of life. I long to eat of the fruit
of that tree, which is planted in the midst of the Paradise of God; Revel. 22.
and to drink of the pure river, clear as Cristall, that runs through the
street of the new Jerusalem, Job 19.25.
I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the last day upon
the earth; and that though after my skin worms destroy my body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God, whom. I shall see for my self, and not another for me.
and my eyes shall behold him, though my reins be consumed within me. I long to
be refreshed with the souls of them that are under the Altar, Revel. 6.9.
who were slain for the word of God, and the testimony they held. And to have
these long white robes given me, that I may walk in white raiment with those
glorious Saints who have washed their garments, Revel. 7.14.
and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Why should I think it a strange thing to be removed from this place, to that
wherein is my hope, my joy, my crown, my eldest Brother, my head, my Father,
my comforter, and all the glorified Saints; and where the Song of Moses and the
Lamb are sung joyfully; where we shall not be compelled to sit by the rivers
of Babylon, nor to hang up our Harpes on Willow-trees, but shall take ^em and
sing the new Halelujah, Revel. 5.13.
bleffing, honor, glory, and power, to him that sits upon the throne, and to
the Lamb for ever and ever. What is there under this old vault of the heavens,
and in this old worn earth, which is under the bondage of corruption groaning
and travailing in pain, and as it were still shooting out the head, looking,
waiting, and longing for the redemption of the Sons of God; what is there, I
say, 2 Pet. 3.13.
that should make me remain here? I expect that new heaven, and that new
earth, where righteousness dwells, wherein I shall rest for ever more. I
look to get entry into the new Jerusalem; at one of those twelve Gates,
whereupon are written the names of their welve. Trybes of the children of
Israel; I know Christ Jesus has prepared them for me: may I not then with
boldness, in his blood, step in into that glory, where my head and Lord has
gone before me? Jesus Christ is the door and the Porter, Who then shall hold
me out? will he let them perish for whom he has dyed? will he let that poor
Sheep be plucked out of his hand, for whom he has laid down his own life?
Who shall condemn the man whom God has justified? who shall lay any thing to
the charge of the man for whom Christ has dyed, or rather risen again? I know
I have grievously transgressed, but where stane abounds, grace will
superabound. Romans 9. 20.
I know my sins are red as scarlet and crimson, yet the red blood of Christ
my Lord, can make them as white as Snow or Wool. Whom have I in heaven but
him, Psalm. 73.26.
or whom desire I in earth besides him? O thou the fairest among the children
of men; the light of the Gentiles; the glory of the Jews; the life of the
dead; the joy of Angels and Saints; my soul pants to be with thee Master
Welsh in his greatest prosperity, spent every day more time in prayer and
soliloquies with God, then men in this profane Age can believe. John 1.14.
. I will put my spirit into thy hands, and thou will not put it out of thy
presence: I will come unto thee, for thou casts none away that comes unto thee.
O thou the only delight of Mankind, thou camst to seek and to save that
which was lost; thou seeking me have found me; and now being found by thee, I
hope, O Lord, thou will not let me perish. I defire to be with thee, and do
long for the fruition of thy blessed presence, and joy of thy countenance. Thou
the only good Shepherd art full of grace and truth; therefore I trust thou will not thrust me out of the door of thy grace. The Law was given by Moses,
John 1.17.
but grace and truth by thee: Who shall separate me from thy love? Romans 8.35.
shall tribulation or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things I am more then conqueror, through
thy Majesty that has loved me; for I am persuaded, that neither death nor
life, nor principalities, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor things
prefent, nor things to come, nor any other creature is able to separate me from
the love of thy Majesty, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord. I refuse not to dye
with thee, that I may live with thee; I refuse not to suff^^ with thee, that I
may rejoice with thee. Shall not all things be pleasant to me which may be my
last steep He points at the sentence for he and the rest of the Ministers were
all condemned to be hanged as Traitors.
by which or upon which I may come unto thee? When shall I be satiate with thy
face? when shall I be drunk with thy pleasures? Come Lord Jesus and tarry not:
the spirit says come; the Bride says come; even so Lord Jesus come quickly,
and tarry not. Why should the multitude of my iniquities, or the greatness of
them afright me? Why should I fe^nt in this my desire to be with thee? Rev.
22.17.20.
The greater sinner I have been, the greater glory will thy grace be to me
unto all eternity. Oh unspeakable joy, Eph^s. 3.18.
endless, infinite, and bottomless compassion! O Ocean of never fading
pleasure! O love of loves! O the breadth and height, and depth, and length of
that love of thine that passes knowledge. The love of Jonathan was great
indeed unto David, it passes the love of women. O uncreated love! beginning
without beginning, and ending without end: thou art my glory, my joy and my
gain, and my crown; thou have set me under thy shadow, Cant. 1.3. Cant. 2.4,
5.
with great delight, and thy fruit is sweet unto my taste; thou have brought me
to thy banqueting house, and placed mei^ thy Orchard; stay me with thy
flagons, and comfort me with thy Apples, for I am sick, and my soul is
wounded with thy love. Cant. 2.15.
Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou have Doves eyes;
behold, thou art fair my beloved, yea pleasant; also our bed is green, the
beams of our house are Cedars, Cant. 7.6.
and our rafters are of Fur. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love for
delights. My heart is ravished with thee; oh, when shall I see thy face! How
long will thou delay to be to me as a Roe, Cant. 2.8, 9. Cant. 1.13. Cant. 1.3.
or a young Heart leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping upon the hills; as a
bundle of Myrrh be thou to me; and lie all night betwixt my breasts: because
of the savor of thy good ointments: thy name is as oyn meant fowred forth;
therefore desire I to go out of the Desert, and come to the place where thou
first at thy repose, Cant. 1.7.
and where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon. When shall I be silled with
thy love; surely if a man knew how precious it were, he would count all things
dross and dung to gain it: truly I would long for that Scaffold, or that Axe,
or that Cord, that might be to me that last step of this my wearisome jeurney,
to go to thee my Lord. Thou who knows the meaning of the spirit, give answer
to the speaking, sighing and groaning of the spirit; thou who have enflamed my
heart to speak to thee in this filent, yet love-language of ardent and fervent
defires; speak again unto my heart, and answer my desires, which thou have
made me speak to thee; O Death where is thy sting, 1 Cor. 15.55.
O Grave where is thy victory! the sting of Death is sin, the strength of sin
is the Law; but thanks be to God which gives me Victory through Jesus Christ.

What can be troublesome to me, since my Lord looks upon me with so loving and
amiable a countenance, and how greatly do I long for these embracements of my
Lord; O that he would kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1.2.
for his love is better then wine: O that my soul were the throne wherein he
might dwell eternally! O that my heart were the Temple wherein he might be
magnified and dwell for ever; all glory be unto my God, Angels and Saints
praise ye him; O thou earth, ye hills and mountains be glad, ye shall not be
wearied any more with the burden of corruption, whereunto ye have been subject
through the wickedness of mankind: lift up your hearts and be glad, for a fire
shall make you clean from all your corruption and vanity, wherewith for the
space of many years, you have been infected; let all the Saints rejoice, for
the day of the marriage with the Bridegroom (even the Lamb of God) is at hand,
and her fair white robes shall be given her, she shall be arrayed with the
golden vesture and the needle work of his manifold graces that shall be put
upon her; he who is life shall quickly appear, and she shall quickly appear
with him, in the glory and happiness of a consummate Marriage.

But I must remember my self, I know I have been greatly strengthened and
sustained by your prayers (honorable Lady, and dearly beloved in our Lord
Jesus) continue I pray you, as ye have begun, in wrestling with the Lord for
me, that Christ may be magnified in my mortal body whether living or dead,
that my soul may be lifted up to those third heavens, that I may taste of
those joys that are at the right hand of my heavenly Father, and that with
gladness I may let my spirit go thither where my body shall shortly follow:
Who am I, that he should first have called me, and then constitute me a
Minister of glad tidings of the Gospel of salvation, these sixteen years
already, and now last of all, to be a sufferer for his cause and Kingdom.

To witness that good confession, The matter of this gracious man's suffering
was the very controversy now in hand betwixt us and the Erastian Statesmen.
that Jesus Christ is the King of Saints, and that his Church is a most free
Kingdom; yea, as free as any Kingdom under heaven, not only to convocate,
hold and keep her meetings, Conventions and Assemblies, but also to judge of
all her affairs in all her meetings and conventions amongst her members and
Subjects d.

These two points, first, that Christ is the head of his Church; secondly, that
she is free in her government from all other jurisdiction except Christ's: These
two points, I say, are the special cause of our imprisonment, being now
convict as traitors for their maintenance; we have been waiting with
joyfulnesse to give the last testimony of our blood in confirmation thereof; if
it would please our God to be so favorable as to honor us with that dignity:
yea, I do affirm that these two points above written, and all other things
which belong to Christ's Crown, Scepter and Kingdom, are not subject, nor
cannot be to any other authority but to his own altogether, so that I would be
most glad to be offered up upon the sacrifice of so glorious a truth.

But alas, I fear that my sins, and the abuse of so glorious things as I
have found, deprive me of so fair a Crown; yet my Lord does know, if he would
call me to, and strengthen me in it, it would be the most glorious day and
gladdest hour I ever saw in this life; but I am in his hand to do with me
whatsoever shall please his Majesty. It may suffice me that I have had so long
a time in the knowledge of the Gospel, and that I have seen the things I have
seen, and heard the things I have heard, and that through Gods grace I have
been so long a witness of those glorious and good news in my weak ministry,
and that my witnessing has not been altogether without fruit and blessing, so
that I hope at that great day I shall have him to be my Crown, my glory, my joy
and my reward, and therefore boldly I say with Simeon, Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, not in a peaceable dying, but by rendering up to
him my spirit in stamping of this his verity, and in sealing the same with my
blood; I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course, 2 Timothy 9.7.
I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not to me only, but to all them also that love his coming.

Now is the prophecy at hand to be fulfilled, which these two worthy servants
of the Lord, Master George Wishart and Master John Knox, my Father in Law
spoke; which was, That Christ should be crucified in this Kingdom again, but
glorious should his resurrection be, This strange Prophecy of Knox and Wishart
is here explicat and mervailously enlarged by this divine man; the first part
thereof, whereupon alone be here infists, has been performed lately in every
tittle before our eyes; the second part of Christ's glorious resurrection, and
our glorious deliverance, we expect shall be as punctually performed in the
Lords good time.
as Master Knox with his own hand upon the Margin of Calvin's Harmony upon the
Passion, did write, which is yet extant.

But alas, for the Kingdom, my testimony now does not differ from that of many
before this time, who said, That the Judgment of Scotland should be blood,
this Kingdom shall be drowned in blood, a furbished and glittering sword is
already drawn out of the scabbard, which shall not return until it be made
drunk with the blood of the men within this Land; More blood shed by the sword
in Scotland the other year, then for many Generations before.
first, the heavy intestine sword, and then the sword of the stranger This
indeed was the Lords method with us, the blood shed in our first troubles at
the Bridge of Die, and diverse parts of the North, from the Castles of
Edinborough and Dunbartan and in the South, was only by the intestine sword,
but the great bloodshed in our present troubles was for the most part by the
sword of strangers, the barbarous Irish Rebels having their Commission from
Ireland.
.

O doleful Scotland well were he that were removed far from thee, that his
eyes might not see nor his ears hear all these evils that are to come upon
thee; Never so great a flight in Scotland as the other year, the m^st
considerable persons fled away to England or Ireland or some corners and strong
holds of the Land for the safety of their lives.
neither the strong man by his strength, nor the rich man by his riches, nor
the Noble man by his blood, shall be delivered from the judgments; there is a
great sacrifice to be made in Bosrah; in thee O Scotland, of the blood of all
sorts in the Land; Vide f.
Ephraim shall consume Manasseh, and Manasseh Ephraim: Jsaiah 9.21.
Brother against brother, and every man in the judgment of the Lord shall be
armed to thrust his sword in the fide of his neighbor; Thus indeed it was
among us, under the standard of the enemy, many of our Brethren, Kinsmen and
Neighbors did fight, and by their hands much of our blood was spilt.
and all for the contempt of the most glorious Gospel, and that blood which
was offered to thee O Scotland in so plentiful a manner, that the like thereof
has not been offered to any Nation.

Therefore thy judgment shall be the greater, but the Sanctuary must be begun
at, and the measure is not yet fulfilled, till the blood of the Saints be shed;
then the cries will be great, and will not stay, tili they bring the Lord down
from Heaven his Throne, to see if the sins of Scotland be according to the
cry thereof, neither shall there be any Subject in the Land, from the greatest
to the meanest, guiltless. The guilt of our blood shall not only lie upon the
Prince, but also upon our own Brethren, Bishops, Counselors and
Commissioners; it is they, even they that have stirred our Prince against us,
we must therefore lay the blame and burden of our blood upon them especially,
however the rest above written be also partakers of their fins with them.

And as to the rest of our Brethen, who either by silence approve, or by crying
Peace Peace, strengthen the arm of the wicked, that they cannot return; in
the mean time, make the hearts of the righteous sad, they shall all in like
manner be guilty of our blood, and of high treason against the King of Kings,
the Lord Jesus Christ his Crown and Kingdom.

Next unto them all Counselors, Chancellor, President, Comptroller,
Advocate, and next unto them, all that first or last sat in Counsel, and did
not bear plain testimony of Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, for which we do
suffer: and next unto them, all these who should have been present and
supplied, who should at such times have come and made open testimony of Christ
faithfully, although it had been contrary to plain Law and hazard of their
lives; when the poor Jews were in such danger, that nothing was expected but
utter destruction, Queen Ester after three days fasting, concluded thus with
her self; Ester 9.16.
I will (said she) go in to the King (though it be not according to Law) and
if I perish, I perish: with this resolution, such as are borne Counselors
should have said, Christ's Kingdom is now in my hand, and I am bound also and
sworn by a special Covenant, to maintain the Doctrine and Discipline thereof
according to my vocation and power all the days of my life, under all the
pains contained in the Book of God, and danger both of body and soul in the
day of Gods fearful judgment; and therefore though I should perish in the
cause, yet will I speak for it, and to my power defend it according to my
vocation. Finally, all those that counsels, commands, consents and allows, are
guilty in the sight of God: but the mourners for these evils, and the faithful
of the Land, and they who are unfainedly grieved in heart for all the
abominations; these are marked as not being guilty, Ezekiel. 9.

I know not whether I shall ever have occasion to write again, and therefore
by this Leteer as my latter will and testament I give testimony and warning and
knowledge of those things to all men according to the Lords direction to the
Prophet, Son of man I have made etc. therefore I give warning to all men
hereby, Ezekiel. 33.7.
that no man's blood be required at my hand. Thus desiring the help of your
prayers, with my humble commendations and service in Christ to my Lord your
Husband, and to all the Saints there; the Messenger of peace be with you all
for evermore, Amen.

Yours to my full power, for the time Christ's Prisoner, JOHN WELSCH.
From Blackness Jan. 16. 1606.
This second Letter was written before the first to Sir William Levinstone of
Kilsyth, one of the Lords of the College of Justice.
RIght honorable Sir; after my hearty salutations: Your love and care toward
us uttered many ways has certainly comforted me; and having no other thing to
requite, as I am able, I shall desire the Lord who is mighty, and has taken
upon him so to do, to meet you and yours with consolations in his good time.

As for the matter it self, the bearer will show you, that what is required is
such a thing as in the sight of our Lord we may not do, without both the
hazard of our consciences, and liberty of Christ's Kingdom, which should be
deerer to us then any thing else; What a slavery were it for us to bind our
consciences in the service of our God in the meanest point of our callings, to
the will of man or Angels. And we are fully resolved, that which we did, was
acceptable service to our God, who has put it up as service done to him, and
has allowed and sealed it to us by many tokens; so that it were more then high
impiety and apostasy to testify the ruin or undoing of any thing which our
God has ordained to be done, and has accepted of us being done This Letter is
an Answer of Master Welsh to Kilsyth; it seems Spotswood then Archbishop of
Glasgow, had moved Kilsyth to tempt the prisoners after their condemnation, to
acknowledge a fault, and crave pardon for their actions at Aberdeen, upon
assurance of liberty: this overture Master Welsh rejects as unlawful, and
withal denounces the judgment of God against Spotswood, the chief instrument
of the gracious Ministers oppression, in a mervailous and altogether
Prophetical manner.
.

We, Sir (if the Lord will) are yet ready to do more in our callings, and to
suffer more for the same, if so be it will please our God to call us to it, and
strengthen us in it; for in our selves we dare promise nothing, but in our God
all things.

As for that instrument Spotswood, we are sure the Lord will never bless that
man, but a malediction lies upon him, and shall accompany all his doings; and
it may be Sir, your eyes shall see as great confusion covering him ere he go
to the grave, as did his predecessors. Now surely Sir, I am far from
bitterness; but here I denounce the wrath of an everlasting God against him,
which assuredly shall fall, except it be prevented; Sir, Dagon shall not stand
before the Ark of the Lord, and those names of blasphemy that he wears of
Lord Bishop and Archbishop will have a fearful end This Prophecy of the
abolishing of Episcopacy is now accomplished in our eyes.
. Not one beck is to be given to Haman; suppose he were as great a Courtier as
ever he was; suppose the Decree were given out, and sealed with the Kings Ring,
Deliverance will come to us elsewhere, and not by him that has been so sore an
instrument, not against our persons (that were nothing, and I protest to you
Sir in the fight of my God, I forgive him all the evil that ever he has done,
or can do to me) but unto Christ's poor Kirk, in stamping underfoot so
glorious a Kingdom and beauty as was once in this Land: he has helped to cut
Sampsons hair, and to expose him to mocks; but the Lord will not be mocked; he
shall be cast away as out of a sling-stone; his name shall rot, and a
malediction shall fall upon his posterity after he is gone Not a word of this
is fallen to the ground; Spotswood in the top of all his honors, when he had
come up to be Archbishop of St. Andrews and Chancellor of the Kingdom, he
was cast out of Scotland, and dyed a poor miserable man at London, having not
a sixpence of his own to buy Bread, or to put him in his grave, but as it was
begged at Court; the evident hand of God lighted on his posterity; his Lands of
Darsie ( all the conquesse he was able to make to his eldest Son Sir Jo.
Spotswood) is ready to be sold, and that branch of his posterity to go a
begging: his second Son Sir Robert Spotswood President of the College of
Justice, for his treason against Scotland, did dye miserably on a scaffold at
St. Andrews, an obdured impenitent man: his brother the Bishop of Clogher was
cast out of his great estates in Ireland, and here in extreme old age was put,
as he told us, to teach children for his Bread; and being unfit for that
employment, he was long a suitor here at London for the meanest place in the
Ministry, that he might be kept from starving, but could not obtain it.
.

Let this Letter Sir, be a Monument of it, that it was told before, that when
it shall come to pass, it may be seen there was warning given him, and
therefore Sir, seeing I have not the access my self, if it would please God to
move you, I wish you did deliver this hard Message unto him, not as from me I
assure you, but as from the Lord; that except he repent, he shall be made a
fearful spectacle of Gods wrath in this Land These things were Prophesied in
the year 1605. forty years before their full performance, contrary to al
worldly appearance; for then and many years after Master Welsh his death it
was more improbable that the Episcopal thrones in the King of Britains
Dominions could ever have been overthrown by any humane force, then that the Sea of the Pope at Rome, and the Seats of all the Antichristian Prelates in
Italy, France and Spain, or any where this day in the Earth, should be
overturned in despite of all their Defenders.


I have kept the matter only to my self, as our Brother will show you: Now
the grace of God be multiplied upon you:

Yours, from my heart to be commanded in the Lord. JOHN WELSH.
From Blackness, Oct. 9. 1605.

