A BRIEF RELATION OF A VICTORY, Obtained by the Forces under the Command of
Genesis Edward Doyley, Commander in chief of his Highnesse's Forces in the Island
of JAMAICA. AGAINST The Forces of the King of SPAIN, Commanded by Don
Christopher Arnaldo Sasi, Comander in chief of the Spanish Forces there.
Right Honorable,
THe Eighth of May last, the Spaniards made good my Intelligence to your
Honor, by landing thirty Captains, thirty Alferes, and thirty Companies of
foot, at a place called Rio Nova in the North of this Island, who were there
about twelve days before they were discovered; at which time our Ships plying
up and down saw three sail of Spanish in that Bay, and made an attempt to have
boarded them, but being becalmed could not effect it. That night the Spaniards
stole away, and our Ships came to acquaint me therewith. I immediately called a
Council of War, as the affair did importune, and we debated, Whether it were
most advantageous to assault them presently, or let them partake of the
distempers and want of the Country, and when sickness had weakened them, to
attempt them then; though much might have been and was urged, how Invaders were
to be used with delays, etc. yet the exceeding desire of the Officers and
Soldiers to be doing with them, cut off all debates, and determined a sudden
Resolution to fall upon them before they were Fortified, So I commanded-out
750. Officers and Soldiers, and on the 11th of June last, we set sail from
this Harbor toward them, and on the 22th in the morning we landing on a Bay,
which was defended by two Companies and two Captains, within half shot of their
Cannon, playing from their Fort; Our Forlorn went on with such gallantry, and
leapt into the water with so much cheerfulness, that persuaded the Enemy they
would not be denied entrance, and so they ran, leaving one of their Captains,
and about 23. slain, the other we took wounded, who died since; then we made
all the have, and in the space of an hour landed our men, their Cannon playing
all the while on us with little success: that day we spent in playing upon
their Fort from our Ships, though the place being of so vast a height, they
could bear to do them little harm. The next day, understanding their numbers to
be more than ours, we were at a stand how to attempt them, having fortified
themselves, and having six pieces of Ordnance, and a River to to pass, the
depth whereof we knew not; Wherefore, after our Ladders were made, and other
things fitted as well as we could, in the evening I sent a Drummer, partly to
discover the depth of the River he was to pass, with this Summons following;

SIR,
BEing here with the Forces of the Mighty Prince, the Protector of England, and
the Dominions thereunto belonging, I do in his Name, and for his use, require
and summon you, to deliver-up the Fort of Rio Nova, with the Ordnance and
Ammunition therein; assuring you honorable terms, and transport to your
Country: which if you refuse, I shall be acquitted of the blood which shall be
shed. I expect the return of my Drummer within an hour, and am, Your very
humble servant,

E. D.

For Don Christopher Arnaldo Sasi, Commander in chief of the Spanish Forces.
The Drummer was very civilly treated, the General gave him 25. pieces of
Eight, sent me a Jar of Sweetmeats, and this Answer.

LORD GENERAL,
DON Christopher Arnaldo and Sasa, Governor for his Majesty the King of Spain,
my Lord of the Island of Jamaica, answering to your Letter, wherein you require
me to deliver the Fort of Rio Nova and what else is therein; I say, Sir, that
his Majesty (whom God preserve) has appointed me for Governor of this Island,
being his own property, and has remitted me unto it a Regiment of Spanish
Infantry, and twenty foot Companies to defend it; the Forts and Castles of his
Majesty are not yielded with so much facility; hitherto I have received no
batteries, nor have you made any advance, I want no Powder, Ball, Provisions,
nor gallant Men, that know how to die before they be overcome. God keep your
Honor many years in those Comands that you desire.

Don Christopher Arnaldo Sasa, to the General Monsieur Monsieur Doyley,
Governor General of the Forces of England, These.

We made no more demurs, but resolved to march the morrow morning. So I
ordered two of our Vessels to set sail Leeward, to persuade them we intend to
stand on that side of them, the other ships to warp as near as they could, and
play on them, while we fell on the other side: We marched as soon as it was
light, having two miles to go, being through a VVood on the backside of them;
about a quarter of a mile from their Fort we met a party on a Work, on a high
Hill, prepared to obstruct our going over the River, who only gave us a
fruitless Volley, ran to their Fort and told them, All the world was coming;
we climbed that Hill with much ado, refreshed our weariness and advanced; when
we came in sight of their Fort, which we found, to our exceeding joy, was not
finished to that height as that to the Seaward: We ordered our business with
our forlorn Ladders and Hand-Granadoes, and without any further dispute,
received their shot and ran up to their Flankers, which, in a quarter of an
hour, we gained; many of them made shift to run out of their Works, and ours
followed their chase about three or four miles, doing execution; the Seamen
likewise, seeing of them run along the Rocks, came out with their Boats and
killed many of them.

In this Fort we took about Ten double Barrels of Powder; Shot, great store;
Six Pieces of Ordnance; great store of Provisions, Wine, Brandie, Salt, Oil,
and other Provisions for eight months, as they termed it. There was slain about
Three hundred persons, diverse Captains, two Priests, and their Sergeant Major:
About an hundred ordinary Prisoners taken, and six Captains which we have sent
home; the King (...) Spain's Standard, and ten Colour^ (...) rest, especially
the straglers that are VVoods, must of necessity perish.

Though this Mercy was very great, yet our joy had some abatement, by the loss
of Captain Wiseman, Capt. Meers, Capt. Lieut. Walker, Capt. Lieut. Robinson,
and Ensign Farrar, men, for their gallantry, rather to be admired than
commended; about twenty three private Soldiers killed, and thirty four
wounded, whereof some are since dead; some other of our Officers slightly
wounded with stones. Thus has the Lord made known His Salvation: His
Righteousness has He openly showed in the sight of the heathen. I have sent
this short Narration, because it comes by Colonel Barrey, who was an
eyewitness, and principal Actor herein, and rest,

Your Honors faithful servant, EDW. DOYLEY.
Caoway in Jamaica, the 12th (...) July, 1658.
^DINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts^ Close, over against the
Trone-Church, Anno Dom. 1659.


