CHURCH REFORMATION, Tenderly handled IN FOUR SERMONS, Preached at the weekly
Lecture in the Parish Church of Great Yarmouth.

By John Brinsley.

MAT. 3. 12. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor.

IT is the first day of June, Anno Domini, 1643.
Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in PARLIAMENT concerning
Printing, That this Book Entitled (Church-Reformation) be printed.

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Burroughes, at the Sign of the
Golden-Dragon, near the Inner Temple Gate in Fleet Street, M. DC. XLIII.

TO ALL THE SONS OF PEACE In the Church of ENGLAND, Especially those in the
Town of Great Yarmouth, Grace and Peace.
WHen I entered upon the seventh Verse of this Chapter, (for there I first brake
ground) I cannot say, that it was my purpose to have followed the Baptist to
the end of his Sermon. But Providence leading me along, it has now brought me
to the Borders, the middle clause of the l^^ Verse of it* Which when I fell in
hand with, I can say, that it was far from my thoughts to make my Meditations
thereon any further public, then as the Pulpit rendered them. But finding the
Subject seasonable for the times, I have been induced to comply with the
desires of some* and approbations of others, in sending them abroad, as Noah
once did his Dove out of the Arc, when the Earth was covered with waters. What
entertainment they shall meet with, or what return they will make, as I know
not, so neither am I overthoughtfull. It is enough for me, that I have
endeavored herein to please God and not men, otherwise then in him, and for
him. My desires (I confess) have been, and are, that this my service, (if
possible) might be acceptable to all. However, being a Service for Jerusalem* I
doubt not but it shall be so to you, and all those who pray for the peace
thereof; whose I am and ever shall be

Only in the Lord John Brinsley.

CHVRCH REFORMATION. THE I. SERMON: April 12. 1643*
Matthew. 3. 12. And he will thoroughly purge his Floor.]

THe whole verse is a plain and familiar, but elegant Allegory, under which
the Baptist sets forth unto us the Sovereign Authority of Jesus Christ, with
the Exercise of that Authority. His Authority, in the first words. Whose fan
is in his hand. The Exercise of that Authority in the sequel of the verse;
which is set forth unto us, first, more Generally, over his whole Church; He
will thoroughly purge his Floor. Then more Particularly, toward his Elect* by
way of mercy, He will gather his wheat into his Garner. Toward Reprobates and
Unbelievers, by way of Judgment. He will burn up the Chafe, etc.

It is the second of these that my eye is upon at the present, (having already
insisted upon the former) viz. the Exercise of Christ's Sovereign Authority in
general, over and upon his whole Church: He will thoroughly purge his Floor.

Here by way of Explication, and Illustration, two maine particulars are to be
unfolded:

1. What is that Floor which Jesus Christ will Purge?

2. How that Floor of his shall be Purged. At this time of the first of these.

Christ* floor, what?
H ^ Floor.] To tell you what a Floor is, were needless, whether the
House-Floore, or the Barne-Floore: Both well enough knowns. We have here to
deal with the latter of these. (...), aream, the Barn-Floore: viz* the place
where the Husb^n^^an uses to Thresh, and Fan, and Winnow his Corn.

Generally, this inferior world, which is.
I, bu^ what is Christ's Floor? An. The whole World, (say some) viz. this
Inferior World. And not unfitly may it be so called (says Aretius.) A Floor,
and Christ's Floor.

Substratum, the lowest part of the A floor* being the pavement of Gods house.
world. Such is a Floor, whether the Honse or Barne-floore, it is the lowest
part of the room, the Pavement: such is this in^eriour world wherein we live,
the Pavement of Gods house, or Barn. Adhasit Pav^mento, so the vulgar Latin
reads that of the Psalmist. Psa. 119. 25* My soul eleaveth to the dust, to
the earth, to the Pavement. Compare the whole world to a House or Barn, Heaven
is the Roo^e, Earth is the Floor, a Floor for site and situation.

Floor, and Christ's Christ's floor; where he exercises diverse pieces of his
husbandry up on his corn.
Floor, for the use that he puts it to, which is analogically* by way of
resemblan^e, the ^ame with that which the Husbandman makes of his floor. The
Floor (as I told you) is the place where the husbandman exercises those
pieces of husbandry upon his Corn; Threshing, Fanning, Winnowing it. Such a
Floor is this present world. Palaestr^ est i^ qua Christus suos exer^^t, says
Aretius. It is the place wherein Christ exercises his Church, and people with
Affliction, Tribulation. In the world ye shall have Tribulation, John 10. verse
last.
(says our Savior to his Disciple^) (...). Pressuram habebiti^. Ye shall have
Pressur^s, Tribulations, and that of diverse kinds. To follow the Metaphor
close. Here is Threshing, here is Fanning, here is Winnowing, all to be met
with in this Floor, this present world.

Threshing. In the Barne-floore, the Straw and Threshing.
the Corn, both are threshed together, and that with the same Flaile. In this
present world, Gods own People, and his Enemies both are Threshed. His
Enemies, wicked and ungodly men, which are as the straw in this floor, they
are threshed with plagues and judgments, which are the strokes of Gods
flaile, Isaiah 25. 10.
of his revenging justice. Moab shall be threshed under him, even as the straw
is threshed, (so the Geneva reads that of the Prophet Isai.) Isaiah 25. Moab,
all the Enemies of God and his Church, they are as Straw, and as Straw often
times they are threshed, even beaten to pleces. And as the Straw, so the Corn;
as Gods Enemies, so his own people they also sometimes feel of the Flaile
here: I the same flaile, being exercised with the same Judgments, the same
calamities, the same for kind, for substance. Moab is threshed, and Israel is
threshed. Isaiah 21. 10.
O my Threshing! or Thou whom I do thresh, says the Lord, speaking of his
own people, his Israel, as some interpret it. Isaiah 21. 10. Them God
thresheth ofttimes with his own hand; sometimes leaving them to Satan and his
Instruments to be threshed by them, by the exercises of cruel^ie upon them.
They have threshed Amos 1. 3.
Gilead with threshing instruments of iron, so the Prophet Amos complains of
the horrid cruelties exercised by bloody enemies upon the people of the Lord.
Amos 1. 3. Well may this world be called a Floor, here is Threshing. In the
world ye shall have Tribulation, Threshing, as the word [Tribulation] properly
signifies.

Fanning, and that with Fanning.
the fan, the Cross, whereby God often scatters Ie^ 15. 7.
his own people to and fro upon the earth. I will fan them with a fan in
(or through*) the gates of the land. Upon this I have insisted largely already
in handling the former part of the verse.

winnowing too. God winnoweth Winnowing.
his people. I will sift (or winnow) the house of Israel amongst, all nations
like as corn is sifted (or winnowed) with a sive. Amos 9. 9. God winnowes, and
by his permission Satan winnows them. Simon, Simon, (says our Savior) Satan
has desired to have you to winnow you; or sift you. Luke 22. 31. God winnowes,
and Satan winnowes, both by the wind of Tentations. God by Tentations of
Probation, Satan by Tentations of Seduction; the one for the trying, purging;
the other for the scattering, destroying of them. All these pieces of
husbandry does this great Husbandman exercise in this inferior world upon his
Corn, his Church and people, and therefore well may it be called a floor, his
floor.

Tribulations here not to be vvondred at.
A meditation not unusefull: Let it serve to stay the hearts of Gods people in
respect of the many and manifold pressures and tribulations that here they meet
with upon earth. Alas, can they look for other, considering the place and
condition they are in? They are Gods Corn, I, but as yet they are as Corn in
the floor. O my threshing (says the Lord) and the Corn of my floor. Isaiah
21. 10. Filius Areae, so the original Hebrai^me has it, The son of my
floor. Gods people, his Saints, even whilst they are here, they are sons.
Behold, now are we the sons of God, says S. John 3. 2. Sons, but filij
Areae, not Apothecae; sons, or corn of the floor, not of the Garner. Now
corn, whilst it is in the floor, it must look for no quiet: that is
reserved for the Garner. Gods Corn, his Saints, when they shall be laid up in
his Garner, received into those heavenly mansions, then shall they enter into
their rest, a perfect Heb 4. 9, 10.
rest, where they shall never more feel of the flaile, or the fan, or the
sive. All these are for the Floor. And let not any wonder to meet with them
there. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, says 1 Pet 4. 12.
S. Peter: what ever our trials be, what for nature, what for number; are we
threshed, fanned, winnowed, make not strange of it; remember the place where we
are, and the condition we are in, whilst we are here below, we are like corn
upon the floor. But I will not dwell here.

The floor shall be purged.
This World is Christ's Floor, and this floor he will purge, thoroughly purge.
This will he do at that last and great day, when he shall come from Heaven
with the fan in his hand, (the fan of the last Judgment) then will he
purge this inferior World from all the dross of corruption which now cleaves
to it, delivering it from the bondage of corruption, to which it is now made
subject through the sin of Man, and under which it groaneth, as the Apostle
has it, Romans 8. 21, 22. Then making a new Heaven, and a new Earth, Rev. 21. 1.
a new roof, and a new floor to this house of his. But to let this pass, not
being the mark I aim at.

Christ's floor, more specially is his Church visible.

Aquin. ad locum.


By the Floor here, more properly and peculiarly we are to understand the
Church. Not the World, but the Church in the world, that is, the floor; For
(as Thomas well notes it out of Chrysostom) if we will drive the Allegory to
the head, the World must be the wide field. So our Savior interprets it, Mat.
13. 38. The field is the world.] The floor here properly is the Church of
Christ in this world.

The Church. But what Church? why the visible Church of Christ upon earth. The
visible Church; The visible Church what.
what is that? A society, or company of men and women, called out of the world
to the knowledge and acknowledgement of the true God in Christ. A company of
men professing faith and obedience: faith in Christ, obedience to Christ:
professing to receive Christ as their Prophet, Priest, King. Their Prophet, to
be taught by him: their Priest to be reconciled to God through him: their King
to be ruled and governed by him: This is the visible Church; which is either
universal or particular. Universal, the whole company of such as prefesse the
Gospel throughout the whole world. Particular, such as profess the Gospel in
such a Nation, such a Province, such a City, such a Town, such a Family;
Every of which in several considerations and respects, may be called a Church.
Not only the Church, in such a Family; (The Church that is in thine house,
Philem. 2.) or the Church in such a Town, such a City: (The Church at Corinth,
at Philippi, etc.) But the Church in such a Province, such a Nation; wherein,
though there may be many particular Congregations and Churches, yet they may be
called one Church; and that not without some warrant from Scripture. St. Peter
writing to the Churches dispersed 1 Pet. 1. 1.
through several Countries, viz. through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bythinia, (as the 1. verse. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
of his Epistle directs it) he yet speaks of them singularly, calling them one
flock: Feeds the flock of God which is amongst you; It is his charge to the
Elders of those Churches, cap. 5. 2. many Churches, many flocks, and yet one
flock: Not to go from the Text. The Baptist here speaking of the Church of
Christ, dispersed through Judea and other parts of the world, the Church under
the new Testament, which is made up of many particular Congregations and
Churches; he yet speaks of it singularly, calling it one floor, He will
purge his floor.] Not floores, but floor. Where ever Christ has a Church* he
has a floor. Many Churches, many floores: yet put them together, all the
Churches in such a Province, such a Nation, or through the whole world,
Collectively and Aggregatively considered, they make up one Church, one floor.
This I do but touch by the way, to give some satisfaction to such as are so
ready to scruple the word, as if there were no color of warrant from
Scripture, to give the Name of a Church to any but to a Congregationall Church.
Letting that pass.

Christ's floor is his Church, or Churches, considered in a visible State. And
not unfitly may the visible Church be so called. A floor, and his floor.
Touch upon them severally.

The visible Church a Floor.
First, A floor, and that principally in two respects.

1. In respect of the Mixture that is in it. Here is the difference betwixt the
Garner and the Floor. In the Garner there is nothing but pure grain: In the
For mixture of Corn and Chafe.
Floor there is a mixture; Straw as well as Corn, Chafe as well as Wheat,
Tar^s and Titters, and Cockle and Darnill, as well as the good grain. Such a
difference there is betwixt the Church Militant and Triumphant, the Church upon
Earth, and the Church in Heaven. The Church in Heaven is all pure: Thither
shall no un^lean^ thing enter. No chafe, no dross, Rev. 21. v. last.
nothing but good and pure corn to be found in that garner. But it is otherwise
in the floor, in the militant and visible Church upon Earth, here is a
mixture, Corn and chafe, good and bad together; Elect and Reprobate, true
Believers, Hypocrites, and happily persons openly wicked, all associated
together in the same outward profession. A truth which needs no probation.
This is the House wherein there are vessels of all sorts, some of purer,
richer, others of courser, baser metal. In a great House (says the Apostle)
2 Timothy 2. 10.
there are not only vessels of Gold and of Silver, but also of wood and of
earth; some to honor, and some to dishonor.] A place worthy the pawsing on,
and considering. Happily it may give satisfaction to some groundless scandals
and offenses taken by some at those undesired, deplored mixtures which are to
be found in the Churches of God amongst us. In a great House (says he.) What
is meant by this great House? why the whole World (say some) which is Gods
House indeed, he being the God and Father of all the Families in Heaven and
earth; Gods House, and his Great House; And in this great House there are
vessels of Gold and of Silver, and of wood and of Earth, some to honor some to
dishonor, (i. e.) some elected, others reprobated and passed by. So the
Apostle S. Paul carries and applies it, extending it to the whole world, Romans
9. 21. A truth, but not so pertinent to this place. The Great House here (as
Calvin and others note upon it) denotes and points out more peculiarly the
Church of God, the visible Church. So much may be collected from the Context.
The Church visible is a House, Gods 1 Timothy 3* 15.
House, (That thou might know how to behave thy self in the House of God,
which is the Church of the living God, (says Paul to Timothy.) His House, and
a Great House, (...), the House of the Great God, the Father of this Family, of
a great and large Gal 6. 10.
extent; and having many Inhabitants, Officers, Children, Servants, even all
those domestici fidei, the household of Faith, as the Apostle calls them. And
in this great House (says the Apostle) there are not only vessels of Gold and
Silver, but of wood and of earth, i. e. some elect, others reprobates: Not only
so, but some good, others bad; bad, and that oft-times not only closely and
secretly, but openly and apparently such. Not only hypocritical and unsound,
but scandalous Christians. Such were those whom the Apostle speaks ver. 16.
ver. 17.
of in the verses foregoing: Profane and vain bablers; men whose words did
fret as a canker, or cancer, whose very society was infectious and dangerous.
Two of these he there instanceth in, by Name. Of whom is Hymenaeus and
Philetus.] two dangerous and damnable Heretics, denying and overthrowing that
great Article of the Faith, the Resurrection of the Dead; which being
overthrown, opens a wide door to all lie^ntiousnesse and pro^anenesse. Such
were these, and probably some other members of that Church at that time;
persons scandalous and dangerous, seduced themselves, and seducing others. Such
vessels there were in that house, wooden and earthen vessels; vessels to
dishonor, (...) to dishonor, and that both Passively and Actively, having
dishonor and shame for their portion, and dishonouring the house, the Church
of God whereof they were, members. Such vessels, such members, there may be and
often are in the House, in the Church of God; persons erroneous in their
judgment, and scandalous in their lives. Such there may be.

So it is, de Facto, not de Jure.
Mistake it not: We speak here de Facto, not de Jure, not what ought to be;
but what may be, and will be. If we speak de Jure, ^s it ought to be, then
that of the Apostle in the words f^re going, takes place. Let every one that
calls on the Name of the Lord depart ver. 19.
from iniquity.] Every one that joyneth himself to the Church of God, that
takes upon him the profession of Christianity, he ought to grace his
profession by an answerable conversation. In Solomon's Temple the 1 King. 7. 49,
50.
vessels were all of pure Gold, and such should the members of the Church of
Christ be. Thus it should be, But thus it will not be. Some there are and will
be, that shame their profession by an unchristian conversation Vessels to
dishonor. Neither is it a thing either to be stumbled or wondered at. Such
vessels there are in a great House, and such members there will be in the
visible Church, which is a mixed company.

This point I might further enlarge, and set of by those common and obvious
illustrations made use of by our Savior himself; of the draw or drag Net,
Mat* 13. 47.
wherein there are fishes of all sorts, good and bad. The ver. 30.
Field wherein there was Tares, as well as Wheat. The wedding supper whereat
there were guests of all sorts, good and bad (says the Text.) But I will not,
neither Mat. 22. 10.
need I go from that Metaphor in the Text, which is so clear and express, as
that scarce an Expositor falls upon it, but meets with this truth in it: The
Church, the visible Church is a mixed company. Such is the floor, a place of
mixture, wherein there is (as I said) Corn and Straw, Wheat and Chaff, etc.
all brought in together. Such is the Church. Such it ever has been, and such
it ever will be, as long as the 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jude 12.
Moon has her spots, the Church will have hers; even such spots as Peter and
Jude speaks of, persons scandalous in their lives, disgracing the Church as
spots do the garment wherein they are.

Reason. God will have it so.
And will you see some Reason why it is so: Take it in a word. God will have it
so, and Satan will have it so.

For the Trial* 1 Cor. 11. 19.
1. God will have it so, and that first, For the trial of his own people. It
is that which S. Paul says of heresies, There must be heresies, why? That
those which are approved may be made manifest. And we may say the same of
Heretics and scandalous persons, There must be such in the Church, (I speak
it as the Apostle, de Facto) that those which are (...), approved of God, may
be made manifest, more manifest to the world.

(permits it) as for For the benefit of his people.
the trial, so for the good and benefit of his own people. Even as the
Husbandman sometimes suffers the Corn to lie in the Chafe, that it may keep
the better. And such use God sometimes makes of hypocrites, of wicked and
ungodly men, whom he suffers to have a Name, and a Room in his Church, he
makes use of them for the good and benefit of his own people: ofttimes using
them as Conduit pipes, conveying many outward blessings and benefits to his
Church through

Satanwill have it so.
Thus God will have it so. And secondly Satan will have it so. That E^viou^ man
in the Gospel, which sows Tares in the field, he also casts Chafe into
the floor. Mat. 13. 25.
Which he does through the inadver^ancie of those which should watch this
floor, I mean those which have, or should have the oversight and government
of the Church; Hereby seeking to poison the Church, by throwing in corruptions
into it: corruptions in Doctrine, corruptions in Worship, corruptions in
Manners; so to make a mixture, which he does in opposition unto that God, who
being himself a pure and simple Essence, is most delighted in purity and
simplicity. Put these together, and you see a first respect wherein the visible
Church of Christ is compared to a floor. A floor for mixture.

Secondly, A floor, Because here is the same Husbandry used that is in the
Barne-floore. Here is threshing, fanning, here is winnowing. All these shall we
The Church a floor, for the Husbandry used in it.
find no where more frequent, more ordinary then in the Church; as if the Church
were the proper element for every of these. The Church is Christ's threshing
place. O my threshing*] his fanning place, his winnowing place. No where shall
we find the flaile, Isa. 21. 10.
the fan, the sive, more bu^^^ then here. The Worlds flayle, Gods fan, the
Devils sive; the flayle of Perfecution, the fan of Affliction, the sive of
Tentation, no where so busy as in the Church. Well may the Church in all these
respects, be called a floor. But I will confine my self to the Text.

Here is the fan at work. What fan? why that fan, which is in the hand
of Christ, the fan of the Here the fan of the Word at work.
word. This fan is walking, and working in this floor, and not without some
efficacy and power. What ever the Husbandmans fan does in his Barne-floore,
that does this fan in the Church, which is the proper place for this fan to
stir and move in; and in that respect again, fitly called a floor. Here it
is where Christ stands with the fan in his hand, working upon his corn,
his Elect, severing them from the chafe of sinful corruption, dressing
them, that they may be pure corn, fit to be laid up in his heavenly garner.

The Church is a floor. And in the second place Christ's first, by The Church
Christ's floor.
Gift. Secondly, His, by Purchase.

His by Gift: Gift from God his Father, who By Donation.
has indeed given unto him the whole world. Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the Heathen for thine Inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy Possession.] All the Kingdoms of
the earth are put into the hands of Jesus Christ, as Lord paramonnt over them
all. Even Heathens and Infidels, which know him not, which never heard of his
Name, yet they are under his government; But the Church after a more special
ver. 6.
manner, as being his peculiar Seigni^rie. I have s^t my King upon my holy hill
of Sion.] In the Church, Christ has a more peculiar interest; The Church it
self, and all the members of it being given to him by God his Father: I, all
the members of the visible Josh. 17. 12.
Church, they are also given unto Christ. Of all that thou have given me I have
lost none, save the Son of Perdition.] All the Apostles; I, Judas amongst the
rest, though a son of perdition, lost in Gods decree, and marked out for hell,
yet given unto Christ to follow him in an outward profession. And thus are all
the members of the visible Church; even all that profess the Name of Christ,
they are given unto Christ. And consequently the Church is His, his floor, His
by Donation.

His by Purchase. What his Father By Purchase. ^ Sam. 24.
gave him, he also bought and purchased. Even as David purchased the
Threshing-floore of Araunah the Jebusite, that he might offer a Sacrifice upon
it. Thus Christ has purchased this floor, his Church; not that he might offer
Sacrifice upon it, but that he might offer it up as a Sacrifice unto God his
Father. Take heed unto your selves, and to the flock of God: whereof the Holy
Act. 20. 18.
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood: The Church purchased with the blood of Christ.
True it is, (if we speak properly,) this purchase is peculiar unto Gods elect,
his Church invisible, for whose sake Christ dyed: But for their sakes, (from
whom the Church takes the denomination, as being the better and most
considerable part of it) it is attributed to the whole Church, even to the
Church visible. It is his floor by purchase.

Yet further in the third and fourth place, It is his floor in respect of his
presence, his providence: His presence in it, his providence over it.

In regard of his presence in it, Ruth. 3. 7.
His presence in it, which is continual. The Story tells us of Boaz, that he
went down to his floor and lodged there, lying down at the end of the heap
of Corn. Even ^o is Christ ever present in his Church. There he lies down,
there he lodges. [Shew me, O thou Cant* 1. 6.
whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie down at noone;] It
is the Spouses speech to her welbeloved; to which his answer follows. [If thou
ver. 7.
know not O thou fairest among women, get thee forth by the steps of the
flock, and feed thy Kids by the Tents of the Shepherds.] Would we know where
Christ feeds, lodges, where he manifests his presence chiefly and
principally upon earth; It is in his flock, by the Tents of the Shepherds; In
his Church, in the midst of his Ordinances, Christ is ever present in this
floor, manifesting his presence in it.

And fourthly, Exercising his providence over it. His first in watching, then
in governing. Providence over it, in Watching the Corn.


1. Watching in and over this floor. To this end, Boaz lay down in his
floor, at the end of the heap of corn, to watch it, least it should be
stroyed, or stolen, or purloyned away. To this end is Christ present in his
Church, his floor, viz. to watch his corn in it; to defend his people against
enemies without, or enemies within: to defend his Church against the open
hostility of bloody tyrants and persecutors, Beasts which would stroy this
corn; as also against the secret devices of cunning seducers, Thieves that
would st^ale Mat. 24. 24.
away his corn, deceiving the very Elect if it were possible. To this end he
watches in this floor; watches, and that, not as Boaz did in his, lying
down Psalm. 121. 4.
and sleeping there. No, The watchman of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleeps.
He exercises a special providence Ordering the business in it.
in watching over this floor.

2. And secondly, In ruling and governing it, ordering all the businesses in
it. Even as the Husbandman orders all the business in his own floor, giving
direction to his servants, for threshing, fanning, etc. So has Christ the
ordering of this floor. Not an Ordinance in his Church, but is of his ordering
and appointing. He it is that rules the whole business of his Church, both
for substance, and material circumstances; prescribing Laws to his Church,
governing it, which he does by his word.

Put these together, and you see the doctrinall part of this first Branch of
the Text, opened and illustrated. I see, I must wade no further into it at
present. What use shall we make of this which has been spoken?

Use 1. Anabaptists con^uted.
As briefly as I may. First, Is the Church of Christ a floor in respect of
mixture? Here, (swimming with the stream of Expositors,) I might take a just
occ^sion to fall upon that Anabaptisticall error wherever it is found, which
affirms and maintains the true visible Church, to consist only of true
believers, such as are good. A doctrine charged upon us by our Adversaries of
Rhemes, in their Gloss upon the Text; but with what truth, let the joint
consent of all the writers Vid F^lk and ^^rtvvright, super Text.
of our profession testify, all which with one vote have censured, and
condemned the Tenet, upon all occasions averring and maintaining the visible
Church of Christ to be a mixed company, mingled of good and bad, believers,
hypocrites, etc. Such a company the Church here is. As for those who seek for
any other Church* here upon earth, they seek for that which they shall never
find. Mundam in mundo immundo Ecclesiam, (says Aretius.) A pure Church in an
impure world. Those which will join themselves to no Church but such an one,
they must, (as the Apostle says,) go out of the world for it. But I will not
spend 1 Cor. 5. 10.
time in confuting of this Error, which I presume there is none here present
that will dare to own. To come nearer.

Use 2. Be not offended at mixtures in the Church amongst us.
In the second place. Is the Church of Christ a floor in respect of mixture?
why then let not any be scandalized, or offended at what ever mixtures, either
are, or are supposed to be in the Church or Churches of God amongst us.
Mixtures happily there may be; mixtures there are; we grant it. Possible some
corruptions cleaving to some of the Ordinances; However corrupt men mingling
themselves with the people of God, not only coming with them into the house of
God, but si^^ing down with them ^t his Table, having communion with them in
the most sacred ordinances of God. A sad mixture, I plead not for it. B^t
what? shall we hence infer a nulliti^ of the Church? No true Church because
o^ these mixtures? Surely the very Barne-floore will cry out against this
inference. There we see wheat and chafe lying upon the same heap, and who
wonders at it ^ Do we mee^e with a li^e mixture in the Church or Churches of
God, be not ^^andalized, be not o^^^^ded at it* I^ i^ that (I nonceive) which
the Apostle (...) aims and drives at in the place fore*named, a Tim. 2. to
take off that scandal which any might take at scandalous Apo^^at^^, persons
openly wicked in the Church.

Mixtures not pleaded for*
Here let me not be mistaken (a thing which we are very (...) to in poin^^ of
the nature.) It is far from my purpose to patronize what ever mint^res in the
Church of God, to plead either for Admission or Toleration of persons openly
profane and seandalous; their Admission into the Church, their Toleration in
the Church: Much less for the promiscuous resorting of all sorts of persons to
the Lords Table, without any regard had to their q^alific^tions or
conversations. An error I confess, which, till it may be redressed, I shall
mourn over; wishing that all this 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Leaven were purged out* and this floor of Christ amongst us thoroughly purged
from the chafe and dross of what ever corruption is yet remaining in it. But
in the mean time, though I plead not for mixtures, yet But the Church.
let me plead for the Church, that Church whereof God has made me a member and
a Minister, which all the mixtures that are in it, cannot Unchurch, make to be
no Church; or yet warrant a separation from.

The Church of the Jews, at this time, when the Baptist preached to them, it
was (I suppose) in as corrupted, nay a far more corrupted state then the Church
of England at this day is, or ever yet was since the first Reformation of it.
How was that floor all covered with chafe? How many foul corruptions had
even overspread the face of that Church? Humane Inventions, and Traditions
being brought in, even to the thrusting out of the Ordinances of God.
Ceremonies eating out the heart, the power and substance of Religion. Those
which sat in Moses his chair, as vile as could be imagined: A generation of
vipers. Such were their Mat. 23. 16. ver. 3. Ioh. 11. 49. Hose. 4. 9.
teachers and Church Governors, Blind guides, having a corrupt and unlawful
entrance into their calling, and demeaning themselves as corruptly in it; and,
no question, like Priests, like people. The state of that Church most corrupt;
little else but chafe to be seen in that floor; yet for all that, a floor
still; So the Baptist here calls it, telling them that Christ would purge
that floor of his. Purge it, not presently leave it, cast it off, or else
break it up, (as some hot spirits would do at this day; who because of the
chafe that is in it, would presently be breaking up the floores; For some
supposed corruptions in the Church, presently unchurch it; a matter of a higher
nature then many in this last age have taken it to be. Not so) but purge it,
purge it, So will Christ deal with his floor, he will thoroughly purge his
floor.

Object. The Church of Engl^n^ a true Church.
True may some say: If it were a floor of Christ, then it ought not to be
broken up; if a true Church, then purging would serve the turn. But such is
not the Church of England, such are not the Churches in England. And why not?
why they fail in constitution, which is a fundamental error. They are not
rightly constituted. And why not? Because the members of them were not rightly
gathered, nor yet knit and joined together in the formality of a Church
Covenant. Even as if one should reason after this manner; It is the same man,
though in other clothes; the same argument though in different expressions.
The Corn was not brought in at the right door, or the floor is not a boarded
floor; or at least the boards were not joynted and fastened together, not
right laid at the first; but either it is a Clay floor, or else the boards
are laid loose and warping; therefore it is no floor, no true floor. The
absurdity of the one will sufficiently discover the weakness and
inconsequence of the other.

Quest. Answ. A (...) Church how known.
But how then shall we know a true Church if we see it? A. Why even as we may
do a true floor, I will not go out of the Text for a demonstration. Where
the fan is ordinarily at work, there is the floor; and where Christ's fan
is ordinarily at work, there is his floor, his Church; What this fan is, I
have told you already* the fan of the Word, the word preached. This is the
fan which the Baptist here principally speaks of, the fan of the word,
which is in the hand of Christ, both in respect of liberty and efficacy (as I
have shown you.) Now where this fan is ordinarily at work, where the word
is ordinarily preached and dispensed in the public ministry of it, especially
if it be with efficacy and power, certainly there Christ has a Floor, a
Church. Now this I think will not be denied, but that this fan has been at
work in the Churches of Christ amongst us, and that with such efficacy and
power, as no where more. Strange, that any should question whether Christ have
a floor, a Church amongst us or no.

Object.
But it may be said, the Fan may work out of the floor, sometimes in other
corners of the Barn, and sometimes abroad in the open field. And thus (say our
adversaries of the Separation,) the word may be, and often is preached, where
there is no true Church. Paul preached Acts 17. 16.
the word to the scoffing Athenians (say they) who yet were no true Church.

Answ. The ordinary and setle spreaching of the Word a note of a true Church.
To this Evasion I have insinuated an answer already, in that I said, not the
Preaching, but the ordinary Preaching of the word, is an effentiall mark and
note of a true Church. The word may be preached two ways. Either Occasionally,
or Ordinarily in a settled way. Now, in the former way it may be preached to
Heathens and Infidels, where there is no more but the Passive Capacity of a
Church. It is the latter of these that we conclude to be an evidence of a true
Church, viz. the settled preaching of the word amongst a people that profess
subjection to it. Where the fan is constantly at work, day after day, and
week after week, who questions but there is a floor? Where the word is
preached in a fetled way, day after day, week after week, year after year,
to a people professing subjection and obedience, and not without power and
efficacy, (especially being attended and accompanied with the S^ales of the
Covenant, the Sacraments, for substance rightly administered) surely it cannot
be denied but that there is a Church, a true Church. And this is it we say for
the Church of England, or Churches in England, (for I am not curious or
scrup^lous about the word.) In this floor Christ's fan has been stirring,
and that lively; his Gospel has been preached, and that powerfully,
succe^sefully* and that for more then a whole age together. How much Corn is
now laid up in Gods Garner, which this Fan has dressed in this Floor? How
many blessed souls now triumphing in Heaven, which were here gained and
brought home unto Christ, by the ministry of the word in this Church? And
shall we yet question, whether it be a true floor or no, upon a bare supposall
that the Corn was not brought in at the right done, or that the boards were
not laid right at the first? whether a true Church or no, because of some
supposed failings in the first constitution? The Argument happily is
displeasing to some of you. Let me tell you, it is not pleasing to my self.
Had I not met with it so full, that I could not baulke it without manifest
injury to the Text, and to sleighting of the general current of Expositors
writing upon it, (whose company I shall ever make much of,) I would not have
fallen with it at present.

Use 3. Comfort, Christ will have an eye to this his Floor.
A word or two more (to sweeten your pallates) and I have done. Is the Church
Christ's floor? here is Comfort to the Church, and to all that wish well to it.
The Church being his floor, he will have an eye to it. So will a faithful
servant have to his Masters floor, he will have an eye to it, that the Corn
shall not be either stolen or ftroyed. Such a faithful servant will Christ
approve himself unto God his Father. Moses was Heb. 3. 2.
faithful in all Gods House, and Christ will be faithful in his Floor, in
looking to his Corn, that it be not stroyed. Threshed, fanned, winnowed it may
be, but stroyed it shall not be. Not a Grain of Wheat shall miscarry in this
Floor. Express and emphaticall is that of the Prophet Amos, in the place
forenamed. I will sift the house of Israel amongst all Nations, like as Corn
Amos 9. 9.
is sifted in a five, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.]
Mark it, Gods Corn may be sifted, winnowed, but not a grain of it shall fall
to the earth; If Wheat, it shall not be stroyed: Why? Christ will have an eye
to this floor, to his Church: not any true member of it Ioh. 6. 39.
shall perish or miscarry. Of all that his Father has given him he will loose
nothing.

Use.

Exhortation, Let Christ have the ordering of it.


A word of Exhortation, and but a word. Is the Church Christ's floor, let him
have the ordering of it, and of all businesses in it. This privilege we will
allow the Husbandman, to order the business in his own floor. Let Christ do
as much in his Church, in ordering all the public Ordinances in it. And who
but he should do it? It being his floor, over which he has an absolute
Sovereignty. So much for this time.

THE SECOND SERMON, April 19. 1643.
MATTHEW. 3. 12. And he will thoroughly purge his Floor.]

WE have here set forth (as you heard the last day) the Exercise of the
Sovereign Authority of Jesus Christ over and upon his Church. His Church; that
is here meant by the Floor; the visible Church of Christ: which in what
respects it is called a floor, and His floor, I then showed you. Not to look
back: Come we now to the second particular, to see what shall be done to this
floor. It shall be purged, (says the Text,) thoroughly purged. He will
thoroughly purge his Floor.]

Ban^^, Epist. 24
Purge it, Not cast it off, not break it up. I like not that Surgerie (says
one of our late Worthies) which upon every aylement dismembreth and cutteth of.
I know not who would like that Husbandry, which because of some chafe in the
floor, would presently break it up. Not so; purge it, purge it. This is
Christ's way, let it be Doct* ^hrists Floor, his Church shall be purged, and
that thoroughly.
ours.

He will thoroughly purge his Floor.] The Church then shall be purged,
thoroughly purged.] This is that which the Lord promises to the Church of the
Jews, Isa. 1. Isa. 1. 25.
I will purely purge away thy dross.] What ever it was that defiled or imbased
that Church, she should be purged from it, and purely, thoroughly purged. This
promise he will make good to his Church under the Gospel. It shall be purged,
thoroughly purged.

Purged.
Purged.] What shall it be purged from? Who shall purge it? When shall he purge
it? By what ^eans shall he purge it? And wherefore will he so purge it? Enquire
we into every of these five particulars, by way of Explication and
Illustration. To most of them (to the four first) we shall find an answer in
the Text. Begin with the first.

Quest. 1. From what shall it be purged?

Answ. From the chaff, viz Corrupt men and corruptions.


From what shall this floor be purged? The Text it self insinuates the
answer; from the Chafe that is in it. He will purge h^ floor, and will burn
the chafe.] First, purge it out, cast it out of the floor, then burn it. And
from this shall the visible Church of Christ be purged; from the chafe that is
in it. What chafe? Take the word as we will* understanding by it, either
corrupt persons, or corruptions themselves: Both, in the phras and language of
Scripture, known by the name of chafe. Corrupt and wicked men, they are
chafe; The ungodly are like the chaffe] says the Psalmist. Chafe for their
vileness, Psalm 1. penult. Ier. 23. 28.
barrenness, inconstancy etc. As corrupt men, so corruptions. What is the
chafe to the wheat? says the Lord, Jer. 23. Gods truth ^s as wheat, sound and
solid: False Doctrines are as chafe. Such are corruptions in Doctrine* and
such are corruptions in worship; and such are corruptions in Discipline, all as
chafe, that will not endure the Fan of the word. And from this chafe shall
this floor of Christ, the Church, be purged, viz. both from corrupt men, and
from corruptions themselves.

From corrupt men.
1. Corrupt, wicked men, Hypocrites and others* they are in the Church, as ill
humors in the body. In the body, but not of it. Joining themselves to the
mystical body of Christ, but no true Members of it. And being such, they shall
be purged out. Wicked men, Hypocrites and others, they are as Dross and Tin,
mixed with the good and pure metal; and being such, they shall be purged out.
I will purge away thy dross (says Isa. 1. 26*
the Lord;) amongst other, her corrupt Judges and Councillors, which should be
taken away. Wicked men, they are the Goats, which now flock and feed together
Mat. 25. 32, 33.
with the Sheep: Joining themselves unto the people of God, and having
communion with them in many, it may be in all the public ordinances of God.
They are the Tares, which grow up together with the Mat. 13 38.
wheat in the same field. They are the chafe, which cleaving close to the
Corn, lies with it upon the same Goaffe, upon the same heap. Being so, they
shall be severed, they shall be weeded, purged out. Rev. 21. ult.
The Church shall be purged from corrupt men.

2. And secondly, from Corruptions themselves. Corruptions Corruptions.
to the state of the visible Church or Churches of Christ upon Earth.
Corruptions, not only in manners, which are personal; but corruptions in
Doctrine, corruptions in worship, corruptions in Discipline.
Church-corruptions. Now from all these shall the Church be purged. Isa. 1*
I will take away [all] your Tin.] What ever it was that corrupted the state
of that Church. This will Christ do for his Church under the Gospel. He will
purge away all her Dross, all her corruptions, be they (as I said) in manners,
Doctrine, worship. Express and full is that of the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 36.
25. From all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you,
says the Lord. Cleanse them from their filthiness, from corruptions in
manners, those spiritual pollutions and defilements: From their I dols, all
corruptions in Doctrine, in worship. And let me add also, corruptions in
Discipline too. It is the Lords promise to the Church of the Jews, in that
place forenamed, Isa. 1. 26. I Isa. 1. 2^.
will purge ^^ay thy ^rassv, etc. And I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning.] And this will Christ do for
his Church under the Gospel. He will restore her Judges, as at the first, and
her Counselors, as at the beginning. Restoring his Church to Primitive Order
and Discipline, purging out what ever corruptions are in this respect crept
into it. All this without question shall be done; the Church shall be purged.

Thoroughly purged.
And thoroughly purged, (...), perpurgabit: Thus did Christ purge the Temple in
the days of his flesh: he made a thorough sweepage, driving out all the buyers
Mat. 21. 12.
and sellers, etc. And thus will he purge his Church: Isa. 1. 25.
(...), He will thoroughly purge it. Purge out All corrupt men, and All
corruptions. I will purely purge, etc.] Repurgabo ut purificationem (so
Montanus renders the place) I will diligently and thoroughly purge thee, as the
Furnace or fining pot does the silver. This is that which the Prophet Malachi
tells the Church, Mal. 3. where prosecuting the same Allegory, he sets forth the
sedulity and exactness of Christ in this purging of his Mal. 3. 3.
Church. He shall sit down to try and to fine the silver; he shall even fine
the sons of Levi, and purify them as gold and silver.] Mark it; full
expressions. Christ shall purge and purify his Church; and this he shall do,
both diligently and thoroughly. Diligently, not cursorily. He shall [sit downe]
to try, etc.] As a man that intends a work seriously, he sits down to it.
Thoroughly he shall try and fine and purify, etc. The Prophet multiplieth
words, heaps up expressions, all to intimate the throughnes, the perfectnes of
this work.

Gods way perfect.

Ps. 18. 30.


Gods works, they are all perfect works. As for God his way is perfect, Psalm.
18.] Such they either are, or such they shall be before he leave them. Such was
his work of Creation, perfect at the first. Every thing which he had made was
very good, i. e. perfect. Such shall his work of new Creation be, the work of
Regeneration; Genesis 1. last.
though imperfect at the first, yet before he leave it, it shall be perfect, He
who bath begun ^ good Phil* 1 6.
work in you* will perfect it* says Paul to his Phili^pians. The new* birth,
though at the first ^n (...) yet it shall Ephesians. 4. 13.
grow to a perfect man. This will Christ do* as for every true member of his
Church (The Lord will perfect that which concerns me, says the Psalmist*
Psalm. 1^8. last*) so for the Church it self. The ^^w Heaven and the (...) Isa.
65. 17.
Earth shall be as perfect, as the old ever was. He that has begun the good
work of restoring, purging his Church, will also perfect it* he will purge it*
thoroughly purge it.

Quest. 2. Who will purge it? viz* Christ.
He will do it. Who? Why, that shall the Lord Jesus Christ. There have you the
answer to the second enquiry, which I am fallen upon unawares. [He] shall
thoroughly purge his floor, says the Baptist. The floor is His, as I have
showen you; and being so* he will take care, as for other things* so for the
purning of it. To this end, God the Father (the great Husbandman) Ioh. 1^. 1.
Isa. 53. 1^.
has put the Fan into the hand of this his Servant, that he should dress his
Corn, purge his floor. To this on^ Mat. 28. 18.
amongst other, has he given all Power and Authori^y to him, as over the whole
world, so*over his Church after a special manner, that he should purge it. And
this he will do, which is properly his work. He is like a purging fire, and
like Fullers soape, says the Prophet Mal. 3. 3.
Malachi, speaking of Christ* Mal* 3. 3. He shall sit down to try, etc.] He
shall make it his work to purge the Church.

None but hecan do it.
And indeed, who but he should do it? I, who but he can do it? The purging of
the Church is a great work. So was the purging of the Temple, a greater work
then it is ordinarily apprehended. Temple purgati^ maximum The through purging
of the Church a great work.
miraculum, says the Father. The purging of the Temple it was one of the
greatest miracles that ever Christ did in the days of his ^lesh. That a
private person (so he was then accounted and taken to be) nay a despicable
person of so inferior a rank, the Son of a Carpenter Hieron.
should come into the Temple with a whip in his hand (as despicable an
instrument, rather to be scorned then feared) and therewith should drive out
all those (no petty chap men) Drovers and Bankers (notwithstanding all their
privileges and protections, which they had from the Masters of the Temple, the
chiefe-Priests, etc.) as so many sheep before him, without opposition, without
contradiction; what a work? Well may we say of it, as Paul does of the
resurrection Romans 1. 4.
of Christ from the dead; Hereby he declared himself to be the Son of God,
and that (...), with power mightily. Whether there were at that time any Radij
claritatis, Rays and beams of splendor and glory, shining in, and st^eaming
from the face and countenance of our blessed Savior, striking an awful dread
and terror into the beholders or no? I leave it as I find it, an uncertain
tradition or conjecture, which may as safely or Dionis. Cart has. in 2 John
more safely be rejected then believed. (Non creditur quia non legitur.) But
this we may say, and make it good; here were Radij divinitatis, rays and
beams of Divinity, a divine power put forth and manifested in this act. The
like we may say of this great work, the work of Church-Reformation. To purge
the Church, and that thoroughly, from all corrupt persons and corruptions. What
a work?

To purge it from all corruptions.

Act. 1^. 29.


To purge it from all corruptions. You heard in the Chapter read even now, what
a stir, what a tumult there was at Ephesus, when once the great Goddess Diana
was but supposed to be touched. What a dust it raised? The whole City was in a
confusion. Now how many Diana's are there to be found in the Christian world?
Personall-Diana's and Church-Diana's? All these must be, not only touched* but
pulled down and purged out. And what hand, but a mighty, an almighty hand
shall be able to effect this, even the hand of Jesus Christ.

From all corrupt persons.
Again, To purge and cast out all corrupt men out of the Church, what a work?
a great work first to discover them, to find them out; when once discovered, a
greater work to cast them out. And who but Christ can do either of these? Who
but he can discover them? Some so close, so secret and hidden, that their own
hearts do not discover them; much less can others. Who shall do it, but he
that is (...), he that knows and searches the hearts, to whom all things
Heb. 4. 13. Specially the casting out of Antichrist.
are (...), nacked and open? And who but he can cast them out being discovered?
That man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome, long since discovered to be (as the
Father said of Marcian the Heretic) Primogenitns Diaboli, the eldest son of
the Devil, the Head of the Church malignant upon earth; yet to eject, to cast
2 These. 2. 4.
him out of the Temple of God, where he sits as God; what a stir, what a
combustion has it made, does it make, and is yet like to make through the
Christian world? Tangit montes and fumigabunt. He touches the hills and Rev. 17
9.
they smoke, Psa. 104. 32.] Those seven Hills of Rome being touched, how do
they smoke? How do they burn as if they would set all the world on fire? Never
did Aetna or Ves^vins, those flaming Mountains so terrible to the neighboring
Territories, cast out such thunderings and lightenings, such vollies of smoke
and flames, as those seven hills have done, and at this day do, to the terror
and amazement of all the Christian world. Tant^* molis ^rit. So great a work
is it like to be to disinthronize that same (...), that great Antagonist of
Jesus Christ, that Lord Paramount, that opposes against, and exalts himself
above all that is 2 These. 2. 4.
called God. To bring down that Antichrist, and to cast him out of the Temple,
the Church of God, his usurped possession, which he has held so long a time*
vi and armis, by force and might, to cast out him with all his accomplices and
adherents, it is a mighty work; such a work, as who but Jesus Christ can be
able to effect? And he will do it, and that when the time comes, with great
facility and case* He shall consu^^s him with 2 These. 2. 8.
the breath of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his coming,
that is, suddenly, easily consume, abolish him, and together with him, all
other enemies of his Church, whether open or secret.

The through purging of the Church an argument of Christ's Divinity Par^us a^l
loc.
A great work. I such a work, as if we had no other argument to prove it, yet
might we even from hence (as a good author observes upon the Text) evince and
demonstrate the Divinity of Jesus Christ; that he is more then man, truly God.
To purge the Church, and to purge it thoroughly, it is Opus plane divinum, the
work of God and not of man. So much judicious Calvin rightly observes from
that forenamed place of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1. 25. where the Lord tells
his Calv. in Isa. 1. 25.
Church, I will turn my hand upon thee, and will purely purge away thy dross,
etc.] Purgatio Ecclesiae propri^^ Dei opus. The purging of the Church is Gods
peculiar work, the work of his own hand. I will turn my hand upon thee,
etc.] Certainly had not Christ bin more then man, he could never have purged
the Temple as he did; And were he not truly God, he could never purge this
floor, as it shsll be purged, thoroughly purge it. This he can do, and this
he will do.

Quest. 3. When shall the Church be purged? Act. 1. 6.
But when will he do it? there is the third Quere. It was a business of like
nature that the Disciples were so inquisitive with our Savior about, Acts 1.
vi^. When he would restore the Kingdom unto Israel. If any shall make the like
enquiry touching the purging of the Church, when Christ will do it? Let him
rest contented with that satisfaction that the Text gives him. He will do it.
The purging of the Church a continued work, begun and carried on here,
perfected hereafter.
(...), perpurgabit. He [will] thoroughly purge his floor.] This he will do.
The purging of the Church (as I told you) is a great work, and therefore not
the work of a day, to be done at once. As it was with the building of the
second Temple under the Law, so shall it be with the purging of the Church
under the Gospel. (I dare not go so far as to make the one a Type of the
other, but the congruity betwixt them, with the allusion of the one to the
other, I cannot but acknowledge and approve.) That Temple was not built all at
once, as Solomon's Temple was, but by degrees. Such shall the repairing and
purging of the Church under the Gospel be, Graduall, not perfected all at
once. Christ in the days of his flesh, he purged the Temple more then once:
three several times, three several days, (so Chemnitius notes it upon that
second chapt. of John.) First in the beginning of his Ministry; afterward
once* and again a little before the end of his Ioh. 2. 15. Mat. 21. 12. Mark.
11. 15. Luk* 19. 45.
life, as may be collected by comparing the four Evangelists. And as he
repeated the work, so he did it by degrees (as the same Author there
observes.) First he casts out the Sellers only: Joh. 2. 15. Then afterward,
both buyers and Sellers, Mat. 21. Mark. 11. Luke 19. The purging of the Church
is not one act. It is not to be done at once, but by degrees. The Moon having
lost her light, recovers it by degrees, so shall the Church hers. The purging
and restoring of the Church is a continued work, and therefore Christ is said
to fit at it, in that place forenamed, Mal. 3. He shall sit down Mal. 3. 3.
to try and to fine, etc.] He fitteth down to it: Beginning and carrying it on
here, perfecting it hereafter.

Quest. 4. How Christ purges it? viz. by hu Fan.
And all this will he do with and by his Fan. So I am fallen upon the fourth
inquiry. How Christ will do this, by what means, by what Instrument. The
Text resolves it. He will do it by his Fan. Who has his fan in his hund*
and he will thoroughly purge his floor, viz. by that his fan, even that
threefold fan which Scultet. exercit. super Textum. Ventilabrum in manu
Christi triplex.

1. Doctrinae. 2. Crucis. 3. Iudicij.

I spoke of, the fan of the Word, the fan of the Cross, the fan of the
last Judgment. All these three Christ makes use of for the purging of this
floor, his Church. The two former he makes use of here; the fan of the
word, the fan of the Cross, whereof the latter is subservient to the former.

Properly the Fan of the Word. I^r. ^3. 29.
The chief Instrument which Christ makes use of in this great purging work
is his Word. This is that fire, (is not my Word as fire?) Whereby this Refiner
tries and purges his metal: First, discovering corruptions, then consuming
them. Even as the fire first shows which is the dross, and then burns it
up. Both these does Christ by his Word. First discovering 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
corruptions by the light of it. If Wood, Hay, Stubble, be built upon the
foundation, the day will declare it, (Dies Evangelij, the lightsome Doctrine of
heavenly truth, as diverse Expositors expound that place) it shall be revealed
by fire, viz. by the Word, which examining and trying the Doctrines of men,
discovers the corruption that is in them. And discovering them by the light of
it, he consumes them by the heat of it; and that both personal and Church
corruptions. Both these Christ purges out of his floor by this fan, his
Word. Hereby it is that he has already purged out so much Romish chafe out of
this floor, so much of Antichristian Idolatry, and superstition out of his
Church. And by this means he will purge out the rest. He shall consume 2 These.
2. 8.
him with the breath of his mouth, says the Apostle, speaking of Antichrist
and Antichristianisme, with the breath of his mouth, i. e. spiritu Sermonis
Evangelici, says Caje^^n rightly. The Gospel preached. This is that same
(...). Rev. 1. 16. Heb. 4. 1^.
that sharp two edged Sword going forth of the Mouth of Jesus Christ. Even his
Word in the mouth of his Ministers, which is sharper then any two edged Sword.
Hereby it is that Christ goes forth against all the Enemies of his Person and
Kingdom, wounding them, Psalm 45. 5. Rev. 6. ^.
slaying them. Wounding them. T^ine Arrows are sharp in the heart of the
Kings Enemies.] Arrows shot out of that Bow in the hand of Jesus Christ,
wherewith he goes forth through the world conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6.
viz. his Word, his Gospel preached, which is the powerful instrument of Jesus
Christ, wounding the souls and consciences of such as oppose it. And not only
wounding, but slaying them. He shall smite Isa. ^1. 4.
the Earth with the R^d of his Mouth, (says the Prophet Isaiah) and with the
Breath of his Mouth shall he slay the wicked. The R^d of Christ's Mouth, and the
Breath of his lips is his Word; his Gospel preached: Hereby he smites the
Earth, that is, the wicked and impenitent which are upon the Earth, Smites
them, nay slays them; Either killing sin in them, or them in their sins,
slaying them spiritually. This does Christ by his word, which is unto all
impenitent unbelievers a killing letter, a deadly savor, a savor of death
unto death. Of 2 Cor 3. 6. 2 Cor. ^. 16.
such effi^acie is this fan in the hand of Jesus Christ. Hereby he not only
discovers, but also dissipateth and scatters what ever chafe he meets with
in his floor. And by this means purges it; making use of his Word, as the
chief and principal Instrument in effecting this great work.

Accompanied with the wing of Discipline.
True it is, it must not be denied, but that this fan (as I have heretofore
said) works the better when it has the winge to help and second it. The Word
is made more powerful and effectual, when it is backed by Discipline, which
rightly and duly exercised, serves as a winge to sweep off such scandalous
and obstinate offenders, as do despise the wind of this fan, such as will
not yield obedience to the Word. A useful implement, so it must be
acknowledged. The fan will not make clean work without it. Without it this
floor will not be thoroughly purged. And in this regard much to be desired. But
yet know we it not to be so absolutely and essentially necessary to the being
of a Church, as that the bare absence, the want of the exercise of it, (for as
for the power, that cannot be taken away from the Church, being by Christ
himself given to it as a Church) should make a nullity of a Church, make it to
be no Church. Surely where the fan is at work, there is Christ at work
purging his floor. This being (as I said) the chief and principal Instrument
and means whereby he eff^cteth this great work.

Accidentally ^y the Fan o^ the Cross.
Not but that he also make^h use of that other Fan, the Fan of the Cross,
for the furthering of this work. But this is accidentally. The Cross having no
such purging property in it self, otherwise then a^ Christ is pleased to make
use of it, which he does o^^-times to this end: Hereby purging out (as
persona^^, so Church-corruptions. Isa. 27 9.
By this (says the Prophet Isaiah) shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged.] By
this, viz. by Gods debating and contending with his Church in the branches
thereof (as the old ^ranslation reads it) by blowing ver. 8.
upon it with a rough wind in the day of the East wind: that is, by his
exercising of it with the strong and sharp wind of some sor^ judgment, which
like an East wind nippeth and blasteth the ^ud and the branch, though not
killing the Root, Hereby (says the Lord) shall the iniquity of Jacob (the
Church) be purged. Expiabi^^r, it shall be expiated, purged, not by way of
satisfaction (as ver. 9.
our adversaries would carry it) but by Repentance and Reformation, which God
would use this as a means to bring his Church and people unto, thereby purging
out their Idolatry and superstition with all the monuments of it, which is
properly the iniquity of Jacob there spoken of (as may be gathered from the
sequel.) Such use God often makes of this second Fan; where the former, the
Fan of the Word, takes not place, he sends the latter, the Fan of the
Cross to second it; making use of both for the Purging of his floor. Thus he
purges it Here.

But this purging is imperfect, not yet a through-purging, when shall that be?
When shall this Floor be thoroughly purged? I have told you it already.
Hereafter at that last and great day, that day of purification; when Heaven and
Earth shall be purified, then shall this Floor the Church, be purged,
thoroughly purged. And this shall Christ do by that third and last Fan, the
Fan of the last judgment. Thereby shall he make a Mat. 25. 32.
full and final Separation, separating the Goats from the Mat. 13. 30*
Sheep, which here have gone with them in the same flock, fed with them in
the same pasture. Thereby shall he lever the Tares from the wheat, which here
grew up with it in the same field. Hereby he will sever the chaff from the
Corn, which here lay with it upon the same heap. And that he will do
thoroughly, perfectly; from thence forth for ever freeing his Church from all
mixtures, whether of corrupt-men or corruptions, neither Rev. 2^. 27.
of which shall enter into the new and heavenly Jerusalem.

Quest. 5. Wherefore shall it be so purged, viz. that it may be a glorious
Church.
Thus will Jesus Christ purge his Floor, his Church. And wherefore will he so
purge it? That is the 5th and last Enquiry: To which take the Resolution in a
word. This he will do, that he may have a glorious Church; a Church suitable to
the Head of it. The Head of the Church is a glorious head, a Head like that of
Nebuchadnezzars Image, all Gold, fine and pure gold. Such shall Dan 2. 32.
the Body be, not part of brass and part of Iron, and part of Clay, a mixed
body, as that was; but all Gold, pure Gold, that it may be suitable to the Head.
A glorious body to a glorious Head. To this end it is (says the Apostle)
Ephesians* 5 27.
That Christ sanctifies and cleanses his Church by the washing of water
through the word, that he may present it unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing (any mixture) but that it should be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians 5. 27.

Introduction to Application.
Thus have I run over the Doctrinall part of this Conclusion, That Christ
will thoroughly purge his Church. What Use shall we make of it? Time gives not
way to particular inlargements: Neither indeed am I very willing to give way to
them upon this subject in this Congregation; which if I should, it would
happily occasion some debates and disputes, which my desire is (as much as may
be) to decline and avoid. Truth is, I scarce know a Text in Scripture, which
offers a more fit and full occasion to the discussing of the differences and
controversies of the time, then this: But such is my love to peace, and desire
of peace, that I will not only not run out my Text to fetch in differences,
but I shall (as much as may be) baulke and pass them by, when I meet with
them. This I have hitherto done, not meddling in public with any of those
points of difference between us and those our brethren, who do hold communion
with us. As for that bitter error of the Separation (so I call it, borrowing
the word from James 3. 15.
St. James, who informs me of a bitter zeal, (...), of which nature I take
this to be, which is so far distasted, not only with the Church of England,
but with the Churches in England, as that at once it rejects and renounceth
them all as false and Antichristian) apprehen ling it like to be the error of
the times, dangerous to the Church, and in particular to this place, I
confess^, as I have met with it, I have not spared it, neither (by the grace of
God) for the future shall; But for what ever d^fferences there are betwixt us,
and those that will own us for Brethren, I have not yet touched upon them,
neither shall I willingly do it; wishing that herein I may find a like
correspondence from others in this place, that so Church-differences being laid
aside, 2 Samuel ^0. 12, 13.
(as that dying Amasa once was) and covered with silence, the Lords people might
be led on in their march to Heaven without diversion or interruption. Upon this
ground, I shall forbear inlargements.

Besides, let me tell you, All Truths (I though Gospel Truths) are not so
fit for every audience. For this 1 Cor 3* 2.
I have S^. Paul's warrant to bear me out, who writing to his Corinthians, tells
them, that he had sed them with milk and not with meat, Why? For hitherto
(says he) ye were not able to bear it, neither yet are ye able, 1* Cor. 3.
And such I take this subject to be, which I have now in hand.
Church-Reformation. A subject fit indeed to be handled before that Authority to
which a Church-Reforming power is committed; but not so fit for private
Auditories. Herein I cannot but applaud and approve T. G. Zerobabels
Inc^uragement.
the profession and practice of a reverend and worthy brother of ours, a known
Advocate for Church-Reformation, who having preached a Sermon upon this very
subject before the Honorable House os Commons at one of their Public Fasts,
and at their command publishing it, in his Epistle Dedicatory to them, he tells
them and the world, that it was a subject which otherwise, and in all other
Auditories h^ had been silent in, and yet was no whit sorry for it. Not but
that the People ought also to know their duty herein. So says he, and so say
I, and in that way shall I carry the Application, which ^ intend to make of it.

Use. Do what we may to further this design of Jesus Christ upon this
Church, viz. the Purging. Reforming of it.
Will Jesus Christ thus thoroughly purge his floor, why then let all and every
of us (every of us in our places) do what we may, do what we can for the
furthering of this design, this great design of Jesus Christ, in and upon
this and other of his Churches. That this is his design, we comfortably hope.
Certainly one of these two it must be, either Reformation or Desolation. We
trust, not the latter, though we have cause enough to fear it. Our hopes are,
that Jesus Christ will not yet forsake this Floor of his, where the Fan of
the Word has bin so long a time at work, and where he has so much wheat
lying upon the Heap. It is the Lords own Reason to Paul, why he would not have
him depart from Corinth, but abide and preach there; for (says he) I have much
people in this City. Surely God has Act. 18. 10*
much people, a great people in this Kingdom: A great people already called and
brought in, and we hope yet a greater to be called in; Much Corn already
threshed, and more in the Straw. This gives us some comfortable hopes, that he
will not yet desert this Floor, not yet leave this Church of his. What then?
Purge it, Purge it, Reform it, Reform it. This we hope is the present design
of Jesus Christ at this day, not to abandon, not to cast up this Floor, this
Church of his, but to purge it from what ever Chafe of corruption is yet
remaining in it.

That there is Chafe yet remaining in this Floor, it must not be denied;
Certainly were there not, this Fan, the Fan of the Cross, the Fan of
Judgment should not be so busy at work, as at this day it is (and now for so
many months has been.) It is Jobs speech Job 6. 5.
to his Friends, Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass, or does the Ox
low over his fodder? The very bruit beasts do not complain, when they have
what they would have. Surely it cannot be but something must be amiss amongst
us; otherwise God would never deal with us, and other of his Churches as at
the present he does. Certainly we may hence conclude, that as yet he has not
what he would have. Something there is amiss amongst us, and Ezekiel* 24. 6.
something which we hope he is about to reform. Questionless some scum there
is in this Pot, which whilst it has bin pla^ing with so long a continued
prosperity, has even boiled and sodden-in. And Psalm* 73. 10.
hereupon it is (we hope) that God has now powered in this full cup of
cold-water, that as he has hereby in part raised this scumme already, so he
may in his time purge it out. Some Chafe in this Floor, some Corruption in
this Church, which we trust Christ is about to purge out and reform.

Motive. Christ's work cannot be hindered.
And do we apprehend this to be his aim and Design? Let every of us further
it what we can, not hinder it. Hinder it we cannot: Which may serve as an
argument to put us on to further it. Hinder it (if we would) we cannot. He will
purge and thoroughly purge his floor. This he will do, and that in despite of
all opposition; maugre the malice of Satan, Antichrist, and all their accursed
Instruments and Adherents. Let them all do what they can either by power or
policy to keep the chafe in the Floor of Christ, yet Christ will purge it
out. And can we not hinder it? Why then let us put to our hands to the
furthering of it. None of us in this case but may do something, if we have
hearts to the work.

Quest. What shall we do?
Quest. But then, What shall we do? A great, useful and seasonable Question,
but it will require more time for the resolution of it, then is at the present
allotted me. Let me only tell you what my design and purpose in the Answer of
it, is, viz. to show you these two things: 1. What the Reformation is which we
are to desire and seek. And secondly, What we shall do to further and
compass that Reformation. Two useful points. The former I shall only touch
upon in the general (having already bounded my self from particular
inlargements upon this subject.) In the second I shall deal more distinctly
and particularly; but the time being now past, takes me off from present
prosecution of either. I shall adjourne them both (if God please) to another
occasion.

THE THIRD SERMON, May 3. 1643*
MATTHEW. 3. 12. And he will thoroughly purge his Floor.]

THe subject of the Text (as you have already heard) is Church-Reformation; a
great and a glorious work, the great design (as we hope) of Jesus Christ
upon this and other of his Churches at this day. Apprehending it so to be, be
we excited every of us, to put to our hands, in our several places to do what
we may for the promoting and furthering of that design in the Church of God
amongst us. This Exhortation I propounded the last day, and give me now leave
to prosecute it.

Use.
Do what we may every of us for the furthering of this great Design. But what
shall we do?

For answer hereunto, I then chalked out the way, wherein I intend now to
walk; which was, first to show you, What that Reformation is, which we are to
seek. Quest. What Reformation to be ^esired in this Church.
Secondly, What we shall do to compass that Reformation. Begin with the first
of these.

Qu What is that Reformation which amongst us is so desired, and so desirable?
A question of great and present concernement, other wise I should not so much
as have meddled with it. Reformation, it is the common Theme of the times: No
one thing more frequently, more freely spoken of every where; but my fears
are, not so clearly, so distinctly understood by many, it may be by some of
them who seem to be most zealous in the cause, either for or against it. To
rectify, not to quenth or quell the zeal of the one, to kindle and blow it up
in the other; I shall adventure to descend into, or rather upon, these troubled
waters; hovering over them, (as the Spirit is said to have done over those
first waters. Movebat super faci^m;) Mooving upon the face of the Genesis 1. 2.
Mat. 14. 25.
deep; or walking upon the surface of them, (as our Savior once did upon the
Sea;) not diving into them; passing over the point as lightly, as tenderly, as
overly, as generally as with convenience I may; Yet so as I may give some
satisfaction to those which do, or shall desire it.

Answ. The Churches Imperfection wherein it consists.
For resolution we must look a little back, casting an eye, (so far as with
humble modesty we may)* upon the Churches deformation; enquiring what chafe
there is yet left in this floor, what Errors, what Imperfections, what
corruptions there are, or may be supposed to be left in this Church, unpurged
out, unreformed. Ezekiel. 8* 12. It must be either in Faith or Order.

Col. ^. 5. Faith and Order the two main Pillars of a Church.

Duo ponit Apostolus quibus constat Eccle^i^ perfectio. Beza* ad ^ocu^.


Chafe there is, Errors, Imperfections there are (as what Church without?)
Let that be granted, yealded. But wherein lie those Errors, those
Imperfections?

To find them out we shall not need to go far about; there are but two Roo^^s,
two Chambers (as I may say) wherein we are to make search for them. They must
be either in matters of Faith or Order. To these two heads the Apostle reduces
the whole business of a Church, Col. 2. 5. Beholding your Order, and the
steadfastness of your Faith.] There are but these two maine things to be eyed
in a Church, the perfection of a Constituted 1 King 7* 21.
Church consisting in them, Faith and Order, the two great supporters of a
Church, like those two Pillars in the Porch of Solomon's Temple, Jachin and
Boaz; Establishment and Strength, as the words signify.

Faith the righthand Pillar.
Faith, Doctrine, or the Doctrine of Faith, the righthand pillar, the maine and
principal thing in a Church; So much the Apostle there insinuates, in that he
calls it (...), Firmamentum fidei, (as the vulgar Latin renders it) The
Firmament, the Groundworke, and Foundation of Faith. Such is the Doctrine of
Faith to the Church, Totius adificij (...), i. e. Ibid.
Fulcimentum, (as Beza glosseth upon it) The maine Basis or Buttresse of this
Building, the maine Pillar of the Church.

Faith and the Church, they are mutual Pillars, each a Pillar to other; the
Church a Pillar to Faith, and Faith a Pillar to the Church; but in a different
respect. The 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Church is a Pillar to Faith (The Pillar of Truth) modo forensi, a Pillar
houlding it forth, as Pillars do the public Edicts or Proclamations which are
hanged upon them, or fixed to them. Faith a Pillar to the Church, Modo
Architectonico, a Pillar holding it up, as a Pillar does a House which rests
upon it. Faith the righthand pillar.

Order the lefthand Pillar. Naz:
Next to that is Order. Order the Beauty of a Church, Vbi Ordo dominatur ibi
pulchritudo splendescit (says the Father.) Where Order reigns, Beuty shines.
A thing much to be joyed in where it is. (...), says Col. 2. 5.
Paul to those Colossians. Rejoicing and beholding your Order of the Essence of
a Church.

Ex quibus velu^i generalibus partibus constat Ecclesia, Beza* Ibid.


Order, Much to be desired where it is not, or where it is not in some degree
of perfection. The Beauty of a Church, Nay more, of the Essence of a Church,
Faith and Order (says Beza) they are the general parts of which a Church
consists: Each essential to a constituted Church, requisite not only to the
well-being, but the being of it; without which it cannot be a Church, a
constituted Church. A Church it cannot be without Faith, which makes it an
Essential Church, A constituted Church it cannot be without Order (some Order)
which makes it an Integrall and Organicall Ames: Medul: lib. 1 cap. 33.
Church, (as our Learned Countryman distinquisheth.) This it is that makes the
difference betwixt Ecclesia, and Agora, (as Illiricus well observes) betwixt a
Church and a Market. The one is Conventus Ordinatus, an Orderly Convension or
Assembly. The other, Confusa Congregatio, a Confused and Pr^^iscuous Gathering.
Even as it is betwixt an Army and a Route, that which differenceth the one
from the other is Order. An Army is an Orderly Body, made up of Commanders,
Officers, Common-Souldiers, divided into several Regiments, Squadrons and
Companies, Martialled in Ranks and Files, observing a Militario Order. Such is
the Cant. 6. 10.
Church, an Army [Terrible as an Army,] it is said of the Church Universal;
and it may be said of every particular Church, it is (or ought to be) an Army,
Acies ordinat^, an Army; as for Strength, so for Order, without which it
cannot be a Church.

Some Perfection of Order of great concernement to a Church.
Of such concernement is Order to the Church, and that, some Perfection of
Order. Without the one it cannot be a Constituted Church, and without the other
it cannot be a Settled, an Established Church. He shall sit upon the Throne of
David, and upon his Kingdom to order, and to stablish it,] it is spoken of
Christ and his Church, Isa. 9. 7.
Isa. 9. To Order and to stablish. No Establishing of a Church without Order;
No such way to Establish it as by Order; Which, the more exact and perfect it
is, the more Beautiful, the more Stable the Church is; and therefore not to be
slighted, as it is by many. Next to the Faith of the Church, no one thing of
so great concernement as ^rder. If Faith be the right hand Pillar, Church Order
der wherein it consists* viz. in 3. things.
Order is the left.

Q. But wherein consists this Order which we erye up to be so requisite, at
least to the well being of a Church.

D^ven^t (...) Calvin

super Col. 2. 5.


A. Here give me leave to follow the steps of a Reverend and Learned Worthy of
this Church, or rather Calvin's before him, whom therein he follows.
Church Order consists principally in these three things. 1. In the Unity and
Agreement of the Members of a Church. 2. In the Orderly walking of those
Members. 3. In a right Discipline duly exercised. All these three did the
Apostle, not without singular complacencie and joy, take notice of in the
Church of Colosse. He there saw a sweet Harmony and agreement betwixt the
members; he saw their personal walkings, and Church-businesses all carried in
a Regular and Orderly way. Three things much to be desired in every Church.

Unity and Agreement, and that both in Judgment Unity in Iulgment and
Affection.

Phil. 2. 2.


and Affection; That the Members of a Church might be all (...), (to use Paul's
words) Like-minded, One-Hearted, Having the same Love, being of one accord, of
one mind, (as Paul says to his Philippians,) minding and speaking one and the
ver. 20.
same thing. Mutually embracing, and Naturally caring for the state one of
another: Thus knit together in that double Bond of Faith and Love. Here is the
first Branch of Church Order, Unity and Agreement.

Carriage and D^meanour, the life Regulatitie in life and convensation.

Tit. 2 12. 2 These. 3. 6.


and conversation of the Members of a Church, which ought to be Orderly.
Orderly both toward* God, Themselves, Others. A living Righteousness,
Soberly, Godly, (as the Apostle has it.) Godly to Godward: Soberly to
Themselves-ward: Righteously to the Worldward: which who so do not, they are
said to walk (...), without Order, Disorderly. [Withdraw your selves from
every Brother that walks Disorderly.] Here is the second Branch of this
Order. Order in the Personal walkings of Christians, such as join themselves
to a Church.

Discipline, Church Discipline, Discipline.
taking the word in the latitude of it, the largest sense, as it comprehends
under it the Right-Ordering of all the affairs and businesses of the Church;
whether of Officers, for their Election, Ordination, etc. or Ordinances, as
viz. Word, Sacraments, Prayers, Censures, all which ought to be done (as the
Apostle has it) (...), Orderly, according to Order. So were the Services under
the Law done. The Service of the 2 Chronicles. ^9. 35. 1 Cor. 14 ^lt.
House of the Lord was set in Order, 2 Chronicles. 29. So ought all Services under
the Gospel to be done. Let all things be done decently and in Order.] Put
these together, and you have the full comprehension of this second General so
requisite in every Church- Order.

Now, (to wind up what I have raveled, and to return from whence I have made
this necessary digression.) In which of these two Chambers shall we find the
Errors and Imperfections in this Church of onrs, needing, and calling for
Reformation? Shall we find them in matters of Faith, in points of Doctrine, or
in Order?

The Church of England defective not in points of Faith.
Not in the former. So much I suppose is, or will be freely confessed and
acknowledged at all ingenuous and impartial hands. As for the great things of
the Gospel, matters of Faith or Doctrine, the first Reformers of our Church
had so happy a hand therein, that there is to be Zerubbabels Incourageme^t, by
T. G.
found little, if any hay or stubble therein; It is the free, public, and true
acknowledgement o^ one, no backfriend to Church-Reformation, in his Sermon
before the Honorable House of Commons, upon that Subject. Not in Faith, not in
Doctrine; Blessed be God for that* Wherein then? why in Order. There it must be
or no where. And here I dare not say, but that some things But, Order, viz.
may be found amiss, some Errors, some Defects, some Corruptions, and those
possible to be found in every corner of this Chamber, In every of those three
Branches which I particularized even now. In some of them they are more
palpable, (not more palpable then deplorable.) In the two former I think none
but will acknowledge foul errors, foul deformities.

Unity and Agreement. In Unity. Ioh. 17. 21.
Herein what disorder in the Church of God amongst us? The Church which should
be one, one in the Members of it, (I pray that they may be all one,) says our
Savior, speaking of all that are given to him to believe on him, to make
profession of his Name) One, in Head and Heart; Judgment and Affection, united
to Christ, and amongst themselves by those sacred bonds of Faith and Love,) how
is it divided, rent, torn? Christians, Members of the same mystical body, how
severed, and hat both in Judgment and Affection? The evidence is too clear
against us.

Regularity.
the Personal walkings of Christians, what Irregularitie? amongst those which
join themselves to the Church, or Churches of God amongst us, how many that
walk (...) Disorderly? neither Righteously, nor Soberly, nor Godly: persons
every ways Scandalous, in their practice, running counter to their
professions, shaming the Gospel of Christ, and the Church of God, as
ungracious Children do their Mother; as worthy to be severed and separated
from all Church society and communion, as ever was Leaper or unclean person to
be cast, or kept out of the Camp or Temple? A blot it must be acknowledged,
and a blot very readily hit, that we should have such and so many of these
Blots 2 Pet 2. 13. Jude 1^.
and Spots, (...) (as S. Peter and Jude calls them,) in our most sacred
Feasts, whether for want of Power to keep, or cast them out, or for want of
the due exercise of that power, I dispute it not. That it is so de Facto, it
must not, it cannot be denied. So as in this point it seems, that the Temple
of God amongst us is yet imperfect, having too great an outward Court of an
Ignorant and Profane multitude laid unto it. In both these, (as I said) the
evidence is too clear against us.

3. And I will not take upon me to clear and acquit Accuser, neither come I
Discipline.
hither to pick holes in the Churches coat, to pass a peremptory censure upon
what ever stands established by the Law, to which I am a Subject; Yet dare I
not say but even therein, in point of Discipline, (take the word largely) there
may be some things, and many things amiss; Some things Redundant and
Superfluous, fit to be pared off, and taken away; Some things deficient and
wanting, wherein the Church has not yet attained her full perfection. Neither
can it be thought any dishonor to those ever honored Worthies, the first
Reformers of this Church, that they should leave it in some particulars
imperfect. Strange and wonderful it is, that coming out of such darkness,
they should see so much as they did; that they should leave the Church so
perfect, which they found so imperfect, and that both for Faith and Order, in
both like that first Chao^, without form and void.

Of what nature these supposed imperfections are.

Not Fundamental*


But to do them right, and the Church no wrong; Enquire we yet a little
further; of what Nature and Quality are those Errors, those Imperfections
which we suppose to be ye^ left remaining? Are they Fundamentals, or no?
destructive to the Essence and being of a Church, or no? Not so. This also is,
(or I suppose will be) freely yielded and acknowledged at all Judicious hands.
In the first Reforming of this Church, T. G. Ibid.
God took care for all fundamental Ordinances of his worship, furnishing the
Church with what was necessary for the making, and building up of Saints, and
the bringing of his people to Heaven: Word, Sacraments, Prayer, those great
Ordinances of God, the very Basis of the Church, together with all the
substantials appertaining to them, were all settled and established at the
first. And I may add to them the substantials of Discipline also.

Wherein then lies the Error? why surely for the But for the most part
Circumstantiall.
most part in circumstantials. Such is Order to Ordinances, a Circumstance, an
Appurtenance. And herein probably there may be some, possibly many, and those
very considerable defects to be found amongst us. The House of God amongst us
may want some of her Vtensils and Ornaments; The Worship of God, though for
substantialls entire, yet may want some of her Appurtenances, and
Accoutrements. The Ordinances of God though for substance rightly dispensed and
administered, yet in the manner, and Order of their Administration, possibly
they may be found, some of them at the least, not so Regular and Orderly.

Now put these together, and see what it is that stands charged upon this
Church, as needing and calling for Reformation. Her Defects in point of Order.
Her Members, (first) are not so joynted and cemented together, as the Timbers
and Stones of the Temple ought to be. Many of them, (in the second place) in
their personal walkings do not answer their profession, being scandalous in
their lives and conversations. Her Ordinances, in the third place, some of them
defective in some Circumstances, wanting some Appurtenances, or else not so
Exact for the Order and manner of their Administration.

These Errors and Imperfections of great concernment.
Q. Why, but you may say, are these Errors and Defects, Tanti? are they of
such high concernement, as that the Reformation of them should be so earnestly
desired?

A. To this I must answer, and I shall do it freely; Of Concernement they are,
and that of great concernement: Though not of so great as some have taken them
to be, who have forsaken and abandoned the Church for them, renouncing,
nullifying it, as being no floor because of these remainders of chafe in it,
no Church because of these defects, these corruptions, Yet of greater, then
others happily conceive them. That will appear if we do but consider these
two things, 1. The Inconveniency of allowing or tolerating of these
corruptions. 2. The conveniencie of their Reformation.

For the former. Corruptions in a Church are like Moath^s in a Garment, if let
alone, they will be subject The Inconvenien^y of tolerating them.
to decay it. Many and great are the Inconveniences and hazzards, which the
Church of God amongst us, by reason of these acknowledged corruptions or
imperfections at the present lies under.

1. The want of unity and agreement, what an Eyesore? Nay what a Heart-sore.
For the Divisions of Reuben Judge. 5. 15, 16.
were great thoughts of heart.] To see the seamelesse Coat of Christ, nay his
Body rent and torn in p^eces; Col. 1. 24.
Christians, members of the same mystical body, so divided in head and heart,
in judgment and affection; a sad spectacle, and as sad a presage. Unity, as it
is the Beauty, so is it the strength of a Church. No one thing either deformes
or weakens it more then division.

2. To have the outward Court of the Temple so wide, as that it should admit
and receive all comers; what a disproportion? To have all sorts of persons,
Persons openly profane and scandalous, received into and retained in the bosom
of the Church, admitted to Church society and Communion, even communion in
those sacred mysteries, the Seals of the Covenant, what a sca^dall? What a
Hazard? Hereat and hereby some are offended, others hardened, the Church
endangered. Endangered and that both in respect of guilt and infection. Both
these ways that of the Apostle carries a truth with it: [A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lumpe] leaven, corrupt 1 Cor. 5. 6.
and scandalous sinners, not purged out, but allowed or connived at in a Church,
it leaveneth the whole lump; lays the whole Church under a guilt, where the
Church is Accessory to that Toleration; besides the danger of souring,
leavening, infecting others, possibly the whole Church, probably some of the
members of it: both ways the Church is damnified or endangered.

Order in dispencing the Ordinances of God, or managing the affairs and
businesses of the Church, it is a thing of dangerous consequence; I, though the
substance be right. David in 1 Chronicles. 13.
bringing the Arc from Kiriath-Jearim to Jerusalem from a private house, the
house of Abinadab, to its own place, the Tabernacle, which he had prepared for
it, ver. 10.
for the substance of the duty he was right in it, yet mistaking in the Order,
laying the Arc upon a Cart which should have been carried upon the Priests and
Levites shoulders, God made a Breach amongst them for 1 Chro. 15. 13
it. The Lord our God (says he) made a breach amongst us, for that we sought
him not after the due order.] Not observing the order instituted and appointed
by God in his Law. Of such dangerous consequence may some failings in point of
order be. Were there nothing else, this alone may provoke God against a people
to cause him to break in upon them, to make a Breach amongst them. Great
Inconvenience in allowing, tolerating of these corruptions.

convenience in their Reformation. The Convenience of their Reformation.
To have all the stones gathered out of the Lords vineyard, to have all
stumbling blocks and scandals, all grounds and causes, and (as much as may be)
occasions of division removed, and taken out of the way, whereby the hearts of
Gods people may come to be cemented and united together. To have the Court of
the Temple reduced to it is due scantling and proportion, made neither too wide,
nor too strait (there may be an error on both hands.) To have the House of God
clean swept and garnished, purged from all corruptions, furnished with all
requisite Implements and Ornaments, not only her 1 King. 7, 48, 49, 50.
Altar, Table, Candlestick, but also her Tongs and her Snuffers, etc. and
those all of pure gold. To have her Officers and Ordinances all reduced to
native, primitive purity and simplicity. To have this Vineyard amongst us not
only planted with choice vines, but to have a hedge set Isa. 5. 1, 2.
about it (a hedge of Discipline about the Ordinances) to have a Tower and a
Wine Press, and all other requisites in it. How would this ad both to the
beauty and safety of the Church, to the Power and Glory of the Ordinances, to
the joy, comfort and growth of all the Members of the mystical Body. Let them
not then be blamed who seek and seek earnestly for the purging of this
floor, the Reformation of this Church in the forenamed particulars.

Quest. 2. W^a^ shall private Christians do ^o further this work.
But what then shall we do, for the compassing or furthering of this
Reformation? Here falls in the second Question: For Answer to which take some
directions; one for the present (for I see I shall not be able to compass what
I intended.)

Direct. 1. ^e thankful for mercies enjoyed.
In the first place. Be we thankful for what we have. A useful, a needful
direction. No means more effectual to obtain what we want and would have,
then thankefully to acknowledge what we have already received. This do we in
the behalf of the Church of God amongst us, not lessening, not undervaluing,
much less over-looking and forgetting the great things which our God has
already done for us. This do some (I fear too many amongst us) whose eyes are
all upon the Churches blackness (they are evil eyes which are so, a thing
which the Church charge the Daughters of Jerusalem (her friends) not to do.
Look not upon me Cant. 1. 6.
because I am black, Cant. 1.) her blemishes, her spots, her defects, her
corruptions, and in beholding of these they are Eagle-eyed, but in the mean
time as for her comeliness; her beauty, her graces, her blessings, these they
either over-looke, or else look overly and coyly upon them, as if they were
not worth the looking on. The Story tells us of the Israelites, that when they
first saw that Bread, which God rained down from Heaven Exodus 16. 15.
for them; They said one to another (says the Text) it is Mannah; or (as the
Septuagint and Montanus with others, render it, according to the Original)
(...)
Man-Hua, Quid hoc? What is this? And is not this the language of some amongst
us at this day, touching that Bread of life, which God daily raineth from
Heaven for the feeding the souls of his people? These sacred Ordinances of
his* his Word and Sacraments, Man-Hua, Quid hoc? What are th^se? Ordinances
indeed, but they cannot have them in the way of an Ordinance (as they say)
dispensed in a due Order, after such a manner as they would have, and therefore
nothing worth: especially wanting some other Ordinances to attend and accompany
them. A dangerous surfeit (my Brethren.) Such was that of the Israelites, which
they took of their Mannah: We can see nothing (say they) but this Numb. 11. 6.
Mannah, this, we know not what. Why, what would they have? some other dish
besides. They would have ver. 4.
flesh to their Mannah. Who shall give us flesh to e^^?] And without this,
their Mannah was nothing worth, they were weary of it. A dangerous surfeit; so
that proved to them. God heard their prayers, gave them their desires, sent
them in another dish, a second*course dish* and that a dainty one, (Quails)
but they had better have been without it. I pray God the like Maladi^
Inordinate lusting, though after things in their own nature very desirable of
dangerous consequence. ver. 33.
amongst us, do not meet with a like Remedy; the like sin (I mean our
inordinate lusting, understand i^ rightly) do not meet with a like punishment.
Certainly this surfeiting of our Mannah (a disease which begins to grow too
epidemicall) it can presage no good. For this cause it was, that the Carkases
of so many of the Israelites fell in the wilderness; In Memorial whereof,
they called the place where those Carkases were buried, Kibroth*Hattaavah,
Sepulchra concupisce^^iae, The gr^^es of lust. For (says the Text) there they
buried the people ver. 34.
which fell a lusting: I will not, I dare not say, that for this cause so many
Carkases are full^^ amongst us in this Kingdom at this day; I dare not write
Kibroth*Hattaavah upon the Sepulchers of any that have yet ^^llen in this
unhappy quarrel, the ground whereof is said to be, not Reformation, but
Selfe*preservation, not the obtaining of what we never yet had, but the
retaining of what God and the Law have invested us in, and possessed us of: But
this I dare say, and this I must say, that the inordinate lusting of some
amongst us, though after things in themselves very desirable; their inordinate
lusting I say, when they shall so lust after what they want, and would have, as
that in the mean time they slight, if not forget, what ever they already
have, as little or nothing worth, this may, nay it cannot but provoke the God
of Heaven against them, and it may be, for their sakes against the Nation,
causing him to withold from it, that good which otherwise he intended toward
it. Herein let me use a ministerial (...), an awefull ^oldnesse: Give me leave
to discharge my thoughts freely. My fears are (I wish they may prove Pannick
and groundless fears) that this one sin of unthankefullnesse (the
commonnesse whereof I fear, begins to take away the sense of it) in
^leighting* undervaluing, if not over-looking and forgetting the spiritual
mercies which we have, will do more in putting from us, then all our Prayers
can in pulling to us, the mercies which we would have.

What great things God has done* for the Church already.

Ps. 80. 8. Isa 5. 1.


What? ^s all that God has hitherto done for us nothing, or as good as
nothing? That he has brought his Church amongst us, as a Vine out of Egypt
(give me leave to go along with the Psalmist, running descant upon his words,
Psalm. 80. enterlacing there with some passages of the Prophet Isaies, Isa. 5.)
A vine out of Egypt (that Romish Egypt.) Casting out the Heathen (those
Romish Idolaters) and planting it, I, planting it in a very fruitful Hill (a
place plentiful and abundant.) Psalm. 8. ^. ver 9.
That he has made room for it (inclining and enlarging the hearts of Princes
and People to the receiving and embracing of the Gospel, causing it to take
root (to be established by a law) in so much as it filled the ver. 10.
land, and the hills were covered with the shadow thereof (it became a National
Church) making the boughs thereof like the Cedars of God, the goodly Cedars
(the Members thereof many of them Saints, and that glorious ones in their
personal walkings. Thus planting it, that he Isa. 5. 2.
should fence it, making a hedge, a wall about it (fencing it by his own
gracious providence and protection.) Psalm. 80. 13.
Not suffering the wild Boar out of the wood to waste it, nor the wild beast
of the field to devour it (enemies fierce and potent to prevail against it,
though often assailing it.) Thus planting, thus fencing it, that he should
build a Isa. 5. 2.
Tower, and a wine press in it, (furnish it with all necessaries for the
Churches subsistence, and his peoples salvation,) What is all this nothing, or
as good as nothing? and all because there are as yet some stones in this
Vineyard left ungathered out; or because there wants a Pruning-knife for the
pruning and taking off of superfluous Branches, or some other Instruments or
Implements of like nature, commodious and useful for the Culture, and dressing
of this noble Vine? What has God not only laid the foundation of his House
amongst us, but raised up the walls thereof to such a conspicuous and envied
height? And not only so, but furnished it with such store of necessary
Temple-furniture, placing his Arc amongst us, (which alone makes a Temple
where ever it rests, as the Kings personal Acts 7. 38.
residence does the Court) giving to us those (...), (as S. Stephen calls
them) those living, lively Oracles of his Law and Gospel: Speaking to us so
plainly, so familiarly, so powerfully, as never to any Church, any Nation under
Heaven more: In so much as we Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
may herein say as Moses once of his Israel, What Nation is there, (or has
there been) to which God has come so nigh as he has done to us? He has
placed his Arc amongst us, the Glory of a Church, the glory of Romans 9. 4.
a Nation. To whom pertained the glory, says Paul* speaking of the Arc.
Besides this he has furnished this House of his with those necessary pieces,
an Altar, a Laver, a Table; an Altar for Sacrifice, a Laver for Washing, a
Table for Shewbread, not unaptly representing to us those great Ordinances of
God, Prayer, and the Sacraments; Prayer offered up upon that Golden Altar, in
and only in the Name and mediation of Jesus Christ. Sacraments; Baptism, that
(...) Tit 3. 5.
(as S. Paul calls it,) the Laver of Regeneration; The Lords Supper, sh^wing
and setting forth unto us that true Shewbread, that Bread which came down
from Heaven, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. All these we have, and I think
it will be acknowledged at all hands, that we have them for substance rightly
dispensed and administered. And is all this nothing, ^or as good as nothing, and
all for want of some other useful utensiles; Suppose a Beesome, a Shovel,
Exodus 27. 3. ^ King. 7. 40, ^0.
a pair of Snuffers, (Temple furniture too.) A Beesome to sweep the Floor, a
Shovel to cast out the Dust, or Ashes; Snuffers to top the Lights, to make
them burn the cleare^* all excellently shadowing out that useful Ordinance of
Christ, the Censures of the Church rightly dispensed; And what? for want of
these, all nothing? What has Jesus Christ brought his Fan into this Floor,
purging out so much Chafe and Dr^sse of Antichristian Idolatry and
Superstition, wherewith the face thereof was so wholly overspread and covered?
fanning and dressing up so much Corn here? giving such liberty and efficacy to
the Fa^^e of his Word amongst us? and is all this nothing, or as good as
nothing? and that because of some remainders of Chafe in this Floor, or for
want of a Wing to back and second the Fan? Oh (my Brethren) what unparalleld
ingratitude is this? How should it be but that such unthankfullnesse Our
unthankfulness for Mercies received a da^gerou^ presage.
should even cause repentings in Heaven? moove God to repent, if not of what he
has done, yet of what he may have intended to do. Surely, so would it work
with us; to see all our former kindnesses sleigh^ed and forgotten, as nothing
wo^^h, and all, because they are not seconded with a continued succession of
new favors; Would it not make us at the least stay our hands for the future?
Let our own hearts herein tell us, what we may expect and look for from that
God, who is in this kind every day so highly provoked. Which that we may
prevent, withal, procuring further Grace and Favor from him toward this
endeared Church of his, for the perfecting of the great and good work which he
has begun in it, and the completing of it with what ever Ordinance or Ornament
it yet wants; learn we to set a higher price upon what already we have.
Learn we to cry Grace, Grace, to every stone in this Building; Not to the
Top-stone Zach. 4 7.
only; As it is said of Zerubbabel, Zach. 4. He shall bring forth the Top-stone
(o^ Head-stone) thereof with shoutings, crying Grace, Grace unto it.] Thus
happily many amongst us would be ready to do, could they see the Head-stone,
the Top-stone brought forth, the Finiall of the House, the Pin cl^ of the
Temple set up, the work of Reformation perfected, this they would entertain
with joyous Acclamations and shoutings, crying Grace, Grace to it; But in the
mean time, as for that which God has already done, their Grace, Grace,
engraven upon every stone in this Building.
hearts are not affected with it as they ought to be; As if Grace, Grace, were
not engraven as well upon the Foundation-stones as upon the Top stone. Whilst
we rea^e it in the one, d^e not over-looke it in the other. Give we unto God
the Glory of his abundant Grace in laying the Foundation-stones of so glo^i^^s
a Church amongst us, which, should our eyes never see more, yet deserves a
thankful gratulation from our hearts and tongues. So were the people of the
Jews affected, when they saw but the foundation of the Temple laid. Ezra 3.
11.
All the people shouted with a great shout, (says the Text) praising the Lord,
because the foundation of the House of the Lord was laid, Ezra 3. And surely
this did our Fore*fathers, when they did but see the dawning of that light
which is now brok^ forth amongst us so gloriously, when they saw but the
beginning of this Reformation. Let not us their children despise that day, as a
day of small things. Had it been so, yet were it not to be despised. [Who has
despised the day of small things?] Z^ch. 4. 10.
but such is not this Day, the Day of the Gospel, the Day of salvation brought
unto this Church, this Nation, by that first Reformation. A day not o^ small,
but of great and glorious things; So look we upon it, so account, so
acknowledge it; Give we unto God the Glory of his first Grace, this will be the
most e^^ectuall means to obtain a second Grace. Would we obtain what yet we
want, learn to be thankful for what we have. Thus I have only broke the
Bulk of these Directions; Time takes me off, I must shut down the hatches for
the present; That which remains I shall put over to the next occasion.

THE FOVRTH SERMON, May 10. 1643*
MATTHEW. 3. 12. And he will thoroughly purge his Floor.]

Christ's Floor is his Church, his Church visible. This Floor he will purge;
this Church he will Reform, and that thoroughly. This work we trust he is
about at this day, as in other of his Churches, so in this, whereof we are
members. Taking this to be his Design, Do we what we may every of us for the
furthering of it. That is the Exhortation which I insisted upon the last day,
but was enforced then to leave imperfect.

Use.
Do what we may; But what shall we do? In answer to this great and useful
question. I have begun to lay you down some Directions. One I then gave you,
and but one, which might serve as a preparative and introduction to the rest.
Be we thankful for what God has already done for us; thankfully
acknowledging the Graces and blessings already conferred upon this Church. Not
to take notice of the Graces of God in a man's self, not to acknowledge them in
others, is a fault, a sin: much more in a Church, and that such a Church,
wherein the graces of God are so conspicuous. But I spare to press what then I
insisted on. Only, before I leave this Direction, give me leave to subjoyne a
Caution to A Caution.
it. I would be loath (if it might be) to give either Offense, or Advantage. Be
we thankful for what we have, but not so as to sit down, and rest contented,
as if we were already complete and perfect. Not as though I had Do not think^
our selves perfect.

Phil. 3. 12.


already attained, or were already perfect, (says Paul of himself,) Phil. 3.]
So should Christians look upon themselves; so taking notice of the graces of
God in themselves, as that withal they should take notice of their wants and
imperfections. And so look we upon the Church of God amongst us, as a Church,
I a glorious Church, but not absolute, not perfect. To say or think of this
Church that she wants nothing, were to make her too like to that Beggarly
La^dicea* (as some have already done.) Thou say I am Rich, and have need of
nothing, Rev. 3.] Never was there Church yet so Rich, that could say so Rev. 3.
17.
in truth. Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatird, famous Churches in their times, yet the
Spirit has a Charge against every of them. (...). I have something against
thee; I have a few things against thee.] Philadelphia Rev. 2. 4. 14, 20
though not charged with any downright Corruption, yet was she not free from her
Imperfection, Thou have a little strength, Rev. 3.] Now a little strength
implies Rev. 3. 8.
a great deal of weakness. What Church ever yet was, or ever will be free?
The through purging of this Floor (as I told you) is reserved for hereafter.
Here indeed there are degrees of Church perfection* but they are all
Comparative, none Positive, none Superlative, none Absolute. Church perfection
here, is but comparative.
In the greatest perfection here, still there will be an allay and mixture of
Imperfection. To think otherwise of this Church, were too great weakness; to
speak otherwise of it, were too open flattery. To attribute so much to the
wisdom of those first Reformers, as that they should leave the Church every
ways perfect, is an honor, which if they were se^sible Rev. 22. 8.
of, they would never own, no more then the Angel would the divine honor,
which S. John would have given to him by falling down to worship him. That
privilege was Apostolical, and it dyed with them, Gal. 2. ^.
not to be capable of Addition, To have nothing added to them.] So perfect was
their Doctrine, their Counsels. Not so the Counsels of others, specially where
the Word has left things more dubious and dark, not so clear and evident,
(as in the Case of Church Order it seems to be.) Dream we not then of a
present perfection, but taking that for granted, which cannot be denied, that
there are Defects and Imperfections amongst us; let us not sit down as
satisfied and contented under them, but do what we may for the hea^ing*
reforming of them. Though we may not forget those Phil 3. 13.
things which are behind, (as Paul says he did his own labors, and sufferings
for Christ, viz. in respect of any resting upon them* or glorying in them.) Yet
reach we forth (both our Hearts and Hands) to that which is before.] This
Caution being interposed now let the maine question run on. What shall we do?

Direct. 2. Mourn over Imperfections.
I answer (in the second place) taking notice of the Churches whether
Imperfections, or Corruptions, lay them to heart, mourn over them, over
Corruptions. So did the Lords faithful ones over the personal corruptions
Ezekiel. 9* 4.
which they saw in Hi^rusalem, they mourned over them, Ezekiel. 9. So did our
blessed Savior over both Personal, and Church-Corruptions, in that City, Luke
19. 41.
When he behold the City, he wept over it, over Imperfections. So did the
Chief of the Fathers, the Ancient men amongst the Jews, which had seen the
first House, the first Temple, and the Glory of it; when they saw Ezra. 3 12.
the Foundation of the second House, they wept ^ver i^. viz. over the defect and
imperfection which they saw in it, because it came so f^r short of the former.
Others at the same time shouted aloud for joy, they w^p^ and there was ground
for both; of Joy, in that the Foundation was laid; of Sorrow, in that it came
so far short of the Pattern. Even with such a mixed Affection should we at
this day look upon the present state of the Church of God amongst us. Joying
over the Foundations which are laid, yet Mourning over the defects and
imperfections. Thus be we affected with what upon good grounds we apprehend to
be amiss, that so our Hearts may work toward a Reformation.

Direct. 3. Begin the work of Reformation at home.
Which that we may promote and further, Begin it at Home. Take that as a third
Direction, and a maine one. Would we have the Churches floor purged, let every
one of us purge his own floor. For every man to sweep before his own Door,
is the next way to make the street clean. For every one to purge his own
floor, is the next way to have the Churches floor purged. Home-Reformation is
the first step, and a good step to Church-Reformation. Here begin we the work,
every one at home: Being (as it most nearely concerns us) most solicitous
about this work, Home-Reformation, the Reforming of our selves, and those
belonging to us; It is our Saviors speech to those good women, which lamented
and bewailed him going to his Passion. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for Luke 23. 28.
your selves, and for your children. Hear we the Church of England speaking in
a like language to her Daughters; Daughters* of England, Reform not me, but
Reform your selves and your children. Not but that private Christians may have
an eye to public Reformation, (So might those women do what they did, Mourn
and lament for their Lord and Master,) but the maine business which they
should be most intent about, is Home-Reformation. Weep not for me, but for
your selves, and for your children: that is, rather for your selves, and them,
then for me? (as you heard it not long since rightly expounded.) So, Reform
not me, but your selves, and your children; Let your thoughts be more taken up
with Home-Reformation; then Church-Reformation. A point not unseasonable for
the times; wherein it is to be feared, least thoughts and speeches concerning
the public affairs of Church and State, being so frequent every where, should
divert, and take of our hearts from some businesses, (I will not say of
greater, but) of nearer concernement. Would we have this great work prosper,
begin we it at the right end. Begin we Reforming our selves.

2 Timothy 2. 21.


the work of Reformation at Home. Every of ^s first beginning with our selves.
This is S. Paul's method, 2* Tim. 2. 21. where having spoken of that mixture,
which is, or may be found in the visible Church, that House, wherein there are
vessels of Gold and Silver, and ver. 22.
Wood and Earth; He presently subjoynes, If any man purge himself, etc.]
Intimating, that this should be every man's chief care; not so much the purging
of the Church, as the purging of himself. Here begin Iam. 4 8.
we at our own hearts and hands, purging both. Purge your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye doubleminded, James 4. What ever chafe we find in
these floores (as some we shall find) purge it out. What ever we find here
amiss, in our hearts or lives, set upon the Reformation of it.

Our Fanilies.
Next to our own hearts and lives, purge we our Families. I speak it to those
whom God has made Governors of Families, Parents, Masters. Families, they
are, or ought to be, as so many Churches; (The Church Philem 2*
that is in thine House, says Paul to Philemon:) Every one a floor; and in
these floores God has appointed the Governors to be the f^nners; Let them see
to the through*purging, reforming of them. So Genesis 17. last.
did Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, Genesis 17. He Circumciseth himself
first, and all that were in his house. So did Joshua, going about to reform
the people, he begins at home, resolves upon a Reformation of his own Josh.
24. 15.
House, I and my House will serve the Lord. So did David, resolving upon a
National Reformation, a through purging of the floor of his Kingdom^, J will
early Psalm. 101. 7.
destroy all the wicked of the Land; he begins first with his own House,
resolving, that what ever scandalous person there was in his Court, he would
either reform him or cashiere him. He that works deceit, shall not ver. 8.
dwell in my house; he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Like
course take we. For the bringing on of public, begin with a private
Reformation. Purging our own Floores first. It is the Churches complaint
against Cant. 1. 6.
the sons of her Mother, Cant. 1. 6. That they had made her a keeper of other
vineyards, but her own vineyard she had not kept. Her natural corruption,
which was bred and born with her (as Junius interprets the place) that made her
very solicitous about things, which belonged not to her office and calling,
whilst in the mean time she neglected her duty in things of nearer
concernement, things which concerned her self. This will the corruption of our
nature do, (if not looked to) it will make us so busy, and pragmaticall about
the Reforming of others, the Persons of others, the callings of others (a thing
which comes not within the verge and compass of our callings to do) as that
in the mean time we shall neglect our own hearts, lives, families* which as
they most nearly concern us, so we should be most solicitous about. First,
Purging our own floors. Which having done; then, as for the purging of the
Churches floor, Earnestly pray for it; Quietly wait for it; humbly submit to
it. Three Directions more, wherein (as I take it) lies the maine of the private
Christians duty, which is the mark that I aim at. Touch upon each, as briefly
as I may.

Direct. 4. Seek Reformation by prayer and supplications.
In the fourth place then, Earnestly pray for this Reformation. This private
Christians may do, ought to do; Help the Fan of Jesus Christ with the wind
of their prayers, Contributing their Requests and Supplications to this good
work. Supplications, and that both to God and man.

God in the first place. In every thing (says To God. Phil. 4. 6.
Paul) let your Requests be made known unto God. How? By prayer and
supplications with thankesgiving. Let it be so here. As many of us as desire a
through-Reformation of what is amiss amongst us, let us make our Requests
known unto God by daily and earnest Prayers and Supplications, but with
Thankesgiving. Let not that be forgotten. Blessing God for what he has already
done in purging this Floor of his, beg it from him that he would go on to
perfect the work. To that end raising, and stirring up meet instruments for
the effecting of it. It is our Saviors direction to his Disciples, Mat. Mat 9
last.
9. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth ((...), thrust
forth) faithful laborers into his harvest. This do we in this case, pray we
the Lord and Owner of this Floor, that he would send forth, thrust forth
faithful Fanners into this his Floor. Faithful fanners, Jer. 15. 9.
such as may put a true and precise difference betwixt the precious and the
vile, the Chafe and the wheat; not casting out any of the one, not retaining
any of the other; In which two things (as in opening of the clause foregoing I
showed you) consists the fidelity of a Fanner. Faithful Fanners, such as may
do the Jer. 48. 10.
work of the Lord, not negligently, not deceitfully, but with all their might,
all their strength, every ways approving themselves to their Lord and Master
in doing his work according to his own mind and will. Such Fanners beg we
from the Owner of this Floor. Withal imploring his direction, his assistance
for them, that he would both guide, and bless the Fan in their hands, making
their endeavors effectual for the through purging of this Floor of his.

To Men.
men, those into whose hands Jesus Christ, either has or shall put this Fan
of his; These I mean* to whom he has committed a lawful Power and Authority,
(whether supreme (viz. under himself) or subordinate) over this Floor, this
Church of his, for the ordering of it. Beg we it from them that they would set
the Fan a work, using all lawful, warrantable ways and means, both for the
discovering and casting out of what ever remainders of Chafe there are to be
found in this Floor. Thus earnestly pray we for this Reformation. Which doing,
then

Direct. 5. Quietly wait for it.

Lam. 3. 2^.


In the next place, Quietly wait for it. A good thing so to do in all straits
and difficulties. It is good (says the Church) that a man should both hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. This do we in this case, a case
wherein the work happily may meet with some unexpected difficulties, sticking
in the birth (as now a long time it has done) not coming off, either so
easily or speedily, as it may be we made account of; in this case let us wait
and quietly wait: waiting for the Law of our God, as the Prophet Isaiah says
the Isles (the Isa. 4^. 4.
Gentiles) should do. The Isles shall wait for his law, Isa. 4^. i. e. for the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ. This let us of this Island do. Christ being now (as
we hope) about that great work, which the Prophet there speaks of, in the
words immediately foregoing, setting Judgment ver. 4.
in the Earth, that is (as the Geneva note glosseth upon it) setting all things
in good order in his Church (for such is Christ's way sometimes to bring Order
out of confusion) O^let us now wait for his law, even for what ever it is that
he shall reveal unto us out of his word to be according to his will, for the
ordering and regul^ting of this Church of his. This wait we for, and quietly
wait for it. Quietly, not Precipitating; Quietly, not Anticipating the work.

1. Not Precipitating, not overhastening of it. Over^asty births are seldom
long lived, never perfect. Be we Not precipitating it.

Gen* 18. 10, 14


con^ent (as ^^turall mothers are) to tarry the time, the appointed (...) for
this Birth, which we hope the Church (...) in her womb; God^ (...) (I mean)
who a^ ^e (...) (...) down a time, a season for all other Eccl. 3. 1.
things, a time for every purpose under the Sun, times for us to observe; So
he has set down a time, a time with himself for the effecting of this work.
The Apostle writing to his Hebrews, he tells them of a (...), Heb* 9. 10.
a time of Reformation, a period until which those (...) (as he there calls
them) those carnal, legal ordinances and Constitutions were to continue.
Surely, as that first, so all successive Reformations under the Gospel, they
have all of them their times, their periods set down, and appointed by God. Be
we contented Isa. 28. 16.
to tarry that time, not making haste. He that believes will not make haste, so
make haste, as to use any unlawful or unwarrantable ways and means for the
compassing of his desires and hopes. So indeed did Jacob Genesis 27.
make haste, thinking to go the next way to get the blessing, but he had better
have gone further about, and have tarried Gods time for it. Take heed of
Precipitating the work.

2. And (in the second place) take heed of Anticipating Not Anticipating it by
taking the Fan out of the hand of Christ himself.
it, viz. by taking the Fan out of the hand of Christ himself, or out of
their hands into which he has put it.

1. Out of the hand of Christ himself. This did th^se frantic Germane
Anabaptists of the last age attempt to do. Impatient to tarry Christ's leisure
for the through purging of his Floor, they would set upon the work, to purge,
not the Church only, but the world. And how would they do it? Not by the Word,
but by the Sword; therewith attempting (for that was their professed design)
to cut off and destroy all the wicked from off the Earth. Here, if I listed to
enter the Listes with madmen, I should not need to go out of the Text for
weapons. He has his Fan in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
Floor. The through purging of the Church (much more of the world) is Christ's
own work, and a work* which he will do; but when? Not here, but hereafter.
In the mean time our Rule is, and theirs should have been; that direction of
the Mat. 13. ^9, 30.
Husbandmans to his servants touching the Wheat and the Tares, Let them both
grow together until the harvest, least whilst ye pluck up the Tares, ye root
out also the wheat with them. But I forbear to press this, ^oping that there
is none here present, or belonging to this place, touched with this frenzy.

His Officers, which are
2. Beware of taking the Fan out of the hand of Jesus Christ, or else out of
their hands into which he has put it. There is a twofold Government that
Jesus Christ exercises upon earth. The one inward and invisible, viz. in the
hearts of men; the other outward and visible in his Church. Now the former of
these he exercises immediately, by his Spirit; the latter mediately, by
Instruments, by men. And thus he purges his Church here, not immediately, but
mediately: (even as the Husbandman does his Floor, which he purges, not by
himself, but by his servants, into whose hands he puts the Fan) delegating
and appointing some in every Church to be the ordinary instruments of public
Reformation.

Who these are I have glaunced at already; take it now a little more fully and
distinctly. They must be public persons. Public works call for public
Instruments. Public persons are of two sorts, Civil, Ecclesiastical,
Magistrates, Ministers.
Magistrates, Ministers; And upon their shoulders in an ordinary way, does this
work lie. So it was in the building, re-building of the Temple. The Ezr. 3. 2.
chief undertakers in that work, were Zerub^abel and Jeshua; Zerub^abel the
chiefe-Prince with the Elders, the chief of the people, as you have it
explained, Ezr. Cap. 3. 2. Cap. 5. 2.
6. 14. Jeshua the chief-Priest with his Brethren, the other Priests and Levites
and Prophets; all joining hands in the work. The Prophets exciting and
encouraging the Elders, Ezr. 6. 14. The Elders builded, and they prospered Cap.
6. 14.
through the Prophecy of Haggai and Zachariah. The Elders appointing, and the
Priests directing the Levites to set forward the work of the house. Thus was
the Cap. 6. 14. Cap 3. 8, 9.
Temple builded; and by the same hands ought it to be purged. So was it in the
days of Hezekiah, Josiah, both which intending a restoring of Religion then
decayed and corrupted, they summon the Priests and the Levites, and set them a
work to purge and sanctify the 2 Chro. 29. 4, 5
house of the Lord. So you have it, 2 Chronicles. 29. Hezekiah brought in the
Priests and the Levites, etc. And said unto them; Hear me ye Levites, and
sanctify the house of the Lord God of your Fathers, and carry forth the
fil^hines out of the holy place. Josiah the like. He commanded Hilkiah the
high* Priest, and the other Priests to bring forth out of the Temple of the
Lord all the vessels that were made for The Fan taken out of their hands by
Baal, etc. 2 King. 23. 4. See here by whom it is that the House of God, the
Temple is to be purged, viz. Magistrates, Ministers. Into their hands has
Christ put this Fan, having (in an ordinary way) committed the Power and
Authority of Church-Reformation unto them. Beware then how we take the Fan
out of their hands. Which may be done two ways, by rash censuring, by
unwarrantable reforming. Take we heed of each.

rash and unadvised censuring, passing rash and Rash censuring.
harsh, and peremptory censures upon things dubious and doubtful. Surely, such
(at least) are some of the supposed Imperfections and Corruptions in this
Church; not yet fully cleared up to be such. Certainly it must not (I think it
will not) be denied, but that the lightest and uppermost of the Chafe was
fanned out in the first-Reformation; that which yet* remains being most of it
not so discernable to every eye. Thence are those differences in judgment
amongst us, betwixt men both pious and learned, judicious and con^eien^ious. In
this case then the duty of private Christians is, rather modestly to suspend
their censures, then by a peremptory passing and venting of them, to wound the
reputations of those who (happily upon as good; or better grounds) are
otherwise minded then themselves. Leaving things in question, and putting them
over to a due discussion and Trial; not condemning them before they Ioh. 7. 51.
be heard, which (as Nicodemus says) is against the Law; the Law of God,
Nature, Nations: Not taking the Fan, the Power of censuring and sentencing
out of their hands, whom God has betrusted it with. Under the Law you know who
it was, that was to give sentence in a case of suspicious leprosy: viz. Aaron
and his sons. This was the Priests office to do, as Lev* 13. Aynsvvorth Ann.
Lev. 13 3.
you may see it set forth at large, Levit. 13. Not but that all others might
look on the sore (as the Hebrew Doctors tell us) and judge of it too in a
private way, according as they thought; but to pronounce the person clean or
unclean, that belonged to the Priests office, Deuteronomy. 21. ^.
as most other controversies of like nature did. By their word shall every
controversy be tried; so you have it, Deuteronomy. 21. 5. tried and determined by
their word, that Eze. 44 23, 24.
is, Gods word in their mouth, So the Prophet Ezekiell explaines it, Ezekiel. 44.
where speaking of the Priests and their office in discerning and judging
betwixt the clean and unclean, etc. he shows by what Rule they should
proceed in deciding and determining cases of ver. 24.
that nature. In controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall
judge it according to my judgments. Mark it. This was that which they were to
do: Judge of things, not according to their own, but Gods judgments, not
according to their fancies or wills, opinions or affections, but according to
the Rules and directions Act. 23. 3.
in the word. Even as the Judge sits to judge according to the Law; declaring
not his own mind. but the mind of the Law. Such was the judgment of the
Priest in those cases* not authoritative, but declarative. They shall show thee
the sentence of judgment, Deuteronomy. 17. Deuteronomy. 17. 9. ver. 11.
9. show it, viz. according to the sentence of the law, which they shall teach
thee: So you have it explained, ver. 11. of that Chapter. In cases of like
nature under the Gospel, I mean in points of controversy in or about the
Religion of God (for in other cases we agree to that of Luke 12. 14. Mal. ^7.
our ^aviour, Who made me a Judge?) surely here the law should be required at
the Priests mouth: viz. the law of God, according to which they are to give
sentence in points dubious, and controversall, in or about his worship and
service. Let none take the Fan out of their hands, their mouths, by rash and
unadvised censuring.

Unwarrantable Reforming*
Nor yet (in the second place) by preposterous and unwarrantable Reforming. Such
I call that which is undertaken by private hands without public warrant. An
unwarrantable undertaking. A ruled case, Private persons in an ordinary way,
may not attempt or undertake the work of public Reformation, the reforming of
what they apprehend to be amiss, whether in Church or State; no, though the
errors, corruptions and miscarriages therein were never so palpable. When our
blessed Savior under-tooke that work of purging the Temple, the Jews looking
upon him as a private person (for they knew no other) they demand of him what
Ioh. 2. 18.
sign he could show for what he did. What sign show thou unto us, seeing
thou do these things? This they did Calv. ad. lo^um
(says Mr. Calvin) not without some ground and reason; in as much as it is
neither meet, nor lawful for private persons, every one, or any one, if he see
ought amiss in the house of God, presently to set upon the reforming of it.
Damnare quidem corruptelas omnibus liberumest. Corruptions (where they are
apparently such) every one may (in a private way) condemn them, but not
execute them. This is a work appropriated to those which have authority to do
it. We read of diverse Reformations in Scripture, but still we shall find
them acted by public hands. The golden Exodus 32 20.
Calfe was burnt and ground to powder, Exodus 32. The Brazen Serpent (that
famous relic) being abused to ^ Kin. 18. 4.
Idolatry was broken in pieces, 2 King. 18. The Grove sculptile luci, that Image
of the Grove set up by Manasses 2 King. 23. 6.
in the Temple, 2 King. 21. 7.) with other I dola^rous implements, they were
broke, and burnt, and stamped to powder, 2 King. 23. But by whom was this done?
by Moses, Hezekiah, Josiah. As for private In public^ administratione fas non
est quicquid mutare sine certa vocatione ac mandato Dei. Calv. in Ioh. 2. 18.
Si ad corruptelas tollendas privatus homo manum admovet, temeritatis arguetu^.
Ibid.
persons, if they will attempt works of this nature, they must either show a
sign, a special warrant from God for what they do, or else they cannot be
excused from unwarrantable rashness. So that great Master of Reformation there
censures it. I beseech you let this be taken notice of, which I press and
inculcate the rather, because I apprehend that there is no one thing, that will
prove more disadvantagious and prejudicial to that which is so much desired,
a public and happy Reformation, then this preposterous and inordinate zeal,
in snatching the Fan or Whip out of the hand of Christ; which in some sense
they may be said to do, who take it out of the hands of his Servants, his
Officers, those to whom in an ordinary way he has committed the authority and
charge of purging his Floor, his Temple, Reforming his Church. Here is the
fifth Direction.

Direct. 6. Humbly submit to it.
A sixth and last is yet behind. Earnestly praying, quietly waiting for this
Reformation, then (if ever God give us to see it,) humbly submit to it. I,
though it should not be every way according to our own minds, agreeable to the
model which we have molded and framed to our selves. So did the Churches to
the Determinations and decisions of that first Council or Synod, the Act. 15.
Council at Jerusalem. Notwithstanding that the Council had imposed some
burdens upon them; (so they call ver. 28.
them) burdens, not to their Consciences, (for such they were not) but in
respect of some restraint put upon their liberty by them, as viz. The
absteyning from meats offered ver. 29.
to I dols* from blood, etc. things in themselves of an indifferent nature, and
so lawful for them to do, yet the Council apprehending and conceiving them
necessary, (necessary, not simply and absolutely* but respectively pro tempore,
for that time; not in themselves, in their own nature, but extrinsically, and
accidentally necessary, viz. Calv. ad lo^um.
for the preserving and maintaining of Peace and Unity in the Church, (as
Calvin well explaines it.) it enjoynes ver. 31.
them, and the Council enjoining, the Churches submit, and that both humbly and
joyfully. Surely even such a submission ought Christians to yeald to the
determinations of lawful Authority in things not contrariant, but agreeable to
the Rules of the word, either to the particular and express rules and
directions therein contained, 1 Cor. 14. last. 2 Cor 108. chap 13. 10.
or else to those general Rules of Decency, Order, Edification, the three
maine points of the Churches compass, according to which she is to steare her
course* in the ordering of all such Church affairs, as are not expressly and
distinctly stated and regulated in the word; of which nature no question some
will be found. In all these, God and his Church expects a humble submission
from the hands of all private Christians. The Law was express under the Law.
In matters of controversy which could not easily be decided, the people were
to repair to the Priest and the Judge, and to their Order they were to stand.
So you have it expressly, Deuteronomy. 17. Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 8. 9, 10, 11.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment, etc. Thou shall come
to the Priests, the Levites, and to the Judge, (the Judge for the time being,
who was to ra^ifie the sentence of the Priest,) and enquire, and they shall
show thee the sentence of Judgment. This the Priest and the Judge were to do,
Ex Offi^io. And (mark what follows,) Thou shall do according to the sentence
which they shall show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all that
they inform thee; viz. according to the sentence of the Law; (as you have it,
verse. 11.) that is, the Law of God, which was to be their Rule. Now surely,
however that Law, being Judicial, was (as touching the obligation of it)
Temporary, yet the equity and Morality of it is perpetual. In cases
controversall about the Religion, Worship and Service of God, the people ought
to make their addresses to the Priest and the Judge, Ministers and Magistrates,
desiring and expecting their decisions, their determinations, and to that
sentence of theirs, (being (as I said) consonant and agreeable to the Word,
viz. to the particular or general Rules of it,) they ought quietly and humbly
to submit. So the Apostle presses it in that known place, Heb* 13. Obey them
th^^ have the Rule over you, ((...), Ductori^us, Pr^^ sitis, your Heb. 13 17.
Leaders, your Rulers, be they Civil or Ecclesiastical, (though he speak
there chiefly of the latter) And submit your selves. (...), Obey and Submit,
viz. in Believing and practicing what they teach and require, agreeable to the
Word of God, which still must be their Rule and ours.

Conclusion.
Time takes me off, I must strike sail. Put we now these directions together,
and reduce them to practice. Would we have the Floor of Jesus Christ amongst
us purged, and throughly-purged, the Church of God blessed with a happy
Reformation of what is amiss amongst us; Be we thankful for what we have;
Mourn over what we want: Begin the work of Reformation at home, at our own
Hearts, Lives, Families; which having done, then earnestly pray for, quietly
wait^ for such a Reformation as may be after Gods own Heart and Mind; which he
shall please to tender unto us, thankefully receive it, humbly submit to it. So
doing, doubt we not but God will do his own work in his own time. To this
end it is Ioh. 15. 1. Isa. 53, 1^.
that God the great Husbandman has put the Fan into the hand of this his
righteous Servant, the Lord Christ, that he should purge his Floor. And this
he will do, and that faithfully, thoroughly. He will thoroughly purge his
Floor. Our hopes are, that he is now about to do it, and that he will
speedily do it. Whether so, or no, we are assured he will do it. Whether this
Floor, this particular Church in this Kingdom or no, we have no assurance,
though some comfortable hopes; but his Floor, his Church, his Church visible
upon Earth, he will purge; washing off those spots and freckles from the face
of it, which do now any ways deforme it; beautifying and adorning it with all
requisite ornaments and habiliments, which may make it lovely in his eyes, and
the eyes of his Saints; so dressing and preparing Rev. 21. 2.
it as a Bride adorned for her Husband. This the Lord Jesus, the Head of the
Church, in his own time will do; And for this let all of us wait and pray.

REV. 22. 20. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
FINIS.

