A Brief Examination; Of a Certain Pamphlet lately Printed in Scotland, and
Entitled: Ladensium Autocatacrisis, etc.
1. THere was written in Scotland, and directed to the high Court of the
Parliament of England, at their last sitting, a bitter and malicious Pamphlet,
entitled: Ladensium Autocatacrisis: The Canterburians selfe-conviction: Or, An
evident Domonstration of the avowed Arminianisme, Popery and Tyranny of that
Faction, by their own Confessions. The purpose of this Work speaks it self
in the Title; namely, to brand many particular Divines in this Church with
Heterodoxie of Opinions, and that under the name of a Faction, and a Faction
united in my Lo. of Canterbury, as in their Common Head. Which Accusation of
Heterodoxie in Opinions will be here found false and frivolous, and never a one
of these Divines but will shake off this Pamphlet, as S. Paul did the venomous
Beast, into the fire, and feel himself never the worse for it: But were it
so, that some men in their opinions, and writings, did depart from the
established Doctrine of this Church; yet to affirm, they combine to do it as
a Faction, and to ascribe the Conduct of that Faction to my Lo. of Canterbury,
without manifest and convincing Proof, is a mere Calumny, and indeed but the
spume of that Malice with which they prosecute him, endeavoring through his
sides to wound the Church of England, and to draw one Line of Confusion over
all. Yet that the Matter may carry some Color, this Undertaker, whoever he be,
has evesdropped all his Grace's Writings, to see what he may possibly distort
to any ill meaning; Concerning which, though we might briefly answer, what Ep.
ad Neocaesar.
S. Basil speaks in like case for himself: (...): that is in effect; A furious
Zelot is no competent Judge of the Writings of a well-affected Protestant: Yet
I shall endeavor to lay the Particulars before you, very briefly and
faithfully; that so when you see the whole reckoning together, you may judge,
whether on his Grace's part, in any thing he has written, any just cause has
been given, of all this Clamor raised against him, and all the unreverent
Contumelies which are here cast upon him. Archbishops were not wont to be thus
handled; but in this Age of the World, it were a ridiculous thing to send these
Men to the Counsels of Can. 6.
Constantinople, Can. 8.11.
Carthage, or Can. 21.
Chalcedon, to learn better manners in this behalf: Now is a time with them
to hiss at all the Canons and Councels of the Christian World; and instead of
such superstitious and out-worne stuff, to idolize their own new Books of
Discipline, which leave both their tongues and pens free, Iud. 5.8.
to despise Dominion, and speak evil of dignities. But whether these things
proceed from hearts seasoned with the least tincture of Grace, or any sincere
Affection to Religion and true Piety (a thing so much pretended and boasted now
adays) whether it be Christian-like, so barbarously and uncivilly to slander
men of Place and Eminence, in the face of a Kingdom, wherein by Gods
Ordinance, and the established Laws, they are (under the Kings Majesty)
appointed the chief Guides and Governors of the Church: that any sort of men,
especially the meanest, should be permitted such an unbridled license against
them; whether, I say, it be Christian-like, or befitting the honor of a
Reformed Church, though men may have forgotten to judge, God will surely
remember.

2. But before I meddle with matters of Opinion, I must expostulate some things
with this Author, which come rather to the nature of Fact, and serve to make
up a great part of the noise. Where first, Sir, what mean you by this Title,
or Frontispice, Ladensium Autocatacrisis, The Canterburians Selfe-conviction?
Expound you (...), a Selfe-conviction? Sure the word signifies,
Selfe-condemning: and Selfe-convicting is not Selfe-condemning.

But not to detain you in this slip: Why Selfe-conviction? Because they have
written something, out of which, you think, you can convict them? But your
Convicting them, is not Selfe-convicting.

3. And thirdly; why, a Demonstration by their own Confessions? Do they
confess the Fact? Indeed you have raked together many Sayings and Sentences
out of their Books to prove them Arminians, and Papists, and Maintainers of
Tyranny; but do they answer guilty to all this? Sure your Purpose is but to
fright the poor Men with this Mormo of your Title. Otherwise we know, an
Accusation, though taken from the Parties own mouth, does not presently
infer his own Confession; for words may be misapplied, or misunderstood: Nor
to be convicted by another man, though out of his own mouth; is to be
selfe-convicted: nor to be so convicted, even by himself, is presently to be
selfe-condemned. This is such stuff, that the Parties concerned, as De Pallio.
Tertullian says of the Camaeleon, Ridebunt illico audaciam and Graeciam
Nominis.

4. But in your We offer to instruct to the full satisfaction of the whole
world of free and inprejudicate minds, not by fleeing reports, not by probable
likelihoods, not by the sentences of the gravest and most solemn Iu^icatories
of this Land, our two last general Assemblies, and late Parliament. All there
means of Probation we shall set aside, and take us alone to the Mouth of our
very Adversaries.
Preface you tell us, you could have used other Proofs, beside their own
Books: 1 Flying reports. 2 Probable likelihoods. 3 The sentences of the two
last general Assemblies and late Parliament in Scotland: where the two first
are, if you mark it, forsooth, very strong proofs: and though you seem to
pass them by, yet you have trusted them as much as any. But for the third, if
my Lord of Canterbury and these his Canterburians, as you please to call them,
were then and there in your two Assemblies and Parliament condemned of Popery,
being, as they stand in your Index, all Englishmen: may they not reasonably
plead what he does in the Tragedy? (...): A subject of one Country ought not
to be judged in another: Ne, usurpata altarum partium sollicitudine, Bellum
inter se incitarent, as S. Ambrose: Spartam, tibi quae contigit, orna:
Nobis fuerint Cura Mycenae.
But the truth is, it is enough with men of your Feather, to call your
Adversaries, Papists, or Arminians, or what you please, your Adherents will
believe it upon your bare Word. Do but you say it, and all the Protestations,
Oaths, Subscriptions, all the art and industry they can use, shall never
sufficiently purge them of it. So that, if now, ex superabundanti, you will not
say it only, but prove it too; very good reason, you should grace your
performance with some extraordinary inscription. Let it be therefore
Autocatacrisis, a very Selfe-conviction, though it be indeed neither, nor one
of these, the other.

Once more; If you will needs mistake these men to be Arminians, and Papists,
and upholders of Tyranny; was it not enough to call them such? No; they are
Ladensians, Canterburians: as if my Lord of Canterbury had led them into these
Opinions; when you cannot be so blind, as not to see, who their Authors and
Abettors are, in all this, as you call it, Popery. Examine but your own
Margin, there you shall find P. 51.
Ignatius, P. ^5
Irenaeus, P. 51
Tertullian, P. 52.
Optatus, P. 5^.
Basil, P. ^5.
Nazianzen, P. 38, 76.
Chrysostom, P. 82.
Epiphanius, P 3^, 57, 59, 65.
Augustine, P. ^1.
Damascen, P. ^5.
Bernard, and other like: all vouched together by you with these modern men.
Are all these Canterburians? For let the reader turn, I say, and see, if they
stand not in your margin under the same condemnation, all. You pretend against
the Pope, but you are his friend many ways; especially in this, a more profuse
benefactor to him, than Pipin, Charlemaigne, or any other. You give him East
and West, the suffrage of all Christendom, side and wide, the consent of the
best Writers in elder and later times; They are all for the Pope, by your
Donation, all involved in one common guilt of supporting his Antichristian
Hierarchy. The voice of the Donatists was, Nos soli mansimus, the whole world
is apostate; Our congregation remains the only true Church: but yours must
be, Nos soli fuimus; we are the first, and before us there was never any;
never, in all the centuries of Christianity, any such doctrine or discipline to
be found, as you have devised. And your performance here, is not against the
Canterburians only; but even a general indictment of all times and ages for
superstition and heresy. Only this humor of nick-naming is none of the
newest, whether we regard either fact, or opinion. Those that stuck to John
Chrysostom in his troubles, an innocent man, and refused to communicate with
his unworthy successor Arsacius, were called Socrat. l. 6. c. 16.
Ioannitae, Iohnists, forsooth. And those, that in the Ephesine Council
maintained the Orthodoxe Faith, together with S. Cyrill, against the fect of
Nestorius, were by that Sect termed, Apud Bin. 10.1. par. 2. p. 287. Colon.
1618.
Cyrilliani, Cyrillians. Just thus, the conformable Ministry of this Kingdom,
that in their books and practice maintain the doctrine and discipline of this
Church, which my Lord of Canterbury does in the prime place, must be,
Canterburians: This is the ingenuity of the title prefixed to your book: dignum
patina operculum; a fit cover for such a dish.

6. Now in your Preface, this chimaera of the Canterburian faction and the
Prelates, must be stigmatized for the authors of all the mischiefs in the
world; thereby to induce the high Court of Parliament to expel, non
Tarquinium, sed Regnum; not the Bishops, but even the Bishoprics. Which yet
were not equity, to blame the office, for the men. And whereas it has been
ever your way, in your accusatory writings, to shift from things, to persons;
let me tell you, It is the known practice of schismatics: Me facit causam,
cum defecisset in causa, says St. Austine of Petilianus. When he fails in
his cause, he mistakes me for the cause: And, in Lib. cont. Fortunatum, Alia
est quaestio de Fide, alia de moribus. And, Istae haereticorum machinae sunt,
etc. says St. Hierom cont. Ruff. Thus the Prelates, they declare, they
proclaim in the Kings name, they change the face of the Court, you say, into
what shape they please: They doubtless have some secret design, Praef. p. 3.
when both Nations by mutual wounds, are disabled for defense against the
common enemy, to bring in France, or Spain, spightfull Nations, and the
hereditary enemies of our Religion and Island: and this they do, when the
tears of his Majesty's only sister, the desolation of her most miserable
subjects, the captivity and banishment of her hopeful children should command,
as in pity, to put up all our homeward quarrels, though they evere both great
and many, nor should we be induced by any allurement, by any terror, to submit
our selves as vallets and pages to the execution of the lusts, the furies, and
outrageous counsels of Canterbury and his dependers; since the maine grievances
both of Church and State, have no other original, no other fountain on earth,
but those men. All which is a Libell even against common sense, and needs no
other answer.

Besides, this man's falsehood had bin much more tolerable, if he had kept
himself within civil language; for possibly, That might proceed from
misinformation, but This must needs be too much his own. All this ado, he
says, is but for the bearing up of Prelates tails, for the execution of the
Mandamus of Bishops. Might he not as well have said, in case he had thought so
(which I hardly believe he does,) That all this ado was, upon a
misapprehension; That Regal power in a Christian Monarchy cannot well stand
without Episcopal? which if it be indeed a misapprehension, it arose not from
Bishops: This known axiom, No Bishop, no King, was not invented by a Bishop.
Neither was he a Bishop, but a Statesman and a Judge, and a witty man in his
time, who advised King James; by all means you must keep up the Bishops,
because it is written; Mutato sacerdotio, mutabifer lex, Heb. 7.12. The
Priesthood being changed, there must follow of necessity a change also of the
Law: So he in allusion to that Text. But for your self, if it were your mind
to lay all the blame of this quarrel upon the Bishops, not taking notice of
his Majesty's interests, or the preservation of his royal Authority, yet you
might have given good words. What mean such expressions, as these? The lusts,
and furies of Canterbury, malepert Canterbury, effronted impudence, the touch
of his Graces panton, and many like; besides the perpetual venom of your
style, ever when you have said the worst you can devise, leaving a sting and
suspicion in the Readers mind, as if somewhat worse might be said: As here in
the Preface, Men whose open profession in their printed books, beside secret
practices, leads to wicked ends, etc. S. Paul exhorts us, Ephesians. 4.15.
to speak the truth in love. But where we find neither truth nor love, neither
probable matter, nor charitable speeches; pretend you never so much to Gods
calling, and revelations, and reformations, and what you please; this we are
sure of: Mat. 12.34.35.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Bonus homo de bono
thesauro profert bona, malus homo de malo thesauro profert mala.

For the things themselves; you have put together here a long beadroll of
untruths, purposely to raise hatred against my Lord of Canterbury, whereof you
bring no proof at all; and therefore you are feign to lubricate them with some
oil of Rhetoric, to make them slip the better. A long scheme of
interrogations you put us here: who did this? and, who did that? To all which,
considering I say, you bring no proof, in reason, and equity, you can expect
no other return from us, then a plain negation: Quintilian. Decl. 12.
Sat erit, verbo negare, quod verbo ponitur: remove hanc spem eludendae
mendacio civitatis. Now then I tell you, point by point: It is not He, that
has kept the King at a distance from your country, these many years. Not he
that hinders Parliaments, nor that breaks up Parliaments. It is not by his
connivence that the idolatrous Chapels of both the Queens are so gorgeous and
so much frequented. It is not by his tolerance that Mass Priests are so much
multiplied in City and Country. He sets up no Cloisters for Monks and Nuns:
No Houses for open Mass, in any City of the Kings Dominions. He holds no
correspondence with the Pope. He sends no Agents to Rome: Entertaines not his
Holiness Nuncios, here in State. He hindered not our Alliance with the Swedes
and French, for the relief of Germany. He withheld not from the poor Prince
the King of Bohemiah to his dying day all considerable help from Britain.
Prague was lost, and the Palatinate surprised while he was yet but a private
Master of a College in Oxford, And what could he do withal? He sent not
those young Princes into the Field the other year, so poorly provided that
one silly Commander beat them both. He moved not that innocent Prince to such
strange Counsel, as now the World speaks of. He betrayed neither his purpose
nor his Person to the French King. He is not the prime Author of the Scottish
broils. All this you put upon him; all this we deny: Whereof some things are
false in themselves; All in regard of him. And you have not only trusted
report too far, which is ever Tertul. Ap.
Nomen incerti, detrahons, adiiciens, demutans de veritate; But withal yielded
your self too much, to that naughty disposition, which they call (...), a
rejoicing in another man's evil: for we may reasonably think, what ever of
all this be found false, you could wish it were true: Otherwise it is strange,
a man should rake together all the disasters and mischiefs, that have been done
at home and abroad these many years, and lay them all upon Him; but not give
him the least share in any good action. What good my L. of Canterbury has done
in the civil state, what in the Church, what in City and Country, what in
the University, there will be a time to remember. And though in this
distempered state of things, seu been, seu male facta juxta premunt; good and
bad actions bear a like construction, with many men at least: yet the
insuperable strength of virtue and innocence by Gods Blessing will overcome at
last, Matthew. 11.19.
and wisdom be Justified of her children. In the mean while it shall be
sufficient, to say to you here that of S. Cont: Ruff.
Hierome: Non est necesse, ut in tractatihus ecclesiasticis rem tribunalem
ventilemus. It is no way requisite, that disputing about points of religion, we
should mingle therewith, civil or criminal accusations.

8 Coming up to your Work, you tell us, you will prove these men, against whom
you inform, to be guilty of gross Arminianisme, plain Popery, and of setting
up barbarous Tyranny. Tot Calones quot Milites, every soldier must have his
Cullion; every substantive an Epithet put to it, to carry along the Luggage of
your Notion: not Popery only but plain Popery, not Arminianisme only but
gross Arminianisme, nor Tyranny only but setting up of barbarous Tyranny: yet
lest we should be forgetful or inobservant of this your great undertaking, you
tell it us over again and again, and again; four times, before you can end;
And with it shut up this your zealous Preface. But these your vehement
exaggerations, your long and sweet Rhetorications, (...) with which you would
charm our Nobles, not to stir a weapon against you in so innocent a Cause, I
willingly permit you: Only two things I must expostulate with you.

9 First, that in case you fail in this great business, you are content, you
say, to be censured of Jf J fail in my fair undertaking, let me be condemned
of temerity, and no hour of your leisure, etc.
Temeritie: and will never desire men to employ their leisure any more in
hearing your Complaints. This indeed would be a great deal of Charity on our
parts: for it was written of old, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.
Make good your undertaking, prove these men guilty of Idolatry, Heresy, of
betraying the King into the Bondage of Popery, the subject into a Condition of
slavery; and their goods, their Bodies, their Lives will be too little
satisfaction: nay what extreme hazards many have run already, without any
form of Justice, upon your bare suggestions, is sufficiently known: now you
demand Justice upon my Lo. of Canterbury, where in Case you fail of your
proof, shall it be sufficient for you to suffer in point of reputation; and
to be Condemned of Temerity, such a Lucifuga, as your self, an Exploratour of
other men's discourses, whose only Artifice it is, been dicta secius
interpretari? I except against your iniquity in this.

10. The other thing is: you complain of the obstinate silence of the English
Divines: it is most prodigious, you say, and one of the Wonders of the World
how at this Time they can be so dumb. You have scored down in your Index here
about twenty English Divines that have written within these few years against
Papists and Schismatiques, as the necessities of the Church did require. God be
thanked; there was never greater plenty of men, able and willing to encounter
our adversaries on the right hand, or on the left. And do you find so great a
solitude of English Divines, that you are feign to supply your self with
Burton, Bastwick, Prinne, Layton, Lilborne; of whom Burton only is the Divine,
Prin a Lawyer, Bastwick and Layton Physicians, Lilborne a Tradesman. Are these
your English Divines? do you propound these for imitable Examples to the
Clergy of this Kingdom?

Depuduit, profugusque pudor, sua signa reliquit. You call us to the Example of
those Marian Days, Times of hottest Persecution: as if now were the Time for
faithful Witnesses to stand up in defense of true Religion: That is, to oppose
those Laws now by which Popery was then cast out: to condemn that Liturgy,
and those Ceremonies, as superstitious now, which were then ordained to cut off
superstition: and the retaining of which, our very Ista autem multaque alia ex
moribus and caeremoniis antiquis, politicorum suasu, contra hujus novi cleri
voluntatem Regina retinuit, etc. Et certe fecit plurimum ad stabilitatem,
firmitatemque haereseos, etc. Sander. de schism. Angl.
adversaries cannot but Confess, has been the strongest sinew and support of
our Reformation. To revile Bishops now, that were then prime Martyrs: as if
their very calling were wicked, to whom even Scio instaurationem ecclesiae
Anglicanae and eversionem Papismi, post Deum and Reges, deberi praecipue
Episcoporum doctrinae and industriae: Quorum etiam nonnulli martyrio, etc. Pet.
Moli n. Ep. 3.
Strangers give this Testimony: that they were then the Chief Instruments of
planting pure Religion among us, and have been of conserving it ever since. We
must be mad now, and cut off our right hand with our left, or else England is
gone off, you say, from her zeal to the true Religion. But leave this wicked
vanity, Mock not God, the World, and your own Conscience. Do not parallel
persons and things so extremely different; Prove. 17.15.
to justify the Wicked, and condemn the just, are both Abominations to the
Lord.

11. In your first Chapter; you seem to sear the World is mistaken in your
Quarrel, and does not understand it to be so extensive as it is, being as you
say, not only that which P. 2.
properly concerns your selves, but that which rubbeth upon other Churches;
not the Book, Canons, and Episcopacie only; but many notable wrongs and
affronts openly done to the reformed Religion. Experience teaches us to
understand your meaning; P, 12.
you found in your general assembly, you say, the cockle of Arminianisme
coming up apace in many furrows of your field; which being cast over the
dyke, it was at once received and replanted in England in too good a soil.
Were it so; truly you have followed it so fast into that good soil, that it is
likely to take no very deep root: though how it has been received or
replanted here, I know not; except it offend you, that your expulsed Bishops
and Clergy were permitted fire and water, or so much as livelihood among us.
But we ask not, quo Warranto, by what Authority you take upon you this large
Visitation, to set right the Church of England. Nor are we very solicitous to
inform our selves of the extent of your quarrel. This we are sure of, (...).
The end and beginning of Business appears not together, especially of
Contention; which Solomon says, Prove. 17.14.
is like the letting out of Water, it will not always stop where men think.

But whereas you are so charitable to judge P. 4.
sundry Bishops of the Isle to be innocent and very free of these Mischiefs,
and such as would readily purge themselves, if only my Lord of Canterbury and
his dependants were in any way to receive from the Kings justice some part of
their Deservings: Herein we cannot but challenge you of injustice, that some of
them being innocent, you would make it the Concluding vote of your Book, that
all without exception should be rid away. Will you destroy the righteous with
the wicked? But yet your charity we are ready to compensate; and tell you, we
believe there are involved in the Covenant many honest Hearts, many well
meaning Souls: and that they are not all so blameworthy, as you their
spiritual Misleaders are; nay we believe, diverse of them, were they truly
taught the nature of this Action you have put them into, would gladly purge
themselves, and leave you to receive from the King's Justice some part of your
deserving.

12. You have brought us next a long Syllogism, which is to be the touchstone
of your whole discourse, and summarily is this:

P. 5.
Whoever in the Kings Dominions spreads abroad Popery, or any Doctrine
opposite to the Religion and Laws of the Land, now established; ought to be
punished.

But Canterbury and his Dependants have spread abroad in the Kings Dominions,
Doctrines opposite to our Religion and Laws; and especially Points of grossest
Popery. Ergo.

Where I hope you will give me Leave to scruple two or three things without
Offense: and first, touching your Major: Let me tell you, it is ever a lurching
Trick to Complicate many Terms in one Proposition; as here be two: Spreading
abroad Popery, and spreading abroad any Doctrine opposite to the Laws
established. It is a Fallacy Multarum Quaestionum, to which the Respondent
cannot very advisedly give his Answer at once: for it may be half true, and
half false. Know then, one you must leave out, by the Law of Art, unless you
will affirm them to be both one, or convertible, which I think you will not.
Let me Counsel you then to leave out the Word Popery, and that because it is
an Ambiguous Word; about which you and your Opposites are very little agreed,
and in all Controversies, (...); Principium est Nomen. First you must agree
upon the Clear Meaning of your Terms, or else instead of Disputing you will
but beat the Air. As here in this Case, you will urge them with some
Doctrines and call them Popery: They will acknowledge the Doctrines, but deny
the Popery: then you must revert to dispute, what is Popery, a thing that by
all reason should have been cleared at first. You seem to define it by Tenets
of Reformed Churches, and Tenets of reformed Divines; as if what crosses
these, were Popery. But this is to define it by uncertainties: for Churches
differ in their Tenets, not to go from home, P. 98.
you tell us you could never in Scotland be induced to follow so much of the
Mass as we retained in England. Divines differ in their Tenets. What thing
more known? He that follows not Calvin in the Point of Praedestination, may
yet follow Melancthon. And he a man, (as Pietas ordinum. etc.
Hugo Grotius very truly says) never a whit inferior to him. Shall the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Rome be Popery? that will not be
universally true, for there was a Time when S. Paul commended both: their Romans
1.8.
Faith and Romans 16.19.
Obedience. Shall the Customs and usages of that Church be Popery? not all.
For they had many in Common with the whole Catholic Church, which cannot
without great scandal and falsehood be taxed of Popery. You of all men have
made this word Popery, such an ambulatory word, that we know not where to fix
it. Arminianisme shall be Popery, if you please to call it so: to refuse the
oaths of allegiance and supremacy, shall not be Popery, if you please not to
call it so. Our English liturgy with you is a Popish mass; our Ceremonies,
Popish ceremonies. Now should your adversaries be so unadvised to grant
themselves punishable, for teaching and maintaining Popery, admitting it ever
in your acception? In the mean while, to say, they are punishable, for
teaching any doctrine opposite to the Religion by Law established; is to say a
Consequent, and undeniable truth, which will they, or nill they, they must
submit to. Now then let this undefined thing Popery stand by; or else let
every Doctrine insisted on by you, be Popish so, as withal opposite to the
Religion by Law established: and therein you shall do very well.

12. Next, in your Minor: I may not suffer you to jumpe out of England into
Scotland; as you do in this Clause of it: Our Religion and Laws. Ours? whose?
yours, in Scotland? shall these men, subjects of England and Members of this
Church, be punishable, for teaching some Doctrine opposite to the Religion by
Law established in Scotland? when did they subscribe to your Religion or Laws?
you Scota ante aliquot Annos Anglorum Auxilus e servitute Gallica liberati,
Religionis Cultui and Ritibus cum Anglis Communibus subscripserunt. The scottish
being some years before delivered from the slavery of the French by the Aids
of the English, subscribed to the same Worship and Rite of Religion, which the
English used. Buchan: hist. Scot. l. 19.
have subscribed to ours, as coy as you are of us now: we to yours never. And
yet would you heartily set out even your own Laws; happily they would not
refuse you upon them. But if you superinduce the Books of Discipline, or
Records, to them utterly unknown, Large Declar. p. 270
wonderfully preserved, and now after a long silence of Time, no doubt, as
uncorruptly exhibited by you: if that must be a Canon to regulate your Church
and Religion; then they will recoile, and desire to be tried by their own
Laws. The sum of all, is: they would not have you juggle and sophisticate,
confound and tumble together Places, Persons, Things, as every where you do; to
raise Clamor, not to discover Truth. In all Equity then, this must be your
syllogism.

Whosoever in the Kings Dominions, respectively, spreads abroad any Doctrine
opposite to the Religion by Laws established; ought to be punished.

But Canterbury and his Dependents, being subjects of England, have spread
abroad Doctrines opposite to The Religion, by Laws established in England.
Ergo.

Now if you can acquit your self of this Minor and carry it handsomely through
your whole Book, you will do a memorable performance. But you mean no such
thing: and therefore I desire the Reader to do it for you; upon every point to
bring you to this test: which he must do if he will be just and impartial. For
make you up your parties as you please, with reformed Divines and orthodox
Preachers; that will be but to call up against you other orthodoxe Preachers;
and all to no purpose: for nothing is punishable but by Law: Simul ac a jure
discesseris, go you from that, and either in Fact or Opinion, men will think
they may use a moderate liberty.

13 First, touching Arminianisme, in relation to Fact: It is but hard measure
in you to represent it presently with this Odium: A Page 8.
dangerous innovation, and such a one as was found to be the readiest Engine,
which had ever been used by the Pope or Spaniard to overthrow the Church and
State of Holland. For were this true, yet sure it could be true by no other
necessity, then as Medicus cantat; a Physician may be skillful in song, but it
is no intrinsecall act of his Profession. An Arminian may be a seditious
Citizen, but it flows not from any of the five disputed points. Divines may
differ about the order of Gods Predestination, and yet be good subjects to
their Prince: In the mean while, your self that make this objection, living
in a Monarchical State, make no bones to affirm; Postscrip. p. 14.
That public Assemblies, and Conventions may be held without the authority of
the Civil Magistrate: Ibid. p. 8.
That, subjects may bear Arms against their Sovereign: p. 14.
That, there is and ought to be in a Kingdom, an Ecclesiastique Power,
supreme in it self, and independent on the King. These Opinions touch the life
of a State, and tend dangerously to the dissolution of Government; yet these
must be borne with, in you: but if men doubt of absolute Reprobation, or stick
at any like rigid Doctrine, (...), the State must look about, it is some
secret Plot to betray the Kingdom to the Pope or Spaniard.

Ultra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet, etc. I take not upon me to Apologize for
Arminians: let them stand or fall by themselves: But I think a dram of
equity will obtain them thus much, that they may be as good and loyal
subjects in any State or Kingdom, as they which maintain your aforesaid
positions or any of them. When my Lord of Canterbury, that then was, took so
much care (as you tell us) to suppress Barrow at Cambridge, and to enact his
Lambethane Articles (which you ridiculously call the Page 16.
Synod of Lambeth) the Queen, even Presat.
that most sacred Queen Elizabeth, did not interpret it as any great service
done to the State, or as if the Kingdom had been thereby secured: Which is
plain enough by the cold thanks she gave him. If you know not the carriage
of that business, I pray you inform your self better, out of the story.

14. The greatest Accusation that lies against my Lord of Canterbury here, in
this matter of Arminianisme, is the preferment of men whom you suspect to
incline to the opinions of Arminius, wherein before you pass any Verdict, you
should do well to consider: First, whether all Preferments be so absolutely in
his Graces disposing, that he may be truly said to prefer them all.
Secondly, whether he look upon them in that Quality, as they incline to such
Opinions, and be not obliged to favor them, for some other eminent Abilities,
or Merit of particular service, done in Church or State. Thirdly, whether some
others sufficiently known to be anti-Arminians, be not as high in the Church,
and as well promoted as they. Fourthly, whether most men promoted in the
Church, are not upon your own false grounds, by you causelessly suspected to be
Arminians. Quicquid horum tetigeris, Ulcus est: you are not Proof in any of
these. And because the Preferments of sundry men may be upon sundry motives,
by sundry Means and Procurements: Nor can it be any thing else in you, but an
invidious Presumption to think all done by his Grace in favor of
Arminianisme, whereas all in that kind is not done by him, nor any with an eye
of favor upon Arminianisme, clamor while you please, my Answer is this: and
it is sufficient to satisfy any honest man. There is no man, promoted in the
Church of England, with or without my Lord of Canterburies help, but
subscribes to the Articles; the established Doctrine of this Church. Now these
Articles, either they condemn the Opinions of Arminius, or they do not: If
they do not, then is Arminianisme, either a thing set by, and left at liberty,
neither belongs it to my Lord of Canterbury, or any other trusted with the
Government of the Church, to take cognizance of any man's judgment in those
points: Or if those Points be comprehended in the Articles and not condemned,
belike they are approved there: But if the Articles do condemn Arminianisme,
all men promoted in the Church subscribe to the Articles: They profess fully
and heartily to assent to the Doctrine there set down; which Profession is as
valid, as an oath; and an Heb. 6.16.
Oath for confirmation is an end of all strife. So that to affirm his Grace
keeps a constant course, in promoting Arminianisme, as a Sect offensive to
this Church, is but a mere calumny: Their subscription being as great and
apparent a Purgation of any their adherence to heterodox Opinions, as they can
possibly exhibit, or he require of them: And should he require more, he could
not justify it.

15. That which brought up Arminianisme among you, was, you say, P. 11.
a gentle air from Court: which were it true, as it is undoubtedly false, yet
it leaves no real Aspersion upon those Opinions. The Court does not always
cherish the evil seeds: it is the voice of Schismatics sometimes; Optat. l.
1. Aug. Ep. 48.
Quid Episcopis cum palatio? The Arrians and Donatists did often complain they
were borne down by favor at Court; and so do you now, and so did always all
unquiet Spirits, when they could not have there, what themselves desired. P. 11.
Dr. Wederburne, you tell us, was made Bishop of Dunblane, and that Bishop is
always Deane of the Chapel Royal: and a society of twenty four Chaplains
was erected, the fittest that could be found in the whole Kingdom, to preach
to the State the Deanes Arminian Tenets. Where, it may be, all the offense is,
that your self was none of the number.

16. Passing over into Ireland, you question there: P. 15. P. 21.
Who holds down the head of that Orthodoxe Primate? Which complaint, after
three or four pages, you resume again, thus. What fray, makes that worthy
Primate Usher to foretell often to his friends his expectation, to be sent over
sea, to die a Pedant, teaching boys for his bread, by the persecution of this
faction. Where this strange expression from your pen, Orthodoxe Primate, made
me almost forget the maine of your complaint. For say, in good earnest, is
Episcopacie a wicked and Antichristian calling? So you teach sometimes. And
sure if a simple Bishop be a limb of Antichrist, a Primate must be a very
principal member: how then, Orthodoxe primate? Or, why care you, who holds
down his head? Were it in your power, would you advance it? You that have
howted all Ecclesiastical Dignities quite out of your Country? You tell us
plainly, that a total ejection of the Bishops Postscrip. p. 28.
would much increase the joy and prosperity of all the three dominions: We have
just reason to think then, that if this Orthodoxe Primate were in your Power,
you would divide betwixt his Orthodoxie, and his Primacie, by such a kind of
distinction, as that was of old; Platin. in vit. Joan. 24.
Gibellinorum, bona Guelfa; the Man might be Orthodoxe, but the Primacie, with
what belongs to it, his Rents and Revenues, would be found all Antichristian:
so that he must be content indeed to die a Pedant, teaching boys for his
bread. But to the maine of your Complaint, take his Answer, which upon sight of
this passage in your book, he made with his own mouth. This is notoriously
false, I never said any such thing, I never thought it; and I am in my
particular beholding to my Lord of Canterbury. I had the happiness to be by,
when my Lord Primate spoke this.

17. Your aptness to misconstrue even the best actions, appears by the
censure you put upon His Majesty's Declaration before the Articles. You make it
but a crafty trick in his Grace, then Bishop of London, by the Duke his Patron,
you say, to persuade that course of silence purposely to give Their crafty
leader seeing the s^t of opposition, and sinding it meet a little to hold in,
etc. p. 19.
advantage to the Arminians. It were a happy thing, if in all emergent
controversies men would carry themselves with that temper, and prudence, as
that no such declarations might be needful: But when the fire of contention
begins to burn, and endanger the peace of Church and State; it is then time
for Kings, who are nutritii Ecclesiae, to interpose their power and suppress
the flame. What our gracious Sovereign did, was done more majorum, after the
example of all godly Princes. In the time of Theodosius the elder, every man's
tongue ran upon the Trinity, nothing could be heard but perpetual wrangling
about those high mysteries; whereupon that pious Prince forbad all disputing
thereabout, Sozom. l. 7. c. 6.
lata lege and paena constituta. Had you lived then, you would have said; This
was but the trick of some Prelate, to give advantage to the Sabellians,
Photinians, Arrians, and the like. In these very questions blessed King James
both counseled and approved a pacificatory edict, devised and published in
Holland, to make peace there; which indeed was variously carped at. But God
forbid, that at such exigences, for the misprision of some disaffected spirits,
Kings and Princes should lay by their care; whose office it is to suppress
Schism and Faction in Church, as well as theft, homicide, or like crimes in
State, as Ep. 50. and cont. Crescon. 3. c. ^1.
S. Austin tells us. But what advantage did the Arminians make of this edict, I
pray? Yes, P. 23.
Many Doctors, you say, in both Universities, and over all the Land, boldly
gave out their mind to all they met with, for the advancement of the new way.
Boldly gave out their mind? But did they print as boldly? I am sure some of
the contrary part as boldly gave out their minds: otherwise your intelligence
had not been so good. And what know you, but that many books, like to be
offensive in this kind, were and are suppressed by my Lord of Canterburies
care? I am sure, you can keep no tale of them, no more than Diagoras his
friend could of those that were drowned; quia nusquam picti sunt, for they
appear not.

18. Needs will you make the world believe; in this quarrel of Arminianisme,
my Lord of Canterburies Predecessor, Archbishop Abbot, was so far P. 21.
wrought out of grace with the King, that he remained some years before his
death, well near confined to his house at Lambeth: and that for the same
cause, is caged up in the Tower that great and learned Bishop of Lincoln.
Where touching the first; in good time said you, well near confined: For
certainly, no other confinement lay upon him at Lambeth some years before his
death, but by that which serves an arrest upon all the sons of men, age and
infirmity. And for the second, that Arminianisme is any way concerned in my
Lord of Lincolnes affair, is more than I ever understood; or, I believe, any
man else. It were a great folly for me to misreport or dissemble in things so
public and notorious as these.

19. Much ado you make about Chounes Book: where you begin with the License,
but mistake the Licenser; whence I hope we may conclude, you are over-apt to
trust flying Report. For, had you used ocular inspection here, we cannot but
think you can read a printed Name. Touching the Book it self, very eager you
are to stretch all to the worst. For, he says not, Fides, Resipiscentia,
Perseverantia, Faith, Repentance, Perseverance, are the Causes of Salvation, as
you allege: but Fidei, Resipiscentiae, Perseverantiae recta quae est ex Deo
Ordinatio: Kenne you no difference here, betwixt man's act, in believing,
repenting, and persevering; and Gods (...) in ordaining, faith, repentance, and
perseverance, to be the means of salvation. But a dangerous matter it is, to
fall into the hands of a Man, that is resolved to make the worst of every thing
he meets with. You tell us farther, D. Bastwick in the Face of the
Star Chamber, charged my Lord of Canterbury with this Book. That he did not
neither; in the High Commission somewhat he wrangled about Fundamentalls:
which truly was not worth the writing into Scotland.

But more than all this; It wounds, you say, the Kings Monarchick Government at
the very heart, and transferres from the Crown to the Miter one of its fairest
Diamonds; which the King and His Father before him did ever love most dearly.
You cite not the Words, nor the place: but in your Chapter of Tyranny, we
cannot miss it, sure. There he is alleged to say; that P. 113.
Kings and Princes are accounted sons of the Church, That Bishops make
Canons, which yet have their Vivacity, or Act of life from Kings, as the Heads.
This is all in effect, he says there. I wonder much what design M. Choune, a
Lay-Gentleman, should have, to transfer from the Crown to the Miter this
fair Diamond, Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical: for that is it you mean:
And I wonder more to find you so jealous of it. But be content, good Sir,
neither M. Choune nor the Bishops intend any such theft. In the mean while,
Romans 2.21.
thou that teach a man should not steal, do thou steal? Do not you with
open face rob the Crown of this Diamond, and transfer it to your
Ecclesiasticke Assemblies? Parall. 4.
Lysimachus Nicanor says you do; And in your Postscript-answer to him here,
durst you deny it, so much as in one syllable? Are you not feign to conclude
the point with him thus, Our Prince is very well content from the General
Assembly, the highest Ecclesiasticke Court, should come no appeal at all to
him? Belike, from other Sessions and Presbyteries, lies Appeal thither, but
there you are at the top: (...). Look no higher, then: though sure the top is
ever the Kings by right. Obediunt simul and regnant, says Choune. Princes obey
the Church, but rule and govern it withal: but with you, it is simply
obediunt, nay Synodo intersint, non ut regnent, sed ut serviant, etc. Bez.
conf. c. 5. art. 15.
serviunt, by no means, regnant: You may make Acts, censure, depose,
excommunicate, and no Appeal lies from you. Indeed you slide it over with a
mannerly expression, our Prince is very well content, etc. but should the
Bishops build up such an independent Supremacy, and be questioned for it,
would it suffice for them to answer, Our Prince is very well content? That
personate Jesuit, as you call him, objects; you deny Kings, Power to convocate
Assemblies: whereto you answer; Postscr. p. 14
he knows the contrary, that you give to all Christian Sovereigns, so much
interest in affairs of the Church, as to convocate Assemblies when and where
they please: but withal, you hold indeed, that without them, you may convocate
your selves, in some case. So tender you are of preserving in the Crown, that
fair Diamond: And so much you indigne at Choune, though very innocent thereof,
that he should transfer it to the Miter: the fault is, he did not indeed
transfer it to the Presbytery. Where be it known, That Ecclesiastic power
is not to be lessened by the expulsion of Bishops; now it is jurisdiction, but
then it shall be discipline.

21. In your third Chapter you P. 31.
tax my Lord of Canterbury for promoving Master Duries Negotiation with the
Churches beyond Sea. This Durie is a Scottish Minister, that has much pained
himself, traveling up and down Germany, to solicit an Union betwixt the
Churches of the Augustan confession, and the rest. My Lord of Canterbury found
his Predecessor, Archbishop Abbot, imbarqued in this design; and thereupon
inclined the rather, to give encouragement to it: but ever kept himself within
the bounds, which his Predecessor had set. Now if this be a fault, there be
many partakers: For we are made believe, few Ambassadors, or Agents in those
parts, few Doctors or Professors of their Universities, that have not
intermedled more or less, to promove this action. But after all; I doubt, you
need not much fear the success. A synctetisme you say, all good men did ever
pant for; but not a full peace. I suppose you mean, they should combine
against the common enemy, but still keep at odds amongst themselves. Yet a
syncretisme being not every days Word, you might have done well to explain
your self better: and the rather, because the Cretians had an ill name, you
know, for cheating and cozening, that possibly (...), may be taken in a
vicious sense; to pack together for mischief. And I think, Beza uses it so,
in an Epistle of his to Bishop Grindall. Quis porro fuerit quorundam nuper
adversus omnes harum Partium, ac proinde etiam adversus Gallicas and vestras
quoque Ecclesias, quas omnes nobiscum in omnibus doctriae capitibus consentire
arbitramur, conatus and (...), jam pridem ad vos usque perlatum esse Opinor.
Conatus, and (...): I hope, this is not the syncretisme, you have long panted
for. But a syncretisme you would have, not a full peace; though otherwise a man
very peaceably minded. Now we in England, are taught to pray thus; That God
would inspire continually his universal Church, with the spirit of truth,
unity, and concord: and grant, that not only, These, and Those: but even all
they, that confess his holy name, may agree in the truth of his holy word, and
live in unity and godly love.

22. And thus much of Fact, now to matter of Doctrine, or Opinion; wherein all
that is objected will be found, as hitherto it has been, lighter then vanity
it self. But when such things as these are printed with License, and informed
of as matters of very great consequence; we trust it will be excused, if we
lose a little time, to give some answer at least, to such an importunate
Delatour.

23. In the point of Arminianisme, one passage is said to be gotten from his
Graces Pen: And that is, the changing of a Clause in the Collect, for the Queen
and the Royal Issue: instead of Father of thine Elect and their seed, putting
in, the Fountain of all goodness. Grave Crimen, Cai Caesar; and not so
fortunate as to steal out of the world, but with noise enough. For this
complaint you took up of Burton. But you charge it further; It was, say you,
in favor of Arminianisme, to cut and mangle the very Liturgy of the Church,
otherwise a sacred piece in England, and a Noli me tangere, even in the
smallest points, be they never so much by any censured of Error. Then which,
what could be spoken more ridiculous? For first, not to urge how this Collect
is a post-nate, to the Licurgie of the Church of England: Wherein could this
Clause offend even Arminius himself? The difference betwixt him and his
Opposites, being not, Whether there be any Elect or none? or whether God be
the Father of them and their seed? but about the Object of Election; whether it
be, man simply considered, or man so qualified, that is, believing, and
repenting: whether faith and repentance, antocede, or result from Gods
Election. Does any Arminian deny a personal Election, that is, an Election of
singular persons, as you ignorantly say here? They hold it to be indeed,
singularium credentium. But what is that to my Lord of Canterbury? or what to
this Clause of the Collect? This innocent Clause, not touching in the least
manner the condition or motive of Gods Election, why should it be discarded in
favor of Arminianisme? Again, if the word Elect did scandaline his Grace, why
did he not put it out of other Collects, as well as out of this as, upon All
Saints Day, Almighty God, which have knit together thy Elect in one Communion,
etc. And at the Burial of the Dead, Almighty God, in whom the souls of them
that are elected, etc. accomplish the number of thine Elect. Besides, be you
pleased to know, your Brethren here in England help this Prayer with a
certain distinction of Ips. News.
Elect to a Crown temporal, and Elect to a Crown eternal: doubting that
somebody at some time may be included in it, whom they cannot heartily allow to
be one of Gods Elect. Now were his Grace content to pray with that singleness
and simplicity of heart as these your godly Brethren use to do, in case this
Clause were peccant, and would not down with him (what an easy escape was
there for him?) it had been but to reserve to himself, that special meaning
of Elect to a Crown temporal, and all had been safe. But in charity, I
beseech you, believe the matter to be indeed what it was; when this Change was
made, the King had no issue. But, shy you, A childlesse man may say in his
prayers, that God is the Father of the Elect, and of their seed? Yet, by your
favor, not so properly then; for to address a prayer to God under such a
compellation, Father of thine Elect and of their seed, should doubtless in
Congruity relate to the prosperity of the Kings and Queens Children, which then
were none. For you scoff upon the Liturgy of this Church, a sacred piece, and
a Noli me tangere in England. Though you presume you have gotten the time now,
wherein you may say any thing of Gods public Worship established among us; yet
we trust you will find your selves extremely disappointed.

24. This is all you can get from his Grace's Pen, to help on the clamor
here; except that you tell us, you have a suspicion, my Lord of Canterbury
directed, in penning a passage of the large Declaration, concerning your
censure at Glasgow upon the opinions of Arminius: Which were there condemned to
be Popish opinions. For, Dr. Balcanquall, you say, could not relate it; because
he was a member of the Dort Synod. Who penned, or who directed in penning that
Declaration, is to me unknown; but sure your reason is a mere cobweb. For why
may not a Member of the Dort Synod relate a matter of Fact, as it passed in the
Assembly at Glasgow? Because your affections do biasse you, in all your
relations, to your own party, think you it is so with every man else?

25. The hard shift you make to find out such Objections as these, are his
Graces most evident Purgation, and so he is clear in this matter. One thing
let me tell you by the Way, you cite King James: And great reason we should
rise up to such a sacred Authority. And willingly would I hereby engage you,
that K. James may be cited to you, upon just occasion? It is a Rule in Law:
Reg. Iur. in Sexto.
Quod semel placuit, amplius displicere non debet: An authority admitted for
good here, should not be refused elsewhere. Shall we decide concerning the
maine points which have been, as you pretend, the prime and proper Incentives
of this present miserable combustion. That is, the Canons, Liturgy, Supremacy
of Kings, Episcopal Government, by King James his sentence? Who, in many
years, with much Care and Cost labored to build up, what at one Commotion you
have tumbled down? was it not I, that in the year of God 84. erected Bishops,
and depressed all their popular Parity, etc. I, that for the space of six
years before my coming into England, labored nothing so much, as to depresse
their Parity, and re-erect Bishops again, etc. That Bishops ought to be in the
Church, I ever maintained as an Apostolic Institution, and so the Ordinance of
God. Monit. to all Christ. Monarchs.
King James? But this is always the fashion of men that are wholly addicted to
serve their own Opinions. Let K. James declare himself in some speculative
points of so abstruse a nature, that the most acute Judgments, after long
search are feign to sit down, with that of the Apostle, (...)! Let him in such
points as these declare himself in any manner as you desire; and then who but
King James, a venerable Prince? but if he speak in things practical and
palpable upon long experience and setlednesse of judgment any thing that
crosses your Humor; then you turn your deaf ear to King James; Charm he
never so wisely, you will not hear him.

26. Now we go on to Popery, where the first point objected to my Lord of
Canterbury, is: That he holds not the Pope to be The Antichrist. How know you
that? Where has he told you so? P. 35
You say, he confesses that place of the public Liturgy wherein it was
imported, was changed by his own hand. How was it changed? From these words;
Root out that Babylonish and Antichristian Sect, into this form of words, Root
out that Romish and Babylonish Sect of them, etc. So the Word Antichristian is
delete. A strange Cause have you taken in hand, that must be thus unhappily
defended. First, you are wrong upon the Liturgy again: This Prayer, is in the
Service appointed for the fifth of November, which you fraudulently, and to
raise hatred, call the public Liturgy: The public Liturgy was extant and
established by Act of Parliament, before that Service was begotten, or the
miserable occasion of it fell out. Secondly, Ep. 2.18.
S. John tells us, there be many Antichrists: so that though a man doubt,
whether the Pope of Rome be that great Antichrist; yet he may esteem well
enough the Doctrines and practices of the Romish Church to be Antichristian,
and call them so: what needed this blotting of the Service then? His Grace
might have held his Opinion, and let the word Antichristian stand. And thirdly;
so he does: there it is, as it was; Root out that Babylonish and Antichristian
Sect of them. For the change (with which you would color this passage)
objected by Burton, ventilated in the Star Chamber, defended afterward by
Heylin and Dow (all which you seem to have read with double diligence, and
therefore I mention them) was no more but this, from, that Sect, into, that
Sect (of them:) I say the word Antichristian, remains (I have seen the very
Original:) So that your Crimination here is a notorious, and which is worse, a
wilful Falsehood: And whatever your pretentions of holiness be, and great show
of zeal; we shall desire the ingenuous Reader, for his final satisfaction,
and to decide upon the whole matter betwixt us, but to remember this one
Principle, that the devil is the father of lies.

27. But the Popes Antichristianisme, being thus (as you falsely pretend)
removed by my Lord of Canterbury, you say, P 36.
the Pope, and his Cardinals, and their whole religion, begin to look with a
new face. Particularly it lies upon his Grace, that debating with the Jesuit
Fisher, about the Popes Supremacy over the Church universal, he yields to S
Peter a Primacie of Order: to the Pope, 1 a Primacie of Order; 2 A more
powerful Principality than other Churches; 3 An Apostolic Chair; 4 A
jurisdiction within his own Patriarchate. Touching a Primacie of Order granted
to S. Peter, who ever denied it? Do I deny it, says Chapter 5. div. 3.
D. Reynolds in his Conference with Heart? Then let me be smitten, not with the
blunt weapon of the words of men, etc. Touching those privileges granted the
Pope; neither my Lord of Canterbury, nor any reformed Writer of note in this
Church, does deny them to him. And particularly here had he denied the first,
it would have been extorted from him by the third Canon of the second
Oecumenicall Council: the second, by the flat testimony of Irenaeus, which the
Jesuit alleged: the third by S. Augustine: The fourth, by the sixth Canon of
the Nicene Council, and Rufsinus his Testimony: and again, every one of
these, by other Testimonies sans Number. But now, I pray, observe; First, all
these Privileges are granted to the Bishop of Rome; stante Imperio, and intra
Romaniam: the Empire yet standing, and within Roman soil: so that the States
and Policies of the world being now changed, happily he may be brought to a new
reckoning, as his 25. Number. 13. What if the States and Policies of the world be
much changed? etc.
Grace notes. Secondly, the most demonstrative way to cut off his claim of
Supremacy by divine Right, which is the point in question, is to show all his
Greatness to be founded upon positive Law, and in relation to the temporal
State. So the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon, (...) because that is the
Regal City: And so Can. 28. Ep. ad solit. vitam. agent.
Athanasius, (...) Rome is the Metropolitan City of all the Roman Soil. And
the most demonstrative way to cut off his claim of Universal Supremacy, is to
Prima pars huius Canonis satis perspicue docet Alexandrinum Episcopum habuisse
Potestatem in vicinis aliquot Regionibus, sic etram Romanum Episcopum sua sub
potestate vicinas Italiae Regiones obtinuisse. Antiochenum Episcopum suas etiam
vicinas Ecclesias gubernasse: neque horum quenquam in alterum superioritatem
sibi sumpsisse: ergo tunc temporis Romanus Pontifex nondum pro universali
totius Ecclesiae Episcopo agnoscebatur. Osiand. Ep. ad Con. Nic. Can. 6. Et
Baron. scot. Apol. Tract. 5. c. 9.
limit him within the circuit of his own Jurisdiction. Thirdly, (as is said
before) it is neither strange nor new in the Church of England, to yield the
Bishop of Rome all these Privileges. I shall put this Author in mind of King
James only, King Charles his blessed father: Praemon. to all Chr. K.
Of Bishops and Church Hierarchy, I very well allow (as I said before) and
likewise of Ranks and Degrees amongst Bishops. Patriarchs (I know) were in the
time of the Primitive Church, and I likewise reverence that Institution for
orders sake, and amongst them was a contention for the first place. And for my
self (if that were yet the question) I would with all my heart give my consent
that the Bishop of Rome should have the first seat, I being a Western King
would go with the Patriarch of the West. And for his Temporal Principality
over the Signiory of Rome, I do not quarrel it neither; let him in God his
name be Primus Episcopus inter omnes Episcopos, and Princeps Episcoporum, so as
it be no otherwise then as Peter was Princeps Apostolorum. How say you, Sir,
whether is more bountiful to the Pope? King James, or the Archbishop of
Canterbury? he that can be content to admit him Patriarch of the West; or he
that circumscribes him within his Italique Diocese? Had you been to answer
the Jesuit here, you would have granted him none of all this. You would have
told him plainly, the Pope was never of any credit in the Catholic Church,
neither Bishop, nor Primate, nor Patriarch, but a Monster, and always
Antichrist: or rather you would have told him, there was never any Catholic
Church at all. But it has not been our way in England to confute Jesuits so:
We are persuaded that by the strength of Truth, we may subdue Falseshood.
Magna est veritas, and praevalebit, but to drive out one untruth with another
is an unworthy, and indeed, an unsuccessefull way. Though our Adversaries be
never so mad (says (...). Ad Gal. c. 1.
St. Chrysostom) yet it behooves not us out of the like love of contention to
go awry from the Truth.

28. But among all the Paradoxes charged here by you upon the Divines of our
Church, this I stood amazed at. You say, They teach, That the Restitution of
the Popes ancient Authority in England, and yielding unto him all the Power
that this day he has in Spain or France, would be many ways advantageous,
and in nothing prejudicial to the King. Good God! upon which of the
Canterburians will this Paradox fall? Even upon his Grace himself, you say;
whose words stand upon the black list of your Margin, thus. Cant. Relat. page
202. He that is not blind, may see if he will, of what little value the Popes
power in France and Spain is, this day, further then to serve the turns of
their Kings therewith, which they do to their great advantage. Now that
impudence it self should not blush, out of these words to extort such a
prodigious conclusion. Relat. of Relig.
Sir Edwin Sands, a man never suspected sure in the least manner, to warpe
toward Popery, discourses very largely, with what permutation of courtesies
the Pope gratifies Popish Princes; and they, him: how he serves them with his
Dispensations and Excommunications, that he may be served by them with their
Executions: In all which, belike, he does but commend the like Practices to
his own King, and insinuate that the restitution of the Popes power in
England, would be many ways advantageous, and in nothing prejudicial unto
him. He that says, men of haughty spirits, use proud and atheistical
Discourses, Psalm. 33.
Their tongue goes through the world, therefore fall the people unto them, and
thereout suck they no small advantage, does by your reasoning, herein exhort
men to Pride and Atheism. If these your candid Constructions may go for solid
Arguments, to prove Popery upon my Lord of Canterbury, nay if they induce not
all reasonable men, to believe him, as he is, most clear and innocent, and
that more effectually, then any thing we can reply to you: (...). Farewell to
all modesty, truth, and piety. But let me tell you touching these great Kings,
French and Spanish; the experience of your Behavior here, toward our and your
Gracious Sovereign, will rivet them faster into the Popes Chair, then all the
Courtesies they can receive from the Pope himself, when they shall see that to
reform Religion, will not be to vindicate their own just power in the
government of the Church, nor to reduce their Kingdoms to the peaceable
profession of Christian Truth; but to expose themselves to new hazards, and
indeed to break one yoke to put on another, when they shall see that under
pretense of Reformation, some men will still be heaving at the public
Government, and induce others to expostulate espee au poing; upon every
occasion, when they shall see the King of Great Britain, that sustaines so
much unjust envy and inconvenience with the neighboring world, for defense of
the Gospel, after the settlement of so many years, at as hard a pass to
satisfy his Subjects in matters of Religion, as ever Themselves were: When
they shall observe all this to arise not from any accidental matter of Fact;
but from questions of right; from Principles and Doctrines infused into the
people, by them that will be held the only Architects of a Reformation: though
(God knows) they are far from it: I say, when they shall observe and
consider all this; it may probably be thought, they will keep too close, where
now they are. And this is an immense scandal, and incurable would given by you
to the Truth of God, which you may do well to consider of in your cooler
thoughts.

29. Next it offends you, P. 39.
my L. of Canterbury should exempt himself from the jurisdiction of the Pope,
which he does even by their own Laws and Canons. But I pray let not this be a
point of Popery: To any reasonable man this one period is a sufficient
confutation of your whole discourse: unless you can by some strange art
conclude this contradiction, That to shut out the Pope, is to let him in. P. 41.


30. But it offends you most of all: that he says, We and the Papists are of
one religion: yet he gives you his reason withal: Starre-Cham. Speech. p. 36.
There have been in the world of old, three Religions, Paganism, Iudaisme,
Christianisme: Two of these are false, says Cont. Sabel. Gregales.
Athanasius; and if they oppose each other, it is but as the Babylonians fought
with the Egyptians: the third is the true. To these three, says his Grace,
later times have added a fourth, which is Turcisme. Now if these be all (and
Brerewood, who inquired thereabout with more diligence, than, I believe, ever
you did, can Inquir. c. 11.
tell us of no more) And we cannot reasonably account the Papists to be Jews,
Pagans, or Turks, we must grant them Christians; and so we and they fall under
the same gender of Religion. That in this Religion we differ, and that the
Difference is certain gross corruptions superinduced by them to the very
endangering of salvation; this the Archbishop defends, and you take notice of
it: but this satisfies you not, it must be toto genere, a diverse Religion. Now
to bid us quit such an authentic division, and not supply us with a new one;
to put the Archbishops Reason in your margin, and not gainesay it with a better
in your Text, is but the same prudence which you have used all your book
along. There is a great Schism in the Mahumetan Religion, and it begun Paul.
Iovi. L. 13.
much at the same time that Luther stirred in Germany, yet we count them all
Mahumetans still: and why may not dissenting Christians be all Christians? That
some errors and corruptions brought into a Religion, should diversifie it so,
as to make it no more the same, is alike absurd and unreasonable, as if one
should say, an unsound man is no more a man. We hold the substance of Religion
in Common: the Papists with us, Ephesians. 4.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; which are S. Paul's Fundamentals. Our
Faith, or Belief, is the same, as it is contained in, and explicated by the
same Creeds: Our Baptism the same, which is the proper Badge, and Character
Vide S. Aug. cont. Crescon. l. 2. c. 4.
of one Religion: when any of them return from their Errors to us, we Pource
qui'l rest encores quclque petite trace d'Eglise en la Papaute and mesme que
la substance du Baptesme y est demcurce joinct que Defficace du Baptesme ne
despend de celui qui Padmintstre, nous Confessons que cieux qui y sont baptizez
n'ont besoin d'un second Baptesme. Confess. Gallican
iterate not this. We think our selves bound to eschew that arrogance and
singularity, which Iam illud quale est quod hominibus Christianis etiam
Clericis dicitis, e^te Christiani* Optat. l. 3. Non est alius tam impius
superbiae tumor apud omnes qui se a Christi unitate discindunt, quam se solos
esse Christianos jactare, and damnare caeteros. August. cont. Crescon. lib. 4.
Et in Epist. 169. ad Eusebius.
Optatus and S. Augustine reprehended so sharply in the Donatists. Now if this
be not to your mind, I pray tell us what specificates a Religion; what latitude
you will allow: Shall every difference in Religion be sufficient to produce a
new one? Then Geneva and you are not of one Religion: For your new erection of
Ruling Elders to sway in all Presbyteries and Assemblies, and to voice in
Matters of Faith, Geneva knows not: Nay the Protestants of France, as D'Aubiga
l. 2. c. 5.
an Historian of their own Party tells us, offered to conform themselves to
all the Ceremonies and Constitutions that had been established within the
fifth Age of the Church; whereas you forsake them all. But if one difference
serve not to diversifie a Religion, may a few do it? Then are not you (a thing
which we shall by no means acknowledge) of one and the same Religion with us.
P. 98.
For, besides other differences between us, you say, your Contrymen would
never be induced to follow so much of the Mass as we retained here. If a few
will not do it, then how many, I pray? -- depinge, ubi sistam: how many
Errors for Number, and how great for Quality, are of a just weight, to make
Christened men, no Christians? When you go about this Work, you will find
your self brought, in locum lubricum and periculosum, as Cicero calls it: so
that you were better take the Stoics counsel, (...), that is, to be quiet;
and to stop this differencing of Religions, which is cutting a thread betwixt
Heaven and hell, at those known bounds and limits, which common observation
has made: else, you will but venture into a soriticall Maze, out of which you
will never be able to find your way.

31. In like manner, it offends you, P. 44.
that my Lord of Canterbury, in all that large Book set out by him the last
year, does no where charge the Papists, with Schism, Heresy, or Idolatry;
nor any of his Favorites, you say, have done it, in earnest, as far as you
can remember, in all your poor Lecture. Now truly I see little Cause, why you
should much confide in your own poor Lecture: For doubtless, most of these
Collections were brought to your hand; and it is plain, because in the puzle
of digesting them, your fashion is to put down a Quotation, and then another
and another; and often by mishap you light upon the same again, and down you
clap it again, without any Care at all. Let the Reader but observe the manner,
and he will be of my mind.

32. But first, touching Schism: does my Lord of Canterbury no where charge
the Papists with Schism? That he does sure very plainly: especially in the
23. Sect. of his Book: where he shows; in regard they thrust us from them by
Excommunications and Censures, and were obstinate to continue in their own
Corruptions; the Schism was theirs. The Cause of the Schism is yours, says
he, for you thrust us from you, because we called for Truth, and redress of
Abuses: A Schism must needs be theirs, whose the cause is. Again, he makes
the Separation, that gives the first just cause of it; not He that makes an
actual separation upon a just cause preceding. Further, as he casts upon them
the P. 145.
beginning of the Schism, so does he the continuance of it. And if this be not
to charge them with Schism, I know not what is: and insisting so largely, as
he does, upon this Argument, how could you miss it? You that a little before
could see in his Book, what was not there; the Popes Authority absolutely
vindicated, and commended to be set up in England; Now cannot see what is
there, The Papists charged with Schism: but no great marvel, this: Tertul.
Apol. cap. 9.
Coecitatis enim duae species facile concurrunt, ut qui non vident quae sunt,
videre videantur quae non sunt. Or in S. Basil's language: (...): An eye
indisposed and out of temper sees not many things that are, and seems to see
many things which are not.

33. Next how should we be sure, neither the Archbishop nor any of his
Favorites charge the Papists with those other two Crimes of Heresy and
Idolatry? You that read them only to explore what is amiss, will not report
what you find, for you say, they absolve them clearly in formal Terms of all
those three crimes, Schism, Heresy, and Idolatry: Of Schism: because they
go on in the practice of their Forbeares without introducing any late
Novations. Of Heresy, because their errors takes no part of the Foundation
away, but are only Excesses and Additions, consisting with all fundamental
Truth. Of Idolatry: because they teach not the giving of Latria to any Image
or any Creature. Where that they clearly and in formal terms absolve them of
all these three, or any of the three, I am very confident will be found an
untruth; for it is one thing to absolve them by Deductions and Consequences, of
your making, and another to absolve them clearly and in formal Terms,

Concerning the first, which is Schism, as your report is false, so the reason
given is weak and filly, for it is no Contradiction, but they may go on in
the practices of their forefathers, and yet be guilty of Schism; by
exterminating all those, that will not submit themselves to the same vicious
practices, together with them; as it was showed even now. The blame ever goes
along with the Cause.

34. For the second, which is Haeresie: Even those Errors of Rome which they
hold not to be contra fundamentum, fundamental errors: yet they hold them to
be damnable; and if obstinately persisted in, heretical. Which is clear by
his Graces discourse, Confer. p. 315. And elsewhere; as what say you to this
passage, p. 298. Therefore in this present case, there is peril, great peril
of damnable, both schism and Haeresie, and other sin by living and dying in
the Roman faith, tainted with so many superstitions, as at this day it is. Call
you this clear absolving?

35. Thirdly Concerning Idolatry; though the Papists be very nice in their
doctrine here, yet it is well enough known, their Practice is gross: and how
little my Lord of Canterbury favors them either in their doctrine or practice,
I leave the Reader to be his own Judge, if he please to peruse the 33. Sec.
Nu. 13. of his Conference, where upon occasion of a proposition taken out of
Lammas, he puts his adversary to this question. And now I pray A. C. do you
be judge, whether this proposition do not teach idolatry: and whether the
modern church of Rome, be not grown too like to paganism in this point: For
my own part, I heartily wish it were not. And much more has he there to this
purpose; enough sure to show what credit may be given to this shameless
Calumniatour, who would make the World believe, that the Papists stand absolved
of these three Crimes, Schism, Heresy, and Idolatry, clearly and in formal
terms.

36. His like frequent overstrainings in this kind, are an evident
demonstration, that he set himself about this Work, not out of any Love of
Truth, but out of a wicked purpose to do Mischief, They teach, says he, P.
43.
that not only the People, but their most learned Clergy, Popes, Cardinals,
Jesuits, living and dying in their bitter oppositions and persecutions of
Protestants, are in no hazard of Damnation, though they never come to any
particular Acknowledgement of their sinful opinions, and practices, following
thereupon; as who should say (for so the Words import) though knowing them to
be sinful Opinions and practices, yet never acknowledging them such, never
repenting, nor asking God forgiveness for them, they are still in the way to
heaven. Belike these Canterburians would be content to save the Pope and his
Cardinals: though sinning against the Holy Ghost: for truth is, this were no
less. To make good this Accusation, stand in his Margin this and such like
sayings. The Corruptions of Rome materially and in the very kind and Nature,
are leven, dross, hay and stubble, yet the Bishop thought that such as were
misled by Education or long custom, or over-valuing the Soveraigntie of the
Roman Church, and did in Simplicity of heart embrace them, might by their
general Repentance and faith in the merits of Christ, attended with Charity
and other virtues, find Mercy at God's hands. Reader, how say you, does this
come home to the Popes learned Clergy living and dying in bitter, and
unrepented Oppositions, and persecutions of Protestants? It was counted a
Christian Speech, that of Eusebius. Hist. L. 6. c. 45.
Dionysius Alexandrinus to Novatus: Thou ought to have endured any thing,
rather then to rent the Church of God: To suffer for avoiding of Schism is a
Martyrdom never a whit less, nay indeed more Glorious, then for not
sacrificing to Idols. And S. Chrysostom cites this from the mouth of an holy
man, as he says; That even Martyrdom will not satisfy for Schism. Now then
what Spirit, may we think, guides these men, that are so dearly affected to
Division and Combustion, that rather, then fail to kindle a fire among us, do
harden their faces to slander, and in this bold Manner?

37. Our Divines say; there is a Difference in Case of Schism or Heresy,
betwixt the Simple, and the Learned; the Misled, and the misleaders: They say;
A man may be a good Protestant, and yet not damn all his forefathers: They
say, we refuse Communion with Rome in her Public Service, being gross and
superstitious; but in Charity we hold Union with them and all the Church of
Christ. These and the like sayings are scored down here in his Margin as foul
and impious: So that belike, the Contradictory of them would have better become
the Pens of Protestants. They must say, there is no difference betwixt Priest
and people, simple and learned, Leaders and followers, all are in a like
Condition, all must to hell alike. They must say, no man can be a good
Protestant that lives in charity with a Papist; Nor can he be a good
Protestant, unless he damn all his Forefathers. What Cause there may be to
repent of that pious and prudent Way, which has hitherto been insisted upon
by this our Church in defense of the Truth; and is most agreeable to Christian
moderation and the practice of the most holy times, I know not. But if this
keen zeal were the only Weapon left, to destroy Popery: And the Bishops with
their Adherents should wipe their Pens, and give place to these fiery
Champions; What Fields of honor would be won by their devouring sword of
damnation: what accession made to the Protestant part; wise men know well
enough, and time would teach the rest, which is the best master to show an
error, but the worst to mend it.

38. Hitherto you have stood upon Generals, you tell us; now you will come up
close to the Canterburians in particular points of Popery: and for that
purpose you propound us four heads. P 48.
Their Idolatries, their Heresies, their Superstitions, their abomination of
Desolation the Mass: In all which, say you, nay the grossest of which; it
shall appear, that the Canterburians join with Rome. But having undertaken to
present the Reader with such passages as are objected to my Lord of Canterbury
from his own pen, which was to be expected would raise a great Cloud over him:
To see the ill luck of it; my work is done even where it should begin. For,
except about the Matter of Altars, in this next point of Idolatry, I meet not
with his Name cited above once or twice in all the residue of your Book: so
that you are feign to give him over at the first loose: only the word
Canterburian runs through all, but to keep the work alive, and your Reader in
mind, at what mark specially, be it right or wrong, he is to shoot. This must
be swallowed, or else you have done just nothing, that all these men, whom you
bring to the Bar for Canterburians, wrote by his special encouragement, and
direction; whereas some of them were his Elders and Antecessors in the Church,
as D. Andrews and D. White, (...) some of them were and are mere strangers,
and unknown to him, so much as de facie, which is most true, and will be
avowed. Yea and when this is swallowed, yet you have done just nothing, for let
the indifferent Reader, but use the help of your Margin to confute your Text,
not distracting his own eyes with passion or prejudice, and this quarrel is
well nigh ended. Though were it otherwise, yet to affirm that the Archbishop
of Canterbury, long before he was Archbishop, for these many years, has held
the Pens of all that have written in England amiss, and of none of them that
have written right, is such a wild Presumption, as no man of any honesty can
say, and no man of Common Sense will believe.

39. Concerning the holy Table or Altar, your Accusation is, Canterbury says,
that Worship, yea and divine Worship or Adoration is to be given to the Altar.
Let us see now, whether your Allegations in the Margin will come home to this;
there we find: Great reverence is due to the Body, and so to the Throne where
this Body is usually present; Mark you, Reverence, not Worship. But you say he
gives, Venite Adoremus to the Altar, and no man can suppose that to be less
than Divine Adoration. Let us to your Margin again: there we read thus:
Therefore according to the Service Book of the Church of England, (in this
Compellation, Venite adoremus) the Priest and the People both are called upon
for external and bodily Worship of God in his Church. Mark you again,
Worship of God, not of the Altar. Let the Reader peruse the whole Passage, as
it is set down within the Bounds of a few short Pages in his Star Chamber
Speech, and see if his constant expression be not, Reverence to the Throne,
Worship to God. St. Sp. p. 43.
God forbid (says his Grace there) we should worship any thing, but God
himself. It is a rare confidence you have in your Reader, that you dare set
before his eyes your own assertion and confutation of it both at once.

40. Now that he says, Great reverence is due to the Body, and so to the
Throne where this Body is usually present: Why should it repent him of so
saying? Ad 2. Epist. Cor. Hom. 20
S. Chrysostom says the same, and that even Terminis terminantibus: (...):
Thou reverencest this Altar, because thereon is placed the Body of Christ. And,
(...). Why we should challenge S. Chrysostom of Idolatry; or why that should
be Idolatry in our Archbishop, which was none in S. Chrysostom, cannot I
imagine. But this you call, Sheltring ones self under the name of a Father; an
P. 49.
usual thing, you say, with us here in England, and we are feign to do it, to
keep off our heads the indignation of the people. A speech so unworthy, that I
think no Scholar, nor good Christian but will disdain to read. Sir, excuse
our Divines in this, I pray: They have to do with Adversaries in the Church of
Rome, that are men of learning, and would make the world believe, they have
carried all the suffrage of Antiquity from them, they cite the Fathers to
discover their falsehood. And they have to do with novelling Schismatics; who,
because men, though of the best merit, are commonly undervalued in their own
times, must be encountered with names, and Authorities above exception. But
chiefly they do it, because Error being surreptitious and younger then Truth,
we are bid by insisting upon the old Paths, to find out the good Way, Ier.
6.16.
and to walk in that. And for this, did the Fathers (...). Basil. de Spir.
Sanct. (...). Chrysostom ad Mat. Hom. 3. (...). Socrat. Lib. 3.
cite their Forefathers; ever by the Tracke of intermediate Times, ascending
to the Spring head of Truth. But you pass by all ancient Authors, and to make
good your work, betake your selves to other ways, very far different from
scholasticke arguments, thinking it sufficient, you incur not the indignation
of the People, however abused and misled by you.

41. But touching the point in hand; we are very much unsatisfied, since all
Primitive Christianity, Eastern and Western, is so full for reverencing holy
places and holy things, whence it should come, that to give them any regard
now, should be one of Rome's grossest Idolatries. The Altar had so much honor,
as by it self to denominate our whole Function, and Ministry sometimes: as
Altari Cypr. Ep. 4.9. and passim.
deservire; ab Altari avocare; ad Altaris Ministerium, vel locum Sacerdotalem,
indignum obrepere; to make a Schism in the Church, was erigere Altar contra
Altar. Catholic Christians did honor it: Quid enim est tam sacrilegum, quam
Altaria Dei (in quibus and aliquando vos obtulistis) frangere, radere,
removere? in quibus vota populi and membra Christi portata sunt. Optat. lib. 6.
(...), etc. Conc. sub Agap. and Men. Act. quint.
Heretics and Schismatics either break it, or as if it contracted some
pollution, from former use, scrape it: Infidels and Apostates, in contempt of
Christian Religion, profane it, Theodoret. l. 4 c. 22. and Nazianz. (...).
dancing, or dicing, or otherwise abusing it: One Impudenter contra sacrum
Altar minxit. Hist. trip. l. 6. c. 32.
of Iulians Renegadoes did that to it by way of disgrace, that I cannot civilly
tell you; as if to dishonor a Christian Altar, were to dishonor Christ. And
since all this is so, be you as petulant and as bold as you please, I should
rather desire to be with them, that in contemplation of those holy mysteries
there dispensed to us approach thither, (...), as (...).
Gregory Nyssen speaks, with reverence and godly fear. In the mean time your
falsehood is intolerable, that tell your Reader, my Lord of Canterbury gives to
the Altar, no less then divine Adoration.

42. This being past, you have little else to object to him, insomuch that
after the intervall of many pages, you are feign to P. 85, 86.
rub up the same again. In your next point, touching the Adoration of the
Communion Elements, you are quite to seek of any Allegation at all: not one
Canterburian can be brought to depone for it, except that you are angry at
bowing, and call it our new adoration, that is our new Idolatry; our old
Idolatry, kneeling at the Communion, you are content to pass over you say: but
the new will not down with you. How new or old it is in the Church of God;
Much has been said of late time: But whether you be a competent Judge of
Idolatry the while, or whether our writings in England ought to be levelled by
the Rubric of your Presbyterian Discipline, let any son of this Church
consider.

43. Touching Images, Relics, and Invocation of Saints; I find of my Lord of
Canterbury, Ne gry quidem. Was it, because that in all his Writings he touches
no where upon those Points? No. But where you cannot speak ill of him, you
will be sure not to speak well. How he writes of Images, I showed before; Pray
you read what he says concerning Invocation of Saints: Sect. 33. Number. 13.
Though some of the ancient Fathers have some Rhetorical Flourishes about it,
for the stirring up of devotion (as they thought) yet the Church admitted not
then of the invocation of them, but only of the Commemoration of the Martyrs,
as appears clearly in S. Augustine. And when the Church prayed to God for any
thing, she desired to be heard for the mercies and merits of Christ, not for
the merits of any Saints whatsoever, etc. If God must hear our prayers for the
merits of the Saints, how much fall they short of sharers in the Mediation of
Redemption? You may think of this. For such Prayers as these, the Church of
Rome makes at this day, and they stand (not without great scandal to Christ
and Christianity) used and authorized to be used in the Missall. For instance,
upon the Feast of S. Nicholas you pray: That God, by the Merits and Prayers of
S. Nicholas, would deliver you from the fire of Hell. And upon the Octaves of
S. Peter and S. Paul, you desire God that you may obtain the glory of eternity
by their Merits. And on the Feast of S. Bonaventure you pray, that God would
absolve you from all your sins by the interceding Merits of Bonaventure. How
say you? if the Canterburians hold to this, I hope they are not gone from the
Protestant Way: if otherwise, why then are they Canterburians?

44. In your next long Chapter there is but one dribbler against my Lord of
Canterbury, and that is in the matter of P. 71.
Baptism; where pressing against the Jesuit that Baptism of Infants may be
proved out of Scripture: (Mark you, out of Scripture; so he does not leave it
to stand upon one leg of Tradition:) Thus he speaks, Relat. p. 56. That
Baptism is necessary to the Salvation of Infants in the ordinary way of the
Church (without binding God to the use and means of that Sacrament, to which
he has bound us) it is express in S. John Chap. 3. Except a man be borne
again of Water, he cannot enter. No Baptism, no entrance: nor can Infants
creep in any other ordinary way. And this is the received opinion of all the
ancient Church. Infants are to be baptized, that their salvation may be
certain. For they which cannot help themselves, must not be left only to
extraordinary helps, of which we have no assurance, and for which we have no
warrant at all in Scripture. Hence your inference is: They avow (say you) that
all those who die in their infancy without Baptism, by whatsoever miss, by
whosoever's fault, are certainly damned, as far as men can judge. A very
liberal Conclusion, considering the narrow Premises you had to deal upon:
but you follow it; For Baptism is the ordinary mean which God has appointed
for their salvation; which failing, salvation must be lost; except we would
dream of extraordinary Miracles, of the which we have no warrant. Now if a
man analyze this huddle of words, and take the height of their sense, it is, as
if you had said: They avow, that infants dying without Baptism, must certainly
be damned, except they be saved. The Archbishops speech falls into these
Parts. 1 Baptism is the ordinary way of salvation appointed by Christ
himself, John 3. 2 To save without Baptism, is a way extraordinary. 3 To
trust to extraordinary ways, we have no warrant in Scripture. 4 Children are
not to be exposed to the peril of those ways, whereof we have no warrant. You
will wring out of this; Children dying without Baptism, by whatsoever miss,
by whosoevers fault, are certainly damned: But before you can get off, a
Whimsey takes you in the head, that you are feign to add; Except we will dream
of extraordinary miracles, of which we have no warrant. That is in sense;
Except God, who is not tied to means, please to save them by a way
extraordinary. So that a primo ad ultimum, your discovery is; Children dying
without Baptism, according to the Canterburians, are certainly damned, except
they be not damned. Marry that to express, an honest and orthodoxe sense, you
will use such an invidious phrase, as dreaming of extraordinary miracles, it is
but your wonted Candor. Call you it a miracle, for God to save by a way
extraordinary? that is, besides the means and rules prescribed to us? Or a
belief of such a saving, a dream of miracles? The proper Matter and Subject
of miracles is Nature, and things natural: Aquin. 1. q. 110. 4. c.
Miraculum dicitur, quod fit praeter ordinem totius naturae creatae. But
Salvation is a work wholly supernatural; and if you will translate miracles
thither, to works supernatural, then to save even by Baptism, is a miracle;
Ferrar. ad Aq. Cont. genesis l. 3. c. 101.
Et universaliter omne opus, quod a solo Deo fieri potest. And now see the
addle language we are fallen into; for thus it will come to pass, that if to
save by Baptism, be a miracle, and to save without Baptism, an extraordinar^e
miracle, then some miracle is an ordinary miracle; which is absurd, and a
contradiction in terminis; every miracle being praeter ordinem.

45. The Canterburians (for so you will call them) do not love to be too busy
with damnation: you are those men of wrath; in whose Power if it were to send
poor souls to hell, it is to be doubted the whole world had been consumed by
you ere this; as (...), etc. Ep. Ethic.
Justin Martyr speaks of your like. The matter is; you stand not much upon
Baptism or the necessity of it, you use to dispute against it at home: but we
here, hold it most necessary: and our Liturgy has a special Rubricke for
Private Baptism in case of extremity, which I still urge, to show your
incompetency to judge of our Writings. And whether our or your doctrine be the
sounder in this point, I refer you to be instructed by your own P. 78, 79.
and seq.
Duplyes, who have set you to school in this Argument, and many other; I would
we could see you rid your fingers handsomely of them. Take along which you
likewise K. James his opinion, and what evidence, say you, ought to be so
demonstrative as that? Who in the Conference of Hampton Court, reports, that to
a Scottish Minister, pierking against him with this Question, Think you
Baptism so necessary, that if it be omitted, the child should be damned? He
made this Answer: No: but if you, being called to baptize the child, though
privately, should refuse to come, I think, you should be damned.

46. Behold another Innovation: They P 73.
forbid Matrimony (...)


