A brief DESCRIPTION Of the future History of Europe, from Anno 1650 to An.
1710. Treating principally Of those grand and famous Mutations yet expected in
the World, as, The ruin of the Popish Hierarchy, the final annihilation of the
Turkish Empire, the Conversion of the Eastern and Western Jews, and their
Restoration to their ancient Inheritances in the holy Land, and the FIFTH
MONARCHY of the universal Reign of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth. With
principal Passages upon every of these, out of that famous Manuscript of PAVL
GREBNER extant in Trinity-Colledge Library in Cambridge. Composed upon the
Occasion of the young KINGS Arrival into Scotland, to show what will in
probability be the Event of the present Affairs in ENGLAND and SCOTLAND.

Ludit in humanis divina Potentia rebus. Printed in the Year, 1650.

TO THE Ingenuous and well-affected Readers.
GENTLEMEN,
I Here present you with a misshapen Embryo, having neither had time for
Perfection, nor life to actuate Acception. A mere Chaos and disordered
Discourse is it, yet for matter treating of wonderful and famous Events, which
in this European world are quickly to be performed. It is true, that Primi
foetus sunt horridiores, as commonly defective in mature Conceptions and
ripeness of judgment. Yet they that read this Pamphlet seriously, will find
those Passages opened (I will not say fully explained) in Scripture, which
Commentator never yet disclosed, nor Divine unfolded. In such an intricate
Labyrinth it is easy to stray: therefore I am confident, Charity will usher
your Judgments, and your love cover mine Infirmities. I know I have slipped in
many places, but for the present can neither tell where, nor how: Some Ariadne
might do well to lead the way, and I shall be as ready to follow: Secundae
cogitationes sunt meliores: If I find those Non-entities to be accepted with,
but as much respect as worse ware every day is, it shall not irk me to bestow a
week or two in licking it over into a better form and putting a handsomer Coat
upon it is back. There are several passages in it, which (I know) will not
resent with our Great Ones: but Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, yet Magis amica
veritas, which shall prevail, though all the world gather in battalia against
it. I must confess it is too too abortive: for it came into the world in fewer
hours, then Tostatus bestowed in translating the five first Chapters of Genesis
out of Greek into Latin. I wish it may obtain the end for which I made it:
that is, to move us all with repentance to meet God in these great Mutations
and Changes he is bringing upon us in this Land; that every one would strive to
reform one from Heresies, Sects and Schisms; to suffer the Scriptures to be our
Rule, and the holy Ghost our Guide both in Faith, Religion and Discipline, that
so God may put out his hand in amending the Body-Politick in the whole, that
judgment may depart from us, destruction flee far from us; that Peace may
dwell within our walls and plenteousness within our Palaces.

I study multum in parvo, and hope to give satisfaction to all, but such as are
wedded more to their wills then reasons. For these I have no more but this, A
good wind at their backs to the Anticyra's, that they may drink Hellebor
lustily to purge their Brains, that they may be more quick, and their Eyesight
clearer. I quote strange Authors in this Work; and good Reason, for the Work it
self is strange. Yet they in whose hands these Authors are (and they are not in
every Library) shall find I have both dealt with them truly, and cited them
faithfully. And for the Tractate it self, it will with the learned be either
Laudatus aut saltem excusatus; either of which shall content me at this time.
Farewell.

A brief DESCRIPTION OF THE Future History of EUROPE, from Anno 1650, to An.
1710.
I. The Occasion of writing this Treatise.
HAving with silence and admiration beheld these ten years, the horrid Broyls
and civil Tumults in these Western Coasts of Europe, I cannot but adore the
Justice of God upon his enemies, and his paternall chastisements upon his
Church for sin. It has made me often wonder, to behold how virulently and
barbarously Protestants could oppose and massacre one another, when the Romish
Froggs can live in an established amity among themselves, and laugh at our
follies. I will not say, it is Jesuiticall projects which sets us by the ears
together, so much as our own Seditious and Schismatic spirits, and want of
Charity. If we would but ponder, how much Popery has won upon us by these
Wars and Divisions, what fearful occasions we have given to the professed
enemies of Christ to blaspheme his Name, and deride our Religion, it would much
provoke us to end our Controversies, and band against the common Enemy. The
Empire has got but a woeful Booty, by her 30 years Wars, having weakened her
self with the loss of Six Millions of valiant Soldiers, and enticed that Imp
of Mahomet to prepare an Army of 200000, now in the Field, and ready to march
within the bowels of Germany. We in England have gained no better by our civil
War, but in stead of one Tyrant to advance a douzen over us, and from the
height of Liberty to run the broad way up the next hill, to the height of
Slavery. Our Western Sun is set, on whom the eyes of all Protestants were fixed,
to have composed their differences, and united them into a mutual League
against the Romish Dragon, and the false Prophet. Nor was any insufficiency in
him to the performance of so glorious an Enterprise, had not the sins of his
own Subjects, hastened his untimely Fate. Behold then what profits our War
has brought us! and what a blessing our sins have deprived us of! How fearful
are the Judgments of God and his anger against sin, when the Church is
dilacerated, the Commonwealth disjoynted and dismembered in every part thereof,
the lust of Tyrants, the pleasure of Pesants, the barbarousnes of Soldiers,
dissentions of Churchmen, sad and tragical ends of Nobles, confusions in
Families, countenancing of Heresies, and applauding of Blasphemies are so rife
and ripe amongst men! On the contrary, how happy are Kingdoms, how blessed be
Commonwealths, when Princes, Magistrates, and other subordinate Officers, each
in their several place and calling, strive to promote the glory of God, with
the Liberty, Honor and Tranquillity of Subjects; where the Ministry is
encouraged, Universities countenanced, Courts of Judicature upholden, Subjects
be unanimous and accustomed to the Exercise of Piety and Godliness: lastly
when both Prince and people aim jointly at the advancement of the Gospel and
mutual commodity of one another, so that there be no decay, no leading into
Captivity, nor complaining in their streets!

II. The subject matter of this ensuing Discourse.
The disparity of these two contradictory conditions, and the fearful effects,
which they in all ages have wrought in the Consciences of men, have made me at
length after a long time of silence put Pen to Paper, and through the intricate
Labyrinth of those portions of Scripture which never Commentator yet ever
meddled with (I mean, the twelve last Chapters of Ezekiel, the three last of the
Revelation, the last of Daniel, with some passages in Hosea and Zechary) to
descry when We People of England with all Protestants in Europe shall see an
end of these our Wars and Tumults, what shall be the Estate of our Churches,
Stares and Kingdoms, from this present year 1650, to the beginning of the
Fifth and last universal MONARCHY of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth, which
shall begin in the year of our Lord 1710; and in what year we may expect the
downfals of the Beast of Rome, the Red Dragon of Constantinople, the total
Conversion and restoration both of the Eastern and Western Jews within their
holy Land of Jury: all which must most certainly be falfilled before the end of
the World. Of these high Points and Mysteries, I find nothing in any
Commentator upon the last of Daniel and the Revelations, save only Brightman,
who being acquainted in Leiden with Joseph Scaliger, got some (but those very
imperfect) notes of Grebner concerning those Numbers in Ezekiel and Daniel. But
that excellent Manuscript, which Johannes Baudensis writ of the Life and
Writings of Grebner, declares all these things most plainly and punctually,
how that greater Troubles, fearfuller Combustions, direfuller Devastations
shall come upon the Western. Kingdoms of Europe, then yet ever did, before
they can expect the downfall either of Turk or Pope, or the universal Monarchy
of the Gospel of Christ upon Earth. In which incomparable Work the Learned
Astrologer brings Divine and Heavenly Reasons, why Europe (for the space of
thirty seven years, after that fearful blazing Comet in 1618.) should with
amazed eyes behold the infinite and sudden mutations and downfals of
flourishing States and potent Kingdoms, the deformity of Empires, and
mournful faces of Commonwealths (as is lately happened in England, Portugal,
Swethland, Bohemia, and Denmark) the Devastations of whole Kingdoms at a clap,
and burning six or seven Nations at once in their ashes and cinders (as of late
in Germany) not to make them ask whether there be a God, Heaven and Providence,
or not? or whether Empires and States depend wholly upon the will and power of
man, or upon secret and hidden causes beyond the thoughts and expectations of
the World? but to praise God for his paternall corrections, seeing by this they
know he remembers them, and that through this Fire and Water of Affliction he
will bring his Church to a final Conquest over her Enemies, and both the
Congregations of Jews and Gentiles to an universal Monarchy over the face of
the whole Earth. Several passages of which Manuscript I will insert here and
there in this ensuing Discourse, as Method and Matter shall require.

III. The Confutation of the wicked Opinions of the Millenaries of the
Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth after An. 1700.
Since the spiritual sword was sheathed in England (which lopt off the
serpentine Heads of Heresy and Schism, while they were yet growing) it is a
wonder to see how all Sects and Schismatic Opinions in the world have (like
devouring Weed) overgrown and choked the seed of the Word. Above the rest, the
Millenaries have exalted themselves, whose abominable Pamphlets have flown
abroad like Atoms, wherein they dream of a Personal Reign of Christ upon
Earth, how he shall descent from Heaven An. 1666, destroy all the works of
darkness in every corner of the Earth, make an easy passage to men from Earth
to Heaven, so that they may ascend into Heaven, and leap down to Earth again,
as often as they list: how he shall keep a Quarter Sessions or Jail-delivery in
his own Person upon Mount Olivet, call all Nations before him, rebuke them of
sin face to face, and shall cut out of them their stony hearts, and shall sew
in their bellies hearts of flesh in stead thereof: that An. Dom. 1700 shall be
the day of Judgment, and that the Judgment shall last other 1700 years,
because otherwise the glorious Attributes of Christ's Mercy and Justice cannot
be sufficiently explained to the World and the Consciences of men. All which
Fopperies with many mo too horrid to relate, are contained in M. Archers
Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth, Rich. Stirreys Kingdom of King Jesus,
and in A.R. his Caelestis Jerusalem, Printed A. 1642, 1644, and 1645. Now
having unmasked the vanity of this Error (ut contraria juxta se posita magis
elucescant) I will epitomize in this Section the truth of the future estate of
the World, from this time to the end, which afterward I intend (God willing)
further to dilate and prosecute in this Treatise. This year 1650 all Europe are
in civil Wars. These civil wars shall not cease till they have mustered
out a great Army of the true worshippers of God to ruin Rome, which shall be
about Anno 1666. Rome thus destroyed, the Western Jews shall begin to learn the
ways of God, and believe his Gospel (which they cannot do so long as Rome
stands) and shall Anno 1683. enter upon the conversion of their Eastern
brethren (the 10. Tribes now invisibly hid in Tartaria and India) and they two
(none else) shall ruin the Mahumetan Empire about An. School. and so shall be
restored to the holy Land to reinhabit Jerusalem. Then must begin a comparative
felicity of the Church of God upon earth, because after these times both Turk
and Pope shall be destroyed. Nevertheless this felicity must be mingled with
internal troubles and persecutions, within the bowels of the Church, because
the Church shall never be wholly at rest, while the world stands. Lo, here
the difference betwixt Truth and Heresy, betwixt the opinions of the
Millenaries and right sense of Scriptures. The Millenaries say, Christ must
descend personally feom heaven: The Scriptures on the contrary say, he shall
not come from Heaven personally till the last day, when he shall descend with
his holy Angels in flaming fire to judge the quick and the dead. He shall send
power and strength from heaven to his true Worshipppers (as he has done
hitherto) to destroy Turk and Pope, from Heaven he shall give power to his
ancient people the Jews, to regain their ancient Land of Judea, and not by his
corporeal presence upon Earth: from Heaven about An. 1700. he shall transfer
his Gospel from Europe, as he has done from Asia, and raise up and inspire
godly Ministers after his own will, who shall implant his holy word in all and
every of the Kingdoms and Provinces of America, and in all countries of the
Southern and Eastern India, China, Tartaria, and in all the regions of the
North unto the worlds end, and make it shine in as great purity and glory as
ever it has done in England or Germany. This is the felicity of the Church,
the fifth Monarchy in Nebuchadnezzars Image, the ministerial (not personal)
Reign and Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, which must not endure for ever (as
Archer would have it) nor for a 1000 years (as Alsted dreams) but for a very
short time, that all Nations (none excepted) may profess Gods worship, and
none plead ignorance before his Tribunal, presently after which the
dissolution of the world shall come, after which time shall be no more.

IV. A Declaration of the effects of the blaving Comet, Anno 1618.
This Digression made, I return to my purposed method.

That fearful and ominous Night-torch, which prognosticated all that misery to
Germany and great Britain, which they have now suffered, was the forerunner of
all our evils. This Comet Longomontanus and D. Bambridge say appeared but 28.
days, indeed it was neither observed in Denmark nor at London before November.
18. or 21. but Erycius Puteanus observed it November. 11. the first time, as he
testifies in the first book of his learned Paradoxologie, page 33. 38. so it
appeared for the space of 37. or 38. days, foreshewing that first Germany,
Livonia, Swethland, with other Northparts of Europe, then Scotland, England and
Ireland, should feel the terrible effects thereof in war and famine, for the
space of 37. or 38. years, even from An. 1618. till An. 1656. This Comet was
strengthened by a fearful conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, An. 1616. July 18.
The effects of both which were not to be confined in those terrible
concomitants of war perpetrated in Germany (which L.B. and D. Vincent so
pathetically delineate) but were to end in the judgments of God upon Europe
for neglecting the downfall of Antichrist, ruin of Rome, annihilation of the
Sodomiticall Order of the Society of Jesuits, and in the extirpation of all
Kingdoms and free States of Papists, to make way for the Lion of the North to
erect his FIFTH MONARCHY in the ashes of Germany, wherein shall be established
the eternal felicity of the Church, by the conversion of the Jews and fullness
of the Gentiles.

M. Shirley Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, once showed me a Letter
from his learned friend Buxtorf, dared An. 1624. May 3. wherein was contained a
Prognostique Prophecy of the beforementioned Comet and Conjunction, sent him
from that incomparable Astrologer, Johannes Baudensis Nephew to Paul Grebner,
which for the strangeness and rarity of it, I will here insert.

Caeterum, quod de patriae nostrae afflictissimae statu consilesco, indignaris;
nihil profecto seribendum nunc habeo, nisi omnia (ut Poetae verhis utor) in
pejus ruere, and retro sublapsa referri. Tam'Danus quam Caesar enixe laborant,
ut miseram Germaniam quamprimum pessum iri spectent: Nec milites utriusque
qui^quam aliud meditantur, nisi strages and vastitatem. Accepi nudiustertius a
Johanne Baudensi (amico mihi multimodis charissimo) sententias nostratium
Astrologorum de horribili illo Cometa, qui Anno 1618. apparuit, and nuperrima
Saturni and Jovis Conjunctione. En tibi vaticinium, si non Apostolicum, at
long (ni fallor) plusquam Astrologicum. Surrexit Deus and gladium eduxit.
Clades magnorum Imperatorum, strages populorum, regum funera, rerum-publicarum
eversiones, monarchiarum mut^^iones, assassinationes principum and ducum
illustriorum, vivienta and superba consi^ia, proditiones and rebelliones inter
Subditos in hoc coelo nostro Europico exorientur. Experientur religiosi a
potentioribus Legum and institutorum Ecclesiasticorum mutationem, a plebeijs
novarum rerum inexplebilem cupiditatem. Boreales Europae parts ferro, morbo
and peste laborabunt, depauperabuntur divites, Principes Dominijs exuti erunt,
exulabunt patres and filij post longum turbarum inter capedinem in integrum
restituentur. Hie quoque Cometa terribilem Romae ruinam, singulisque Europae
civitatibus incendia minitatur, Clerici Papicolae praecipue Cardinales de
gradibus si^is dejicientur, Lowlistae ubique ad mortem rapientur, nec Gallis
aut Hispanis animus erit carnificum laqueos evitare. Quinimo cernimus etiam in
terra sanct a aveteribus incolis oriturum Regnum, quod erit Christianis
miraculum, and Orbi terricul^mentum. Novique Imperij Revolutio istis succedet,
sub quo generale gaudium, laetitia and voluptas humano generi subministrabitur,
improbis ubique de medio sublatis. Haec omnia per Regem quendam Borealem
peragentur, qui pacem, Religionem, and Securitatem per totum Orbem miraculose
stabilibit.

Whereas you are angry that I keep silence concerning the estate of our most
distressed Country. Truly I have nothing now to write, but that all things
(that I may use the words of the Poet) grow worse and woese. As well the King
of Denmark as the Emperor earnestly endeavor to see miserable Germany
destroyed as soon as may be; neither do the soldiers of either of them, think
of any other thing then slaughter and desolation.

I received the other day, from my dear Friend John Baudensis, the opinions of
our Astrologers concerning that terrible Comet which appeared Anno 1618, and
about the later Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. Behold thou then a Prophecy
(if not Apostolical) yet (if I mistake not) far beyond Astrological. GOD has
arisen and drawn his sword: There shall happen in these our European Regions,
the destruction of great Emperors, the slaughter of people, Funerals of Kings,
subversions of Commonwealths, mutations of Monarchies, massacres of Princes and
illustrious Commanders, violent and proud Counsels, Treasons and Rebellions
amongst Subjects: Clergymen shall find a change of Laws and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, by those of greater power, and an insatiable desire of new
things amongst common people. The Northern parts of Europe shall be greatly
oppressed with War, Sickness and Pestilence. Rich men shall be impoverished,
Princes cast out of their Dominions; The fathers shall be banished, and after a
long space of trouble their children shall be restored to their former
condition. This Comet also threatens the terrible ruin of Rome and burnings
in all the Cities of Europe. The Papistical Clergy, especially the Cardinals,
shall be cast down from their Dignities, the Jesuits every where shall be
drawn to death, neither shall the Frenchmen or Spaniards have courage to save
their necks from the halters. Furthermore, We discern a Kingdom to arise of the
most ancient Inhabitants in the holy Land, which to Christians shall be a
Miracle, and to the World a terror; and these shall obtain the Revolution of a
new Empire, under which shall be administered universal Gladness, Joy and
Delight to mankind (the wicked being every where taken away.) All these things
shall be effected by a certain Northern King who shall miraculously establish
Peace, Religion and Security throughout the whole world.

Thus far the words of this Letter. And how punctually all these things are
come to pass, let the world judge. We in England have felt the misery of the
one, and are ready stripped to suffer the calamities of the other, having for the
present lost what is impossible to be regained, and seeing a new storm of
Devastations hanging over our heads by the young Kings late arrival in Scotland
(where he is received as absolute Sovereign) which fills men's hearts with
pensive thoughts and doubtings what will be the end of these woeful beginnings.
For my part, I am a zealous adoret of a Parliament, nor deserve I to censure
the Actions of our Representatives, yet will I not promise the Term of an Age
to our novel Government, but think verily, a change to the old Model is nigh at
hand. It is casual to the best Kingdoms to have Interregnums, but as we stand
now, we shall neither be for six years together a Body Politic, nor a true
Church of God. That excellent Astrologer of Misnia, Paul Grebner, was more then
an Inquisitour into the Effects of Stars, being questionless endued from
above with a Prophetic spirit, not to be desired, much less expected of all.
He plainly affirms, That as England ever was a Monarchy within it self, since
it was discovered by the Romans, so shall it so continue and remain, even then
when all other Kingdoms and States in Europe are swallowed up of the FIFTH
MONARCHY of the Lion of the North. His Prophecy of our Civil Wars, of the
Fate of our late King, and the Restoration of his Son to his Fathers
Dominions, runs thus in Ban. 72.

Grebners Prophecy of our late King, and his Son now King.
Per idem tempus Rex quidam Borealis (nomine Carolus) Mariam ex Papistica
religione fibi assumptam in matrimonium conjunxerit, ex quo evadet regum
infelicissimus. Unde populus ejus, ipso abdicato, Comitem quendam perantiquae
Familiae regno praeponet, qui tres annos, aut circiter durabit; and hoc quoque
remoto, Equitem quendam bellicosum in ejus locum assumet, qui paulo amplius
regnabit. Post hunc eliget nullum. Interea, unus e stirpe Caroli in littore
regni patres sui cum Gallicis, Suevicis, Danicis, Hollandicis, Burgurdicis and
Germanicis auxiliis stabit, omnes inimicos suos cruentissimo praelio superabit,
and postea regnum suum felicissime administrabit, eritque Cerolo magno major.
And in Ban. 74. he says, Circa Anno 1663 Brittaniarum Rex antiquum cum
Belgarum Ordinibus foedus and amicitiam rumpet, ob ereptas sibi ab ipsorum
piratis naviculas quasdam, qui pertrepidi ad novum Danorum Regem (nomine
Christiernum) confugient, qui utrosque primo compositissimis orationibus,
deinde muneribus in concordiam alliciet.

About the same time a certain Northern King (named Charles) who shall marry
Mary of the Popish Religion to his great unhappiness, so that his people
(rejecting him) shall set up an Earl of a very ancient Family, who shall
continue three years or thereabouts, he dying they shall elect in his stead a
warlike Knight, who shall rule a little longer: after him they elect none; But
in the mean one of Charles his Stock shall land on the Seacoasts of his
Fathers Kingdom, and with French, Swedish, Danish, Hollandian, Burgonian and
German Forces, in a most cruel battle shall vanquish all his Enemies, and
afterward most happily govern his Kingdom, and be greater then Charles the
Great. And about the year 1663, the King of the most ancient Britains for the
loss of some Ships at Sea shall break his League and Amity with the States of
Holland, who fearing, shall to the new King of Danes (named Christiernus) for
succor, and he by fair Entreaties and large Gifts shall win either side to
Agreement.

Nor ever does he speak of England in all that famous Manuscript, but as of the
most warlike and potent Kingdom in Europe. Therefore all good Christians ought
to wish the new War were concluded rather by an happy Agreement and
Composition, then by Sword and Musket, and the King placed on his Throne rather
with the hands of his loving and and rejoice all Subjects, than with the swords
of Foreigners. For if the beginning of his Restoration be in blood, and
tumbling of garments in blood, the Accomplishment of it will be with burning
and fuel of fire.

That this future History of Europe, may be more fully and clearly understood,
I intend to set it down by way of Chronology upon the principal passages in
Ezekiel and the Revelations, as I lately collected it out of the two M S S. of
Grebner and Ioannes Baudensis, and afterward subscribed certain Notes and
Animadversions upon the same.
THe woman travelleth, viz. The Jewish Synagogue brings forth Christ,
whereupon ensues the battle between Michael and the Dragon (Christ and the
Devil) Christ being persecuted of the Devil by Herod in his Infancy, flies
into Egypt, Nero and others, Revel. 12. per tot.

Revel. 6. 2.

Pevel. 20. 2. 8.

Anno 65, to An. 330. Revel. 6. 3, 4.

Simon Magus, Ebion and Cerinthus trouble the Church with damnable and
infectious Heresies, Revel. 6. 5, 6.

Revel. 6. 7, 8.

Caesar's, beginning at Pertinax, and ending at Licinius, slain by Constantine
the Great, Revel. 6. 9, 10, 11.

Dioclesian and Maximilian give over their Caesarships, because they could not
eradicate Christianity. Constantine strengthened with their Armies and
Provinces, warreth upon Licinius, slays him, destroys the Pretorian-Camp,
abolisheth Heathenism, and sets up the true Worship of God, Revel. 6. 12. to
the end.

And silence in Heaven for half an hour, viz. The Church enjoys rest thirty
years, all the time that Constantine the Great reigned, Revel. 8. 1.
Constantines three sons, Revel. 8. 2, 3.

Julian that wretched Apostata bending his utmost endeavors to ruin the
Gospel, licenceth 17000 Jews to return to Jerusalem to rebuild their Temple;
but God destroys them all by Lightnings and Pestilences: Horrible Earthquakes
cast up into the Air the foundations which had been buried in rubbish till
then. Therefore Daniels compute of the Temples final ruin must but begin
then; there begin his two Numbers (Chap. 12. ver. 11, 12.) of 1290, and 1335,
which in all must but make 1335 years, which added to 363, make up and point to
Anno Christi School, the joyful Jubilee of the Churches Deliverance from all
Adversity.

Valentinian, and the succeeding Emperors, until the end of the
Western-Empire, The savage Inundations of Goths, Huns, Vandals and Bulgarians
into Italy, Revel. 8. 7.

Boniface that Mountain of fiery Combustions obtains of Phocas the Popish
Supremacy. Hence wars betwixt the Emperors and Popes, Revel. 8. 8, 9.

Revel. 8. 10, 11.

Sylvester II, Revel. 8. 12, 13.

Gregory VII against the Gospel of Christ, Revel. 20. 4.

John most graphically, Revel. 9. 9. to 13.

Ottoman Empire arises, invadeth first the Eastern-Empire of Constantinople,
and wins it: then flies upon the Germane Emperor with barbarous millions
of invincible Armies, Revel. 9. 13. to the end.

The saying, Revel. 9. 15. of the Turks preparation for a day, a month, and a
year, begins now. Which Number allegorically taken makes 398 years: which
added to A. 1300,
the year of the original of the Turkish Empire, shows that A. School. shall be
the final downfall of the same.

Luther, and other Sons of Thunder to vindicate the quarrel thereof against the
Romish Antichrist to the ruin of his Kingdom, Revel. 11. from ver. 15. to the
end.

By eating of the Book, Chap. 10.
Measuring the Temple and slaying the Witnesses, Chap. 11. is understood the
Reformation by Luther, and downfall of the Papacy under Charles the fifth.

England, Scotland and Ireland by the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, renounce the
Papacy; which generates the ulcers of spite and malice in the Romish Church
against England, Revel. 16. 2.

Martin Chemnitius and others, pronounce the vengeance of God against the
mortiferous Sea of the Council of Trent, Revel. 18. 3.

Anno 1588. Revel. 16. 5, 6, 7.

Pareus, Polanus, Whitakers, Perkins, Andrews, King James and others, pour
light upon the Sun of the Gospel, in writing against Bellarmine, Stapleton,
Campian, and other Papists, Revel. 16. 8, 9.

Swedes in Germany, An. 1632. The English in England, 1640, combine against the
Papists, Jesuits proscribed in Poland and Swethland, Anno 1648. This Vial
shall end in the ruin of Rome, Anno 1666. Revel. 16. 10, 11.

Hydruntum in Apulia, made enrodes into the Eastern Coasts of Italy, and sack
them with fire and sword. Factions and Massacres in Rome and Tuskany. The Pope
contemned and invaded, The Western Christians make an Army, and fire Rome in
the 2419 year after Romulus laid the foundation thereof, as Sibylla prophesied.
Oracul. lib. 4. Revel. 16. from ver. 12. to 17.

descends from heaven with his Soldiers riding upon white horses, to fight
against the enemies of his Church. The Angel in the Sun calls to all the
fowls of heaven, to come to the feast of God, to eat the flesh of Kings,
Captains, mighty Men and horses. Rev. 19. 11, 17, 18. And I saw the beast, and
the Kings of the earth, and the Warriors gathered together, to war against
him that sat on the horse, and against his Soldiers. But the beast was taken,
and with him the false Prophet, that works miracles before him, whereby he
deceived them that have received the beasts mark, and them that worship his
image: These two were cast alive into the lake burning with fire and brimstene,
etc. Ibid. 19, 20.

Vrbs antiqua ruit, multos dominata per annos:
Destruiturque armis gens scelerata suis.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, nor receive of
her plagues Forasmuch (O Rome) as thou glorifiedst thy self, and livedst in
pleasure, saying, I sit a Queen, am no widow, and shall see no sorrow:
therefore shall thy plagues come upon thee in one day, death, sorrow and
famine, and thou shall be burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God that
judges thee. The Kings of the earth shall bewail thee, and thou shall never
more be inhabited, the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee, and the
voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride shall be heard no more in thee.
Rejoice (O heavens!) for righteous are Gods judgments, He has condemned the
great Whore. Then they sung Hallelujah, and her smoke arose up for evermore
Rev. 18. 7, 8, 20. and 19. 3.

Rome being destroyed, Jews dwell amongst Protestants, and begin to search into
the Scriptures, and learn the ways of God.

Saturn and Jupiter in Leo. The Jews converted in the West, prepare to unite
with their Brethren in the East, and raise a Combination to propagate the
Gospel and destroy the Headless-Turks.

Rev 19. 5, 6, 7.

Ezech. 38. and 39. chap. all.

Gog and Magog, (viz. Turks and Tartarians) gather themselves together to
battle, whose Number is as the sand of the Sea, and they went up into the
plain of the Earth, and encompassed the Tents of the Saints about, even the
beloved City, but fire came down from God out of Heaven, and destroyed them.
Revelat. 20. 8, 9.


Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Germany, no more any Western Empire or any footstep thereof; for God has now
transplanted his Gospel from Europe unto a more grateful and pregnant soil,
which will bring forth the fruits thereof in due season.


Exoriturque atris Lucifer albus equis.
Ezech. 12. last chap. per tot.

Rev. 21. 5.

Ezech. 46. per tot.



Thus far reaches the Observations of Grebner and Baudensis.
VI. A true Explication of that Number in Rev. 20. 8.
BEfore I come to comment upon this Chronologicall Index, it will not be amiss
to deliver that saying, Revel. 20. 8. (And the Saints shall reign with Christ a
thousand years) from all those false Interpretations which have been fastened
upon it, by Papias, Bucholcherus, Scaliger, Brightman, Alsted and others, and
declare the true sense of it, as remotest from Innovation, and coming nearest
the intention of the H. Ghost. There is in this 20 Chap. two several Epoches
of a 1000 years, which are two several ways to be interpreted. The first is
in verse. 2. of Satan being bound for a 1000 years; which must begin either at
the Instant of our Saviors Incarnation, and end at An. 1000, in the 2d year of
the Popedom of Sylvester II, that infamous Sodomite, Necromancer, and
Conjurer, under whom the filthiness and Idolatry of the Romish Church was
brought to the height: or rather they must begin at the Destruction of the 2d
Temple by Titus, which was An. 71, and end in An. 1071, in the Popedom of
Gregory VII, alias Hildebrand, who first broke bonds of Allegiance with Henry
the Emperor, excommunicated him, set the Gospel in a total Eclipse, and
Europe in the mournful Flames of a civil War: but of this in the Chronology.
But this in the 8 verse. of the Saints reigning with Christ a 1000 years,
Alsted, Bucholcherus and others expound of a Comparative Felicity of the Church
on this Earth, for a 1000 years, beginning. An. 1694, when they say all visible
Enemies of the Church shall be overthrown, and must end An. Chapter 2694. after
which shall be the War of Gog and Magog against the Church, which shall be
prevented by the coming of Christ to judgment. But in this Alsted is wide from
the right mark: for this number must begin An. 1072, at the expiration of the
former, and must be interpreted for all that time that the World shall last
after the aforesaid An. 1072. And the holy Ghost does term this indefinite and
unlimited time by the Number of a 1000 years, for three special Reasons: 1
Because a 1000 years are the Number of Perfection and of Eternity, and does
most aptly serve to express the End of these Earthly Troubles, and the
beginning of that Time which never shall have end. 2 Because those things which
the holy Ghost in the Scriptures affirms are yet to come, must not be
plenarily accomplished till after An. 1830, it may please God that the glorious
and flourishing estate of the Church and Gospel here upon Earth, may continue
much of 200 years longer, to increase the number of them who shall be saved,
and to amplify more the heavenly Attributes of Gods Mercy, Righteousness,
Truth, Holiness and Omnipotency in the Salvation of the Just: and his Equity,
Judgment and Uprightness in the firebrands of destruction. 3 Because a
vicissitudinary time of Affliction and Ease, Persecution and rest, pure
Doctrine and Heresies, is signified to be the whole continuance or most part of
a 1000 years, wherein those who are to suffer for the Testimony of the Word of
God, and the truth of Jesus Christ, shall have their reward after the
expiration of that time, which cannot be till after the last general
Judgment. The fearful and terrible War of Gog and Magog (viz. the bloody
War of Turks and Tartarians with the Jews newly converted in the Land of
Jury, in which the very name of Turks shall be rooted from off the Earth) must
be before the beginning of this glorious Estate and Felicity of the Church of
God here upon Earth, and therefore the 7, 8, 9, and 10 verses, are in order of
time before the 5 and the 6. The Devil and Antichristianity must be chained up
in the dungeon of Hell for the space of a 1000 years after the Incarnation of
Christ. An. 1000 must the Devil and Romish Idolatry by the Popedom of
Sylvester the second, be let loose to range upon Earth, and tyrannize over the
Church for the most part of another 1000, ever till An. School (numorus completus
being put here pro incompleto) before an happy and comfortable Estate of the
Gospel can be brought forth to the World. The estate of England with other
Provinces of Europe from Anno 1650. to An. School.
Therefore all Christendom from this year 1650, must expect very sad and
woeful days, much persecution, bloodshed and savadge tyranny in every Kingdom
of Europe (especially in France, Spain, Italy, Swethland, Germany and England)
until An. School. Some of thoseKingdoms which have abandoned the superstition of
the beast, shall by subtle allurements be persuaded to readmit and reestablish
the same. Woeful and unsupportable Afflictions shall besall both the European
Jews (which are the two Tribes of Benjamin and Judah, now resident in
Christendom and Turkey) as likewise the ten Tribes, the Kingdom of Israel (who
shall insensibly and miraculously arise out of the bowels of Tartaria and
India, about An. 1669.) who nevertheless shall be so extraordinarily supported
by God, that they shall stand in little or no need at all of the Christians.
Because from this time of the Conversion of the Israelites for the space of 30
years, these 12 Tribes shall suffer much trouble, Heathens, Papists and
Mahometans, shall strive to eradicate their name from under heaven, and yet all
in vain; for an illustrious and heroic Prince (e Tribu Nephtali oriundus)
shall be their valiant and fortunate Commander, called Michael, not proprio
nomine, but because he Dan. 12. 1. shall stand up and show himself the Assertor
and Protector of their Religion and Liberty. In which time shall be such
troubles as never were, no, nor ever shall be to the end of the world. For like
as the Christians had rest 30. years from the Ascension of Christ, and now have
endured the fiery trial almost these 1600. years, since that time from the
Heathen Emperors, and the Beast; so the Israelites, which shall 1600. years
till Anno 1668. live without Prince, Law, Temple, Sacrifice, and true Religion
(as Hosea prophesied chapter 3. v. 4, 5.) beginning now to be converted to Christ,
shall have savage times of affliction and Butcheries for other 30. years (to
welcome their conversion withal) till Anno School. when God shall grant rest
from their enemies, and begin a peaceable estate of the Church.

VII. Certain remarkable Nambers in Scripture, whereby the Epoch's of the ruin
of Turk, Pope, and the corversion of the Jews are more fully strengthened.
Entering at length upon my Notes on the aforesaid Chronology, I think it meet
first to strengthen the former Epoch's of the ruin of Rome, downfall of the
Turk and Tartar, and the Conversion of the Jews by the Conduct of certain
memorable Numbers in holy Scriptures. Grave and judicious Authors have with
wonder and admiration observed the heavenly and inimitable Method of holy
Scrjptures, how all the Mysteries and memorable Occurrences in the same are
comprised in Numbers, how within the compass of such a Quantity of years, God
always divulged his Counsels, and manifested what he purposed should be
wrought among the children of men. So that in considering the admirable consent
and agreement of Times by things past, we may probably conjecture of things to
come. Anno Christi 1656, let the Church of God expect with joy and comfort, the
acting of the first Scene of the Tragedies of all those European Kingdoms,
which have been implacable Persecutours of the Gospel of Christ. Moses (who was
a second Noah to the Church) is a shadow of the Kingdom of Christ. The Law
continued in force 1529 years to the Passion of Christ: But 1598 years to the
Destruction of the Temple by Titus: The Destruction of the Temple by Titus was
according to the account of Dionyfius Exiguus, A. C. 69. From thence reckon the
Number of 1598 years, and you come to A. 1667; which is the year which shall
smoke with the ascending up of the Flames which consume the Kingdom of the
Beast. Luther and other eminent Ministers are 1517 years: And from the
beginning of the Reign of the Maccabees until the Birth of Christ are 169
years: Put these two sums together, and you come to Anno 1686, in which God
having 18 years before enlightened the eyes of those who for almost 2000 years
have sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and having laid the Kingdom
of the Beast and the false Prophet in the lowest dust, shall bring that people
into the bosom of the true Church, which within 13 years after shall deliver
his children from all adversity. Nebuchadnezzar beleaguering Jerusalem are
numbered School years: So likewise from the Birth of the King of Kings unto the
final Consummation of the Miseries, and restoration of the Felicity of the
Church by the Destruction of Gog and Magog, shall be reckoned the very same
Number of School years. Babel to the return of the Jews from Babel, are 1666
years: and from profane Pompey's spoiling of the Temple at Jerusalem (when the
Kingdom was taken from the house of David, and Superstition and Gentilism began
to spring up amongst the Jews) to the Birth of of Antichrist and Apostasy in
the Church of God are 666 years; from thence reckon a 1000 years wherein the
Saints must suffer Persecution and Martyrdom for the Testimony of Jesus Christ,
and the truth of a good Conscience, Revel. 20. 4. and you come to A. 1666, in
which shall be fulfilled all those things which are mentioned, Revel. 18, and
the 19 Chapter. Egypt, until the Death of Christ, are numbered 1542 years: to
these add those 169 years, which are from the beginning of the Reign of the
Assomonaei or Macchabees to the Birth of Christ, and you come to Anno 1711;
which year shall be wonderful and terrible to all the world, because that in
the year next going before (viz. Anno 1710.) the abominable Names and mention
of Papists, Turks and Tartars being eradicated from the memories of men, the
glorious Estate of the Gospel, and the terrestial Felicity of the Church of God
shall begin over the face of the whole Earth. Moses until the Destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus (which typifies the end of the world) are 1646 years: so
many from the Incarnation of our Savior, denoted that year, whose influence
has begun, and shall prove fatal to most of the Kingdoms of Europe: add to
these 20 years to come after, from that time (which 980 years ago were
prophesied of, to be those years, in which the Kingdom and the Dominion, and
the greatness of Kingdoms under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the Saints
of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions
shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7. 17.) and it will amount to the year of the
fatal ^uine of the Beast, Anno 1666. From these few Particulars of the Consent
and Agreement of times in the holy Scriptures, I infer thus much. A Prognostic
of the Estates of certain years Of An. 1657
About the year 1657 shall be great Changes and Alterations in Government in
every Kingdom in Europe, as well Protestant as Papist, attended and accompanied
with such horrid Combustions and Massacres, as has not been before since the
memory of man. This shall make way (as I said before) for the Protestants to
unite in a general Combination to send Forces under the Conduct of an
invincible Cyrus over the Alps to harrow Italy with fire and sword, and after
level the walls of Rome with the lowest dust, Anno 1666. For as in the year of
Grace 666, Popery was brought to a full maturity in the Womb by Vitalian (who
ordained Latin-Service in the Church, contrary to Christ's Institution, and the
precedent Primitive times) and as 1000 the Number of Perfection and Eternity is
seldom used in our ordinary Computes, but left out for brevity sake (as we use
to say, The Spanish-Armado was in 588 for 1588, and the Powder Plot in 605 for
1605.) so it is most certain and indubitable, that as the Birth of Antichrist
was in Anno 666, so the death of it shall be Anno 1666, though the Carcass of
it may lie unburied for 30 years after, yet questionless it shall with Gog and
Magog be cast into the Lake of Gods wrath at one and the same time. This ruin
of Rome shall make way within ten years after to the Conversion of the Jews:
For seeing the Kingdom of Antichrist (as now it is) is the only Let to their
Conversion (for all the Jews that now are, live within the Papacy, and are
prohibited from turning Christians, partly because of the Idolatry they see
amongst the Papists in their worshipping of Images (the Jews being Zealots in
the second Commandment.) partly because at their Conversion with the Papists
they must renounce all their goods as ill gotten, which rigid Condition a
worldly people will never yield to) therefore till the very name and power of
Popery be destroyed, and they admitted amongst Protestant Kingdoms, there can
be small hope of their Conversion. But now Antichrist totally destroyed, they
begin to see into their Errors and Ignorances, endeavor to learn the ways of
God, and that the Savior of the world (whom they so long expected) is come so
many years since and suffered. This Conversion of the Western Jews shall be
completed in that fatal and terrible year 1683. And six years after that
shall they be united with their Eastern-Brethren the 10 Tribes captivated by
Salmanasser, who have for 2433 years lien invisible in the bowels of the
Kingdoms of Turks and Tartarians. The Christian world neither must nor ought to
enquire, how this people which have lien hid and obscured so long a space,
shall in so small a time as a year and an half, so visibly, so powerfully, and
so magnificently arise to the Terror and Conquest of the whole Earth. The holy
Ghost declares, Ezekiel. 37. 8. by the dry bones, fleshed and endued with life in
an instant, so that they stood upon their feet, and became a great Army; what a
strange, horrid and wonderful thing this shall be, and how terrible it shall
appear to the sight of the world in that year; which within 15 years after
(viz. Anno School.) shall fight that famous and fearful pitcht-field with the
united Forcs of Turks and Tartarians, which shall prove the Deliverance of the
Church of God from all adversity. Thrice shall Europe within this time strive
to establish that power, which Superstition and Tyranny first procreated:
Thrice shall the children of this world raise innumerable Forces to destroy the
Saints of the most high: Thrice shall the Power of Godliness prevail in the
hearts and arms of those, who shall make the Land thrice drunk with the blood
of the Enemies of Christ; and whose grand Ancestors stewed it so often with the
blood of the Prophets and Apostles. Preparatives to these fearful Wonders
shall be those horrid and ominous Eclipses preceding the year 1660, fatal and
conspicuous to Europe; signs both of God's paternal Chastizements for Sects and
Schisms in the Church, and of his confuming Judgments impending upon the
implacable Enemies thereof.

Of the Eclipse in An. 1654.
In the year 1654, August 2. shall happen a fearful and lamentable total
Eclipse of the Sun in the 39 Degree of Leo, about half an hour before high
Noon, where shall be seen the mighty hand of God working Wonders in Italy,
Sicily, Bohemia, Greece, Armenia and Syria, the Kingdoms subject to Leo. The
body of the Sun in this Eclipse will be totally darkened for the space of two
hours and 29 Minutes: it will be so great, the like has not been before, nor
after shall be: greater then that Eclipse of the Sun which was Feb. 25. 1597.
commonly called the dark Saturday. Of this Eclipse thus Baudenfis M. S. fol.
105. Exercit. 59. Baudenfis Prognostication of Anno 1657, 1658, 1661, 1663.
Papa, dum Petripatrimonium dilaturies, Italicum quendam Ducem possessionibus
spoliabit-avitis, etc. The Pope attempting to enlarge Peter's Patrimony by
seizing upon the ancient Estate of an Italian Duke deceased without Issue, sets
his own Nest on fire, and Rome in a Combustion. This year shall a new Sect of
Sodomitical Monks arise, which being tolerated by the Pope, sets that Quarrel
betwixt him and the Duke of Florence, which shall prove the downfall of both in
a few years. This is affirmed likewise by Grebner, Ban. 75. Yet in the interim
(says Baudenfis) God shall promote the happiness of Jerusalem, Peace shall be
within her walls, and plenteousness within her Palaces. And fol. 134. Exerc. 67.
he says, The years 1657, 1658, 1661, 1663, shall be formidable to Austria,
Silesia, Hungary, Holland, France and Portugal, because that every one of those
years shall be attended with four Eclipses apiece, portending the Mutations of
all those several States, and that the Revolution of time is come, wherein they
must give place to the Lion of the North, whose Scepter shall bruise their
power to nothing, and his Gauntlet lay their Forces prostrate at his feet. At
which time all Europe shall sing this mournful Ditty; "Heu mala progenies
fatis servata nefandis,
"Gensque nefandarum domitrix altrixque ferarum,
"Quid fueras, quid fisque vide: tua prima propago
"Bella gerit, fibolemque pctet lues atra secundam.
"At Leo terribilis Borealibus cduus oris
"Fammifcram ex Orco and pelagiplangentibus undis
"Educens aciem, pecudes urbesque virosque
"Sternet, and antiquis Solemn Lunamque movebit
"Sedibus; ille etiam patrie jure infima summa
"Reddet, and Occasum sub leges mittet inermem.
Thus Englished. Alas ill race, to dismal Fates reserved,
By whom dire Beasts are tamed and preserved,
See what thou were and art: Thy first issue
Inclines to War, Plague does the next subdue.
But Lion fierce sprung from the Northern shore
Shall bring from deepest Hell and waves that rore
A blasing Army, he shall men o'rerun,
Cities and cattle, yea the Moon and Sun
Shall he remove; and Father-like the least
Make highest, and give Laws to the weak West.


A Description of the 7 fiery Triplicities.
Yet he that returns back in reviewall of the conjunctions and fiery
Triplicities, may see how they have in part prognosticated the present troubles
and and distractions of Europe, with the Commonwealths of England and
Scotland. Anno 1603 in the first great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in
the fiery triplicity, K. James came to the Crown of England, and so was
fulfilled that Prophecy which an holy Anchoret made 890 years ago, English
men for that they wonneth them to drunkeinesse, to treakson, and rechlesenesse
of Got's house, firsten by Dancs, thenth by Nortmans, and the third time by
Scots, whom they holden lest worthen of all, they shallen be overcompn. Then
the world shallen be unstable, and so various and diversable, that the
unstablenesse of thoughts shallen be betookeineid by many manner diversity of
clothing. This could never be fulfilled but by a Scottish King swaying the
English-scepter; and therefore never came to pass till the Union of the two
Kingdoms under the said King. As the second Conjunction, Anno 1623. found
Germany and most of the West involved in civil Wars, and as the third An. 1643.
found the King and Subjects of England in the field one against the other; so
the fourth Conjunction, An. 1663 in Sagitarius shall begin those destructive
Combustions in Italy, which shall allure the Protestant Armies to make a third
all-conquering Party in the same; and the fifth An. 1683 in Leo shall bring
forth the Conversion of the Jews: but the sixth Conjunction happening in
Taurus, An. 1703, shall behold that which many glorious Saints and children of
God have read of, and rejoiced and desired to see, and yet could not see them.
For now Revel. 22. 1. shall the Sea (that is, the miserable estate of the World
by Wars, Desolations and Sicknesses) be destroyed, and no more extant. Now
shall the time of Tribulation, War and desolation, the time of torments,
temptation, heresy and persecution be utterly abolished from the memory of men
For a new Heaven and a new Earth, a renovated Church, purified Saints shall
succeed in the room of those Wolves, who in sheeps-cloathing devoured the Flock
of Christ. These are the days, for the hope of which the stones of Sion cry
day by day, though little esteeming seven thousand deaths in regard of that
precious assurance graven in their Breasts, that they shall then, and in that
day behold the Lord, which has mercifully gathered them from all Nations, and
has so wonderfully preserved them from the sorcery of Babylon (which has
destroyed all the Earth) that leads them in and out before Pagans, Heretics
and Idolaters, before the covetous and foolish-wise of this world, so prudently
and so invisibly, that they seeing are not seen, and living are not known.

The Exposition of Nebuchadnezzars Image, in Dan. 2.
But from these low things let us ascend up to Scripture further to prove the
certainty thereof. Daniels Image as it gave the first, so it gave the fullest
Knowledge of this great Mystery of the Church of God, Dan. 2. per tot. In which
Image is described in brief the Estate of the World, from the very day God
revealed this to Damel, and he to Nebuchadnezzar, to the full and final End and
Conclusion of time. By the golden Head, silver Arms, brazen Belly, and iron
Legs, we must understand the Chaldean, Persian, Macedouian and Roman
Monarchies, which successively one after another, tyrannized over mankind by
cruelty, and by cruelty came to as miserable Destructions in the end. The feet
part of Iron, and part of Clay, denoted the declining Estate of the Roman
Empire (after that indiscreet Division of it under Charles the Great into the
Eastern and Western) under the present Papacy, and now-vulturizing house of
Austria, which hitherto does and shall continue until An. 1694. Therefore the
Stone cut without hands (in the 34 verse) (which smote the Image on his feet,
that were part of Iron, part of Clay, and so brake them to pieces, that the
Iron, Brass, Clay, Silver and Gold became as chaff of the Summer-flowers that
the wind carried them away, and no more place was found for them; And the
Stone that smote the Image became a great Mountain, and filled the Earth) must
needs be understood of a glorious Monarchy of the Church of God upon Earth,
which by the Conversion of the Universal Nation of the Jews shall overcome all
her Enemies, and reign triumphantly in all Nations under Heaven, in
universality, uniformity, integrity and innocence of life and conversation.

The Exposition of the 12 last chapters of Ezechiel.
This blessed and happy estate of Christ's Church upon Earth (after the
aforesaid battle of Gog and Magog described Ezech. 38. and 39 Chap. of which
enough before) is graphically deciphered in the nine last Chapters of the same
Prophet, beginning at the 40; where under a specious and large type of
restoring the old Jewish Temple with the Sacrifices (chap. 40.) the measuring,
ordering and disposing of it in every thing thereto belonging (chap. 41.) as
the chambers of the Priests in the Temple, the holy Utensils (chap. 42.) the
glory of God filling the house (chap. 43.) his paternall upbraiding the
Israelites for their ancient Idolatry, and demonstrating his great and
affectionate love to them for the present (chap. 44.) is contained (as I said
before) a pithy discourse how powerful and magnificent these new converted
Christians shall be; how holy, learned and unanimous their Ministers should be,
how ardent and studious they shall be in communicating the Gospel of Christ to
such as yet sit in darkness and in the shadow of death (chap. 45.) how
vigilant their Princes and Magistrates shall be in being keepers of the house
of God, that is in encouraging the Ministers, tam praemio quam paena, to
inftruct the people in the knowledge of the truch, that so both Ministers and
people may render due obedience to their common Savior, in love to God, and
charity toward men. And again, the reserved portions of Land for the Temple,
City, Priests and Princes all in just measures and dimensions, the waters
issuing out of the Temple, ever increasing in Latitude and Profundity, the
several divisions of the particular lots of Priests, Temple, Levites, the City
and the Princes secondarily repeated in the 45, 46, 47, and the last Chapters,
evidently declare the undoubted certainty and verity of this wonderful
mystery, that the Jews shall repossesse their ancient possessions and several
inheritances in the Land of Judea; how devout, pious and cheerful they shall
be in the worship and service of God, intimated by the frequent performing of
spiritual Sacrifices and Oblations: how potent and spacious their Church shall
be, how great and infinite the Privileges, and never decreasing Graces of God
shall be to it, signified by the depth and latitude of the spiritual waters of
Life.

The Exposition of the end of Daniels 11 chap.
Thirdly, Daniel in the end of his 11 Chap. does above all other, most plainly
and specifiquely picture the two grand preparations to this spiritual Monarchy
of Christ's Church in the end of the World: viz. 1 the (...) of the enemies of
God, and 2. the Conversion of the Jews. For in the 40, 41, 42, and 43 verses of
the said 11 Chapter, declaring first, what Victories the Saracens should get
over the Roman Empire, by saying, that the King of the South should push at him
(viz. the Saracens should invade the Emperor) and secondly, what lamentable
havoc the Turk should make of the Roman Monarchy by conquering and subduing
from them all the Eastern Empire of Constantinople, in these words, And the
King of the North shall come against him like a whirlwinde, with charets and
horsemen and many ships, and shall enter into the Countries, and shall overflow
and pass through; which was verified in the Turks conquering all Greece,
Scythia, Moldavia, Servia, Asia, Syria, Mesopotamia and the Isles of the Aegean
sea: And he shall enter into the pleasant Land, and many Countries shall be
overthrown, but these shall escape out of his hands, Edom and Moab; and the
chief of the Children of Ammon, which also came to pass when Selimus I.
invaded Egypt, slew Tomumbey the Sultan thereof, eradicated the very name of
the Mamalucks, and so got all the wealth and treasures of Memphis and
Grand-Cairo, and added also Judca as a member of Egypt to the Turkish Empire,
An. 1517. His son Solymon the Magnificent, awed India and Ethiopia, and his
Grandchilde Selimus II. conquered Tunis and Algiers in Afrique, yet neither of
them meddled with the Arabians, Edomites or Moabites, as thinking them a people
not worth conquering. In the 44 verse, Daniel says, But tidings out of the
East and West shall trouble him; the conversion of the Eastern and Western
Jews, shall so inrage the Turk, that he shall levy innumerable Forces, and
march forth in great fury to destroy and root them out: And he shall pitch the
Tabernacle of his Palace between the seas in the glorious and holy Mountain,
shall fight a most terrible and bloody pitched Field with them in their own Land
of Jury, and yet shall he come to his end, his power, by God's Providence,
shall be overthrown, and totally eradicated by them from off the Earth, and
none shall help him.

The Exposition of Rev. 9. 15.
Lastly, S. John in Revel. 9. 15. sets down in plain and evident numbers,
the very beginning, increase and downfall of this hellish generation. For in
saying the Turkish Armies shall be prepared at an hour, a day, a month, and a
year, he analogically declares the very time of their birth, and the year when
they shall come to a final annihilation. Here a Day is to be taken
prophetically for a year, a Month for 31 days, which likewise make so many
years, and a year for the days of a bissextile Julian year (which are 366)
making in the same manner as many prophetical years as in the former Epoch's
of Daniel and Ezekiel: So the sum's of 366, 31 and 1, make a complete Product
of 398 years, which added to An. 1300 (the year in which the Ottoman Empire
first saw light in the world) plainly demonstrates, that as the Turkish Empire
began An. Christi 1300, so in An. School shall be the fatal end and final
downfall of the same. Thus it is evident, that as the downfall and captivity of
the Jewish Nation fell in the building and birth of that City, which was
afterward the fourth Monarchy; so in the burial and ruin of the same City and
Monarchy shall be their conversion to the Gospel of truth, and the institution
of the Fifth Monarchy; in which all power, and earthly magnificence must submit
to the Kingdom of the Saints of God, and all Sccpters bow to the Authority of
the Church of Christ.

VIII. The common Objection of Divines against the V, Monarchy and the
universal kingdom of the Gospel here upon Earth, crawn from the badnesse of
the Times, Answered.
Against these former Assertions it is thus objected: That these are but the
Dreams of idle- headedmen, considering the sad Method of the World in the
continual increase of sin and wickedness, and degeneration of all sublunary
things daily more and more to worse; and because our Savior said, at his
second coming he should scarce find faith upon Earth. But to this I answer; No
time is God's time for the propogation of the Gospel, and enlargement of his
Church, but in the Deluge of sin and inundation of impiety: then is his Power
most manifest, when man is weakest; his Decrees most effectible, when-we think
him the furthest off; and his Providence nearest execution, then, when the
world is most irregular, and incapable of a Reformation. When the Abominations
and Paganismes of the old World had destroyed all true worship of God, and an
120 years of repentance did no good, then was God's time to separate the Wheat
from the Chafe, and by saying of Noah's family to preserve a seed for the
implantation of a new. So in the new World, when Idolatry had overspread all,
the Judgment and Mercy of God most appeared-in Abraham's Vocation, by selecting
his Church from the rest of mankind, and continuing it above 2000 years in the
House of Heber, the true Heir to Grace and Salvation. Thus was it in the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, in the Babylonish Captivity, in the
Reformation by Luther, when all the world were become Apostates, God's
Providence shone out brightest, and was most conspicuous in propagating
Religion, maugre all the opposition the devil and the world could invent or
devise: So shall it be in this prefixed time: though the world must degenerate
more and more in civility and humanity; Christianity be eclipsed in a higher
measure, and the true Worshippers of God decrease above what ever yet has been
done: though Protestantisme in many Coasts and Kingdoms shall be totally
swallowed up of Popery and Mahumetanisme; more lamentable Wars and fearful
Massacres rage through England, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and all European
Monarchies, then we have yet beheld; and though some of these Kingdoms wholly
revolt to Popery, others be lukewarm and at a stand, until An. 1686; yet all
these shall but make way for the final Eradication of the enemies of the
Church, and the glorious and wonderful Birth, and erection of the FIFTH
MONARCHY UNIVERSAL, which by these pangs and sorrows of Christendom shall be
brought forth about the time of the total conversion of the Jews. For the
season is now come, when Judgment must begin (not at the Temple of Antichrist)
but at the House of God; and what blood soever is shed upon the soil of the
Church, shall be no other then fruitful showers and warm seasons, to make the
Field of Christmore pregnant in production of that glorious Harvest of Saints,
which shall cover the Earth. For as it shall be in the end of the World, this
old, decrepit, and corrupt world must be purged and refined with the fire of
the Lord, before there can be placed in stead thereof a new Heaven and a new
Earth: So in the final Conclusion of the troubles of the Church, wars,
Apostasies, alternations and changes in Kingdoms and States, the (...) of Gog
and Magog, and all the enemies of Christ, the amputation of unprofitable Trees,
and eradication of noxious Weeds out of the Garden of the Church, shall
facilitate and prepare the way for the ingresse of the Monarchy of the Gospel
into the eyes of the world. Far wide therefore is the Surmise of those
Christians, how this doctrine of the universal Regiment of the Church upon
earth is a vain glorious and fantastic dream, considering the hopes of it now
are small, and like to be lesser, because charity and devotion daily
decreaseth: Nay rather this is the most evident sign that it speedily
approaches, because the malice of the devil with the corruption of mankind,
hourly augmenteth and strives to stifle and prevent it. If God be known to be
God by bringing light out of darkness, and manifesting his power in weakness;
then certainly shall these wars and schisms among Christians, the barbarous
invasions and conquests of Turks and Tartars, the increasing Idolatry of the
Western and Eastern Indians, be an Axe in the hand of God, to lop off all
superfluous branches from his Vine, to make it overspread with nourishing
fruit, the Globe of the whole Earth.

IX. Certain Epigrams of Petrus Damiani of the ruin of Turk and Pope, etc.
never yet before printed.
And that these are no novell Opinions, these following Testimonies may give
sufficient evidence, Petrus Damiani flourished Anno 1060. a laborious Divine,
an acute Philosopher, and a witty Poet. Gesner and other Bibliothecaries say
nothing of him is extant. Yet I have seen in the Library of Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge certain Latin Epigrams of his, Of the conversion of the Jews, Of the
destruction of the world by fire in the last day, Of the ruin of Rome, and Of
the last Judgment, which Latin Epigrams I find translated into English
Stanza's in an old Manuscript of L. B. entitled The Dove.

1. Of the Burning of the world by fire.
Primum foedavit mundum scelerata libido,
Cujus quam ad coelum flammea massa venit,
Diluvium immissum est, immensumque obruit orbem,
Vt mala tanta pijs eluerentur aquis:
O dira Ebrietas mundi faex prima secundi,
Te opposita interiment atque elementa prement.
Justitiam Domini in cunctis sic cernimus actis,
Vnda lavat venerem, pocula flamma bibet.
Thus Englished. As the first world did first by lust offend,
Whose burning rage to such a height did win,
That God to quench the same a Flood did send,
O Drunkenness, the second world's first sin!
The course of Vice that Element must end,
Which is opposed to that which did begin.
In every thing Gods justice we may spy,
As Floods drown Lust, Flames Drunkenness must dry.


2. Of the ruin of Rome.
Effuge, Grex Christi, peccati a Gurgite diro,
Cui meretrix odio est, atque corona triplex,
Effuge, dum Tempus datur, and fera praelia cessant;
Ne ut tu delitias, sic sua damna feras.
Quum jam funestos Agnus superaverit hosts,
Pingue gregique epulum militibusque dabit.
Se mentem metet haec meretrix, quam sevit, eandent:
Jam Sathanae seeds, quae Domina orbis erat.
Thus Englished. Fly, Faithful Christians, from that Sea of sin,
Who hate the Whore, and the two-horned Beast;
Fly, fly, in time before their griefs begin,
Lest as their pleasures, so their plagues you taste.
When once the Lamb the victory does win,
He of fat things will make his Flock a Feast.
Who as she sowed, so shall she reap those evils,
Once the worlds Mistress, now a Cage of devils.


3. Of the conversion of the Jews.
Postquam Evangelium toto narretur in orb,
Fulget and ignotis nostris genitoribus oris,
Quum Gentes Christum agnoscunt generaliter omnes.
Quas Deus aeternum aetherea dignabitur aula,
Tunc amplectetur verum Solynaea propago,
Quod prius invidia tam aversabatur iniqua:
Vltima Evangelium, Legem quae prima recepit,
Quos docuit primos, postremos Christus habebit.
Thus Englished. The Gospel once being preached in every place,
To lands of which our Fathers could not tell,
And when the Gentiles all are drawn to Grace,
Which in the new Jerusalem should dwell.
Then shall the stubborn Jews the Truth embrace,
From which with such disdain they did rebel:
Who first the Law, last shall the Gospel have,
Christ whom he first did call, shall last receive.


4. Of the last judgment.
Indictum Tempus, quod totum territet orbem,
Per praedicta homines signa monere solet.
Praelia, Evangelium mundo vulgatur, adorant
Judaei Christum, cognita jam meretrix:
Zelus hebet, Stellaeque cadunt, fera crimina regnant,
Aegra fides languet, Daemonis ira furit:
Vltima jam genus omne malorum buccina clangit,
Supremamque diem signa tremenda notant.
Thus Englished. That threatened time which must the world appall,
Is that all may amend by signs foreshown.
Wars rumor'd are, the Gospel preached over all,
The Jews convert, the Antichrist is known.
Devils rage, Vice reigns, Zeal cools, Faith fails, Stars fall,
All sorts of plagues has the last Trumpet blown.
And by prodigious signs 'tmay plain appear,
That of the Son of man the time draws near.


Prophesies of Hieronymus Savanarola.
Thus by this great Divine living in the mistiest times of Popery, it may plain
appear, that it was a received opinion that the total destruction of Rome, the
conversion of the Jews, and the fifth Monarchy should precede the end of the
world. And this is also confirmed by Hieronymus Savanarola (who died a Martyr
at Florence, A. 1498.) whose Prophesies are extant in the works of Franciscus
Mirandula. That in the last times Jews, Turks and Moors should be converted to
Christ, a man like Cyrus with a numerous Army of true professors should come
over the Alps and destroy Rome, and ruinate all the Kingdoms and States of
Italy. That grievous Wars, Bloud-sheddings and Massacres should arise in the
world by a Northern King for a happy Reformation, who should carry the Gospel
out of Europe into a vast and unknown world in the end of time. That an Eastern
King should blow the Trumpet of God from Tartaria, which should reform all the
Islands of the Indian Infidels. He likewise prophesied in particular of Julio
the second, of the troubles of the Duke of Mirandula, Of Luthers Reformation,
Of the Persecutions of Merindol, Chabriers, Angrogne, the Valtoline, and other
places of France, all which most evidently came to pass.

A Prophecy lately found in France, of the future estate of the world till An.
1710.
Thirdly, A Prophecy of the estate and condition of the times unto the end of
the world, was found written in Hebrew under the Foundation of the Church of S.
Denis in France, A. 1616. by the Sexton of the place, as he dug for the
erecting of a Monument for the Lord Teligni. He gave it unto the Popes Nuncio
(who rewarded him with 200 dollars for his pains) from him it was sent to the
Cardinal of Bruges, who presented it unto the young K. Lewis XIII. It was
written in parchment, and wrapped in lead in the form of an Heart: Hebrew
numericall letters were set at the side of every Line, signifying in what Year
of our Lord every accident should come to pass, and be manifested to the
world. Out of Hebrew it was translated into Latin by Johannes Parmarino
Secretary to the said Cardinal.

The Prophecy runs thus.











3 Alephs.

text contained within heart-shaped outline

The heat of war does Italy surround,
Let Christ's pasture be one, his sheep and ground.
Gods wrath and terror does the world confound.
But few that God do reverence.
A Prince shall rise of eminence.
Asia does tremble, Europe shake.
Now is a general Earthquake.
All Nations Gods knowledge partake.
Rivers are dried every where.
Pastor and Church only one are.


By this Prophecy great troubles must arise in Italy within this small time,
cruel wars afflicting every State thereof, which must be preparations to the
eternal destruction and ruin of Rome the head City thereof: Rome can never be
destroyed except Protestants lay aside their unnecessary civil contentions,
which may (God so disposing) come to them about Anno 1665. After which great
commotions are like to arise in Europe, till a noble Hero arise, which shall
quench those evils by employing Christians in mutual Leagues against the Turk.
Suddenly after which comes troublesome days in Asia and Africa. Then follows
universal peace and quietness of Nations, prophesied of by Ezechiel and S.
John in the Revelations, which must bring forth the purity and perfection of
the Gospel over the whole Earth.

X. The true Explanation of the Prophecy of the continuance of the Turkish
Empire, found in M. Fox's Acts and Monuments, page, 746.
Of how large an extent the Turkish Empire should be, how far it should prevail
against Christendom, when it should be at the height, and when Christians
should begin to cry quits with them by victories and conquests, is long since
extant in ancient Prophesies. One whereof M. Fox in his first Volume of Acts
and Monuments, page 746. antiq. edit. relates he found in the Persian language
in a Manuscript of Bartholomary Georgienitz: the substance whereof in Latin is
this.

Imperator noster veniet, Ethnici Principes Regnum capiet, rubrum quoque pomum
capiet, inque suam potestatem rediget.

Quod si inseptimum usque annum Christianorum gladius non insurrexerit, usque
ad duodecimum annum eis dominabitur. Domos aedificabit, vineas plantabit,
hortos sepibus muniet, liberos procrebit, and post duodecimum annum
Christianorum gladius apparebit, and Turcam quaque versum in fugam aget.

Our Emperor shall come, he shall take the Kingdom of a heathen Prince, he
shall also take the red apple, and subdue it to himself.

But if the Christians sword shall not arise by the seventh year, he shall
reign over them to the twelfth year, he shall build houses, plant vineyards,
hedge in Orchards, and beget children, and after the twelfth year shall the
Christians sword appear, and put the Turk to flight on every side.

M. Fox expounds these 12 years to be 12 Turkish Emperors prevailing against
Christians, beginning at the first Emperor Ottoman An. 1300. and so Solomon
the magnificent to be the twelfth Emperor, and the last that should prevail
against Christians; who began his reign An. 1519. and died An. 1567. But I
think rather it must begin at Mahomet the II. winning of Constantinople (called
here rubrum pomum) An. 1452. and must end at the late Emperor Mahomet the IV.
his death the last August, 1649. My reason is this: Other Emperors have
prevailed against Christians, since Solomon the magnificent. For Selimus the
II. his son wan Cyprus from the Venetians. Armurath III. took the Fort Guiermo
from the Hungarians, and his son Mahomet III. took Agria in Hungary, and had he
pursued his victory, had won that whole Kingdom in less them a year: So the
late Mahomet is the 12 Emperor from Mahomet the II. and now after his death
shall the Turks prevail no more against Christians. For forty years ago that
Kingdom was at a stand, and is declining to an eternal destruction. The sword
of the Christians shall now arise and prevail against the Turks till An. 1696.
when the converted Jews shall gather head to overcome them in a bloody pitched
field, and root out their name from off the Earth. By this young Emperors
decease without issue, the Ottoman Line is extinct, and none left. One Sultan
Hali (a Persian by birth) is now Steward of the Ottoman house, and the
Crim-Tartar by old composition and agreement lays claim to the Turkish
Empire, which at present is in combustion because of this. And though above
200000 Turks are in the Field, with an intent (as is thought) to invade
Germany, yet if Christians could but leave off their unnecessary divisions,
they might soon ruinate the Turkish, Empire. For since Armurath IV. his death,
An. 1642. (who began to reign, An. 1623.) all the time of this late Mahomet's
reign, since there has been continual contentions and mussacres amongst the
Turks, the Jannizaries eluding and despising the young and weak Emperor, which
terrified the Mufti and the Bassa's sore, because they had a prophecy, that as
a Mahomet wan Constantinople, so a Mahomet should lose it again to the
Christians. A Prophecy of the year School, found in the study of Iustus Lypsius.
However the matter goes for the present, the year School shall be fatal both to
them and to the Pope in both their ruins, and the beginning of the comparative
felicity of the Church of God, as may be further manifested by an excellent
Prophecy, which the learned Erasmus received from Reuchlinus, and was found in
the study of Justus Lypsius by Janus Douza the younger, running thus. Post
mill expletos a partu Virginis annos,
Et post sexcentos rursus ab orb datos,
Nonagefimus octavus mirabilis annus
Ingruet, is secum gaudia laeta faeret.
Corruet hoc anno Turcarum invisa propago;
Roma, tuum in libris fabula nomen erit.
Omnia tunc mundi sursum ibunt atque retrorsum
Imperia, ut populos sceptra novella premant:
Vtque suum cunctas Verbum diffundat in oras.
Christus, and imperitet nomine ubique suo.
Thus Englished. Six thousand years from Virgins birth expired,
Six hundred after that acquired,
The famous ninety eighth year shall come on,
Full of great Contentation.
This year the Turkish hateful race shall rue,
Rome shall a fable be, not true.
Then shall be tossed all Kingdoms of the World,
And into a new Kingdom hurled:
That into all coasts Christ his Word may spread,
And be alone the Peoples Head.


XI. A true Exposition of 2 Esdr. 11. chapter
The two Books of Esdras are thought (and that by none of the least learned, as
Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose, Tostatus, Scaliger the elder, Melancthon, Arrias
Montanus, Bucer, and Bibliander) to be Canonical, because of the most evident
fulfilling of many predictions in them contained. In the 11 chap. of the second
of those Books, there is under the type of an Eagle, a manifest prophecy both
of the Roman Heathenish Empire, as likewise of the Papacy with her chief
Leagurers to this present time throughout the whole Chapter. This Eagle is that
Roman Heathenish Empire; her twelve feathered wings are the twelve first
Emperors from Julius Caesar to Nerva Coccejus. The three Heads are the three
Kingdoms of France, Spain and Germany, preordained of God to uphold and
maintain the power of her pride, when all her wings (her heathenish and
tyrannical Cesars) should fail her. Nevertheless, under her 12 first Cesars
are comprehended in general all the Emperors which reigned in her from Julius
Caesar (who first cracked the strings of her liberty) to Augustulus Momyllus (her
last Roman Caesar) for the space of 474 years. Her 8 contrary feathers are the 8
terrible Inundations of several Nations from the North (God's scourges) which
overwhelmed her fairest Provinccs, sunk her State in blood, and by fire and
sword humbled her as low as the dust she trod on; viz. 1 Alaricus and his
West-Gothes, 2 Attilas and his Hunnes, 3 Gensericus and his Vandals, 4 Odoacer,
5 Theodoricus and his East-Goths, 6 Totilas and his Spaniards, 7 Alboinus and
his Longobards (who deposed her diminitive Caesar Augustulus Momyllus) 8 and
lastly, the intestine homebred Faction and Conspiracy, which proved more
pernicious then the rest (as all included diseases are the worst) which in the
reigns of Otho the Great, Otho III, and Frederique II, so often strove to
eradicate the Papal Superiority, and reedifie her S. P. Q. R. buried so many
ages ago out of the ruins of the City. The Head in the midst is the Germane
Empire, begun An. 801 on Christmas day, by Charles the Great, which though
verse. 32. it long did and yet does put the Earth in great fear, yet verse. 33.
must vanish in an instant, as did the Wings, and come to naught. The Germane
Empire thus destroyed, verse. 35. The Head on the right side (the Kingdom of
Spain) must devour the Head on the left side, which is the Kingdom of France.
Therefore it is manifest, That the Kingdom of France, though now it flourishes
in what Glory and Magnificence Earth can afford, must ere long be humbled by
the power of Spain, with many Discomfitures, and brought to doleful streights
and great perplexities. I my self have observed one remarkable Adjunct of that
Kingdom in particular, how that year (in which the Figures of the Golden
Number were equal to the Figures of the year of Christ) has ever proved
fatal to that Monarchy for War, Bloodshed, Pestilence and Famine. It was so
with them from An. 1570 to An. 1576. in all which seven years, the Guisian
faction made lamentable havoc of the Church of God and the Kingdom; so shall
it be in that year in which the final Tragedy of that Kingdom shall be acted,
six years after which France shall be no more. But when that shall be, no sign
of Europe shall remain, nor remembrance where the walls of Rome stood. The LION
(which verse. 37. and chap. 12. v. 31. came roaring out of the Wood speaking to
the Eagle, and rebuking her for her wickedness) is the WIND which the most
high God has kept for Rome and her wickedness till the end, even the LION OF
THE NORTH (of which you shall hear anon a Prophecy of the true Merlin) which
shall reprove the Roman Empire, and cast before her her spoils; he shall set
her alive in Judgment, rebuke and correct her, and deliver the residue of Gods
people by Affliction which are preserved upon his borders and make them joyful
until the day of Judgment. In the 13 Chapter, Esdras beholds a vision of a
man rising out of the Sea, and devouring the multitudes of fighters that came
against him, neither with sword, spear nor any instrument of War, but only
with the fire and storm that came out of his mouth; which is Christ the son of
man, who through a sea of bloody persecutions and tribulations propagated his
Gospel over the Earth, confounding and devouring the multitudinous Pagans and
Idolaters fighting against Christians, by the invincible force of the Gospel.
After a long time of the obstinate wilfulness and fullness of the Gentiles, he
shall call to himself another peaceable multitude, verse. 12, 40. even the whole
Nation of the Jews, out of Armenia, Tartaria, and the Eastern India, whom God
shall defend and convert to the Gospel, when he shall destroy all other Nations
upon Earth. These are called the peaceable People, because after the conversion
of the Jews, shall come that Ministerial Monarchy of the Church over the whole
World; that peaceable and still Time, when all Kingdoms under heaven shall
forget fighting one against another, Wars shall cease in all the World, and
swords and spears shall be beaten into Plowshares and pruning hooks. When the
seventh Angel blew the Trumpet, Luther began his Reformation, then it is, when
the Multitude stood before the Lamb, and sung the new song of Moses; and then
nevertheless is but the vail only of the Tabernacle opened in heaven, and a
great cloud and smoke covered that Glory. But it must be 180 years after, when
the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ,
and those be destroyed that destroyed the Earth. For then and not till then
shall the Temple of God be fully opened in Heaven, and the Ark of his Testament
(the very same model, which God showed to Moses in the Mount) shall be seen in
Jerusalem, not in a Tabernacle, but in that Temple, which the power of God
shall make. Then shall lastly, the four Beasts, the Elders, with all the Angels
of Heaven, and all the creatures of Heaven and Earth, and of the Sea and under
the Earth fall down before the Throne, and give glory, honor, blessing and
praise unto him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever, and the
four Beasts shall say, Amen.

XII. Evidences out of Scripture that the ten Tribes shall be brought out of
Tartaria and India, and converted to the Gospel, as well as our Western Jews.
I have heard many Jews discoursing of this their glorious Restoration and
Religion to come. They say, they never possessed (no not in the time of David
and Solomon, when their Kingdom was largest) an half of that which God promised
in Deuteronomy and Joshua. Indeed it is said in Joshua, No good thing failed of
what God promised, but this is to be understood of their peaceable settlement
in what Joshua then conquered, not of the utmost bounders of what they were to
possess toward the end of Time. From Euphrates to the red Sea, all the Coasts
on the West to the great Mediterranean Sea, with Tyrus and Sydon, on the North
Hemath and Celosyria, even in length from Lebanon to Egypt, was to be the
confines of this sacred Commonwealth. Now if we consider, what a Moity of this
was possessed by Lot, Ammon, Esau, the Kings of Tyrus and Sidon, the
Philistines with Syria, we may plainly see, that more then an half was never
their own, of what God promised. In confidence of possessing which, and all the
world beside in time to come, in their great Hosanna they shake Palms in their
hands, in triumph toward the four coasts of heaven, to intimate that in their
universal Empire every tree of the wood shall clap hands, and sing for joy. It
is strange, and makes me give more credit to Esdras then otherwise I would, to
see how pat he goes with our Savior Christ, in affirming the second Captivity
of the Jews to be long, and that their return should be about the ruin of the
Roman Empire. He relates how the ten Tribes (soon after their Captivity by
Salmanasser) traveled through a great River or strait (perhaps the Streits of
Anian) in a long journey of many months or years to a Country not inhabited.
Yea many good Authors, who write of the Histories of America, relate how the
Maxicans have a Tradition (delivered from father to son, time out of mind) of
a great multitude coming a great journey into those parts with an Ark carried
before them on men's shoulders, with their God enclosed therein. These people
certainly were Jews, from whom they learned Circumcision (which our travelers
find in most of their Coasts) with other Rites of Tribes, Heads of Tribes and
Families, with some handsome Ceremonies of Marriages, Funerals and Washings,
directly the same with the Jews or Israelites. A large Discourse of a probable
conjecture that the ten Tribes of Israel were placed by Salmanasser in Armenia
and Media, and that from thence they passed into Tartaria, and so into India.
But to prove, that the Israelites were first placed in Media and Carmania, and
from thence removed into India, let us return a little back, and survey
Scriptures and some approved Authors. When Salmanasser King of Assyria carried
the ten Tribes into Captivity (in the fifth year of the reign of Hezekiah King
of Judah) he was a Prince of spacious Dominions and invincible forces, as
comprizing within his Empire all Media and Persia, Mesepotamia, Assyria, all
Arabia and Ethiopia inferior to the confines of Egypt, all Syria and Palestine
(save only the poor exhausted Kingdom of Judah) and lastly Armenia with all the
Coasts bordering upon the Caspian and Euxine sea, as far as Tartaria. By this
it will be hard to define in which Province of his Empire he placed them, out
of his Dominions we may well think he would not abandon them. In the 2 King.
17. 6. it is said that he placed them in Hala and Habor by the River of Gozan,
and in the Cities of the Medes. Which Hala (or rather Chala) and Habor by
affinity of pronuntiation, can be no other then Colchies and Iberia, two
Provinces of Armenia, the first bordering upon the Euxine, the latter upon the
Caspian sea and the confines of the Tartars. East of Armenia lies Media, in the
Cities of which, a great part of the Israelites were likewise placed to
inhabit. North of Armenia is the entrance into those immense and indiscoverable
Nations of Muscovites and Tartars, the utmost limits of whose Kingdoms were
never yet fully known. The chief River of which Countries arising far beyond
the Hyperborian Territories, after a wearisome travel through many Nations and
Provinces, disburthens it self at last into the Caspian sea, at the very
entrance into Armenia, where it is called Zolga (though our Mariners call it
Wolga) which is nothing else but a Metathesis or a bad pronunciation of the
word Gozan. So that that saying of Ben-Gorion is true (if that Manuscript be
his which Gallo-Belgicus fathers upon him, yet visible in Bibliotheca
Florentina) Salbumadzar (says he) rex Assyrius, exciso Samariae regno, december
illas Tribus, quae a divino cultu tandiu ante desciverant ad Idololatriam,
abductas in Captivitatem conlocavit in Fasso, Alvati, Loride, and Bascapante
civitatibus Colchidos and Iberiae Armenicarum provinciarum, and in Ecbatana and
Bocchu urbibus Mediae juxta Pontum Euxinum, and mare Caspium. Thus by the
testimony of this great Rabbi it is manifest that the Opinion of those men is
fond who think the ten Tribes to be utterly lost; thus likewise is it plain
that the Jews Conversion must first arise out of the East, and that Fassum,
Alvatis, Loris, and Bascapan Cities of Colchis and Iberia, and Ecbatana and
Bocchu Cities of Media were the places, where Salmanasser (called here
Salbumadzar) placed these Israelites in name, but Pagans in nature. And John
Lunclay in this Pandects of the Turkish History, fol. 769. writes, how there
are certain Hoords (Troops or Families) of people near the more Northern parts
of Tartaria, which retain the names of Dan, Zebulun and Nepthali, and in the
vicinity of Rega there is a certain barbarous Nation of Letti, which for three
months in the year perpetually wander up and down the fields, having these
words Jure-shele-mashalom continually in their mouth, as a kind of lamentable
tune or mournful Ditty: by which words Authors credibly suppose are meant
Jerusalem and Damascus the two head cities of Judah and Israel. He that
diligenrly reads the history of these X. Tribes in Scripture, after their
revolt from the house of David, and combination with Jeroboam in erecting
Idolatry, may see that they were a Nation quickly overgrown with Heathenism,
cruelty, and barbarousnesse, wholly become abominable Pagans in nature,
manners, life, condition and conversations; as if they had had Numa Pomphilius
to their Father, and not Abraham the faithful: they only kept Circumcision and
the names of their Progenitors in remembrance, but had quite forgotten the
Stories of their religion and piety, thence it came to pass that in this their
Captivity, being transported and implanted among those Nations, they quickly
conjoined and counited with them in marriage and affinity (being already long
before coupled with them in Idolatry) and so ceased to be called Israelites,
but being now all one people, were called by the names of Armenians and Medes.
That these Israeltes likewise inhabited part of Tartaria, and from thence
spread into India and the East, and that they likewise possessed a part of the
Caucasian Mountains mingled with a people, which Herodotus calls (...) (a word
not unakin to Turks) is manifest by these undeniable Reasons.

1. Because the Colchians, Iberians, and a great part of Tartaria used
Circumcision in most ancient times, long before the building of Rome, which
they could not have received from any people else but from these Israelites,
who 30. years before the foundation of Rome were sent to inhabit among them.

2. The Crim-Tartars derive their Progeny from Sampson (hence so many of them
have been called Camson, an obscure Notion of Sampson) and in imitation of him
wear long hair; which could not have been, except they had had their Original
from those people from whom they had the memory of Sampson.

3. The names likewise of Moses, Aharon, Cham, Selim, or Solomon (a vicious
Pronunciation of Shlemo or Solomon) were proper names of men amongst the Turks
long before ever they broke into Asia. Now what times the Turks first broke
into Asia, Chronologers agree not among themselves: Some say they broke through
the Caspian Streits into Armenia major (now Turcomannia) An. 844. But I rather
suppose their first Irruption into Asia was 20. years after the death of
Alexander the great, about An. M. 3718. when the Parthians shook off the
Macedonian yoke, and began their Empire: for in those times we read in Mela,
Pliny and Herodotus, that a barbarous and savage people from the North had
invaded and possessed Carmania, which could be no other then this Nation of the
Turks. Thus it is plainly manifest, that when these Israelites passed into
America, they left a great part of their Brethren behind them in Asia,
Tartaria, and India. Millions of them are in Persia, and their domineering at
this present day in Carmania, is rightly observed by Benjamin the Jew in Air,
by Mercator, Ortelius, and other Geographers.

XIII. Other excellent Proofs of the future conversion and Monarchy of the
Jews.
I. From Abraham.
Abraham was told in Genesis, His seed must thrice be like Dust, and then
afterward like Stars (Stars not for multitude, but for Piety and Glory) once in
Egypt; se^^ndly in Babel; thirdly throughout the world in the Roman Empire,
and afterward in the beginning of the FIFTH MONARCHY must enlighten the whole
world with the Glory of God. And the Jews themselves have an ancient tradition,
That they must have two Messiahs; The first should come about what time the
Government was taken from Judah; he should lay the Foundation of their
Redemption, afterward be betrayed, crucified, and die by their own hands, and
leave them in a doleful plight in the jaws of destruction by the Gentiles: him
they called Ben-Joseph or Ben-Ephraim, alluding to sorrowful Joseph, who
endured so much hardship, being sold by his brethren into Egypt, and estranged
from his fathers house; and to the unfortunate Attempt of the Tribe of Ephraim
(soon after that barbarous Edict of murdering male Infants came forth) to
deliver themselves and the Israelites by force of Arms from Pharaoh some 12
years before the Birth of Moses; when Pharaoh levying an huge Army, made
fearful slaughters of them, forcing them to return to their old obedience, of
which you may read in Psalm. 78. 9. In this doleful misery they should remain
so long till their second Messiah came and delivered them from the hands of all
their enemies, restored them to their native Land of Judea, and reigned over
them in equal fame and prosperity with David their father. Him therefore they
call Ben-David.

II. From Isaac.
Secondly, Isaac was more ways then in his Immolation a figure of Christ. He
had two sons Esau and Jacob, of whom it is said, The Elder shall serve the
younger. Edom (which Jews interpret to be the Roman Christian Church, the
Firstborn to Christ from Isaac) must come to serve the younger, The Jewish
converted Church in the end of time, when it is once come up.

III. From Jacob.
Thirdly, Jacob a Type of Christ in his Descent to Egypt had two wives, Leah a
Type of the visible Church of carnal Jews using and leaning upon ceremonious
shadows in stead of the true sacrifice from Moses to the end of the second
Temple: as likewise of the Church of the Gentiles, which from the Ascension of
Christ was to continue in vicissitudinary fortune to it is end, full 1668 years.
Thus Leah was blear-eyed, but fruitful in her posterity, yet not so acceptable
and lovely in the eyes of her husband as Rachel (a Type of the glorious Jewish
Church in the end of Monarchies) who was to be many days barren, even from the
end of the second Temple, till Anno 1683, then brings forth Joseph, leaves her
fathers idolatrous house, within a few years after travels again, and brings
forth the staff of Jacobs old age with the loss of her own life.

IV. From the New Testament, Act. 1.
Fourthly, That the Jews were to have a temporal Monarchy in the end of the
Roman Empire, is evident likewise out of the New Testament. In the first of
Acts our Savior Christ's Disciples showed how greatly the Jews expected for
this time, when their Messiah should deliver them from the yoke of the Romans,
and restore them to their temporal Kingdom in Judea; as likewise how near they
thought the season and period to be in our Saviors time, when they came to
him, saying, Lord, will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? Our
Savior in his Answer does not deny but that such a time was to be, when the
Jews should be restored to their temporal Kingdom in their own Land (which
should exceed David's and Solomon's in magnificence, and should extend over the
whole world) but only blames and checks his Apostles for enquiring of that
which neither was needful for them to know, neither should be in their days;
as likewise for being too inquisitive in the times and seasons when it should
be, and was to begin, Which (said he) the Father has put in his own power. And
whosoever reads Hos. 3. 4, 5. the four last Chapters of Zechary, Mich. 7. 15, 16,
17. Esa. 2. 2, 3, 4. and Chapter 27. 12, 13. with Jer. 24. 6, 7. with diverse
other passages in Scripture, may plainly see that neither Solomon's house nor
the Maccabees ever obtained their full propriety, nor were those Prophecies of
their universal Sovereignty ever fulfilled in the Old Testament.

V From Moses Song, Deuteronomy. 32.
Fifthly, The Song of Moses in the 32. of Deuteronomy, is clear, that many and
great afflictions shall befall them in the latter days, even all the time of
their first Messiah, and the Roman Empire. No Jew in the world ever expounded
otherwise from the 36. verse to the 43. of that Song. And to this place they
refer their afflictions which they have, and shall suffer all the time of the
Roman Empire till their Restoration. There is but few of them now, but will
confess that their Messiah Ben-Joseph, is come already, but their Ben-David is
yet hid in the depth of the Sea, and will arise from thence about the final
end of the destruction of the Gentiles.

VI From the history and life of Joseph
Sixthly, The life of Joseph in Genesis has in it more then History. At 17.
years of age he was sold by his Brethren, and stood before Pharaoh to expound
him his Dreams at thirty. So he lived above 12. years in misery and irons. And
for those 12. years God rewarded him with 80. years of government in and over
all the land of Egypt. His brethren came and bowed to him according to his
Dream of the sheaves; his father also was inferior and subjected to him as he
was Viceroy in the government of Egypt: and was nourished and maintained by
him according to his second Dream of the Sun, Moon, and the eleven Stars
crouching and making obeisance. Though his Brethren pitied him not in the
anguish of his soul, yet he forgiveth and preserves them in Egypt, and at
their deliverance thence marches triumphantly before them to Canaan in his
Coffin. But yet nevertheless Jacob was to stay in Canaan, and Joseph was to be
unknown to his Brethren till Egypt be destroyed by Famine, and yield it self
to Joseph. And the bones of Joseph too must stay in Egypt till 600000 men
besides women and children be delivered them by the hands of Moses and Aaron.
No departure from Egypt, no passage through the Red Sea without the bones of
Joseph. Edom in the days of Moses, and Babylon in Daniels time suffered the
severest punishments God could inflict upon a people, and all for afflicting
Eber. And here is a mystery not so observed as observable in Scripture. As
Egypt was broken before the first Tabernacle was set up by Moses: as Edom was
harrowed by David before the first Temple was erected by Solomon: and thirdly,
as Babel was Brought to nothing by Cyrus before the second Temple was built by
Zorubbabel and Jehoshuah: so shall both Edom and Babel, Turk, Pope, and all
Monarchies in the Earth be brought to dust, before the third Temple be built by
the converted Jews in their native Land of Judea and Jerusalem. Jerusalem now
inhabited by Turks and heretical Christians shall at that time be purged from
filth, and be the only Receptacle of the children of God. But when that time
shall be, I have abundantly shown in the Sections before. And in that season
shall Benjamin be sent down from his good father in the power of his right arm,
and Joseph (even Ben-Joseph) shall make himself known to his Brethren, who did
hate him, shoot at him, cast him into the pir, and delivered him to the
Gentiles. Which excellent Parallels of Joseph and Christ are fully explained in
the Massorch, Zoar, and in Rabbi-Asse, besides Ezechiel and S. John in the
Revelations. Notwithstanding in citing these Jewish Traditions, I would not be
mistaken, as if I maintained a second descention of our Savior Christ from
Heaven, as the Millenaries do; or that the Jews must have him come personally
down from heaven to destroy the whole world, and restore them to their Land of
Judea, I mean no such thing. God has other means to bring his purposes to
pass then, by sending his Son Christ to sojourn the second time upon earth.
A second Moses, yet a King, must work all this for them: yet not a Moses of
their own blood, but a Captain from the North; who shall work the works of God
in righteousness, and make peace like a mighty stream overflow the whole earth.

XIV. What uses Protestants ought to make of this blessing of the conversion of
the Jews.
The consideration of these future great blessings of God toward this Nation
of the Jews, and in them to all the world in the advancement of the Gospel; as
likewise the laying to heart the grievous calamities which have so long tossed
the Kingdoms and Free-states of Europe, should move all men with repentance to
prepare themselves to meet those great and fearful mutations which God is
bringing upon all the European Coasts of the world. Description of the four
Monarchies.
Historians have made their four Monarchies according to the rise or fall of
several particular Nations. 1. Assyrians. 2. Persians. 3. Grecians. and 4.
Romans: but this is a lame Division, and comes far short of that transcendent
Metamorphosis of humane affairs, which (by comparing of Histories, observation
of new Stars and Comets of late, with the consideration of the manners and
conditions of the sons of men) we may easily perceive must within these few
years be brought upon the world. The learned Mathematicians and Philosophers
(who have more thoroughly searched into the secrets of Astrology) rightlier
place their four Monarchies according to the four coasts of Heaven. 1. The
Eastern Monarchy of the Assyrians. 2. The two Southern Monarchies of the
Persians and Grecians, bounded within the circumference of 3600 miles, or 11
degrees of latitude. 3. The Western Monarchy of the Romans. 4. and lastly, the
Northern Monarchy (but in right account the fifth) must be of the Northern
LION, which to the amazement of Christendom, shall arise from the Northern
Sea, and pitch his Tents in the ashes of the Eastern and Western Monarchies.
But now having made mention so often of this V. Monarchy in this Pamphlet, I
think it meet to produce two or three Reasons of the truth and certainty of it,
deduced out of the holy Scriptures and humane Authority.

Daniel, which is the Roman: and so will not believe Christians professing him
to ^e come already: but say, this coming is deferred till the Roman Empire be
totally abolished; which because it is not nor must be yet, they will not
believe he has appeared. But the Jews are deceived in this, for Dan. 2. 44.
and 7. 9, 22. the Incarnation of our Savior Christ was promised to be in the
very nick of the constitution and establishment of the Roman Empire, and not
after the ruin of it (which was performed accordingly) else should there have
been six Monarchies before the end of the world. For the dispersion and
rejection of the Jews, the revelation of Antichrist with the Fullness of the
Gentiles, was prophesied to be accomplished in the fourth Monarchy, all which
we see are punctually fulfilled. None of which should yet have come to pass,
if our Savior Christ was not to be incarnate before the end of the Roman
Empire. Therefore as the rejection of the Jews with these other signs and
things was to be in the fourth Monarchy; so their conversion and remission into
the Church, and the glorious estate of the Gospel upon earth must be in another
fifth Monarchy, which is yet to come.

Nebuchadnezzars Image (Dan. 2.) must come to pass before the end of the
World: But five Monarchies are comprehended in that Image, Ergo. The major is
manifest, The minor is thus proved: Nebuchadnezzar himself was the Golden Head
of this Image, as he was in another respect the Feet of the old decrepit
Assyrian Monarchy, which by his Chaldean Empire and the ruin thereof (which
was approaching) should totally be annihilated. The Arms and Breasts of Silver
are the Empire of the Medes and Persians. The Belly of brass is the Empire of
the Grecians by Alexander the Great. Lastly, the Iron Legs and the Clay Toes
depictured the Roman Empire, with the present declining House of Austria, and
the breathless Papacy. Therefore the Stone cut without Hands which brake this
Image in pieces, and became a Mountain and filled the Earth, must be understood
(as I touched before) of a Fifth Monarchy yet to come, in which, by the
Conversion of the Jews and fullness of the Gentiles the Gospel shall shine in
majesty over all Kingdoms upon Earth.

Genesis 49. 10. and Numb. 24. 24. then was their conversion not to be till the
beginning of the fifth, and toward the end of the World, as is manifest by the
Apostle, Romans 11. 25. But the first is true and therefore the latter also.

Ezekiel has so largely described in his twelve last Chapters) and the
glorious felicity of the Gospel of Christ proceeding from their conversion,
must either be in the fourth Monarchy, or not until the fifth. But in the
fourth Monarchy it cannot be, for among the Turks the Jews are kept in extreme
slavery, Idolatry and ignorance: and under the Papacy they are not permitted to
use the new Testament (by which only they must be saved) and besides they are
so enraged against Christianity, by the Papists Image Worship, that there is a
flat impossibility (much less any hopes) of their conversion, so long as
either the Turkish Empire or the Papacy stands in force. Ergo their conversion
and restoration cannot be, till both Turk and Pope eternally be destroyed, and
so the fourth Monarchy finally ended.

Prophecies of the LION of the North.
Thus having delivered the reasons of a fifth Monarchy, I come to describe the
LION of the North, as I find it in an ancient Prophecy of the true Merlin,
and by Grebner.

1. Of the true Merlin in K. Lucius days, An. Chapter 130.
First of Merlin. Many Scholars have often disputed what Merlin should be, who
he was, what time he lived in, whether those Prophecies be true, and his, which
go under his name, or not: how he came by them, and lastly, what reckoning is
to be made of them. Of every of which somewhat. It has fared with Merlin, as
with Tostatus in Spain, and many Learned in our times; who for the eminency of
their Learning, and approbation of their writings, became so famous, that
Pedlar Authors fathered bastar'd ware upon them in every corner for easier
vent. Merlins there were several of old; one a Welsh-man in the days of Edgar
the Monarch, of an austere living and Monkish conversation. He lived for the
most part in the Isle of Anglesey, where he had familiarity and acquaintance
with the Bards and Druides then not wholly extinct, who had incomparable skill
in Divination by Birds, and other kind of Magique. He was an excellent
Astrologer and a great Chemist: so that many think those Prophecies, that are
like his, to be deducted from no more then natural reason. All those
Prophecies which I have seen of his (some of which I have) I cannot see how
they smell any whit of a prophetique spirit; they speak him a great Scholar in
Astrology, but no Prophet. But there was living in K. Lucius days another
Merlin (called the first) a Scottish man, and he is the true Merlin, and if any
Prophecies could be found of his, great credit was to be given to them. He was
a great friend of K. Lucius himself, and his daily companion. Of his there is
but one Prophecy extant, which I found in that ancient Chronicle of Nennius of
Bangor of the Saxons (who yet lives in Manuscript) K. Lucius being as yet
unconverted from Paganism to Christianity, would needs join in confederacy
with Santoline a King of the Scutti (now Scots) to raise war against the
Roman Emperor; to which purpose he asked council of Merlin what he should do
in this matter; who earnestly dehorted him from his purpose; and in the end
prevailed. Merlin prophesied to him, That within less then a sesquidecumane
period of time, the Eagles head should be cloven in two; one part whereof Agar
should burn with fire, and Japhet the other after the grand revolution of
days. Mark (O King) says he, and consider, Samothea shall be quickly
overflown with a vagabond Army of an unknown Original, spued out of a land
toward the East, which a flood from the North shall quickly possess. I know
thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart; thou seek Friendship from a
people, whose weakness shall be thy glory, and their greatness thy ruin. A
squadron of Fishers are risen up from the East, which shall ascend unarmed upon
the world without spear and shield, to whom all Nations shall in time obey.
They shall destroy the Temples of thy Gods (O Lucius) and convert them to the
service of their eternal King, who only can rescue from the grave, and deliver
from the snares of death. Behold I see a great Sun arise insensibly upon us
Brittanes! But (woe is me!) what black seas of darkness, and rivers of blood
pursue after it? Have thou not heard of the valiant Angles, of barbarous
Neustria, of yonder terrible Picts thy perfidious enemies? These shall overflow
thy Land, and possess the Cities thereof, till the old age of Empires, and
Government shall flow upon the world. Ill is autem temporibus revolutis, Cauda
Virginis Leonem intrabit, and Sagittarii dorsum Scorpius ascendet. Borealia
Regna a Mossoribus obterentur, Australes Principatus in statum pulvereum
desinent, and insulanarum Monarchiarum potestates sine fraeno aut milite
ephippiabuntur; bella atrocia vent is dissipabuntur, and pessum ibunt judiciali
grandine, quae per baculum ortum habuerunt, per spurios juventutem. Sol ipse
tympanizabit miniato clamyde indutus, and Luna cineritiis cothurnis ad nundinas
tolutabit. Rides, O Rex? At quibus haec supervenient, luctu and maerore
contabescent. Haec omnia vix plene peragentur, quum Princeps regali origin
coronatus ex Borealibus plagis proveniet, suis inexpectatus, alienigenis
desideratus; qui eo quod Leone ferociente infignietur, Leo nuncupabitur, Non
conquiescet, donec Synodo per eum convocata minisque dissoluta, victricia arma
in hosts transferat, and lamentabili successu vicinorum Principum ditiones
pessundet. Alexandrum Magnum virtute, Cyrum felicitate superabit: freta
transnavigabit; a multis regibus Imperator salutabitur; and Urbem quandam
vetustam solo aequabit. Interea ex Orient Princeps bellipotens illum praelio
lacesset, contr a quem Leo cum omnibus copiis procedet, and cis Euphratem
positis castris illum expectabit. Si Princeps flumen transibit, Leo
superabitur; at ipse exercitu fluvium transducto hostem cruento conflictu
superabit, and universum Orientem in potestatem rediget. Dum haec agentur,
complures Reguli ex India in Suriam cum ingentibus irrumpent excercitibus, and
circa vallem Jehosaphat praeliabundi Leonem opperibunt, ubi ab ipso ad
internecionem omnes delebuntur. Nec multo post, Leo ipse fatis concedet,
postquam regnum Transfugarum mirand a pietate in perpetuum fundavit. Those
times being past, the tail of the Virgin shall enter the Lion, and Scorpio
shall ascend the back of Sagittary: The Northern Kingdoms shall be wasted by
Reapers, the Southern Principalities shall end in dust, and the powers of the
Iland-Monarchies without either bridle or soldier shall be harnessed. Cruel
wars shall be scattered by the winds, and quelled by a revengefull hail,
whose beginning were by a staff, their growth and continuance by bastards. The
Sun it self shall play on the timbrell clad with a vermilion coat, and the Moon
with dunne buskins shall amble to the fair. Laugh'st thou, O King? But those on
whom these things shall come, for grief and sorrow shall pine away. All these
things shall scarce be accomplished, when a Prince of royal stock shall come
forth crowned from the Northern parts, as to his own people unexpected, but
desired by foreigners, who because he shall bear a Rampant Lion, shall
therefore be called a Lion. He shall not rest, till having called a Synod and
after dissolved it by threats, he shall advance his conquering arms against his
enemies, and by woeful success shall harrase the territories of neighbor
Princes. He shall exceed Alexander the Great in virtue, and Cyrus in success.
He shall pass the seas and be saluted Emperor by many Kings: A certain
ancient City shall he lay even with the ground. In the mean while a powerful
Prince out of the East shall provoke him to battle, against whom the Lion shall
march with all his forces, and pitching his Camp on this side Euphrates, shall
expect him. If the Prince shall come over the river, the Lion shall be
overcome: but he shall pass his army over the river, and give his Enemy a
bloody defeat, and be master of all the East. While these things are in action,
diverse petty Kings from India shall break into Syria with mighty armies, and
provided for battle shall wait for the Lion about the valley of Jehoshaphat,
where they shall by him be all wholly cut off. Not long after shall the Lion
himself decease, after that with eminent piety he shall have established the
Kingdom of fugitives. This is all that is extant of this former Merlin, whose
glorious works and inestimable Prophecies are utterly lost to the great
detriment of learning.

II. Of Grebner.
Not much unlike this, is that of Grebner, Ban. 73. Europae labes and
imbecillitas singulorum ejusdem Regnorum sedem mirabiliter struet QVINTAE
MONARCHIAE, quae sub tempus exitii Imperii Romani ad terrorem totius mundi ex
ruinis Germaniae refulgebit. Haec triennii spatio caetera Europae regna aut vi
perdomitabit, aut belli metu ad societatem perpellet: quo universalem Ligam and
unionem omnium Protestantium efficiet sub specie bellum Poloniae inferendi, re
autem vera Imperium Austriacum Italiamque invadendi. Nec eum spes fesellerit.
Nam circa hoc tempus SECTA quaedam manachorum adeo abominabilis, obscaena, and
seditiosa in Papatus sinu orietur; ut compellet tam Protetestantes quam Italiae
Principes extremum Romae exitium moliri.

The corruption of Europe, and the weakness of her several Kingdoms shall
strangely make way for the FIFTH MONARCHY, which about the time of the fall of
the Roman Empire to the terror of the whole world shall appear out of the
ruins of Germany. She within three years shall either subdue by force the rest
of the Kingdoms of Asia, or for fear of war shall bring them to a league,
whereby she shall conclude an universal confederacy, under color of making
war against Polonia, but in deed to invade the Austrian Empire and Italy.
Neither shall her hope fail her: For about this time a certain SECT of Monks
shall arise in the bosom of the Papacy, so abominable, obscene and seditious;
that it shall urge both the Protestants and Princes of Italy to endeavor the
utter subversion of Rome.

Who shall be King of this V Monarchy.
Thus having showed the Seat and Certainty of this V. Monarchy; I come to
declare what People or Kingdom in Europe shall obtain and rule it, and whose it
shall soly be. Of the European Christians two several Kingdoms long since, and
of late have mainly striven for the FIFTH MONARCHY.

Not the Spaniard.
First, The Kingdom of Spain has always for a matter of 170 years ago by
incorporating it self with the House of Austria, and the most potent Families
of Germany and Italy by strange Marriages and odd medlies labored extremely
to bring all Europe under her Wings, that so she might become the glorious Sun
of the West. On the other side, the Swede of late by keeping an high hand over
the King of Poland, and fixing his glorious Trophies of Conquest in all corners
of Germany; has brought the Emperor to so low an ebb, and has of late become
so terrible to the Pope and Spaniard: and lastly can in an instant enleague
himself with all Protestant Kingdoms and States, either for fear or favor upon
any necessary occasion, that many account him the man that both goes the
directest way, and whom heaven has ordained to sway the Imperial Scepter
within the limits of the Church. But neither of these are they who are ordained
to the Empire of the fifth Monarchy. Not the Spaniard, because he is for his
inhumane cruelty so generally hated of Christians, all men avoiding him and
flying from him, as the Serpent from the Ash: His Indian Plantations both
thrive not, and likewise for their barbarousnesse are so detested of the
savages worse than vipers, and upon opportunities are accordingly massacred.
Yea, those places of Italy which are under his Protection, as Florence, Genoa,
Millain and other Cities afford him as much affection, as the Spider does the
Serpent. Thus is He the universal Odium of all the world, thrives in no place,
and like oil over-swiming all other liquids, and can hardly incorporate with
any; so seldom is he conjoined but in natural Antipathy with all Nations. Add
hereunto the austerity and unpleasantnesse of his Government, choosing rather to
domineer over subdued Countries by rapine and cruelty, than to govern them by
Love and Piety. And lastly, his Governors in every Province aim at their own
ends, pilling and squeezing the Subjects, so that his Name and Government is
every where abominated, no Province continuing loyal any longer then they can
get arms and stoutly rebel. The injustice of which has caused Portugal to be
rent from him, which while the world stands shall never be his again. And
moreover the Oracle tells him, that Naples, Navar, his reconciled Provinces in
Belgia, with his Indian Plantations (the best Jewels he has) shall be plucked
within 30 years to come from his ambitious Crown, never to be recovered again.

Nor the Swede.
Secondly, The Swede cannot be Paramount in this Monarchy, because of the
various Sects and Schisms he is pestered with, so inveterate and so
predominant, that no Reformation can purge him of them. The male Line of that
Royal Pedigree is extinct, and only a weak young Princess surviving; the whole
Kingdom shared and governed by factious Nobles and covetous Generals, and while
every one sucks from the veins of the Body Politic to cram his own, it will
be soon evacuated, both of life and nourishment. Besides, it has been since
prophesied to Sweden, that he shall not be so much as a tributary Kingdom to
this great Sovereignty, but shall be the first, that shall be made a slave to
that famous Northern Lion, who shall wear the Crown of that transcendent
Monarchy. As for France, Denmark, England, and the free Cantons of Germany,
they make account for the present they do valiantly if they can well husband
what is got already. And for England in particular, if it chance that she make
war upon any neighbor Enemy, and enlarge their Dominions by Conquest, it is
more to secure her self, and prevent the Invasion of the great Eagle, and her
chief feathers, then any grecdinesse of extending her Bounders by the Conquest
and ruin of others. If she keep her ancient soil and possessions in those
times, it is as much as heaven has ordained her, and more she shall not have.
Object.
Who then must be Lord of this Monarchy? Or what people shall be parts and
members thereof? Answ.
Even a Nation which at this day is hid invisibly within the bowels of Europe,
which seeing are not seen, and living are not known: Which shall by a
miraculous Resurrection (like the Jews from India and Tartaria) be raised to
destroy all Idolatry and abomination out of every corner of the North, with the
weapons of an holy warfare tending to the glory of God, and the Honor of their
King. His Sword shall be Religion, and his Ensigns Righteousness and Piety.
All the godly in every Kingdom and State in Europe, the converted Jews
conjoined and united with them in spirit and habitation, shall (as I said
before) root out all names of Iniquity, and be this Monarchy, which shall only
consist of, and subsist by Holiness, and an unquenchable desire of propagating
the Glory and Gospel of God: according to that of Daniel, Chap. 7. ver. 27. And
the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.
Of the Effects of that fatal Star, which appeared in the head of Cassiopea, An.
1572.
The first preparation to the Birth of which, was that ominous and fatal Star
which appeared in the head of Cassiopea, An. 1572, the effects of which shall
begin to operate upon Europe, and the Eastern Coasts of America, An. 1699, in
bringing a Mystery to light which all the sons of Adam are not able to effect.
Of this fatal and ominous Star (or Comet, choose you whether) I find several
Tractates written.

One Nuntius Propheticus in Print: Magell de quinta Monarchia, and Openheims
Ephemeris Caelica, both Manuscripts, both excellently discoursing of the
Effects thereof: How that, Quo tempore accidet septima and ultima-maxima
superiorum Planetarum Conjunctio, princeps erit Monarchia prima, quae caput ex
ruinis quarti Imperii erexerit. Currus Lunae Zodiacum perturbabit, Cauda
Draconis coget Plciades in fletum prorumpere, dorsum Delphini ascendet, and
flores Virgineos obfuscabit: continuaeturbae, seditiones, bella civilia,
strages, panolethriae luctuosissimae omnia illa regua and illustres Familias
persequentur, ex quibus ista Monarchia orta est, aut ei ullo modo obviabunt.
Burgundiae domus finera accipiet, Silesiae libertas Gallico Neroni
prostituetur. Belgarum Ordinespotentiae and Aristocratiae suae finem videbunt,
etc. Openheim fol. 86.

But Magel is most plain above all three, fol. 67. col. 8. Fatcor majorum
Lumiuarium deliquia sine insigni hominnm pernicie pecorumque strage nunquam
extitisse: Regnorum mutationes etiam, populorum clades, regum funera, bella and
incendia in ipsorum Deliquiorum A^ticulis, aut paulo post evidenter apparuisse.
Fateor etiam superiorum erronum coitum malorum ut plurimum Iliadc comitari:
atque hanc stellam (quae hoc An. 1572 in vertice Cassiopeae illuxit) supra
omnem elementarem regionem collocatam novi Imperij Revolutionem Dominiumque
significasse. Quae tamen effecta haec aetas nostra minime perspiciet:
reservanda nihil-ominus in gentem quandam etiamnum invisibilem, cujus
magnitudinis radij in universum caeli terraeque ambitum extendentur.

At what time the 7th, the last and greatest Conjunction of the chief Planets
shall happen, the first Monarchy shall reign, which shall lift up her head out
of the ruins of the IV Empire. The Chariot of the Moon shall disturb the
Zodiac. The Tail of the Dragon shall force the Pleiades to break out into
weeping, shall ascend the back of the Dolphin, and shall darken the luster of
the Virgin: Daily troubles, seditions, civil wars, slaughters, and most
lamentable universal Destructions shall vex all those Kingdoms and eminent
Families, from whence that Monarchy sprang, or which shall any way cross it.
The house of Burgundy shall be at an End: the Liberty of Silesia shall be
prostituted to a French Nero. The Estates of Belgia shall see an end of their
Power and Aristocracy.

I confess Eclipses of the great Luminaries never happened without the notable
Destruction of men and slaughter of Cattle: the Changes also of Kingdoms, the
Deaths of People, Funerals of Kings, Wars and fires have broke forth either in
the very time of their Eclipses, or within a little after. I confess also the
Conjunction of the higher wandering Stars is for the most part attended with
an Iliad of mischiefs: and that this Star (which this year 1572 appeared on the
top of Cassiopaea) being placed above the whole Elementary Region, did signify
the Revolution and Dominion of a new Empire. Which effects shall not yet be
seen by this our age; yet are they reserved for a certain Nation, as yet
invisible, the beams of whose greatness shall be extended through the whole
verge of Heaven and Earth.

The Description of the flourishing Monarchy of the Gospel in America and India
about Anno 1710, and A. 1763.
In that same year shall the kingdom of salvation be preached by the Ministry
of the Saints the most High, to those immense and unknown American Coasts, to
whom as yet the Name of Christ was never yet revealed. And that people who from
the Creation till that time were the Empire of Satan, shall be called the
specious and spacious Church of God. The gates of which shall be open
continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring unto
them the riches of the Gentiles, and the treasures of the Kings of the Earth.
All Nations and Kingdoms, that will not serve her, shall perish and be
destroyed for ever. Within whose land shall be heard no violence nor
destruction, nor desolation within her Borders; but Salvation shall be her
walls, and praise her gates. Her Government shall be peace, and her Exaactors
Righteousness. Her Sun shall never go down, nor her Moon ever be hid, for the
Lord shall be her everlasting light, and the days of her sorrow shall be
ended. The people within her shall be all righteous; for ever shall they
possess their proper inheritances, for God shall make them an everlasting
Glory, and a Joy from Generation to Generation. Therefore ought no man to be
sorrowful for the Calamities of Europe, or the afflictions of the times; nor
grieved with the mutations and Downfals of Kingdoms and Empires, neither should
he be afraid because Wars and miseries rage in all Coasts of the world. For
this is the eternal Law of Creatures (which the Creator imposed upon them at
first) that the Birth of one thing should be the Death of another, and that the
order of Nature should be preserved by the vicissitudinary course of alternate
Mutability. And why should we be offended at wars amongst men, when there are
daily and continual Conflicts between the Elements themselves? Cities,
Republiques, Empires and Families are mortal as men, have their states of
Birth, Infamy, Growth and Old Age as well as they. Glory, Majesty, Arts and
Sovereignty began in Asia by the Assyrians; from them departed to the Medes and
Persians; and from them (before they had well tasted the sweetness of them)
translated to the Grecians, and next to the Romans: The Glory of the Roman
Empire was eclipsed and humbled by the barbarous Inundations of Goths, Huns,
Vandals, and other savage Nations, who being themselves once civilized and
mollified by the Effeminacies of Italy and the West, were in 560 years space
overthrown by the Potency of Charlemain and the Germans. Germany has now fully
possessed the Imperial dignity 790 years; and before fifty years more be past,
shall be made a scorned Servitor of the King of the North, whose Power and
Religion shall transcend the utmost Confines of East and West. In the beginning
of which Empire, Venice shall not brag of being inaccessible by the
circumfluent Ocean, and London, Paris, Antwerp and Prague, the IV Ladies of
Europe shall be humbled to sit in the dust of eternal Destruction. The
consideration of this must teach men humility in prosperity, carfulness to
know God and keep his Commandments, seeing every Plant which he has not
planted shall be plucked up, and nothing can be permanent but by his favor and
protection.

XV. A Prayer to God to unite his Church, end the afflictions of it, and to
hasten the conversion of the Jews, with the monarchy of the Gospel.
Thou therefore the eternal and incomprehensible Father of lights, the
indivisible God of peace and unity, look down at length upon the afflicted
estate of thy Gospel and mournful face of thy Church, clouded with sects and
schisms, rent by civil combustions, dying by the wounds which her sons have
given, and wallowing in that gore which was shed by the hands of her own
children. Though our sins have deserved that we should for ever be cast out of
the sight of thy countenance, yet respect thou the blood of thy Son, crying
better things then that of Abel, and be once at one again with thy inheritance
Abraham knows us not, Israel is ignorant of us, but thou art our Father, and in
thee shall be all our affiance, with whom even the worst of men have found
mercy. Extend the light of thy loving-kindenes to the Tribes of Jacob, and
return to the many thousands of Israel, for the time to build up Zion is come,
and the days of restoring Jerusalem cannot be prolonged. For why? Thy servants
think upon her stones, and favor the very dust thereof. But remember Edom, O
Lord, as thou remembredst Babel, which have cried so often, Down with it, down
with it to the very earth. Pour thy vengeance down upon the Beast of Rome, and
the red Dragon of Constantinople, who never knew thy name, that so the
sorrowful sighings of the Prisoners may come before thee. and thy servants be
preserved that are appointed to die. Let thy work be upon the MAN of thy right
hand, and upon the Son of man whom thou have made so strong for thy self, that
Pharaoh, Elam, Mesheck, with the sons of Tubal may fall in the midst of them
that are slain by the sword, and may descend into the midst of hell with all
that help them, even the whole multitude of the Uncircumcised, whose Lot is to
go into the nether parts of the Earth. There shall they have their beds with
the Uncircumcised near those Valiants, which are gone down to the grave, with
their weapons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads, because
they were the fear of the mighty in the Land of the Living. But what shall be
said to the Captain of the Nations, or to the Angel destroying Edom and
Babylon? Even this, That the Lord has founded Zion, and the poor of his people
shall trust in it. He will leave an afflicted people, and they shall trust in
the name of the Lord: He shall give them a pure Law, that they may pray to him
with one consent. He shall open the doors of darkness, the gates of obscurity
shall he break down, that the world may be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord as the waters cover the Sea. O thou sower of discord, and Captain of
iniquity, how long will thou delight to murder, spoil and pursue the
distressed? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the end? Command
the people to return every man from pursuing his brother: for lo, a Nation is
risen against you, a mighty Nation and terrible from the East, whose horses aee
fire and his Chariots flames of fire to devour: his men are as swift as the
Eagle, who will have no compassion on the fruit of the womb, nor shall their
eye pity: They shall encompasse thy Tents with an intent to lay all waste
before them, but nevertheless be confident and bold in the Lord of Hosts: for
fire shall come down from Heaven and return their wickedness upon their heads,
and their doings upon their own pates. O thou worship of Israel! how wonderful
art thou in thy doings toward the children of men! Bringing light out of
darkness, strength out of weakness, and making Justice the mean to the
manifestation of thy goodness and glory! As for me, I will expect him who is
as well the King of Salem, Peace, as Melchisedeck, the King of Justice, all my
days: and will heartily pray for his coming, who shall bring every work into
judgment, and every thing to a legal trial, whether it be good or evil. He
is the Lamb upon the white Throne, before whose face Heaven and Earth shall fly
away, and the Sea be no more found: Death and Hell shall give up the dead that
are in them, and every Name that is not written in the Book of Life, shall be
cast into the Lake of fire. For which time all the Creation groaneth, crying
out to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and restored to the
glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
that sin may be destroyed for ever, and righteousness eternally established in
stead thereof, Amen.

FINIS.
Forsitan hunc aliquis verbosum dicere librum
Non dubitet: forsan multo proestantior alter
Pauca reperta putet, quum plura invenerit ipse:
Deses and impatiens nimis haec obscura probabit:
Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli.
Sed me juditij non poenitet: haec been vobis
Commisi, quibus est amor and sapientia juxta,
Et Labor in studijs ijsdem celebratus inhaeret:
Vos sequar: investro satis est examine cautum.


