Brief Collections OUT OF Magna Charta: OR, The Known good old LAWS OF
ENGLAND.

Which shows; That the Law is the highest Inheritance the King has; and that
if His Charter, Grant, or Pattent, be repugnant to the said Laws, and
Statutes, cannot be good, as is instanced in the Charter of Bridewell, London,
and others.

By which it appears; That the King by His Charter may not alter the Nature of
the Law, the Form of a Court; nor Inheritance lineally to descend; nor that
any Subject be protected from Arrests, Suites, etc.

Printed at London, for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop over
against London-stone. 1643.

Collections out of MAGNA CHARTA: OR, The known good old Laws of ENGLAND.
INter Magnalia Regni; Magnalia Regni, 19. H. 6.
Amongst the greatest and most haughty things of this Kingdom; as it is
affirmed in the 19. H. 6. Le ley est le pluis hault. Inheritance q. le Roy ad,
etc. That is; the Law is the highest Inheritance that the King has.

For by the Law both the King and all his Subjects are ruled and directed.

The Maxims to direct the King.
The Maxims and Rules whereby the King is directed, are the ancient Maxims and
Customs, and States of this Land.

The Maxims.
The Maxims are the foundations of the Law, and the full and perfect
Conclusions of reason.

The Customs of the Realm.
The Customs of the Realm, are properly such things, as through much, often,
and long usage: either of simplicity, or ignorance, getting once an Entry;
are entered and hardened by Succession, and after be defended as firm and stable
Laws.

The Statutes of the Realm.
The Statutes of the Realm, are the resolute Decrees, and the absolute
Judgments of the Parliament established by the King, with the common consent
of the three Estates, who do represent the whole and entire Body of the Realm
of England.

To the purpose of this discourse, The law is: If any Charter be granted by
the King, the which is repugnant to the Maxims, Customs, or Statutes of the
Realm; Then is the Charter void, and it is either by Quowarranto, or by
Scirefacias (as learned men have left Presidents) to be repealed. As in Anno
19. Ed. 19. Ed. 3.
3.

That a Kings Grant which is either repugnant to Law, A Kings Grant repugnant
to Satutes etc. not good.
Custom, or Statute, is not good nor pleadable in the Law; See what Presidents
thereof have been left by our wise Forefathers.

It is set down in 13. 13. H 6. H. 2.
H. 6. That King H. 2. had by his Charter granted to the Pryor and Monks of S.
Bartholomews in London, that the Pryor and his Monks should be as free in their
Church as the King was in his Crown.

Yet by this grant was the Pryor and his Monks deemed and taken to be but as
Subjects, and the aforesaid grant in that respect to be void. For by the law
the King may not any more disable himself of his regal superiority over his
Subjects, then his subjects can renounce or avoid their subjection, against or
toward their King or Superior.

Stacyes, example.
You know that Stacy would have renounced his loyalty and subjection to the
Crown of England, and would have adopted himself to have been a subject to
King Philip of Spain. But answer was made by the Court; That by the laws of
this Realm, neither may the King release or relinquish the subjection of his
subject, neither may the subject revolt in his allegiance from the superiority
of his Prince.

There are two notable presidents in the time of King Edward 3. K. Ed. 3.
the which although they take place in some one respect; yet were they not
adjudged of according to the mind of the King being the Grantor.

The L. Mountague.
That is, the King granted unto the Lord William Mountague, the Isle of Wight,
and that he should be crowned King of the same.

The Earl of Darby.
And he also granted unto the Earl of Darby the Isle of Man, and that he
should be crowned King of the same.

Yet these two personages (notwithstanding the said grants) were subjects, 8.
H. 4.
and their Islands were under the dominion and subjection of the King, and in
that respect were the grants void.

It was spoken in the 8. 31. H. 6.
H. 4. Quod potest as Principis, non est inclusa legibus. That is, a Princes
power is not bounded with rules or limits of the law: howsoever that sentence
is so, the law agreed to the contrary.

The 31 H. 6. whereas it is agreed for law, That it is not in the Kings power
to grant by his Charter, that a man seized of land in see simple, may devise by
his last Will and Testament the same lands to another, or that the youngest
son by the custom of Borough English, shall not inherit; or that lands
being Frank fee, should be of the nature of ancient demeasne.

Or that a new incorporated town, 34. H 8.
that an assize of Fresh force should be used, or that they shall have toll,
traverse, or through toll, or such like, etc. 37 H. 8. and 49. Ass. 4.8.

See also a notable case agreed for law in 6. H. 7. where the Justices do
affirm the law to be, that Rape is made felony by statute, and that the same
by the law is not inquirable but before Justices that have authority to hear
and determine of the same.

In this case the King cannot by his Charter make the same offense to be
enquired of in a Law day; nor the King cannot grant, that a Leet shall be of
any other nature, then it is by the course of Common Law: So thereby it
appears; that the King may not either alter the nature of the Law, the form
of a Court, or the manner or order of pleading.

And in 8. H. 6. it is agreed for Law; Anno 8. H. 6.
That the King may not grant to I. S. That I. S. may be judge in his own
proper Cause; nor that I. S. shall be sued by an action at the Common Law, by
any other person; nor that I. S. shall have a Market, a Fair, or a free
Warrant in another man's soil.

Hill Justice.
And in the long Record by Hill the reverend Judge, it is said for Law; That
whereas the King has a prerogative, that He shall have the worship of the
body of His Tenants (although be hold of the King but by posteriority) yet if
the King grant over his Seigniory unto another with like prerogative
(notwitstanding any Posteriority) the prerogative shall not pass: For (says
the Book) the King by His Charter cannot change the Laws.

The same Law is; That the King cannot grant unto another the prerogative of
Nullum tempus occurrit Regi; nor that a Descent shall not take away an Entry;
nor a Collateral Warrant shall not bind; nor that Possessio Fratris shall not
take place; nor that the wife shall not be endowed of her husbands lands; nor
that Inheritance shall lineally descend; nor that any Subject shall be under
protection from arrests, suits, and such like, etc. Yet do not we see daily
in experience; That whatsoever can be procured under the Great Seal of
England, is taken Quasi sanctim?

And although it be merely against the Laws, Customs, and Statutes of this
Realm; yet it is defended in such sort, that some have been called rebellious,
for not allowing such void and unlawful grants.

And an infinite number of such like presidents I could set down to maintain
the aforesaid argument, but these few examples shall serve for this time.

The authority of the Governors of Bridewell.
But now we have to see, if the said Charter granted to the City concerning the
authority of the Governors of Bridewell, stand with the Laws, Customs, and
Statutes of this Realm or not.

The effect of which Charter in one place is; That the Governors have
authority to search, enquire, and seek out idle Ruffians, Tavernehunters,
Vagabonds, Beggars, and all persons of evil name and fame, whatsoever they
be, men or women, and then to send and commit to Bridewell, or by any other
ways or means to punish or correct them, as shall seem good to their
discretions.

Here you see what the words of the said Charter are.

Now are we to consider what the words of the Law be.

See Magna Charta of the Liberties of England cap. 29. Magna Charta cap. 29.
29.

No Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned, or be Disseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or free customs, or to be outlawed, or exiled, or any other ways
destroyed, Nor we shall not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of men of his degree, or by the Law of the land.

Now if we do compare the said Charter of Bridewell with the great Charter of
England both in matter, sense, and meaning, you shall find them merely
repugnant.

In the said great Charter of England, in the last Chapter amongst other
things, the King grants for him and his heirs, That neither he nor his
heirs shall procure or do any thing, whereby the Liberties in the said Charter
contained, shall be infringed or broken.

And if any thing be procured or done by any person contrary to the premises,
it shall be had of no force or effect.

Here must you note also, That the said great Charter of England is not only
confirmed by the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 5. Stat. of Malb. cap. 3.
but also by many other Statutes made in the time of King Edw. King Ed. 3. R.
2. H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. Anno 43. E. 3. cap. 1.
3. King R. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. and Hen. 6. Amongst sundry of which
Confirmations, I do note one above the rest. The which is An. 43. Edw. 3. cap.
1. The words are these viz.

It is assented and accorded, That the great Charter of England, and the
Charter of the Forests, shall be kept in all points: and if any Statute be
made to the contrary they shall be holden for none.

Hitherto you see it very plainly, That procurement nor Act done either by the
King or any other person, or any Act of Parliament, or other thing; may in any
ways alter or change any one point contained in the said great Charter of
England.

But if you will note the words, sense, matter, and meaning of the said Charter
of Bridewell, you shall find it all merely repugnant to the said great Charter
of England.

I do note one special Statute made in the said 43. year of King Ed. 3. the
which if it be well compared to the said Charter of Bridewell, it will make an
end of this contention.

The words are these, viz.

Item, at the request of the Commons, by the Petition put forth in this
Parliament, to eschew the mischiefs and damages done to diverse of the Commons
by false Accusers; which oftentimes have made their Accusements, more for
vengeance and singular profit, then for the profit of the King and his people;
of which accused persons, some have been taken and caused to come, etc. against
the Law.

It is assented and accorded for the Government of the Commons, That no man be
put to answer without presentment before the Justices of the King upon Record
by due process, As by Writ original, according to the old Law of the land,
And if any thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in
the Law, and holden for Error.

As I said before, so say I still; If this Stature be in force, as I am sure it
is; then is the Law clear: That the proceedings in Bridewell upon the
accusation of Whoors taken by the Governors of Bridewell aforesaid; are not
sufficient to call any man to answer by any Warrant by them made, without
Indictment or other matter of Record, according to the old Law of the land.

Such like Commissions as this of Bridewell is, were granted in the time of
King Ed. 3. by especial procurement, to enquire of special Articles, the
which Commissioners did make their Inquiries in secret places, etc.

It was therefore enacted, Anno 42. Ed. 3. Anno 42. E. 3. cap. 4.
That from henceforth in all Inquiries within the Realm, Commissions should
be made to some Justices of one Bench or other, or Justices of Assize, or
Justices of the Peace, with other of the most worthy of the County, etc.

By this Statute we may learn, that Commissioners of Inquiries ought to sit in
open Courts, and not in any close or secret place, and that their Inquiry
ought to be by Juries, and by no discussion or examination.

If you look upon the Statute of Anno H. Anno 1. H. 8. cap. 8.
8. cap. 8. you shall there perceive the very cause, why Empson, Sheffeild, and
others, were quite overthrown, the which was (as by the Indictments especially
appears) for executing Commissions against due course of the Common Law, and
in that they did not proceed in Justice according to the Liberties of the great
Charter of England, and of other Laws and Statutes provided for the due
executing of Justice.

There was a Commission granted forth in the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth of happy memory unto Sir Ambrose Cave, Sir Richard Sackvile, and
others, for the examination of Felons, and of other lewd persons. It so fell
out, that many men of good calling were impeached by the accusation of Felons.
Some great men and Judges also entered into the validity of the Commission, And
it was thought that the Commission was against the Law, and therefore did the
Commissioners give over the Commission, as all men know.

And whereas the Examination is by the Commission referred to the wisdom and
discretion of the Governors of Bridewell, As touching this point, I find that
the examination of robberies done by Sanctuary men, was appointed to the
discretion of the Council, or to four Justices of the Peace; But this was not
by Commission, or by Grant, but by Act of Parliament, made Anno 22. H. 8. cap.
14. Anno 22. H. 8. cap. 14.


The Justices of both the Benches have used to examine the abilities and
disabilites of Attourneys, and by their discretions to place or remove them
upon their misdemeanors without any solemnity of trial at the Common Pleas
or Law, And that is and have been done by the Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer touching their Attourneys.

But if you search the cause thereof, you shall find the cause to be done by
the authority of Parliament. An. 4 H. 4. cap. 1. Anno 4 H. 4. cap. 1.


And whereas sundry men are arrested by Latitat, Capias, Attachments, and such
like Process whereof their corporal presence is required, yet upon
infirmities and other maladies, the Justices (having examined the matter) may
by their discretions admit them to make Attourneyes.

But note you in this case, Anno 7. H. 4. cap. 13.
that all this is done by authority of Parliament. An. 7. H. 4. cap. 13.

The Commission of Bankrupts gives power to their Commissioners to take order
by their discretions both with the body and goods of the Bankrupt, and set the
Bankrupt out of his house, and him to imprison, and all this is referred to the
discretion of the Commissioners; But this is by authority of Parliament. Anno
13. Eliz. cap. 7.
An. 13. Eliz. cap. 7.

The punishment and examination of such as countefeit Letters of privy tokens,
is referred to the discretion of the Justices of peace in every County; But
this is by Parliament. Anno 33. Anno 33. H. 8. cap. 1.
H. 8. cap. 1.

The examination of Riots, Routs, and such like misdemeanors in the
Star Chamber, is referred to the discretion of the Judges of the Court; Anno 3.
H. 7 cap. 1. Anno 2. H. 8. cap. 20.
But this is by Parliament. An. 3. H. 7. cap. 1. and An. 2. H. 8. cap. 20.

The examination of unlawful hunting in Parks, warrens, etc. is referred to
the discretion of the Justices of the Peace. And if the Offender deny his
hunting, then it is felony. This is also by Parliament. Anno 1. H. 7. cap. 7.
Anno 1. H. 7. cap. 7.

The Rate, Taxation and punishment of servants, laborers, etc. of their wages,
is referred to the discretion of the Justices of Peace in every County, and
City; but this is by Parliament. Anno 5. Eliz. cap. 4.
Anno 5. Eliz. cap. 4.

The examination of Rogues and Vagabonds with the form of their punishment, is
referred to the lustices, but by Parliament.

The determination of all causes in Wales, is referred to be ended by the
Kings Council there established, by their Wisdoms and discretions; but yet
this is by Parliament.

The Grant of the Pluralities, Tot quots, Qualifications, Dispensations,
Licenses, an* Tollerations, is referred to the discretion of the Archbishop of
Canterbury; but this is by Parliament.

The dealings and examinations of High Commissioners are authorized altogether
by Parliament.

And to be short, you shall find in the great volume of the Statutes, near the
number of forty Acts of Parliament, that do refer the examination and
punishment of Offenders to the wisdom and discretion of the Justices.

Whereupon I do note:

Nota.
That if the King by Prerogative might have done all things by Commission, or
by Charter; That it had been in vain to have made so many Laws in Parliament
for the same.

And to make the Law more manifest in this question, In ann. 42. Ed. 3. lib.
Assiz. 11.5. Ann. 42. E. 3. lib. Assiz 11.5.
A Commission was sent out of the Chancerie to one I. S. and others, to arrest
the body and goods of A. B. and him to imprison; and the Justices gave
judgment, that this Commission was directly against the Law, to take any ones
body without Indictment: and therefore they took the Commission from the
Commissioners, Nota.
to the intent to deliver the same to the Kings Council, Anno 24. E. 3.
Quod nota.

And I do also find in the 24. year of King E. 3. this president, That a
Commission was granted to certain persons, to indict all those who were
notoriously slandered for any felonies, trespasses, or for any other
misdemeanors, yea although they were indicted for the same.

And it was adjudged that this Commission was directly against the Law.

And thus I do conclude upon the whole matter.

That the Commission of Bridewell would be well considered of by the learned
Council of the city: For I do not think to the contrary; but that there be
learned, that by their great knowledge in the Law, are well able either in a
Quo warranto, or any other action brought to defend the same.

FINIS.

