A brief RELATION, Abstracted out of several Letters, OF A most Hellish,
Cruel, and Bloody PLOT against the City of BRISTOLL, Hatched and contrived by
the Malignants of the said City, Prince Rupert, George Lord Digby, and their
fellow Cavalliers, to have massacred, murdered, plundered, and destroyed, not
only the well affected in the said City, but all others, that had not the mark
of the Beast upon them; happily discoverd and prevented by the goodness and
mercy of God, upon Tuesday the 7th this instant March, a few hours before it
should have been put in Execution.

March 13. 1642. Ordered by the House of Commons, That this Relation be
forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Lawrence
Blaiklock, at the Sign of the Sugar loaf, near Temple Bar, 1642.

A brief Relation, abstracted out of several Letters, of a most hellish,
cruel, and bloody Plot, against the City of BRISTOLL.
SIR,
I Shall acquaint you of the happy discovery and prevention (by the wonderful
mercy and goodness of God) of a most hellish, cruel and bloody plot (very
little before it should have been put in execution, hatched and contrived by
and between the Malignants of this City, Prince Rupert and his brother Maurice,
George Lord Digby, their fellow Cavalliers, sons of Beliall and others of
that accursed crew, who with an Army of ten thousand of horse and foot, of
their own forces and Malignants, they rouled up in their march, advanced almost
to the very walls of this City: upon Monday the sixth of this instant March,
they came to Chippingsodbury, from thence upon Tuesday, the next day they
marched to Westbury, Horvill, and Durdon-hill, which is within a mile of this
Town, who could not be so ignorant, as to promise to themselves any hopes of
Entrance by sudden assault, but by surprisall and treachery, confidently
presuming on the malignant party within, that first invited them hither; a
design more damnable then the Powder Treason, and more barbarous and Cruel
then the Massacre of France, being destroyers of their own liberties, and
supplanters and overthrowers of the same Religion that they themselves pretend
to profess. The Agreement betwixt the Chavaliers and the Malignants here in
this City was, that about eleven of the clock on the Tuesday night, a house
near unto Froome Gate was to be blown up; which was to give warning to the
Chavaliers to make their onset; who against that hour were to draw down unto
the City, and Prince Robert with his Army came so nigh as the gallows: a bell
at St. John's Church on a hill above the gates was to toule, another bell at St.
Michaels Church upon the hill above the Green was to ring, to give notice to
the Malignants of this Town to rise in an instant; sufficient parties were
made to have forced all the Courts of Guards, thereby to have let the
Cavalliers in without opposion; for that purpose there were in readiness in
the house of Master George Butcher of Christmasse street, a new made Captain
for this design, about 160 armed men, and in the house of Master Robert
Yeomans (who was one of the Sheriffs of this City the last year, four and
twenty men ready to put themselves in arms which there they had; the one to
supprise the maine Guard, the other, the Guard at Froomegate, and to let in
these blood sucking Chavaliers; two other Bells were to toule at the same time
to give notice to the Malignants to rise in all parts of the City. Both Monday
and Tuesday, white pieces of Incle were given to diverse, and to the better sort
of people Ribbins, who did wear them in their bosoms and hats for distinction,
and all that had not the word Charles, or those Marks, were to be put to the
sword, murdered and destroyed, besides diverse houses in many places of the
City were marked with white chalk, who were designed to utter ruin and
destruction. The business is not, as yet fully examined, but this and much
more is confessed by the principle and maine plotters of this wicked design: I
want time to give you a perfect Relation, you shall speedily have a fuller and
better account, as soon as we have a little recovered our selves out of these
distractions; for the present, here is enough to stir you up to join with us
in the admiration of Gods infinite goodness and mercy to us, and to give God
his glory and praise for this wounderfull and gracious deliverance, that has
preserved so many thousands of us that were innocent, and sold, and almost
given up into the hands of these cruel and blood thirsty men.

The Chief actors of this mischievous design were the aforesaid Robert
Yeomans, and George Butcher, Mr. John Tailor, Mr. Colestone, and his brother,
Mr. Fitzherbert, two Colsons, and two Herberts, N. Cule, E. Arundle, Mr. Caple,
and Captain Cole of St. Augustins, who with at least one hundred more Actors
and Accessories, are already taken and imptisoned in the Castle, and hourly
more are discovered and secured, many of them upon examination have confessed
the plot to be in manner as before is described; and that threescore families
of men, women, and children were to be put to the sword, without quarter, given
in upon a note. Twogoods house was searched and therein were found many papers
that did discover the whole plot, and between three and four thousand pounds in
money and plate, and twenty muskets charged with bullets, besides diverse
instruments to murder and destroy with cruelty, such as we never saw before.

A Postscript.
Prince Rupert and that Army marched away as soon as their Plot was discovered.



The Copy of another Letter written by a Captain in the City of Bristoll, to a
friend in London.
Sir,
I Received yours, dated the 7 present, etc. I shall now relate unto you the
unspeakable mercy of the Lord to this City, in preserving it this last week
from the Cavaliers without, but above all from a most damned Conspiracy of
Malignants who had designed us all to slaughter and massacre. On Sunday last,
hearing of the Cavaliers marching from Basinstoke, or thereabouts and making
their course toward us; Colonel Fines our Governor (whose diligence is
indefatigable, and his success prosperous) made all the preparations that
could be to entertain them with powder and bullets, mounted Ordnance good
store everywhere was needful, whereof two upon a new mount or fort made upon
the hill about a mile from the heart of the City, and there has kept a good
strong Court of Guard. The same night the Governor gave us a false alarm
about one of the clock in the night, to try our readiness to be in arms, and
in a short space our men were all at their Colors, and remained there all
monday, and at night all guards were doubled, and some trebled. On Tuesday we
heard of the enemies approaching within five or six miles about us on
Glocestershire side, but on Somersetshire none, by reason Kensome bridge was by
order of a Council of war broken down. On wednesday toward the evening we did
descry the^ from the Castle to draw to Durdum Down (about half a mile from our
new Fort) and we had intelligence of hey and provisions brought thither, and
there they remained and made fires upon the Down till the morning, expecting
the Malignants in the Town to play their exploit, and cut the throats of the
maine Guard, and the guard at From gate, and there to let them in, who should
have notice by the ringing of the bells at S. John's, and S. Michaels. But see
Gods infinite mercy, how it was prevented but a little before the time of
execution. We were many of us at a Council of war, with the Governor, and
about one of the clock one brought us intelligence, that there were many met
together at Mr Robert Yeomans house in Consultation, and immediately was sent
Captain Buck with forty musketeers to surprise them, who coming to the door,
Yeomans hearing of it, came to him and swore deeply there were none in the
house, but his own family; but they pressing to search were encountered with men
upon the stairs that stood upon their guard, and threatened the death of any man
that offered to come up; the other charged them to lay down their arms and
submit, or they would give fire upon them, who seeing themselves over powered,
immediately submitted; and there they apprehended twenty and four of them; more
there were certainly, but they got away over the gutters of the house: these 24
were prepared for slaughter of the maine guard, and were provided with pistols
and other weapons for present surprise; and immediately upon their taking, they
were sent by a strong guard to the Castle, where they now are in irons, and 51
more of the great Malignants, many whereof are found to have a hand in this
plot. One amongst the rest is one Butcher who was designed for From gate
(near to which his house is) but all the men that he had provided were not
found, in regard that his house was not searched a good while after Yeomans;
but yet they found there 60 men and muskets hidden, one whereof was charged
with 12 pieces of iron, of about three quarters of an inch long. This Boucher
has since confessed much of the plot, viz. the ceasing upon the guards, and
the ringing of the bells; others confess the wearing of white tape, for they
intended when they came into massacre all the Roundheads here, and all that had
not the word, Charles, and those white Tapes tied on their breasts and hats.
This plot being spoiled, and the gates kept close, that none could go out to
give Prince Rupert and his forces notice, made them expect till the morning,
when our Gunner from the Fort let fly at them and killed a horse, which was
found dead there the next day by our scouts: immediately upon this, they all
marched away, and were heard to curse the Seamen that had betrayed them.

On Thursday Prince Roberts trumpeter came to town, but as a spy, his errand
was to demand two dead bodies that we killed upon the Down, one whereof was
one Stroud, as he said. The trumpeter enquired for me and said, my Lord of
Cleveland desired me to send him a pound of tobacco, but I being out of the
way, Colonel Fines sent him one pound, and Colonel Popham another. We
expected to hear of them again last night, but they came not, and fince they
are marched quite away toward Cicencister and Oxford Thus the Lord has
wrought our salvation, for which let us abundantly bless his holy name:
declare this comfortable news to all our friends, that they may praise the
Lord with us.

Yours, most affectionate I. H.
Bristoll this 11th of March 1642. The Country came in to us very strong, and
we are very courageous (God be praised) and when that Sr. William Whaller
comes, we shall be so strong as to drive them out of these parts. He is not
above 12 or 14 miles from us, and we expect him on monday at the farthest, but
he does much good service as he comes along.



FINIS.

