A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF The late Treacherous and Horrid DESIGN, Which by the
great Blessing and especial Providence of God has been lately discovered:

And for which, Public Thanksgiving is by Order of both Houses of Parliament
appointed on Thursday the 15. of June, 1643.

Together with a true Copy of the Commission under the great Seal, sent from
Oxford, to several persons in the City of LONDON.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Narration and Commission be
read in all Churches and Chapels, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
Suburbs thereof, on the day abovesaid.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple. June 15.

MDCXLIII.

A brief Narrative of the late Treacherous and horrid Design.
AFter a continual succession of secret Conspiracies and open Violences,
Plotted and Attempted against The true Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom, there has of late risen up, under the plausible Pretenses of
Moderation and Peace, a most dangerous and wicked Plot of diverse Persons, to
join themselves with the Armies raised by the King, and to destroy the Forces
raised by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London
and Westminster with the Suburbs, and by Arms to force the Parliament; and in a
word, To have delivered up Religion, Parliament, City and Kingdom, into the
mere will and pleasure of the King, now in the hands of most desperate and
pernicious Counselors.

Toward the effecting whereof;

There was framed a mixture and conjunction of Persons of several qualities,
some whereof were of both Houses of Parliament; others of the Court and of the
City, who were in their respective Places and Employments to form and perfect
this Work, raised out of the Ashes of the late Petition of London for Peace.

The Method observed by them for the Conduct and carrying on their Design, was
first for several persons in the City, to dispose of themselves into a
Committee, being those who had been Principal Movers and Fomentors of that
Petition.

The part which this Commit was chiefly to act, was;

First, To hold intelligence with both Armies, Court, and Parliament.

Secondly, To take a general survey of the Affections and numbers of persons,
within the several Wards and Parishes of the City and places adjacent, by the
Weekly Bill of Mortality, under three Ranks; of, Right men, (or the Kings
Party) of, Averse men (or the well affected to the Parliament) of, Moderate
men, (or Neutrals) as they called them.

Thirdly, To consider of Arms, Ammunition, and all other Provisions of War
requisite thereunto.

Fourthly, Out of themselves to appoint some select persons to treat with
Master Waller and Master Tompkins, with relation to the City, Court, and
Parliament, as also with Crispe, Roydon, Broom and Benion, then at Oxford.

Master Wallers part in this business was;

First, To engage a considerable Party of the Lords and Commons in the Design.

2. To be the means of conveying all Counsels, Resolutions, and Intelligences
between the said party of Lords and Commons, and the Committee of the City.

Master Tompkins was not only an Assistant to Master Waller in the premises,
but an Instrument to convey by Hazel, and others, the particulars of their
proceedings to the Court by address principally to the Lord Faulkland, and to
receive from Court directions, Powers, and Commands, for the completing of the
work. For preventing discovery, Protestations of secrecy were taken by them to
this effect, As they were Christians, not to disclose it. Secondly, No man to
endeavor the engaging above two, whereby no one man could impeach many.

The part which was acted from the Court was,

1. By Master Herne, Master Alexander Hampden, and others employed upon
Messages from the King to the Parliament, under pretense of Treaties for Peace,
to convey their directions, encouragements, and Counsels unto their Party in
London.

2. To give Power and Authority by Commissions under the great Seal, by
Warrants under the Kings Hand; and otherwise for settling of a Council of
War; naming of Generals (and other Officers). Execution of Marshall Law;
Raising of Moneys, and Provision of Arms and other necessaries.

3. For the disposing of some part of the Kings forces at Oxford, to be near
the City, and in readynesse to assist the Party here, as cause should require.

The steps and degrees to bring this into Action were.

1. A Commission under the great Seal brought from Oxford, about a fortnight
ago, by the Lady Aubigny, with the Authorities aforesaid, thereby inabling and
commanding them by force of Arms to destroy, kill, and slay, the forces raised
by the Parliament, and their Adherents as Traitors, and Rebels.

2. Several Propositions, most of them agreed, and resolved by Master Waller,
in behalf of the said Party of the Lords and Commons, and the Committee of the
City, in behalf of the Party depending upon them, for the more ready and
orderly execution of the design. As first, Concerning the number of men Armed.
Secondly, The places where Magazines were laid, The places for Randevouz, and
for retreat upon occasion, The Colors, the Marks and Tokens for distinction
from others, The strength to be relied on within the Walls, and without, What
to be done with the Tower, Where the chief Commanders affected to the
Parliament dwelt, The time of executing the design.

3. A Declaration was framed by them under pretense of asserting and
maintaining the heads of the Protestation, thereby the better to Color their
mischievous intentions to the people.

4. A Message was sent to Oxford, on Saturday was fortnight to acquaint the
Lord Faulkland by Hazel, that the design was come to good perfection, unto
which, Answer was returned, That they should hasten it with all speed.

The particulars of the design it self were.

1. To seize into their custody the Kings Children.

2. To seize several Members of both Houses, the Lord Major, and Committee of
the Militia, under pretense of bringing them to a legal Trial.

3. To seize upon the Outworks, Forts, Tower of London, Magazines, Gates, and
other places of Importance in the City.

4. To let in the Kings forces to surprise the City, and to destroy all those
that should oppose them by Authority of the Parliament.

5. By force of Arms to resist all Payments imposed by Authority of the Houses
of Parliament raised for the support of the Armies employed for their just
defense, and preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the
Subject; To suspend, if not alter, the whole Government of the City, and with
assistance of the Kings force to awe and master the Parliament.

All which has been made appear to both Houses of Parliament, by the
Examinations and Confessions of Master Waller, Master Tompkins, Master
Challenor, Master Hazel, and other persons, principal Actors in the same now
under restraint; The publication of the evidence being deferred till after
their Trial.

A true Copy of the COMMISSION UNDER The GREAT SEAL, Sent from Oxford to
several Persons in the City of LONDON.
Charles Rex.

CHARLES, by the grace of GOD, King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. To our trusty and well-beloved, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Sir George
Stroude, Knights, Sir Tho: Gardener Knight, Recorder of London, Sir George
Binion, Knight* Richard Edes and Marmaduke Royden Esquires, Tho: Broom Esquire,
Peter Paggon, Charles Ginnings, Sir Edw: Carlton, Robert Abbot, Andrew King,
Will: White, Steven Boulton, Robert Alden, Edmund Foster, Tho: Blinkhorn* of
London, Gentlemen; and to all such other person and persons, as according to
the true intent and purport of these presents, shall be nominated; and
appointed to be Generals, Colonells, Lieutenant-Colonells, Sergeant-Majors, or
other Officers, or of Our Council of War, Greeting;

Whereas in Our cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof, our
Borough of Southwark and county of Middlesex, there are raised and continued
great number of Military Forces, both Horse and Foot, who under the command of
ROBERT* Earl of Essex as their General, and under the conduct of diverse
others, pretending to derive their Authority from the two Houses of Parliament,
have Traitorously levied War, and rebelled against Us their natural Liege
Lord, and many of our Subjects have been feduced by false informations, by the
practice of a few, who have been the contrivers of the mischievous plots, and
have joined with them, either in person, or by ayding of them with men, money,
horses, or other things, and many of our good and loyal subjects overawed by
the power of the Rebels, have been enforced to contribute to them for the
maintenance of this unnatural War, and others refusing have been Plundered,
and robbed of their estates, and some committed to several Prisons, and other
barbarously used contrary to the liberty of freeborn men, the laws of the
Land, and contrary to all humanity, of which injuries and calamities falling
upon our good Subjects, we are very sensible, and are desirous to give relief
to our good Subjects by all the best means we can, and to resist the violence
and insolency of the Rebels and their adherents, We having no other end
therein but to preserve the true Protestant Religion in the integrity and
purity thereof; to maintain the Laws of the Land, and the liberty of persons,
and the property of the estates of our subjects, and the just privileges of
Parliament. We have thought fit for our better service, to settle a Council
of War in or about Our City of London, who may take these things into their sad
considerations which may conduce best to this end, and to have such Commanders
and Officers settled in the places aforesaid, which may both raise, govern, and
lead such forces as may be raised there.

Know ye therefore, that we reposing special trust and confidence in your
fidelities, industries, and good discretions; have made choice of, nominated
and appointed you to be Our Council of War for the said cities of London and
Westminster; and Suburbs thereof, Our said county of Middlesex and Borough of
Southwark, and do hereby give and grant authority to you; or any four of you,
to make choice of such other able and discreet persons as you shall think fit
to nominate under the Hands and Seal of any four of you, which with your selves
shall make up in all the number of Twenty one and no more; And We do give and
grant to you, or any four of you, power and authority at such times, and in
such places as you shall think convenient, to assemble and meet together, and
there to consult, advise, and resolve of all such things, and of such ways and
means as you or any four of you shall think fittest, for the raising of Forces
both of Horse and Foot, either of the Inhabitants of the said ^ities, county,
and Borough, or any the adjacent counties or other places, who will voluntarily
associate themselves to that purpose, and these Forces to Arm, Muster, Conduct,
Order, Lead, and Govern in the places aforesaid, or in any the counties
adjacent or elsewhere, in such manner as you your selves, or such other able and
fit persons, as you or any four of you shall to that purpose appoint, according
to these presents shall think fit; And the better to ^ffect this Our Service,
We do further give and grant to you or any four of you power and authority
under your Hands and Seals, to make choice of and appoint such a fit person as
you shall think meet to be Captain General of all these Forces thus to be
raised, and such other persons as you or any four of you shall in like manner
make choice of and appoint to be Colonels, Lieutena^t Colon: and Sergeant
Majors, over the forces in such manner and in such places as you shall so
appoint* who by virtue thereof, and by virtue of these presents shall have
power and authority to do, execute, and perform all such things, which to
these several offices and employments, according to the law martial do
belong; and we do hereby promise and grant, that withal convenient speed after
we shall have notice from you or any 4 of you, under your hands and seals of
your nomination, of any person or persons whose several places we shall grant
and confirm unto them and every of them respectively, those several places to
which you have so nominated them as a foresaid, under our great Seal of
England, or otherwise as shall be reasonably devised and required of us. And We
do further by these presents give and grant unto you full power and authority
by all such good ways as you, or any 4 of you under your hands shall agree
upon to raise money for the clothing, arming, furnishing, and paying of all such
soldiers as shall be thus raised, and for the providing of all ammunition and
other necessaries for the war; all which money upon a just account we do for us,
our Heirs, and successors, promise, grant and agree* well and truly to repay so
soon as we shall be enabled thereunto, and in the mean time to secure the same
to those who for our service and by your meditation and industry shall lend or
disburse the same; and we do further by these presents grant that such
Generals, Colonels, Leivtenant Colonells, and other officers so by you
nominated as aforesaid shall have full power and authority by virtue of the
presents to lead and order the soldiers severally under their charges, and
with them to fight against our enemies and Rebels, and them to slay and
destroy, or them to save according to the law martial, or course of war; For
the doing of all which, this shall be to you, them, and every of them a
sufficient warrant, willing and commanding all such officers and soldiers,
which by virtue hereof you shall retain, to obey readily to receive and
accomplish your directions, commands, and summons in all things hereto
appertaining or necessary to be done; as also all Majors, Sheriffs, justices of
peace, Commissioners of Array, and all other our officers and loving subjects
to be ayding and assisting both to you and to all such officers and other
persons whom you shall appoint under any four of your hands and seals, for the
furthering and advancement of this our especial service, for which this shall
be to you, to them, and every of them a sufficient warrant. In witness whereof
We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Our Self at Oxford
the 16 day of March, in the eighteenth year of our Reign.

FINIS.

