ERRORS And INDURATION, ARE The Great Sins and the Great Judgments of the
Time.

Preached in a SERMON Before the Right Honorable House of PEERS, in the
Abbey-Church at Westminster, July 30. 1645. the day of the Monthly Fast:

By ROBERT BAYLIE, Minister at Glasgow.

2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the Truth, that
they might be saved; God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a Lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth. Matthew.
7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Matthew. 15.14. Let them alone, they be blind
Leaders of the Blind: and if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into
the Ditch. London, Printed by R. Raworth, for Samuel Gellibrand, at the
Brasen-Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

Die Jovis, 31 Julii, 1645.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That Master Baylie, who preached yesterday
before the Lords of Parliament in the Abbey-Church Westminster, it being the
day of the Public Fast, is hereby thanked for the great pains he took in his
Sermon, and desired to print and publish the same; which is to be printed by
none but such as shall be authorized by the said Master Baylie.

Job. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Ido appoint Samuel Gellibrand to print my Sermon.

ROBERT BAYLIE.

FOR The Equitable READER.
HOwsoever I have not adventured to offer unto the Right Honorable House of
Peers any Dedicatorie Epistle, having taken up already so much of their
precious time, in their patient and favorable audience of my (prolix enough)
Sermon: Yet presuming upon thy courtesy, who shall be willing to read the
subsequent Notes of that which to their Honors was preached, without any
variation; I have made bold to speak in thy ears (as the custom is) some
words of a Preface.

At the first instant of my calling to this service, the words of my Text were
cast into my mind, where they remained without my least inclination toward
any other, till I had delivered from them what follows. I have been for a
long time in the opinion, that Error and Induration are, albeit not the only,
yet among the principal, both sins and miseries of this time and place.

Hardness of heart is ever a sin, The sinfulness of Induration.
but then most sinful, when most unseasonable. If ever there was a time to
weep, this must be it, when not only the mouth of the Lord from his Word is
calling, but his hand also from the Heaven is drawing us to it. He is a
stubborn child, from whose eye the rod of the Father can draw no water: It is a
hard stone which the hammer cannot break: It is a piece of unnatural metal
which the fire cannot dissolve. And yet this is the complaint of the best
discerning Christians every where, That though the Lord at this instant be
dealing with us by the rod, the hammer, the fire of his judgments; we are so
far from heart-melting, that in this extraordinary and untimous hardness of
our heart, more of the wrath and judicial hand of God does appear, then in
any, or in all our judgments beside.

This plague of the Lord, on the spirits not only of the World, but of many his
dear children, ought to be the subject of our deepest groans, and lowdest cries
to the Heaven, whence alone the remedy of this our spirits disease can come:
For there is but one Father, and one Lord, and one Physician of the spirits of
men. My weak endeavors toward this great Cure, must be fruitless, till his
hand make the application of these prescriptions, which with all the
faithfulness and care I was able for the time, I have collected only out of
the book of his own method of Physic.

As for the other evil of Error; Error no less sinful then ^ice.
it has been the study and work of some here and elsewhere to extenuate the
sinfulness thereof, and to arm the conscience of all they could persuade,
against the sense of its burden; as if the conscience ought to be impenetrable
and secure from all Wounds which vice and fleshly lusts do not inflict. But I
believe, if Error and Vice were Well weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, though you put to vice the grossest aggravations, whereby the
passions of the soul, and actions of the body make it justly abominable: yet
if you Will allow to Error but the grains of its ordinary circumstances,
especially that one of our Text, Induration, its most familiar companion; it
will be found to have such a weight of malignitie, that if betwixt the two any
inequality do appear, the sinfulness of the last will prae-ponder.

The intoxication of the spirit of the mind by the venom of Error, is as
much contrary to the Divine Nature and Will, is as much hateful to the Spirit
of light and truth, and as evidently damnable, as the corruption of the will,
and inferior affections, or any member of the body with whatsoever vice, or
more bodily transgression. I hope I have proved this by places of Scripture
unanswerable.

Whence it necessarily follows, that it is more, Toleration of errors, a
grievous sin.
at least no less unlawful for a Christian State to give any liberty or
toleration to Errors, then to set up in every City and Parish of their
Dominions, Bordels for Uncleanness, Stages for Plays, and Lists for Duels.
That a liberty for Errors is no less hateful to God, no less hurtful to
men, then a freedom without any punishment, Without any discouragement, for
all men, when and wheresoever they pleased, to kill, to steal, to rob, to
commit adultery, or to do any of these mischiefs, which are most repugnant to
the Civil law, and destructive of humane society.

But that which my Text points at in Errors, The errors of our time appear to
be judicial.
is not so much their sinfulness, as their judgment; That God in his wrath
had given over that people to error. If ever the plague of erring from the
ways of truth was sent upon a land, it seems this day to lie upon us. The
Finger of God in this our judgment, is demonstrable by diverse Characters,
imprinted upon the face of our present Errors, above all that in ordinary
(and not judicial Errors) uses to appear. I point at four eminent
singularities in them: Their various multiplicity, Their palpable evidence,
Their incredible increase, and in the midst of universal complaints against
them, A total neglect of their cure.

First, their variety is prodigious; By their variety.
I cannot say that all which stand in the ancient Hereseologies of Philastrius,
Epiphanius, or Augustine, can be found among us, or Were ever to be found upon
Earth in any one age: But this may be confidently averred, That more Errors
have set up their head, and showed their misshapen countenances lately here,
then in any one place of the world this day are known. I add, that there is
not any Error spoken of in the places most infamous for that evil, whether
Amsterdam, or Pole, or Transylvania, and if you please to join all the three in
one, but all are among us, and diverse more, then in any of the places mentioned
were ever heard of.

Their evidence in this to me seems palpable; By their grossness.
that however at their first appearance they did waken a great expectation, by
their fair promises of New-Light, of New-found-Truths, of New-wayes leading to
extraordinary piety: The new-light of all our Innovators is nothing but old
darkness.
yet after a little inspection and commerce to un-ingaged and im-prejudicate
minds, they are found to be no other, but the very same dead karcases of old
Heresies and Schisines, which by the happy labors of the Reformed Divines in
this and other Churches, lay buried in their grave of oblivion and abomination,
till their late infaust resurrection.

That new Canterburian-Protestantisme which the other day so much bewitched the
Court and Country, So it is in the Canterburians
is now seen to have been nothing but masked Popery, but a high path-royall way
to Rome, a School of Idolatry, Heresy, Treachery, and merciless bloodshed.

These Gospell-truths, The Antinomians.
these sweet Sermons of Free Grace, that setting up of naked Christ on his
Throne, which has seduced so many thousands of well-meaning souls, do now
appear in their own colors, and to any common eye may be seen to be nothing
but the gross Antinomy of the old Libertines.

These innocent scruples of tender consciences only about the grounds of
Pedo-baptisme, The Anabaptists.
whither have they now led some millions, not of the worst of our people? See
we not, that without any leave so much as asked of the Magistrate, very great
numbers of Churches are erected by them, of formal and avowed Anabaptists.

These specious and popular Invectives against Tyranny and Persecution; The
Libertines.
those plausible Harangues for a liberty only to examine, without prejudice,
what was proponed under the name of a Divine Truth; whether, at last, has it
carried multitudes who esteem themselves among the most rational of men? Have
they not opened, in the midst of our streets, the old Pantheon of Paganish
Rome; resolutely asserting an absolute Freedom for Turks, Jews, Pagans,
Papists, and if there be any worse Religions, not only to live in all
quietness among us, but to be permitted, without any Discouragement, to follow
their Consciences; and so to employ themselves daily, in the most advantageous
places; private or public, with so much art and diligence as they can use, to
draw all the world toward their wicked Professions?

And not to run out upon all the rest of our old renewed Errors, that so
much-extolled Independency, The Independents.
wherein many Religious souls for the time do wander, which is the chief hand
that opened at first, and keeps open to this day the door to all the other
Errors that plague us: What is it else but a Limb, or rather, Apologet. Nar.
the large half of the Body of old Brownism? as its own Patrons confess, a
middle way betwixt the Reformed Churches and the Brownists; the same Way which
Morellius (seduced by the Dutch Anabaptists) did labor to bring into FRANCE;
but by B^za and Sadaell, in two General Assemblies, it was so fully confuted,
that to this day all the Churches there do d^test it: Yet Bolton and Brown
would needs bring it into ENGLAND.

These two are the known Fathers of English Independency; men whose Inventions
cannot be much loved, for their authors sake, when they are well known. Among
all the Protestant Divines that ever ENGLAND bred, Robinsons Justif. p. 50.
I doubt if any have been more scandalous either in life or death, then the two
former, as their chief followers are forced to acknowledge. Few Prelaticall men
have gone beyond Brown in Profanity, from his Youth to his Old Age: And Judas
himself was no more abominable then Bolton in his death.

I have often marvelled how the Invention of so infamous Authors could be
entertained by men of understanding, especially since God did openly brand that
their Conception with the Marks of his Displeasure, not only in its Birth, but
in all the passages of its Life, wherever yet it has set foot on ground.

The fruits of Bolton and Browns Independency at Amsterdam have been so
eminently scandalous, Apologet. Nar.
that its own friends can find no cover of excuse for them.

The Divisions and Rents that sprang from the same root when it was planted in
some better ground, Edwards Antapol.
at Arnhem and Roterdam, have been no less unhappie and bitter.

But that which demonstrates the Genuine Nature of this Plant, is its fruits in
New England, where, without any Encumbrance from without or from within, having
all the Advantages Civil and Ecclesiastic which could be wished; it got leave
to put out its full strength: In a short time there, it brought forth such a
multitude of gross Heresies and Divisions, as did threaten not the Churches
alone, but the Civil State also with a total Ruin.

If our Hopes of it here may be much better, for any of its fruits which yet we
have tasted, wise men will pronounce.

The third Character wherewith the Finger of God has stigmatized the Errors
of this place, 5. By their increase.
is, Their Incredible increase: It can hardly be shown where Error, in so
short a time, has made so great a Conquest: For however, as I am informed, all
the Fowls that yet have made their Nest in the last Branch whereof we did
speak, may easily be numbered, being no ways so many as some would make them;
yet if ye look upon the whole Tree in all its Branches, it will be found to
have drawn under its shadow a mavelous multitude of Creatures. These last
four years, it seems, more people here have made Apostacy to one Error or
other, of their own accord, without the violence of any Persecution, then in
all the Reformed Churches together for an hundred years and above. Error of it
self is of no such conquering strength, did not the Justice of God give men
over to be captivated by its Delusions.

The fourth Demonstration of a Divine Judgment in our Errors, 4. By men's
neglect of their Cure.
is this, That though they have been universally acknowledged and regrated, yet
to this day their effectual Cure has been well near universally neglected. It
is now not Months, but Years, fince upon the faithful Warning of the Lords
Messengers, all men, every where, have joined to acknowledge and to profess
their displeasure at the spreading of Error over the face of this Land: No
Societies wore full of these Complaints then the three most Considerable, The
two Honorable Houses, and The Reverend Assembly: But yet, after all these
Regrates, What real stop has been made to the Current of this overflowing
Deluge?

These are a great part of our Judgments; Our comfort and hope.
which the godly, in the days of Humiliation, and when else their hearts are
loosed to mourn, do deplore. Yet here is our Comfort, That, in answer to our
Supplications, the Lord has stirred up the hearts of those who have power
effectually to mind that which we are confident will prove the Remedy of these
and many more of our present Evils; I mean, The setting up, without further
Delay, of the Lords Government in his own House, over all the Land.

The whole Government being transmitted from the Assembly, and looked upon by
both Houses with a gracious Aspect, and sundry Votes already past upon the
chief parts thereof; it is certainly expected, that in a very short time the
whole Frame shall be erected, and not only be accompanied with the joyful
Acclamations of this Land, and of all the Churches abroad; but also filled with
so much Grace and Power from the presence of the Lord, as shall prove an
heavenly Attractive, without any need of humane violence, to draw the spirits
of those who for the time do most dissent and oppose, to its admiration and
love. Waiting and praying for the sight of that happy day,

I rest, Thy Servant, in the Lord, R. B.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the House of Lords, July 30.
1645.
ISAI. 63.17. Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our hearts from thy fear? Return for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thine
Inheritance.
IN this and the two next Chapters, The Division of the Chapter.
we have a heavenly Conference and Dialogue betwixt Christ and the Church of
Israel, in the time of her affliction in Babel.

The Dialogue has Three or Six parts: Three Questions of the Church, and Three
Answers of Christ.

In the first verse of this Chapter, The first Pars.
we have the first Question and Answer. The Church, about that time of the
Captivity to which this part of the Prophecy relates, was much oppressed with
many Enemies. God, after all his wrath, begins to arise, and take order with
them who long had deyoured her; especially with Edom, the nearest and most
bitter Enemy of Jacob. When she sees the sudden and unexpected Vengeance on
Edom, admiring who could be the author and worker of it, she proposes the
Question, Who he was that had destroyed Bozra, the principal City of the
Edomites, and was marching in his great and glorious strength from the Land of
Edom, the service there being ended, to other of the Enemies Countries.

Unto the Churches Interrogation, Christ answers, That it was he himself, who
now, by his works, was demonstrating the truth of his ancient promises, and
showing the might of his power to save his people from the Enemies oppression.

Observe, The Doctrine.
When the Church has wrestled long with her enemies, and is ready to faint and
give over; on a sudden, Christ, the King and Captain of the Host of Israel,
comes down, and breaks the strength of the prevailing enemy; to the Church her
great admiration.

The second part of the Dialogue is in the next five verses. The second part of
the Chapter.
The Church finding it was her Lord and God who was begun to take vengeance on
her enemies; before he go, she is desirous of more conference with him, and
proposes a second Question, Wherefore his Garments were red, as if he had been
treading a Press of red wine?

The Lords Answer is, That the set time of his Vengeance upon her Enemies was
come: That though her strength was gone, and among all her friends there was
none able to stand against her foes; yet he alone would do it, and by his own
Arm had destroyed already some of them with so great a slaughter, that all his
glorious Raiment was stained with the blood of the slain.

Hence observe, The first Doctrine.
first, When the condition of the Church is most desperate upon earth, then is
the day and hour of her certain redress from heaven.

The Church, The second.
deserted of her self and all men else, has one fast friend, who alone is
worth many Ten thousands, able to draw her out of all deeps.

In the day of the Lords anger, The third.
woe to all the enemies of the Church. When the Lord begins to trample them in
the Winepresse of his Indignation; if there were no more but the dashing of
their bodies in pieces, the watering of the ground with their blood, and the
staining of the garments of their killers therewith; if no more followed, it
were well to them: But they must drink after death in the Cup of the
everlasting fury of the Almighty, as John comments it, Rev. 14.10. They shall
be tormented with fire and brimstone for ever and ever.

In the third part of the Dialogue from the seventh verse, The Subdivision of
the third part.
the Church finding her Deliverance sensibly begun, but not accomplished (for
though Edom was destroyed, yet Babel was sitting like a Queen over the Nations,
and most over the rubbish of desclate Jerusalem) she turns her self to her
present Redeemer, and most humbly supplicates him to perfect what he had begun,
To deliver her fully from the great burdens both of sin and misery that yet lay
upon her. This Prayer is set down in the remnant of this Chapter, and all the
next; whereunto a large and gracious Answer is returned by Christ in the 65
Chapter, through the whole.

The first part of the Prayer is Thanksgiving, Its first member.
from the seventh to the fifteenth.

To prepare their hearts for petitioning, they lay out before the Lord the
great goodness which he of old had bestowed on the house of Israel, his
wonders in Egypt, his glorious works at the Red Sea and in the Wilderness, the
constancy of his kindness, notwithstanding their Rebellion and vexing of his
Spirit: Though sometime he punished them for their sins, yet he never left
them, for the glory of his Name, and the Multitude of his mercies: Not only
Moses his Shepherd, but the Angel of his Presence went before them: He was
afflicted in all their afflictions; he bare them, and carried them in his arms
all these days of old through that howling Wilderness. This is the Churches
Preface to her subsequent Prayer.

Hence observe, first, The first Doctrine.
Thanksgiving is the meetest usher which a Petitioner can have to the Throne of
Grace. Praise perfumes the lips of a Supplicant; it sweetens, it softens, it
opens the heart of a Seeker, and fits it singularly to receive all its desires
from God.

The kindness of God in the days of Moses, The second.
and the most ancient times, is the Churches Inheritance to the worlds end. All
the favors of God registered in Scripture, all the gracious experiments of the
Saints in any time, in any place, are our Patrimony, serving as ruled Cases, to
strengthen our Faith, Hope and Patience in the days of our adversity.

The sins of many persons, The third.
remove not the favor of God from an elect Nation. There is no interruption of
the course of mercy toward a People, by the destruction of many particular
persons. Great Vengeance may be upon Thousands, the carcases of Ten Thousands
may fall in the Wilderness, even of Moses himself, and many of the Shepherds
both of Church and State; and yet the Lord may graciously march on before his
People, till he have settled them and his Ark in peace on his holy mountain.

The Prayer consists of Petitions, The second member.
Complaints, Confessions of sin, Professions of faith, intertexed one with
another, as the holy passions of the Supplicants hearts do mix them.

In the fifteenth verse, The matter of the 15 verse.
there is a Petition backed with a Complaint. The Lord for a long time had left
his People to the outrages of their Enemies, he had as it were left the earth,
gone up to the heaven, and miskent all that the Enemy had done to his People:
Now therefore they petition that he might be pleased to look down upon them
from his holy and glorious Throne in the heaven. For this is the strange faith
of the Church, That she is persuaded so far of the power and goodness of her
God, at that very time when he has left her to sink in misery for her
offenses; that even then, if he would but look back to her, in never so far a
distance; if from the very heaven, the place of his retiring, he would behold
her on the earth overwhelmed with misery; she is hopeful, if she come but in
the sight of her gracious Lord, he would not fail to take pity upon her, and
deliver her.

To this Petition, a Complaint is subjoyned, of the restraint and withdrawing
of Gods ancient favors: Sometimes his zeal and strength had been employed in
her defense, his mercies, the tender bowels of his compassions, had been
extended toward her; but now all sense of such favors were away.

This complaint, lest it should irritate, The matter of the sixteenth.
is presently corrected in the sixteenth Verse, with a fair profession of
Faith, ^bove and against all present sense, however the beams of Gods loving
countenance did not then shine upon them, as at some other time; yet they
profess their certain persuasion, that God was their Father: Though Abraham
and Israel, and all their bodily Progenitors should cast them away, as unworthy
to be counted their children; yet they did believe, that their everlasting and
unchangeable God would not cast them off, but deal with them as children,
notwithstanding of all their misdeservings.

As for the words in hand in the seventeenth Verse, The division of the Text.
the Church goes on to power out her spirit before him, whom she believes to be
her Father, in the midst of all her afflictions, in a new complaint and
petition. The complaint has two parts, and the petition is backed with a
twofold Reason: The first part of the complaint is in these words, O Lord, why
have thou made us err from thy ways? the second part in these, Why have thou
hardened our hearts from thy fear? The petition is, that he would return after
his long absence. The first reason, They were his servants; the second, They
were his inheritance. Let us consider severally, the mind and use of every
part.

As for the first part of the complaint, The Exposition of the first pars.
four things in it would be exponed: First, What are the ways of the Lord.
Secondly, What it is to err from his ways. Thirdly, How God makes men err
from his way. Fourthly; How the Church complains of this divine action. Three
of these particulars are easy, and may be dispatched in a word; but in the
fourth there is no little difficulty.

For the first; What are the ways of God.
Gods ways here, are his Commandments, full of holiness and righteousness;
they are called Gods ways, because of their similitude with his nature, that
is, holy, righteous, and true: All his Commandments, and conversation, are
according to the strait rule of his eternal, and essential holiness,
righteousness and truth. Secondly, Because they are his Law and Prescription,
his will prescribes them as a way to his creatures to walk in. Thirdly, Because
of his presence therein, in that way he is to be found: He is graciously
present, and does conntenance all that walk into it. Fourthly, Because of their
end; they lead to God, they are the strait way, wherein the godly walk, till
they come to the glorious palace above.

The second point, What it is to err from these ways.
To err from these ways, is to sin, as it is expressed Psalm. 119.8, 10. To
wander from Gods Commandments. When we leave Gods way, and run out on the right
hand, or the left, to the ways of our own blind mind, and corrupted heart;
our false opinions against Gods truth; our wicked inclinations and actions
against his holy nature, and revealed will; all of this kind is our erring
from his ways.

But the great difficulty is in the third, How God makes men to err.
How the Lord causes us to err from his way: This would seem to make God the
cause and author of sin, which is a horrid blasphemy against many Scriptures,
and all reason. To eschew this huge, great, and intolerable inconvenience,
sundry famous interpreters do translate the original otherwise then we read
it; Not, Why have thou made or caused us to err? but, Why have thou suffered
or permitted us to err? So Junius an excellent translator: And many hundred
years before him, the Chaldee Paraphrast did render it, Why have thou cast us
away to err from thy ways? This interpretation is approved by very Learned
and Orthodox Divines, who bring this reason for it, That the Hebrew word here,
is not simply in the active form, not in Kal, but, as they speak, in Hiphil,
whose signification oftentimes is not to make or cause, but to permit.

Indeed, this translation does eschew fully the difficulty; The Grammatical
solution of some great men is not selid.
yet we dare not venture upon it; for as it seems it were to make too bold with
the Scripture. The Septuagens, the ancient Latin, the French, the Dutch, the
Italian, and many more, reads it just as our English, Why have thou made us to
err from thy ways? The Grammatical reason alleged, has no strength in this
place; for be it so, that Hebrew Verbs in Hiphil, sometime have a permissive,
and not an active sense; though this in any word is very rare, and the examples
alleged, are very questionable; yet for the Hiphil of the word in hand, we
deny that ever it can be so exponed. A number of places of Scripture may be
produced where Hithah must be actively exponed, as here our translators read
it; but not one, if it be not this in question, can be brought where it may be
exponed of a mere permission, without some agency and operation upon the erring
and seduced person. We dare not trust the solving of so weighty a difficulty
upon such a mere Grammatication.

Holding therefore to our vulgar translation, The matter of a sinful action
must be distinguished from its form.
How does God cause us to err, and yet is not the Author of our errors? For
the understanding hereof, we must distinguish sin, and the actions of God about
sin. In sin there are two things, albeit inseparably joined, yet essentially
distinct; The matter and form, the act and its pravity; the one is naturally
good, the other morally evil: This is visible in two actions whose matter is
the same, but the forms much different: For example, the stoning of Naboth, and
the stoning of Achan; the substance of the actions, the casting of the stones
at both, was the same; but the forms was much different: The casting at an
innocent man, and at a man condemned by God, and all Israel; the one form makes
the stoning of Naboth an act of unjust murder, the other form makes the stoning
of Achan, an act of just punishment.

The acts, not of Gods will and decrees, Three acts of Gods effectual
providence about sin.
for such concern not the words in hand, but of his actual providence about
the matter and form of sin, are many: The most considerable of these to us, for
opening of our Text, are three: His concourse, his efficacious permission, his
judicial tradition, so to speak.

For the first, An active concourse in the substance of the action.
the Lord has an actual, yea, an active concourse; and if you will, an
efficiency in every act of sin, so far as concerns the substance or matter of
the sinful action; for in him we live, we move, and have all our being, in the
most sinful action, the matter of the act being a positive entity, it must be
a naturally-good thing, and have its existence from the first and universal
mover, the fountain of all Being: Without this kind of efficiency and
concourse, Shimei could not have moved his tongue to curse David, nor Doeg
drawn his sword to have killed the Priests: When God denies this kind of
concourse, sin is necessarily stopped: When he removes the life of the two
Captains, they cannot oppress Eliah. When God leaves the life, but takes away
the sight from the Sodomites at Lots door, and the power from the arm of
Jeroboam, their sin is impedite. When by suspending of his operation, he takes
away the will from David to kill Nabal, though both life and power remained,
the sin is marred. But for such kind of working in the sinner, and cooperation
with the sinful act, Sin uses not to be ascribed to God, more then the
generation of living Creatures, to the motion and influence of the Heavens; for
effects are denominate from the second and particular causes, not from the
first and universal, though their efficiency and concourse be never so
necessary and certain.

The next action of God about sin is, An efficacious permission of the
sinfulness of the act.
his efficacious permission; This for its object, has not only the matter and
substance of the sinful act, but its very form, its pravity, its anomy, its
sinfulness: This malignant quality is a moral evil, and so cannot be of God,
who is goodness it self; its a privation and defect, and so the cause of it is
not efficient, but deficient. If we would render the cause of a lame man's
crooked walking, we behoved to distinguish betwixt the walking, and its
crookedness: The walking we would ascribe to the motive power of the man's
soul, and to the instruments of motion in his body; but the crookedness of it,
to the defect and hurt of some instrument of motion, not to the soul, or to the
faculty, or to the instrument of motion, but only to some defect of the
instrument. So the finfulnesse of sin is to be ascribed not to any efficiency
of God, but to the deficiency of man's will, which now is sinful, and before
sin, was weak, as being made of nothing, and so able to change it self from
good to evil; but however, the sinfulness of sin cannot be charged on Gods
either efficiency or deficiency, yet it must exist by his free permission; for
nothing can have any existence in the world, any being in the dominion of God,
without the leave and permission of the great Lord and Master of the World.

That action of God which in respect of sin is called a permission, in regard
of the sinner is a desertion: This is really one thing with desertion.
This considered, will help to clear that which is the hardest knot in this
matter; the efficacy that is said to be in the permission, and yet without all
efficiency of the permitter, in the sinfulness permitted.

This matter which naturally is exceeding dark, will be best seen in
similitudes: When the Sun goes down, the darkness of the night necessarily
does follow; when the Sun declines toward the Southern signs of the Zediack,
the Winter blasts certainly do come on; the Sun the fountain of light and heat,
in propriety of speech, cannot be called the cause of the nights darkness, or
of the Winters cold; yet these, as ordinary and necessary consequents, are
usually ascribed to the Suns removal. Hot water removed from the fire, becomes
incontinent cold: A ruinous Wall, when its props are removed, falls quickly to
the ground: The coldness of the water flows not from the fire, but from its
own nature; the falling of the Wall comes from the natural heaviness of the
stones, which, without the impediment of a supporter, makes them to fall
downward. It is so with God and man; when he withdraws, we become dark as
midnight, cold like Ice, we fall to the ground.

These effects necessarily follow his desertion, but not as effects, only as
consequents; their proper cause, is neither in God, nor his removal; but in
our nature, which of it self, since the fall, is full of these malign qualities.

This kind of providence about our sins, is expressed in words of the active
form, of blinding the eyes, and hardening the heart: Not that the Lord infuses
any darkness or hardness in the heart, which is not its own; but because upon
the removing of his illuminating and softning Spirit, the natural blindness
and hardness of man's spirit, lurking before, does then appear.

The third action of God about sin, Gods third action, is, a Judicial
Tradition.
is that which I did call, a Judicial Tradition, when God, as a just Judge,
punishes sin by sin; when he gives over men not only to their own heart, but
to the devil and his instruments to be tempted, seduced and drawn away to
commit wickedness with greediness. However all the sinful actions be
immediately the works of the sinner alone, and the upstirring to these actions
be from the devil and his instruments, laying arguments, objects and occasions,
as baits and snares, in the way of the sinner; yet God, as a just Judge,
sending out Satan and men as his executioners and making way for men's own lusts
to break out on the objects set before them: For these acts of Judgment, both
in our Text, and often elsewhere in Scripture, the cause of men's sins, not as
they are sins, but as punishments of sin, is ascribed to him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
Because they received not the love of the truth, God shall send them strong
delusions to believe a lie. He was to send on them The Man of sin, whose coming
is after the working of Satan, with all power, and with all deceiveablenesse.
The committing of the sin is ascribed to the sinner, who believes the lie; the
tempting to it, is ascribed to Satan and his Antichristian Instruments; the
sending out both of Satan and Antichrist, the giving over to delusion, is
ascribed to God the righteous Judge, by these means punishing former sins. Romans
1.18, 21, 24, 26, 28. The wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness
of men; because, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God: wherefore
God gave them up also to uncleanness. For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections. God gave them over to a reprobate mind. The sinful acts flow from
the reprobate minds and vile affections of the sinners; yet God the Judge is
thrice said to give them up to these their own sins. Romans 11.8. God has given
them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear to this day. Let their Table be a snare, a stumbling block, and
a recompense to them: Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see. 2 Chronicles. 18.22. The Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy
Prophets. Many such places there are, where God, as a righteous Judge, is made
to give over sinners to the devil, to other wicked men, to themselves, to be
led in more and greater sins, as punishments of the former.

Thus far Protestant Divines do go; Protestants are unjustly accused for making
God the author of sin.
and all the acts which any of them ascribe to God about the causation of sin,
may be referred to one of the three named: All which stands well with the
holiness of his Nature, and extreme contrariety to sin. The Papists and
Arminians do slander us most unjustly, as if we did blaspheme the holy Lord, in
making him the author of sin: All of us ever have abhorred such Doctrine: We
never ascribed to God more acts of providence about sin, then the most
clamorous of our enemies themselves expressly have done. The three forenamed
acts, by Bellarmine and Arminius are attributed to God, in as ample and
unadvised expressions as ever fell from the Pen of any of our approved Divines.

I grant, the Libertines of old, This is the blasphemy of the Libertines, and
of M. Archers book, justly burnt therefore.
and their children the Antinomians this day, do cast out on this subject many
abominable Blasphemies: but these were ever detested by all Orthodox
Protestants, as the vomit of the father of all lies and blasphemies; which
makes us the more to marvel what these men can mean, who lately here, under the
name of M. Archer a famous Independent in his time, have printed the worst and
grossest of these Blasphemies. Surely, if such kind of Doctrine be entertained
by any of that Party, our Disputations will not stand long at
Church Government; but the world will be confirmed in that opinion which some
wise men long ago have given out, That Independency was not so much loved for
it self, as for somewhat else, A liberty, without censure, to vent such
Doctrines as the conscience of Orthedox Divines will never be able to hear with
patience. But in this I will not enter: The zeal of the whole Assembly and both
the Honorable Houses against the blasphemous Heresies of that infamous Book,
does quiet and secure our minds herein.

The fourth word to be exponed, Why does the Church complain of these acts of
God about her sins?
is the Interrogation and Complaint, Why have thou made us to err? The Church
being now before God, and laying hold on his fatherly compassions, pours out
before him the troubles of her heart. That which troubled them most, was their
sins and obstinacy in Rebellion, which they complain to the Lord had befallen
them in his great wrath, through his deserting of them, and giving them over to
be led away by their own lusts, and Satan's tentations. This part of Gods wrath
upon them, in punishing their sins with more blindness, and making them err
farther from his ways, was their greatest misery, the true cause of all their
outward plagues, and a greater plague then all the rest; as we may see in the
sixth of this Prophecy, where the Lord, for contempt of the Prophets
Ministry, does punish the body of that people with Spiritual Judgments, and
makes their heart fatter, their mind blinder then before: And from this
Spiritual evil, he makes all their Temporal desolation to flow, as out of its
proper Fountain. Of this misery the people here complain to God, not to lay
their sins off themselves, on the Lord; but to witness their deep sense of
them, as coming on them through Gods just desertion, and deserved judgment:
Not to upbraid the Lord with their miseries, but to spread them out before his
feet, as their only hope from whose hand alone they expected a remedy. The
first Doctrine. The godly pour out all their complaints in Gods bosom.


From the words thus exponed, observe, first, The children of God, in their
worst estate, are so familiar with their heavenly Father, as to pour out in his
bosom the complaints of whatever misery lies upon them. At this time, as
appears by the words both before and after, the peoples condition was exceeding
hard. We are all as an unclean thing; our iniquities, as the wind, have taken
us away. Thou have hid thy face from us, and consumed us, because of our
iniquities. His zeal, strength and merciful bowels seemed to be restrained
toward them; yet they come before him: and that which troubled them most,
their wandering from his ways, they spread it out before his feet, as the matter
of their chiefest complaint.

The truth of the Doctrine may be seen, Lam. 4.1. The Proof hereof.
Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us; consider and behold our reproach. In
all the Chapter, and the whole Book, there is a familiar complaining to the
Lord of all their miseries. Moses and Aaron, in all their tribulation, run to
the door of the Tabernacle. Jacob, at the side of the foord Jabbuk, in his
great fray for Esau, betook himself to weep and pray. David, in his present
danger of stoning by his own men, comforted himself in God. Hezekiah spread out
before the Lord the railing of Rabshakeh; and, after his desperate sickness,
turned himself to the wall to pour out his heart to God. The examples of this
practice are innumerable.

The Reason of it is, The Saints interest in God: The Reason.
He is their Father. Poor children in distress, whither shall they go, but to
their father? Neither sin nor misery will annull that more then natural
relation, that supernatural Paternity and Filiation. Though God clothe himself
with a cloud in his anger; yet faith will make the soul, with Moses, run through
the fire and darkness to him. The Prodigal, in the midst of his misery,
resolves to return to his father. The Spirit of Adoption, in our hardest times,
will make us cry, Abba, Father. This reason is used in the same place, ver. 16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us. Verse. 19. We
are thine; thou never bear rule over them. The next Chapter, verse. 8. But
now, O Lord, thou art our Father; behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy
people.

The Use is for our Encouragement to continue this practice with all
earnestness and perseverance. The Use.
If there be any means to draw down a blessing from the heavens on a distressed
Nation, it is the prayer of the Saints: This is the hand that has drawn up
this sinking Land from the pit of ruin; that has set our feet on that Rock of
safety whereon now we stand. Whatever difficulties are yet before us, by this
means, or none else, will they be gotten overcome: Though all other should give
over this holy exercise of Fasting and Praying, or turn it in a sinful and
provoking formality; yet it behooves us to keep it on foot, remembering both the
express command of the Lord, Call on me in the day of thy trouble, I shall
deliver thee, Psalm. 50. Lam. 2.19. Arise, cry out in the night, in the
beginning of the watches pour out your hearts like water, before the face of
the Lord; Lift up your hands toward him. And your own visible experience: As
no people have sown more plentifully this precious seed; so none have already
reaped more evident fruits thereof: Be not weary of this good work, until all
our desires be accomplished.

In the next place observe, The second Doctrine. Sins are heavier then
afflictions. The Proof.
That the chief part of the Saints complaint to God, is of their wanderings from
his ways. Their sins are heavier to them, then all their afflictions.

This is proved from diverse Scriptures, Psalm. 38. When the Prophets trouble was
great, Nothing sound in his flesh, The Arrows of the Lord sticking in him, Gods
hand pressing him sore; yet the chief burden whereof he complains, was his
sins, verse 4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head as an heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me. Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about,
but mine iniquities have taken hold on me; for them he was not able to look
out, his heart failed him: Daniel c. 9. complains of the heavy wrath and curse
that was powered out on Jerusalem, and of so great afflictions as had befaln to
no Nation under Heaven; yet the first, chief, and longest part of his complaint
is, of the sins of their Kings, of their Princes, of their Priests, and whole
Land.

The reason of the Doctrine, The Reason.
Sin is the greatest evil, its the fountain of afflictions: Affliction comes
not out of the dust; trouble springs not out of the ground: Sin is the root
of it. Also sin is most contrary to the nature of God: Wrath and trouble, even
the greatest, the very torments of Hell, are not so; for they are according to
his justice. The godly therefore, who weigh things aright in the just balance
of the Sanctuary, esteem their sins much heavier, and more grievous evils, then
any they can suffer for them.

The use is for our instruction: The Use.
Let our complaints be rightly ordered, and our sorrows rightly placed: Beware
to spend the most, or best of thy sense, on thy sufferings: Beware to pour out
the vehemence of thy passion, the bitterest of thy sorrows on calamities,
either private or public. The first fruits, the flower, the firstborn of thy
grief, must be reserved for the chief evil. The natural and kindly children
of God, will have more sorrow at their heart for the sins of the Land, then for
the desolations thereof: What ever poverty, disgrace, pain, can befall their
person, the very wrath of God, suppose the torments of Hell, will not be so
heavy, so bitter, so troublesome to them, as their sins, the cause of all these
evils.

The third observation, The third Doctrine. Gods hand in our sins, increases
their bitterness. An Objection answered.
Gods punishing and judicial hand in our sins, is their aggravation, and
increase of their bitterness: For this is the head of the Churches complaint,
That God had caused them to err from his ways.

It is true, the Saints in Scripture draw comfort from some acts of Gods mercy
about sin, as from his gracious directing of its act to a good end. Upon this
ground Joseph comforts his Brethren, that not they, but God had sent him down
to Egypt: That their felling of him, which they intended for evil, God had
ordered it so, that it did become the mean of all their preservation. Also Gods
prediction of sin in sundry Scriptures, is made a ground of contentment: All
this was done, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, is a common place of
comfort against the treason of Judas, and the wickedness of the Jews. Likewise
the Apostles, Acts 4. quiet their mind on this meditation, That God in his
eternal counsel, had determined what Herod and Pilate in time had done in
crucifying of Christ. Of such acts of Gods mercy about our sins, we speak not,
be they temporal, be they eternal; but of the acts of his justice and wrath,
punishing sin by sin. From these actions of God, we can draw no comfort; but
they aggravate the weight of our sins, and increase our grief.

The miscarriage of Absolon, The Proof.
his rebellion and incest, could not but grieve David; but to increase his
grief, 2 Samuel 2.10. God tells him, I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun, in that terrible vision, Isai. 6. the Lord, to demonstrate his
wrath against that people, sends to them a message full of anger, Make the
heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy. Their excaecation was in it
self a grievous evil; but it was more grievous, when it came as a plague from
an angry God. John 12.39. Gods blinding of their eyes, that they could not
believe Christ's Word, is brought as an aggravation of their sin, and of the
anger of Christ against them, so far, as he went from them, and hid himself.

The reason of this is, The Reason.
That these acts of God proceed from wrath and justice, punishing former sins.
Again, they are the means to make sin more sinful, the person being given over
to be carried headlong by his own lusts, and Satan's tentations. Thirdly, The
punishment of sin in this degree, is much sorer, then if it had been a simple
sin, as in the sixth of Isaiah, and elsewhere it appears. No marvel therefore,
that men of awakened consciences make it a chief part of their complaint and
grief, That God had caused them to err: This being a figne of wrath, and
increase of guiltiness, and a forerunner of greater punishment.

The use is first for Caution, 1 Use for Caution.
To beware of that dangerous error of taking comfort and encouragement from
Gods judicial hand in our sins, that is, to glory in our shame, and to joy for
what we should be sad. It is to cast off our self the burden of our sin, to
whom alone it belongs, on God, whose eyes are purer, then to behold iniquity.

Secondly, 2 Use for Counsel.
It serves for Council, to make it our chief grief in our mourning, That we
have fallen under so heavy displeasure, as to be scourged with the worst of Gods
Rods: Of all the Arrows in Gods Quiver, this is the most venomous, To be given
over by God to sin; this comes from a special wrath, and is a presage of very
great misery following. When Gods spirit stirred up David to number the people,
it came from his anger against Israel, and was a forerunner of the destroying
Angel: The blinding of the peoples eyes, Isaiah 6. and John 12. is made an
antecedent of a national ruin. When ever we feel this to be our condition, it
should be the matter of our most mournful complaint.

The fourth observation will clear the third; it is this, The fourth Doctrine.
Judicial errors are most lamentable.
The godly, when their eyes are opened to see their wanderings, they are
singularly affected with their judicial errors, As here the Church mourning
and praying to God, for sin and misery, begins her complaint for these errors,
into which, by Gods anger and judgment, she had fallen.

Old Israel by Gods judgment, The Proof.
had fallen in the grievous error of civil discord, which cost in two days,
the eleven Tribes, the lives of forty thousand men; and in the third,
proceeded very near to the extirpation of the twelfth Tribe. When the hand of
God was lifted off them, and they began to look back upon their actions, Judges
21.2. they weeped fore before the Lord, and complained to him of the great
mischief wherein they had fallen: Though the injustice and obstinacy of Benjamin
had been the immediate cause of the dissension; yet they pitied their
Brethren, seeing it was the Lords judgment upon them all, that had made that
breach in Israel, Verse 15. Ephraim in his pride would needs rebel against the
house of David, and have a King among themselves, and Altars of their own
making at Dan and Bethel; God in justice gave them over to these sins of
continual sedition and idolatry, till they were totally ruined: He gave them a
number of Kings in his anger: Hos. 8.11. Because Ephraim has made many Altars
to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin. But when the Lord gave repentance to
Ephraim, see how much they are grieved, ashamed, and confounded, for their
madness, wherein by the judgment of God, they were made long to go on, Jere.
31.18. I have heard Ephrains bemoaning himself thus; Surely, after I was
turned, I repented; and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I bore the reproach of my youth. The
Jews were plagued of God with a horrible blindness of mind, and obstinacy of
heart, so that they rejected the Gospel, crucified the Lord of Life, and remain
in Rebellion to this day: But when the Lord shall take off the vail of their
eyes, and they begin to see their judicial errors, their madness against
Christ and the Gospel, wherewith God in justice did plague them; their grief
for it will be extraordinary, as it is set down, Zach. 12.10. They shall look
on him whom they have peirced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mournath
for his only son; and shall be in bitterness for him, as one is in
bitterness for his firstborn. 2 These. 2. The Churches of the Gentiles are in
Gods justice, many of them given over to strong delusions, to believe
Antichristian Lies; but when God begins to open their eyes to see these
delusions, their grief and indignation for them is so great, Revel. 17.16. That
they hate the whore, who did seduce and bewitch them; They make her desolate,
and naked: They eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

The Reasons of this Doctrine, The Reasons.
are the same which of the former, especially the second. The singular and
extraordinary guiltiness, that is in these judicial errors, the blinded soul
sees them not, while God in mercy remove the cloud, and send in his light; but
then the lightened soul beholding the horrible ways wherein it has been
wandering, such wherein it would never have walked, had it not been led by a
powerful Devil, set on by the permission and commission of a just God; Seeing
in these sins a just God, a wicked Devil, and a heart stirred up by
extraordinary temptations; by this horrible back-sight is affrighted and
amazed, till Faith in the infinite mercies of God, does calm and settle it.

The Use is for admonition: The Use.
Beware of judicial errors; very often they are never pardoned, but bring on
destruction both temporal and eternal: 2 These. 2.11. They to whom God sends
strong delusions, are damned: Isai. 6.11. When God shut the peoples eyes, and
made their heart fat, the Cities were wasted, and the Land made desolate:
Before Ephraim and Juda recovered themselves from that snare of rebellion, and
came to the repentance spoken of, How many hundred thousands and millions of
them did perish both temporally and eternally? And these few whom the Lord
brings to see, and mourn for their judicial ertours; How great is their
grief? How much do they wish to have seen in time their madness, that they
might not so much have been plagued therewith?

But what are these judicial errors which we would beware of? Search the
Scriptures, they will make you wise in this very necessary point of knowledge.

For your use, I shall point at some: First, Civil discord a Judicial error.
Civil Discord is a sin, and a great judgment; a sin to the authors and
fomenters; a judgment to all, as well the innocent as nocent party. Isai.
19.2. God punishes the sins of the Egyptians with his plague, I will set the
Egyptians against the Egyptians and they shall fight every one against his
brother, and every one against his neighbor; City against City, and Kingdom
against Kingdom; and the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof, and I
will destroy the counsel thereof. The same is the Judgment of Israel, Zech.
11.6. I will no more pity the inhabitants of the Land, but I will deliver the
men every one into his neighbors hands, and into the hands of his King, and
they shall smite the Land: and out of their hand I will not deliver them. This
is the great Judgment that long has lien upon us; the removal whereof, has
been one chief end of all our late Humiliations: The longer it lies on, it is
the heavier; and all good men have the more reason to cry, with Abner to Joab,
upon a less occasion; Shall the Sword devour for ever? Know thou not that
it will be bitterness in the later end? How long shall it be ere thou bid the
people return from following their brethren?

Our Malignant enemies, the only authors of our present Discord, have to this
day denied us Peace in any just and safe terms. If obstinately they will go on
in their refusal, we must proceed in our necessary defense, and crave from the
God of Peace, that which these children of Discord do deny unto us; and expect
from the heaven such a Blessing upon our Armies, as may force them to permit us
to live in quietness, when they are no more able to cause troubles. In the
mean time, all should continue their prayers to God so to frame the hearts of
all men, that the weary and fainting Kingdoms may be delivered, so soon as is
possible, from our destroying Discords.

The estate of the world abroad, Reasons why Peace is to be wished.
does much call us to these thoughts. The Desolations of Germany, farther from
any appearance of remedy this hour then Six and twenty years ago, should be
exemplary unto us.

If our minds be so large as to look so far abroad, we may see the whole
Western Kingdoms in a greater danger to be swallowed up with the great Turkish
Leviathan, then they have been at any bygone time: We know his head this day
is bent toward Christiendom. The Bulwarks which were wont to keep him out on
both hands, upon our East in Germany and Hungary, upon our South in Italy and
Spain, are so much brangled with Intestine and irreconcilable Divisions, that
we have just ground to fear what this his Western Enterprise may produce.
England ofttimes has felt the heavy stroke of the Constantinopolitan Arms,
when they were in much weaker and far less terrible hands then at this day
they are.

If these seem far-fetched fears, look over to the condition of our nearest
Neighbors. While we are sleeping, and so soon as awakened, fallen a destroying
our selves, the French King has engrossed a greater and more formidable power
then any of his Ancestors for some hundred years did enjoy. No wise man of this
Isle will close his eyes at the extraordinary and disproportionate increase of
that Estate.

If there were no other reasons, I believe convincing Demonstrations might be
drawn from the present estate of the world abroad, why we should continue to
make it one of our special prayers in all these meetings, That we might be so
happy as quickly to see in all the three Kingdoms a just and well-grounded
Peace. But if the fatal obstinacy of our enemies will force us to fight it
out; with all cheerfulness let us go on, till they be brought so low, as not
to be willing any more to reject the equitable Offers of both Parliaments.

Only let this Judicial Discord be extended to as narrow bounds as is
possible: Most of all, Peace among our selves would be kept with care.
Let all our Divisions be with the enemy; among our selves let the bond of
brotherly Union continue and increase. All that are for God, and the welfare of
the Kingdoms in the three Nations, are united together by the Covenant and Band
of God. All Ages shall call them Cursed, who, for any imaginable advantage,
private or public, shall labor to put asunder what God has conjoined. The
greatest advantages cannot make up the loss which unavoidably will follow upon
such a Breach. We know the Prince of Discord, that restless Spirit, will
always be stirring up in the humors both of evil and of good men the sparkles
of that fire of jealousy, envy, malice, division, wherewith he enflamed the
nature of all men, in the breast of our old father the first Adam: But all the
members of the second Adam should make it not so much their profession, as
their real care and conscience, to smother these smokes, whenever they appear.
I am sure, the wisdom, the piety, the peace of mind, the love to his
Country, of that man is greatest, who with the greatest sedulity employs
himself to cast water on every beginning, on every the least appearance of any
Division which Satan may be working in the Parliament, in the Assembly, in the
City, in the Army, and, above all, betwixt the Covenanted Nations.

The second Judicial Error I point at, is, Ecclesiastic Anarchy is a
Judicial error.
Our Ecclesiastical Anarchy: How great a sin and how great a judgment this
is, a little consideration will clear. By this woeful Anarchy, Christ is robbed
of a great part of his Kingdom in this Land. That in all the Churches he has
in England, there should be no Government at all, no execution of Discipline:
That not one of his Officers should have liberty to keep from his Table, to
cast out of his House those that are most grievous to him: That for so long a
time he should be hindered to keep so much as one Court in any of his approved
Churches in England; it is very strange.

Which of you would not take it for agrievous offense, The absurdity thereof.
if any would offer to hinder the sitting of the high Court of Parliament at
Westminster, or wherever else they please to sit? Yea, it would be taken for a
heinous crime, if any in the City or Country should stop the least Committee,
or meanest Officer whom either of the Houses would send out in their name to
execute any of their Orders. What man in the Kingdom would not take it for an
intolerable affront, if his servant were hindered to close his doors, and keep
out of his house his enemies, or any whom he discharged his presence? What
grief would it be to any of us, to be forced to see daily, not only walking in
our house, but sitting at our Table, those whom least we desire? We may judge,
by what we feel in our own breasts when such offenses are offered to us, what
sense Christ will have of them, when his Spirit so long has been pierced with
them. That Christ, by whose power alone this Parliament has sitten so long
time, in despite of their enemies; by whose goodness it is that their
Sentences get any where obedience; who makes their wills in their private
States and Families to be regarded; That he should not be suffered to keep any
Court in his own Church, That his Orders should not be regarded in his own
House, it is very strange.

Can any man say that ever before it was thus in England these Fourteen hundred
years, or if it be longer since there were any Churches in this Land? Was ever
a total Anarchy heard of in any Churches, before these late times? Is it any
where else this day to be seen in the world? Does the Pagan, the Turkish, the
Popish Princes or States, refuse or delay to grant Ecclesiastic Government to
the Churches that live in their Dominions? Have the Independents, the
Brownists, or the Anabaptists, or any of the Hetorodox Societies among us,
wanted their own Government, since the first hour of their self-erection?

The Judgment of this Error appears in three Circumstances. It is
demonstrate to be a Judgment and Plague.


First, That it is evident to all. Secondly, That it were most easily amended.
Thirdly, That it is singularly hurtful.
The Evidence of it may be seen in the confession of all. The greatest and most
unreasonable Sectaries, will not deny but every true Church should be without
all delay invested with Government: And if you will speak with the men who most
have and do retard the erection of the Government desired, they will profess
their true intention and desire to see the Church Discipline established. For
this evil Anarchy has been so often, by so many of Gods faithful servants
witnessed against, that now its defended by none.

Concerning the second. The facility of its erection, it is as clear: For, I
pray, who are the men that will take it upon them to impede it? Can we at this
present, or could we for some years complain of the violence of a seduced
Court? Can the blame be cast on any Popish or Prelaticall Faction? Will either
Brownists or Anabaptists profess their denial to us of what they long ago
have taken to themselves? Who then must answer to God for our shameful Anarchy
for so long a time?

The hurt of it is too too perspicuous. Whosoever will lay the Sword, the
Pestilence, and all the Calamities that destroy the Land, on our delay to build
the House of the Lord, shall have for him the Prophet Zechariahs direct
Warrant, Zech. 8.10. Before these days, there was no peace to him that went out
or came in, because of affliction: For I set all men every one against his
neighbor. And if we indeed believe, It is not the strength of men, but the
Lord Christ who setleth troubled Kingdoms; What hope can we have, that he will
ever settle our State, so long as his Church lies neglected, in so woeful a
confusion?

Beside outward Judgments, this Error is the cause of the greatest spiritual
Mischiefs. The hedge of Discipline lying level with the ground, makes open
doors, yea, invites and calls for all the devouring beasts to prey on the Flock
of Christ. From this it is, that so many thousand souls are permitted to perish
eternally in ignorance, in profaneness, in Heresies, in damnable Sects,
without the least control, or any man's endeavor to reclaim them. So long as
the Law permits no Pastor in England to exercise his Pastoral charge on any
person, he may well weep and mourn when the devil in his sight plucks away
numbers of his Sheep: but with his Shepherds Crook, with the Ordinance of
Christ's Discipline, to hold off that Lion it is not in his power.

It is not only the passionate desire of all the Reformed Churches abroad, of
all the godly and Orthodox Party at home; but also their confident expectation,
That the Honorable Houses, without further delay, will at last set up the walls
of the House of God, who now is going on apace, by so many Successes, to ruin
their enemies, and to settle the state of their affairs, much according to
their hearts desire. The neglect of this piece of Thankfulness may provoke the
Lord to repent him of his favors, and to call back in one day, what he had
been giving in many.

I point but at one other Judicial wandering, False Doctrine is a Judicial
Error.
that which usually and properly goes under the name of Error, the word of
our Text; false Doctrine, contrary to the ways of Gods Truth. That Error is a
sin, and a Judicial one, infliflicted by God as a punishment of former sins,
we may see in diverse Scriptures: 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because they received not
the love of the Truth, for this cause God gave them over to strong delusions to
believe a lie. Here Errors are Judgments which God puts Satan to bring on
men, for their coldrife entertaining of the truth. And how grievous a Judgment
Error is, this and other Scriptures clear: Here it is made a cause of
damnation. That they might all be damned who believed not the Truth.

The Socino-Remonstrants have taught our new Masters to extenuate much, and at
last to deny the sinfulness and danger of Error. They would hide the Vipers
sting, till the pretty and beautiful worm be once taken into the bosom, where
a little warmed, it makes it quickly appear how innocent and harmless a
creature it is.

They tell us, that all sin is in the Will, Error is a dangerous evil and the
cause of damnation.
but the seat of error is the mind: Is not the mind the most high and divine
faculty of the soul? Is not the corruption of the best things truly worst?
The minds pollution with the darkness of error, is eminently contrary to the
light and truth of the divine nature.

Against this greatest of errors, the excusing of all errors, we should mind
the truth of God, who cannot lie: In the place cited, error is made the cause
of damnation; elsewhere the Apostle tells us, That false Doctrine eats up and
kills the soul, as a Canker, Gangrene or Pest does the body. 2 Timothy 2.17. Also
false Teachers are called Ravening Woolfs, who tear and rent in pieces the
souls of the seduced, Acts 20.29.

The Apostle Peter is in the same mind, 2. Epistle 2. He tells us the
condition of false Teachers, They bring in damnable Heresies, their ways are
pernicious, their destruction is swift, their damnation slumbereth not: It is
as certain, as was the damnation of the Devils, of the old world drowned in the
deluge, of the Sodomites: All this is Peter's Doctrine.

And this he had from his Master Christ, Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets.
When they have the fairest show of piety, he that knows the heart pronounces,
They are but ravening Woolfs. Matthew. 15.14. If the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall in the ditch: If we believe the Lord, a false Teacher does not only
destroy himself, but draws with him all his blinded Scholars into the ditch of
the same perdition.

1 Cor. 12.25, 27. The Apostle tells us, The nature of Shism.
That the Church is the Body of Christ, and that Schismatics make a Schism in
Christ's Body: that is, they rent his Body in pieces: they who crucified him
would not rent his seamlesse Coat; but Schismatics can tear his skin, cut his
flesh, rent his Joints and Members in pieces.

Understand the Language of them who plead for liberty of errors; What is
meant by liberty of conscience, and what is the true sense of their language
who require a toleration of Errors.
If you believe Christ, or the Doctrine of Paul attested by Peter, and the rest
both Prophets and Apostles, whom I have not time to cite; they invite you to
permit ravening Woolfs freely to enter your streets, and tear in pieces all
they meet with; to come into your Houses and Chambers, to devour the souls of
your best beloved Wives, Sons, Daughters, Servants, and Friends; to lead them
all out to a ditch, and drown them; yea, which is infinitely worse, to cast
them all in the pit of damnation. These were hard expressions if they were our
own, and not our betters, I mean Christ, and his Apostles.

Would you permit any whom you were able to hinder, to rent the Coat of Christ,
to tear his Skin, to cut his Flesh, to pull his Arm from his Shoulder? These
are the things which too long have been done in our eyes: It were good that
such impious actions, so grievous to God, so hurtful to the souls of men, at
last were stopped.

Would you count him a gracious parent, who should wink at any who brought into
his house Vipers and Serpents, Woolfs and Tigers, to destroy his Children? who
brought in Boxes of Pestiferous Clothes, and boldly spread them on the Beds,
and about the Table where himself and family were to sit and lie? This is the
office and only exercise of all our Heretics and Patrons of error.

All Christians are obliged to the uttermost of their power to quench the fire
of Heresy and Schism; but above all other, we have a special obligation for
this duty; we have lifted up our hands to the most high God, vowing to him, in
the sight of all the Neighbour-Nations, our endeavors in the sincerity of our
hearts, to extirpate Heresy and Schism, and whatsoever shall be found contrary
to sound Doctrine, without respect of persons. If herein we should be
negligent, would not God avenge our solemn Perjury? If respect to any person
should make us ever think of breaking that Bond, and expressly contrary
thereto to begin once to tamper about the toleration of errors contrary to
sound Doctrine; what might we and the posterity expect from the hand of the God
of Justice and Truth?

Let none object the example of the States of Holland to us in this point: The
example of Holland an swered.


For first, Where the Will of God is evident, the contrary example of men is
not to be regarded.

Secondly, The evil example of one State, is not to be followed against the
good example of all other Protestant Churches.

Thirdly, These States were never bound to God by such a Covenant as we are.

Fourthly, In these States there has been a connivance at Errors by
particular Magistrates for their private gain; but to this hour, was ever any
Sect among them, so impudent, as to offer a Petition for a Toleration by Law,
when lately some assayed to do it, they repented ever since of that folly.

Lastly, Has not the Magistrates connivance without any Legal Toleration, so
much multiplied Sects among them, that for this one thing (though for many
other their renown be great) they have become infamous in the Christian World?
The godly among them have been more grieved with this scandalous sin, then with
any other; and those of them who are wise, do see their State this day in
greater civil danger by this piece of impious policy, and from it apprehend
greater hazards of commotion and ruin to their State, then from any other
ground: However, the connivence there at Sects, and the multiplication of Sects
by connivence, is no ways comparable to what is among us: but we trust that
this kind of our erring from the ways of God, is near a period, and shall
shortly be remedied.

So much for the first part of the Churches complaint, The second part of the
Complaint exponed.
follows the second, And hardened our heart from thy fear, Not only they had
wanderd out of the ways of God in diverse bypath of sin; but in these sins
they were obstinate, their hearts had been hard, the fear of God moved them not
to repentance: This was a worse evil then the first; so they acknowledge the
hand of God, and his sore punishment into it, and of this make a heavy regrate
to him.

The original word that here is turned harden, What is hardness of heart.
is but once else in Scripture, Job 39.16. spoken of the Ostridge, She is
hardened against her young ones, or is removed from her young ones; she leaves
them alone. It signifies two things, To harden, or to remove. Some of the best
Latin Interpreters translate it here, Why removest thou our heart from thy
fear? The Chaldee Paraphrast takes it so also: but the Septuagint, and the most
of other Interpreters old and late, translate it as we have it: The words will
bear both; but for shortness I shall hold with our own translation only.

Hardness of heart is a metaphor, importing the wilful, obstinate, and
rebellious disposition of the Spirit against the fear and counsels of God: As
hard Wax refuses the stamp, while the soft receives the impression: A hard
Wall puts back the Ball, which the soft Air lets pass through: A Corslet of
Iron holds out the Bullet, which the softness of the flesh receives.

The way how God hardneth the heart against his fear, How God hardens the
heart.
is not by infusion of any hardness, or any evil disposition into the heart,
but by three other actions.

First, By withdrawing of his gracious spirit, whose operation it is that
softens the heart, and makes it pliable to the Counsels of God, and subject to
his fear: Deuteronomy. 29.9. The Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, eyes to
see, and ears to hear, to this day: That all they had seen in Egypt and in the
Wilderness, had not pierced their heart with the love and fear of God. Of this
wonderful hardness of the peoples heart, this reason is rendered by Moses,
God had not given them a heart to perceive.

Beside this negative action of God in hardening the heart, he has two
positive; He gives over the heart to its own natural hardness, that it may be
more and more hardened: Thus, the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart: He not only
withheld all the gracious motions of his spirit from him, but let his natural
obstinacy work it self to an acquired habit of hardness: And so, what was
before natural, became habitual and judicial. This is the judgment spoken
of, the twelfth of John, from the sixth of Isaiah: Make the heart of this
people fat; for their rejecting of my former counsels, let their rebellious
heart become-worse and worse, so that thy ministry do them no more good.

Thirdly, God gives over the heart judicially hardened by it self, to Satan's
tentations, whereby it becomes more blind, dead, and hard, then of it self
alone it could be: He sent evil Angels among the Egyptians, for this evil
among others, Psalm. 79.49. 2 These. 2. He sends out Satan to work with
Antichrist; for to blind the eye, and harden the heart with strong delusions.

By all this you understand, why the Church regrates it here to God, That he
had hardened her heart from his fear: Hardness was natural to her heart, yet
they found Gods judgment, causing in justice that natural evil to increase
upon them.

From this part of the Complaint, observe, The Doctrine Judicial hardness is
the godlies greatest grief.
Judicial hardness of heart, from the fear of God, in the times of trouble,
is the godlies chiefest grief, and complaint to God. The troubles and
calamities of the Jews were great at this time, their sins also were great: But
behold, here they complain to God more then for either their calamities, or
other sins, that God had hardened their heart from his fear, in the midst of
all their sins and judgments.

This was it that made the Prophet Jeremy amazed, The Proof.
Jere. 5.3. O Lord, thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou
have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction; they have made
their faces harder then a rock.

The Reason why this condition of a people is most lamentable, is first, It is
a presage of destruction: The first Reason.
When strokes humble not a people, and soften not their heart to the fear and
obedience of God, then it comes to this, Why should ye be stricken any more.
After correction is obstinately refused, then comes rejection. 2 Kings 17.18.
God is very angry with the ten Tribes, and removes them out of his sight; the
great cause we have, Verse 14. They hardened their necks, like the necks of
their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their God. This same was the
cause of the ruin of Jerusalem, Jere. 19.15. I will bring upon this City all
the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their
necks, that they might not hear my words. Jere. 26.29. The Lord has rejected
and forsaken the generation of his wrath, because they had hardened their necks,
and did worse then their fathers.

Another Reason. The second Reason.
This is such an evil as draws on eternal perdition after temporal ruin.
Romans 2.5. After thy hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. There is a treasure and heap of
everlasting wrath from this hardness. Heb. 3.7. To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts as in the provocation: Wherefore I was grieved
with that Generation, and swear in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest:
Meaning such grief and anger in God against this evil, as holds out of heaven.

Thirdly, The third Reason.
This sin has extraordinary malignancy in it, though neither eternal nor
temporal wrath followed on it: The hand of an angry God, of a working devil,
and high degree of corruption, are into it: in its production, all these three
have place. Before any be hardened in sin, and become obstinate, the corruption
of the heart must be great, and highly advanced: Also Satan's hand is in the
blinding of the eyes, and searing with the hot-iron, in stupifying and making
senseless the conscience of the hardened person: and God, as a just Judge,
putting on the executioner, must be also about this action. So that this
hardening is very often the sign of a Reprobate to whom God shows no mercy: Whom
he will he hardens, and shows mercy on whom he will show mercy; albeit its
not ever so, as in our Text and elsewhere. God hardens the hearts of some for a
time, whom thereafter he softens, and to them shows mercy: Yet often, being the
case of Reprobates, and ever very like to it, and in it self a degree to that
woeful condition; it affrighteth the godly, when they see it in themselves or
others, and becomes a great part of their complaint to God.

The Use is for Exhortation, The Use.
That we be careful to grieve and complain to the Lord for this great evil,
wherever we see it, in our selves or others. Not only the most faithful of
Gods Watchmen in all the three Kingdoms, but also those of the people who by
the anointing of God have the eyes of their mind opened to see the Spiritual
estate of their own or their neighbors souls, bear witness with an unanimous
testimony, that notwithstanding all the Judgments which lie on the Land, yet
this hardness of heart is greater and more universal then ever they have seen
it. This cannot be but the hand of God, adding this Spiritual Plague, as the
worst and greatest of all our evils: For this we have great reason to mourn,
and entreat the removal of it above all our Woes.

Motives to the Duty we need no other, then the Reasons of the Doctrine.

If thou find this evil crept in thy heart, as I doubt not but it lodges
sensibly in some hearts that hear me; or though the Lord had blessed thee with
the tender heart of Josiah, to mourn for the sins and calamities that are
already, and to tremble for what further is coming; yet if thou see this
Mischief proclaiming it self in the countenances and lives of the most of thy
neighbors, as truly an observing and conscientious eye will remark too much
of it, wherever he will look, even in the days and places of most solemn
Humiliation, when hardness of heart should be banished farthest away; this
evil, I say, wherever found, in thy self or others, should be complained of to
God: For having in it so much of an angry God, a busy devil, and of a high
degree of humane corruption; it being also a presage and certain forerunner, if
not remedied, of greater Temporal Judgments then yet we have seen, albeit we
have seen and heard of as much woe as our fathers in these Kingdoms have felt
for some hundred years, though all their sufferings were put together: Yet the
hardness of our hearts, if it continue, will make all we have suffered but the
beginning of evils; yea, this hardness of heart poisons and envenoms all our
sufferings with a cursed quality. Pestilence, wounds, spoiling of goods, death,
are all sanctified and sweetened to a softened heart; but to a hardened heart they
are the first acts of a woeful Tragedy; there is a treasure of wrath, and lake
of fire and brimstone at their end attending them.

If we were able, on these days set apart for this end, above all other, to
attain the blessing of a soft heart, and the Judgment of a heart hardened by
God removed, we would quickly be secure of damnation, we would become certain of
the removal of all these Judgments which have very long so heavily lien both
on the Church and State, and on the backs, if not of our persons, yet of many
in whom our interest is great: we should be assured of heavenly consolations
against all evils that for the time were on, or hereafter might befall us. Let
it therefore be our earnest endeavor to find this blessing by the Word, by
the Sacraments, by public by private Prayer, by Reading, by Conference, by
Meditation. At this time I will point at some Scripturall helps toward it.

First, The first cure of hardness is, The embracing of the word by faith.
believe the Word of the Lord. Gods Word is the means that softneth the heart,
like the Sun that melts the wax, likethe Hammer that breaks the stone, the
Fire that softneth the Iron, the watery cloud that moistneth the dry and parched
ground. With all care and conscience, set thy heart under the beams of that
Sun, the stroke of that Hammer, before the heat of that fire, under the
droppings of that cloud. The contempt, the neglect, the misbelief of this holy
instrument of the Spirit, is a great cause of all the hardness of heart we
speak of. Heb. 3. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart. Take
heed there be not in any of you an evil heart of misbelief. Who will not hear
the voice, or does hear, but with an evil heart of misbelief, they harden their
heart. The Word, which should melt them as the Sun does Wax, hardneth them, as
the Sun does Clay: that Word which to the believer is the loud voice of the
Trumpet of God, to waken them when sleeping, to quicken them when dead;
becomes, to the unbeliever and careless hearer, the song of a pleasant voice
to sing them asleep, and to keep them sleeping. To such, the most powerful
Ministry of a Prophet, of an Apostle, of Christ himself, serves to make the
heart more hard, and fat, and dead then it was before; as from the sixth of
Isai. and twelfth of John it is manifest. That which to the faithful is a
quickening Spirit, to the misbeliever is a killing letter: What to the one is
the power of God to salvation, to the other is but as sounding Brass and a
tinkling Cymbal. Let it therefore be your earnest endeavor, in all holy
exercises about the Word, private or public, be it preaching, or reading, or
conference, to embrace it with an honest heart, with all attention, reverence
and faith.

Particularly, Especially the promise of a soft heart.
embrace and lay up in thy heart the promise of a soft heart, as it is set
down, Ezekiel. 36.26. there the people of God were in a worse condition then we
yet: The fury of the Lord was so far kindled against them for their sins, that
they were cast out of their Land, they were swallowed up on every side, as it
is in the third verse: They were taken up in the lips of talkers, they were an
infamy of the people, and the reproach of the Nations, and for all that were
not reformed, but continued to profane the Name of God, and to increase their
provocations, in the midst of all their Judgments: Yet, even then, the Lord
does promise, For my own Names sake, not for your sake, will I do this: A new
heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh. Let
this Word, as a pickle of good seed, be laid up in the heart, it will in time
break up to good fruit. This is a part of the new Covenant, as appears from
Jer. 31 and 32. and Heb. 8. which belongs to us, as to any other, which we
would embrace, humbly waiting till the Lord perform it to us.

A second help to softness of heart, will be a Catalogue of sins for which we
ought to mourn; The second Cure of hardness is, A clear sight of sin.
for softness of heart is either the same thing, or proceeds in a great part
from grief and forrow for sin; as hardness of heart and impenitency are the
same, or are always conjoined. Thou from thy hardness or impenitent heart. The
tenderness and melting of Josiahs heart, was his mourning for the Lands sin:
The softning of the Jews heart from their long Plague of induration, is, when
they are weeping and in bitterness for their sins, as one for his firstborn.
The clear sight of sin being a help to grief, sorrow and repentance, must be so
toward the softness of heart. The special end of these solemn Humiliations
is for registrating, in clear and legible letters, in the hearts of the godly,
the sins both of the Land, and of their own persons. The Tables of our
conscience have been so often impressed with these Types, that I need no more but
to remit every one to the books of their breasts: There you may read in capital
letters the cause of our Woes, the matter of our Mourning.

While the Lords Candle did shine over our head, What are the sins of the Land.
and we washed our steps in butter; while to all the Neighbour-Nations for a
great number of years we were a wonder of Prosperity; and with abundance of all
Temporal blessings, we had likewise plenty of the Gospel; How did we meet the
Lord? Great numbers of all ranks and estates, were obstinate in Idolatry, and
known Papists. Of them who professed the Truth, how many were altogether void
of knowledge, void of fear, without any conscience of God? The most did pollute
the Service and Church of God with manifold Superstitions, and Prelaticall
Tyranny, persecuting all who had the least zeal to oppose their Corruptions:
True Piety was mocked. The Sabbath, by public Authority, profaned.
Covetousness, Pride, Oppression, Pampering of the flesh, Uncleanness, like a
flood, did overflow the Land. In these very times, when the Lords patience is
broken off, and he from heaven is revealing his wrath against our wickedness;
yet where is our Repentance? How many have an ear to hear more what the present
Rods of God do speak, then what his former Favors? How many Popish and
Prelaticall spirits have yet mourned for their old ways? How many upon
conscience have left any of the named abominations? How great an addition have
we made to our old heap of sin? How much have we put to our old treasure of
wrath? Rather then to be reclaimed from their ways, Has not a great part run
to the Sword, and covered the Land with more innocent blood, more Rapines and
Ravishments then this Isle did see for many Ages together?

Many whom Gods mercy has separate to the right hand, Episcopacy and
Independency flow both from one fountain.
How do they still provoke the Lord, continuing without grief for their old
ways? And sundry of them who professemost Piety, advancing the old unhappie way
of this Land, an affectation of singularity and difference from all the
Reformed: The bitter Potions of Gods Judgments, have not yet purged out this
very evil humor of many stomachs. The vain spirits of this Land made that the
peculiar glory of England, which was truly her peculiar infamy, and proper
unhappiness, and the special grief of the most godly in the Land: The
gloriation of these light spirits was, That England did excel all other
Reformed Churches in their Episcopacy and Service Book: also, That the
moderation of their King and Prelates was such, that Roman Catholics might
enjoy a sober liberty among them, without all hazard of persecution. Is this
humor diminished to this day? Or, with a little change, does it not predomine
yet in many? We must still excel all other Churches in our Government: In
place of Episcopacie, we will have a new Popularity: Just the old Brownism of
the rigid Separatists, covered with the new name of Independency: For after
trial it will be found, that this new and Middle way (as it is called) is
really the extremity of the most rigid Separation: That it is not a semi, but a
sesqui-Separation: Independency is not a se^i, but a sesqui-separation.
That for the smaller crotchets of the Brownists which they lay aside, they
add more errors, of a worse stamp, which the old Separatists were wont much to
detest.

But to swe^ten our new eminency above other Protestants, it must be mixed with
a Liberty of Conscience; not that, for which the King, Court and Bishops were
lately so much cried out upon, The toleration only of Papists, or any one
false Religion; but a full and Catholic Liberty for all imagiuable kinds of
false Religion; much more then to this day was ever required, either in
Amsterdam, or Pall, or Transylvania, or any where else where the
licentiousness of erring, in the great wrath of God, has been permitted to
dwell. Upon these things the godly would look, not as upon a subject of
talking, or an incentive of wrath and indignation against the persons of any;
but to be matter of heart-grief, and mourning to the Lord in our secret places.

In the end of this Catalogue of public sins, thou would have annexed a
Register of thy personal provocations: When thou have brought the Candle of
Gods Word and Spirit within thy own house, and within the Cabinet of thy own
breast; doubtless thou will behold so many abominations, both fleshly and
spiritual, that will be just cause of watering thy Couch with thy tears, and
pouring out thy heart before the face of the Lord, if thou were able, in tears
of blood.

A third help to softness of heart, A third Cure of hardness is Motives to
fear.
is Motives to fear; for this hardness of heart proceeds as from misbelief
and impenitency; so also from security: wherefore in our Text it is opposite to
fear: Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? And Josiah, so soon as
tenderness of heart came upon him, began to fear and tremble. So Motives to
fear, are helps to softness, and cures for hardness of heart: Of these, I
point shortly but at three: The Judgments of God on others: His Mercies to us:
And, if these affect not, The Wrath yet to come on us.

For the first, Judgments on others.
we would often remember the examples given us by God: Who ever thou art, thou
have thy pattern from God: Be thou a Churchman, a Citizen, a Knight, an Earl, a
Duke, a Prince; how has the Lord scourged diverse of thy Coat lately before thy
eyes? wounded, killed, impoveriffied, disgraced many, and put others to stand
this day on the brink of ruin and worldly misery? Were they the greatest
sinners on whom the Tower of Siloam fell? Or they whose blood Pilate mingled
with their Sacrifice? The Lords remark on these Judgments was, That except we
repent, we shall all likewise perish. The late Judgments which God has
inflicted on many of thy quality, are loud words to thee, that thou may fear
and tremble; that thy heart may melt within thee for thy sins, lest the Lord
make thee a spectacle of Judgment to others, who by the miseries of others
would not be taught to repent.

Again, Remember the great mercies of the Lord: Mercies on us.
For there is mercy with God, that he may be feared. The special means whereby
Nathan softened the heart of David, after it had been long hardened in sin with
Bathsheba, was a Catalogue of Gods mercies toward him, 2 Samuel 2. I d^livered
thee out of the hand of Saul; I made thee King over Israel; I gave thee thy
masters house; and if that had been too little, I would have given thee more:
Why have thou despised my Commandment? The ointment of mercy is most softning
of it gracious heart, when it grows into hardness: Its good to have a
Register of Gods favors both to the public and thy person. Consider all that
the Lord has done lately for the Church and Kingdom. If the Malignant party
had prevailed, (as once they were too like to have done) if their Tyranny in
Church and State had been established by the overthrow of the gracious party in
the whole Isle; what woeful days should have come upon us and the posterity?
That the Lord has heard our Prayers, and from the heaven has done so many and
so great things for us: That we are in so fair a way to have both Church and
State settled according to Truth and Justice: That for our persons, we have been
guided aright in the common Cause; that when so many greater, wiser, better
then we, have been given over to the counsels of their own hearts, to join with
the enemy, for their own disgrace and wrack: That the Lord should have kept thy
heart strait, and hold ^^ thee on thee side wherein was Justice, Truth, and the
blessing of God: That in that party the Lord has taken any service at thy
hand, when many, more able, and as willing, have been unserviceable: That thy
life, thy limbs, thy estate, are preserved, when this service has cost many
their life, some their limbs, some their estates. These and the like favors
would be remembered, for the softning of our heart.

In the third place, Greater Judgments yet coming.
if neither Judgments on others, nor mercies on thy self, will move; consider
what remediless evils may shortly be the reward of so great a contempt. When
Nabals heart grew like a stone within him, the hand of God did in a little time
cut him off by death. When neither Judgments nor mercies bring a heart to
fear, the Lord usually pours out the full Vials of his heaviest wrath. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hand of that consuming fire. We would do well
to be lifting up our eyes to that invisible Spirit whom the world cannot see;
To behold his hand guiding all the wheels of public and private affairs. Were
our State much better settled then yet for a long time it can be; if he be
miskent, he can cast down in a moment more then men can build in many years. If
he be not feared and sought to, he will so cross and confound the guides of
Church and State, that when they are at the end of the Wilderness, on the very
borders of Canaan, he can bring them back to toil in the Wilderness till they
die, without so much as a sight of that Canaan, though once they had come very
near unto it. Albeit the public did prosper, yet the fearful wrath of God,
for thy hardness of heart, may light on thy person. Achan may be stoned to
death in the valley of Achor, in the midst of Isreal's triumph. The misbelieving
Prince in Samaria may see the Plenty, but be crushed, before he taste thereof.
Thy hardness of heart, if it remain, will ruin thee: What the fury and curse
of an angry God has ever brought on a miserable sinner in this life, think
upon it, for shortly it may be thy portion; and, which is infinitely worse, the
whole treasures of the wrath to come, a greater then ordinary condemnation, for
thy impenitency and hardness of heart, if thou remain as thou art, cannot but
fall upon thee.

The last help I propone, is Earnest Prayer. A fourth Cure of hardness is
Prayer.
Sometimes all the former helps will not do it; for the heart is desperately
wicked, and incredibly hard, like that of Leviathan, Job. 41.24. His heart is
firm as a stone, as hard as the nether millstone. When we find it thus, shall
we give over in d^spair? Not so: For there is yet mercy and power in God to
make the rocks flow down, to melt the mountains, to dissolve the
Adamant-stones. There is a Warrant, Neh. 9. once and again proponed, for the
people of God to lay hold on Gods mercy and power, in the midst of their
greatest Rebellion and Induration, verse 16. Our fathers dealt proudly, and
hardened their necks, and heackned not to thy Commandments: But thon art a God
ready to pardon, gracious and merciful; thou forsakest them not. Also in the
29 verse, They dealt proudly, and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their
necks, and would not hear. Yet in the 31 verse, Nevertheless thou did not
forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful God.

What heart can be more hard and blind then Paul's, when he made havoc of the
Church? yet the Lord made the scales to fall from his eyes, and put in his
breast, in place of the stone, a most gracious, soft and spiritual piece of
flesh. The spectacle of the greatest induration, the Jews, when the Spirit
comes on them, their most obdured hearts fall to the greatest mourning, Zech.
12. Let it therefore be our care, in our greatest hardness, to lie at the
Throne of Grace, to cry on still for this mercy of a soft heart; who knows
how soon the Lord may hear and answer? When nothing else can help us, if he
himself come down, all will yield to his power. When the King of Glory comes to
assault the most stiff and best closed heart, all doors are cast open to him,
Psalm. 24.9. He breaks the gates of brass, and smites the bars of iron in
sunder, Psalm. 107.16. When he puts his finger in the hole of the door, the
bowels of the secure Spouse will shortly be moved for him, Cant. 5.4. It must
be our continual prayer, that the Lord would come to put away the hardness of
our heart, to enlighten it with faith, to melt it with repentance, to break it
with fear; that so it may be a fitted Sanctuary for his perpetual inhabitation.

If time were not past, The last part of the verse exponed.
there are in the second part of the Text, the Churches petition for the Lords
return, sundry things useful for the present occasion. Look in a little upon
the meaning of the words.

The returning of the Lord, is a metaphor taken from finite creatures, that go
and come: But properly the Lord cannot move from place to place; for his
Essence is infinite; he is essentially omni-present; God is every where, in the
heaven, in the earth, in the Sea. Psalm. 139. If I ascend up unto heaven, thou
art there; if I make my bed in hell, thou art there: neither so only, but he
fills the heaven and the earth, Jer. 23.24. Do not I fill the heaven and the
earth, says the Lord? But not so, as if when he filled all things, he could be
within the circle of the highest heavens: 1 Kings 8.27. Behold, the heavens,
and the heaven of heavens, could not contain thee. We have the reason in Job
11.8. The perfection of God is such, that it is as high as heaven, deeper then
hell, longer then the earth, and broader then the Sea.

But beware to conceive of this infinite and immense Essence of God, which is
in all places, and without all places, as of a bodily substance; for God is a
Spirit, and that of an infinite simplicity: take heed of all gross
imaginations of him, left thou turn him to an idol of thine own making.

Not long ago, The zeal of the Court of England against Vorstius heresies.
Verstius and some of the Arminians in Holland, began first to brangle with
their Problems, and thereafter, to deny with their positive assertions, these
groundstones of Religion. At that time, the zeal of England brake out, to the
joy of all the Churches: Then the care of the King, and the very Prelates, was
great, not only to keep Heresies, as hellish vapors, out of England; but to
have them suppressed among their neighbors in Holland, with all speed. We hope
it shall never be told to posterity, that the zeal of this Parliament was less
against Errors at home, then the Courts wont to be against that evil abroad.
And however for the present there be nothing so sacred in the Divine Nature and
Persons, which the boldness of Heretics among us, arising only from
impunity, dare not wickedly profane; yet ere long we expect a remedy to this
and many more evils.

The Returning whereof our Text speaks, is not to be understood of the Divine
Effence, Nature, Substance, nor of the Lords common Operations; but of his
gracious Works, of his Mercy and Compassion, as we have it expressly, Zech.
1.16. I am returned to Jerusalem with mercy: And Jer. 12.55. I will return and
have compassion on them. As a man in his anger turns his back, and goes his
way; but when reconciled, he comes back: So the Lord, when grievously provoked
with the sins of his people, for a time departs to his place, hides his
face, withdraws the signs of his favor: but thereafter, when appeased, he
makes his face to shine, and by his Spirit works graciously in the seduced and
obdured heart: For this the Church here petitions, That the Lord would return,
and make himself sensibly present to her, and by the gracious work of his
Spirit, reclaim her from these errors, and that hardness of heart whereinto
by his absence she had fallen.

The Ground whereupon the Petition is builded, is, Gods Relation to them, and
their Interest in God: They were his servants, he their Lord and Master; as it
is in the last verse: We are thine; thou never barest rule over them: they were
never called by thy Name. Since the Lord had taken them to be his people to
serve him, this was a ground to them, That he would not fully nor finally cast
them off; but, for his interest in them, would return. This is cleared in the
last words, his returning to them was not for any good was in them, but because
they were The Tribes of his Inheritance: Among all the inhabitants of the
earth, he had chosen for his portion the Tribes of Jacob, as the word signifies
the Rods or Branches that sprang out of the Root of Jacob, for his peculiar
possession: Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the Most high divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam; the Lords portion was his
people, and Jacob the lot of his inheritance. Out of the whole world, he chose
Israel for his peculiar portion; as it is in Amos 4. Thee only have I known,
of all the families of the earth. Not for any good in them, but alone for his
own love and good will; as it is, Deuteronomy. 7.8.

Were not the time past, we would have enlarged these Observations:

First, The proper, the sovereign, the only Cure of an erring spirit and
hardened heart, is the presence, the return, the gracious entrance of God in the
heart.

Secondly, When the Lord upon entreaty has come into the heart, and begins to
enlighten and soften it; he would be entertained with much love, humility,
fear, care. All in the heart that may grieve his holy eye, would be swept out,
lest, if again he depart in anger, the last estate be worse then the first.

Thirdly, A Land wherein the spirit of Error and Induration does predomine,
cannot enjoy the gracious presence of the Spirit of Truth. 2 Cor. 6.15. What
communion has light with darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial?

Fourthly, All who plead for a Liberty of habitation to errenious spirits in
this Land, require, in plain English, a Liberty, so far as is in them, to
banish God out of England.

Fifthly, When by the Judgment of God the spirit of Error has entered a Land,
there is no putting of him out, but by Gods own Arm; for he is a great deal
stronger then men. Zech. 13.2. It is the Lord who takes it on him to cause the
false Prophets, and the unclean spirit that leads them, to pass out of the
Land.

Sixthly, Though the Judgment of Erring and Induration cannot be cured but by
the return of the Lord; though the subduing of the spirit of Error and
Obstinacy be the work of Gods hand: yet every good man, according to his place
and calling; above all, the Nobles of a Land, and the Houses of Parliament,
would employ their whole strength to help the Lord against that strong one. We
tempt God, when we neglect to use the means for doing of that work wherein he
has the principal hand. Because we live in God, Shall we not eat, and drink,
and keep our selves from seen dangers? It is the Lord that subdues our enemies
under us; therefore shall not our Soldiers fight? The Lords Spirit is the
subduer of the spirit of Error; therefore Assemblies and Parliaments need to
have no care of this matter? When Satan reasoned thus with Christ, He has
given his Angels charge over thee; therefore cast thy self down headlong: he
replieth wisely, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Seventhly, God will return for his servants sake, The conscience of a desire
to serve the Lord, is a Ground of hope in our hardest conditions.

Eighthly, No hope of a deliverance by God in mercy from any Judgment, unless
we be willing to serve him as an absolute Master. The greatest enemies of a
State, are those, who would evert or enervate the Relation of master and
servant, between God and a people; for this Relation is the groundstone of all
the Protection, of all the Deliverance we may expect or pray for from God.
Popes, Kings, Bishops, have been striving to be lords over Gods Flock; that
ambition has cost all the three dear. Let Christ alone (by his own Laws, his
own Officers, and his own Courts) have the full Spiritual and Ecclesiastic
Government of his Churches: The taking of this from him, may spoil us of his
protection. Those men that are most careful to vindicate the right of Christ,
are best servants to the State; for they lay a sure foundation of Christ's
favor and protection to that State wherein they settle Christ as the only
King, Lord and Master of the Church.

Ninthly, Consider the unexpressible benignity of God, choosing out among the
children of sinful and miserable men, some to be his own inheritance: That the
Infinite and All-sufficient God, who has need of nothing, and to whom all
creatures can add no perfection; in all Agesshould delight to have a
possession and inheritance among men, as his peculiar treasure, they to be his,
and he to be theirs; its a wonderful love to men.

Tenthly, Gods Inheritance, his peculiar People, his dearest Children, if they
will venture on sin, they shall be sure of Plagues both Spiritual and
Temporal, rather then any other people of the world: For their sins are
greatest, being against a most loving Father: It concerns him in honor and
glory not to let them go with their scandalous trespasses: He would be
blasphemed, if they went unpunished. Thee only have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore I will punish thee for all thy transgressions.

Eleventhly, The Spirit of Adoption, under great sins, and grievous punishments
therefore, moves the children of God to lay hold on their privileges for the
melting of their heart, and bringing them to Repentance.

Finally, The sweetest exercise of a Christian, is the improving of the
privilege in band, The making use daily of this mutual Relation, We are Gods
Inheritance, and God is our Portion. A soul truly religious, must give it self
up fully to be possessed and filled by God, to be replenished in mind, will,
affections, memory, conscience, and every faculty, with the whole fullness of
God, as an inhabitant, as a due, proper and only heritor: On the other part,
it will claim and lay hold by faith, on the power, the glory, the truth, the
mercy, and all that is in God, as its own peculiar portion, as the only
heritage which either in earth or heaven it desires to enjoy.

But being cut off by time from enlarging these things, I commend them and the
rest to your meditation, and the blessing of God.

FINIS.

