SATAN THE Leader in chief to all who resist THE REPARATION OF SION. As it was
cleared in a Sermon to the Honorable House of Commons at their late solemn
Fast, Febr. 28. 1643. By ROBERT BAYLIE, Minister at Glasgow.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.



Micah 6.9. and 7.8, 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of
wisdom shall see thy name, hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

London, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1643.

Die Mercurii 28. Febr. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Mr. Rous do
from this House give thanks unto Master Baylie, for the great pains he took in
the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty of this House, at St. Margarets
Westminster, It being the day of public Humiliation: And to desire him to
Print his Sermon. And he is to have the like privilege in Printing of it, as
others in like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint SAMUEL GELLIBRAND to Print this Sermon.

ROBERT BAYLIE.

For the Right Worshipful, his much honored friend, M. ROUS, One of the
Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Right Worshipful,
THese late times have produced many great and sensible changes in many, Time a
great changeling.
both matters and persons: I must acknowledge the power of time, that mighty
changeling, over my mind also. Some four years ago, it was my wish, and very
passionate desire, then publicly expressed, to have had that favor of your
honorable House, as once to speak in their audience: Ladens: Autocat Praef.
Notwithstanding, the other day, when, in their Honors Name, you did offer to
me that singular courtesy, how unwilling I was to entertain it, my own heart
does know fully, and you in a part can bear witness. Verily, my former desires
to speak when I could not be heard, were no greater then my present to keep
silence, when I was required to speak.

As I would have been very glad in so honorable an Audience to have said
nothing, so when your entreaty, in so^ great a Name, had necessitated me to
speak something, I could have wished that what then was said, might have past
away without any farther notice: But being it was your desire that what then
was spoken should now go abroad, esteeming it unfit to dispute any of your
Commands, in this also you shall have me obedient.

Be pleased therefore to receive what you required of me, the Notes of that
poor Sermon, without any addition at all, and without any change considerable:
It is well if it find in the eyes of others when read, that patience and
respect which it had in your ears at the first hearing.

I know the matter it self is above any just contempt, The scope of the Sermon.
for it is not mine, but the Spirit of God's, speaking to the Churches: That of
it which belongs to me, the managing of these divine Truths, and their
Application to the auditor, I leave to the benign construction of every
Reader: entreating his belief, it was my sincere intention, with so great
simplicity and clearness as I was able, To speak a word in season to every
soul, To let out from the fountains of Scripture the streams of consolation on
the dry and parcht ground, To send down from the Lamps of the Word the Rays of
divine Light, for direction in these dark and misty days: By the terrors of
the Lord to persuade some, To smite with the rod, with the Sword of the Spirit,
the secure souls of our sleeping friends, to awaken them; and of our too
watchful enemies, to pull them with fear (but yet with all compassion) out of
the snare of Satan, wherein now they lie captive at his will.

The Text led me by the hand to that most seasonable Consideration, That in all
quarrels about the building or rebuilding of a Church, The chief parties in
the present quarrel are Christ and the Devil.
the chief and principal parties are Christ and the Devil; Men are but
inferior and subservient agents to these two Princes: It is most certain, That
side which is for Truth, for Piety, for Justice, must in the end triumph: For
it is utterly impossible, that the Dragon and all his Angels, though for a time
and a long time, they maintain the fight, should ever prevail over Michael the
Archangel and his followers.

These extraordinary Commotions, whereby not our Kingdom alone, but the most of
the neighboring Nations, are at this very hour so terribly shaken, we trust
they shall prove preparations for a glorious Work. At the building of a Royal
Palace, where much rubbish is to be removed by many hands, where timber,
stones, and other materials, are to be brought together, and set in the work
by a multitude of diverse Crafts-men, no marvel if in that place, for a time,
there be much noise and stir, much commotion, and some confusion also.

Doubtless, ere long, The end of the present troubles must be happy.
the Scene of this world must be closed, the Man of Sin must be beaten from the
Stage, which long he has possessed; The Rebellion must be removed from Jacob,
and the Iron sinew taken out of the neck of Israel: The fullness of the
Gentiles must be brought in with them, that both may mourn after Christ their
common Savior. The shaking of the Heavens and Earth are the Lords Prefaces and
Prologues, his antecedent Acts, which must be followed with such joyful
Conclusions. When we are most tossed with Tempests, when we are most likely to
be split upon the Rocks of desperate dangers, then would we cast up within the
Vail the holy Ankor of this hope, the strong Cable of this confident
expectation.

In the subsequent Discourse I glance at one Point which I wish were well
weighed by all who truly mind the prosperity of the Work in hand: The
longsome Anatchy of this Church is lamentable.
Durst I have taken the boldness of prefacing to the whole House, as indeed I
was loath to presume it, having already by the length of my Sermon, taken from
them so much of their precious time, it would have been all, or at least my
main purpose, to have proposed to their Honors, and pressed that one
Consideration, which now, forsooth, is become so trivial and common in the
mouth of every one, that it seems to be rare in the heart, and real sense of
many; I mean these extraordinary and unexpected delays of setting up the
Government of God in his House.

The ordering of the State and Kingdom, The first care of the State ought to be
the settling of the Church.
how necessary soever, ought not to precede the settling of the Church; In this,
the interest of God, in that, the interest of man is chiefest: If any could be
so impious as to avow their postponing of God to the world, yet they would do
well to be so wise as not to mar their own ends, by the mis-order of their
proceedings. Except the Lord build the house of a Kingdom, the industry of the
wisest men is for little purpose: And how shall the Lord concur with men in
building their state, when men are so careless of his Honor and Service, as
not to build his Church? Nehemiah laid not a stone in the wall of the City,
until Zerubbabel had set the Cap-stone on the wall of the Temple.

It cannot without injury be denied, that the endeavors of this noble Senate,
for the House of God, have been greater then any Parliaments we ever read of in
this Land: That notwithstanding their excessive Labors, the Work is not yet
near an end, it must be imputed to all others, rather then to them.

That most Reverend, Learned, and Pious Assembly of Divines, on whose shoulders
the task of Religion is principally devolved, cannot in any Justice be charged
with neglect of duty herein: They have so many, and so notable witnesses of
their daily indefatigable Labors, that no honest mouth will be bold to fasten
the least slander of this fault upon them.

How then comes it to pass, that the Wheels of the Lords Chariot should move
with so slow a pace? This is it which all the godly far and near, do
vehemently desire to be taken in the most serious thoughts of every Religious
Member of either House. It passes, I confess mine and every common
understanding, to hit upon the true and full Cause, and the solid remedy of
this great Evil, whereof the world does see and proclaim, the sad and sensible
effects.

By this wearisome procrastination to erect the Discipline of God, The bitter
fruits of that Anarchy.
that so the Laws of the Gospel might be really execute; it comes to pass,
that millions of men and women, live as they list, in Blasphemy and
Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness, Strife and Envy, Ignorance and
Impiety, without the control of any spiritual correction.

Beside these open vices, which like a flood without the opposition of any
Bulwark, carry down to hell such a multitude of souls; there is another more
subtle device of Satan whereby daily many thousands are destroyed: Heresies,
and Schisms, under the color of Truth, and more then ordinary devotion, eat
like a Gangreen, and Canker, run like a Pest, from City to City, to the
over-spreading of the whole Land, without all possibility of remedy, so long
as Christ's Discipline is holden out at doors.

How can it be, but the loss of so many thousands, so many millions of poor
souls, which profaneness and error, daily does destroy, should not cry to
Heaven for judgment against them, be who they will, who for what respect
soever, are retarders, or but faint promovers of the Lords Ordinance, the only
spiritual, the only proper remedy of all these heavy evils?

There be some who care for none of these things, the loss of souls, the
flourishing of Satan's Kingdom, the defiling of Christ's Crown in the dust,
touches not so much as the utmost skin of their carnal heart; Let such
worldlings bewar they feel not sooner then they expect, the civil
inconvenience, which to them alone is considerable of that matter whereof we
speak. For what I pray should hinder numbers of our people rooted in
profaneness upon occasion, if they were tempted, to desert the Cause of
Religion, and side with the enemy for our ruin: Can constancy be certainly
expected, where piety its only bottom cannot be found. Also what disturbance
may be wrought in the state by the multitudes of Heretical and Schismatic
people, habituated by long custom in their ways of error; It is no difficult
matter for wise men to prognosticate, who either from story or experience, are
acquaint with the ordinary course of humane affairs.

These and many other the like lamentable fruits of the too too long Anarchy of
this Church, are a matter of daily discourse to many, but of great sadness and
heavynesse of heart, to the children of God: A remedy of them none does expect,
out of Heaven, from any but the wisdom and zeal of this high Court.

To these who have no experience of the many strong invisible Impediments, Too
long consultation is very dangerous.
whereby the motion of all public good Works use to be retarded, it seems a
prodigy, that the reparation of this Church should stick so long in the way:
especially when they consider that no Protestant Church to this day, did ever
stay the half of the time in purging the whole Body of Religion, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and all, as this Land has already spent on some few points
of Discipline alone. It seems they were encompassed with as many, and great
difficulties in their action, as we are in ours: Consider when we will, Germany
or France, Scotland or Holland, we shall find the hands of their Reformers
were fewer and weaker, for all worldly strength, and their opposers, whether ye
speak of Princes or Clergy, or Nobles, or People, were more and more potent
then ours this day: However, we have little reason to pretend difficulties from
any of these quarters: by the mercy of God these two bygone years, neither
Prince, nor Papist, nor Prelate, nor any open Malignant have been able in the
least degree, to stop the wished Reformation: Such an imputation during the
named time, cannot be charged upon any of them: what ever may be said of their
will, yet the good hand of our God has circumscribed their power within so
narrow a line, that for any resistance of theirs, it was fully in our hands, to
have set up what ever Church-policie we had found meetest, in the most, and
best parts of the Kingdom.

I do verily think, if any Church in the World had taken our present course,
they should have found it exceeding hard, ever to have attained to their wished
end: If England, either in Edward or Elizabeth's days: If Scotland, either in
their first or second Reformation, had suspended over all their Kingdoms the
exercise of any Reformation, till every puntillo thereof had been
Scholastically debated, in the face of an Assembly; till every Dissenter, over
and over, had made to the full, against every part of every Proposition, all
the contradiction, his wit, his learning, his eloquence, was able to furnish
him: It seems apparent, that these tedious delays had casten them so open,
and given such pregnant advantages to the enterprises of their active
adversaries, as easily they had been surprised, and all their designs crushed
before they had ended half their consultations, or so much as begun their
practice; And who knows what all this prodigal expense, and spinning out of
precious and irrecoverable time, may produce.

Certainly, this method of proceeding, cannot bring us to any quick issue. If
these points of Government, of Worship, of Doctrine, which yet are before us,
be handled as these that are behind us, which in themselves are far less
considerable then many of the former: If every opponent must be heard upon
every point, to object, to reply, to double, to triple his exceptions (as I
know no reason why it must not be so, if we proceed in an equable pace, and our
motions to come, be of a length proportionable to these that are past.) This
course, I say, if constantly kept, cannot but hold us in hewing of our Stones
more then a week of years, before we can begin to lay so much as the Foundation
of our Building.

But I must hold, for unaware and unsensibly, my Pen has run beyond the bounds
of an Epistle: Your more then ordinary benignity did invite me to that
liberty; It is our comfort, when either, the mentioned, or any other
inconvenience begins to discourage us, that God has put in that supreme Court,
men of your Zeal, Wisdom, and Experience; by whose deep prudence and
industrious Action, what to us seems desperate, can quickly be remedied to the
full satisfaction of all, whose understanding, and affections permit them to be
capable of reason. Thus praying God to asist every man of your mind and
temper, that so this afflicted Church and State, may come in Gods due time to a
happy end of all the present troubles, I rest

Your Worships to be commanded, ROBERT BAILEY.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House OF COMMONS, At the public
FAST, Febr. 28. 1643.
ZECHARIAH 3. verse. 1, 2. And he showed me Joshua the high Priest, standing
before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist
him.

And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee: Is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire?


THe wise Preacher observes well that there is no new thing under the Sun, The
Intreduction. It is a matter of comfort that our present trouble is no new
thing. Eccles. 1.9.10.
that there is nothing whereof truly it can be said, it is altogether new: but
the most strange accidents of our days have been already of old time which was
before us. This wise observation was one of the Pillars whereupon Solomon
settled his spirit when it was much vexed with the sense of the extreme vanity,
and unutterable labor, which he had felt and seen under the Sun even in his
days, which were more then ordinarily prosperous. This consideration will be
very proper for these people or persons, who after a long prosperity are
afflicted with a sudden and unexpected calamity: while their spirit is new and
unacquainted with such a variation, it is filled with grief, with fear and
amazement; but when they find that no other thing has befallen then what often
before has been, and often afterward will fall out; in place of these
griefs, fears amazements, patience, contentment and hope, (much better
guests) begin to possess the soul.

Doubtless to our first Parents the darkness of the first night was somewhat
strange, Persons who had never seen any thing but the light of the day, when
the shadows of the night first did incompasse them, could not be without some
apprehension: yet when at the back of a number of nights they had seen the day
spring of the morning light constantly to arise; the darkness of the blackest
nights was past over without fear, and in so great security, as the light of
the fairest days. To men who have always lived upon land, when first they set
to sea, the winds, waves, and storms, are exceeding terrible; but when they
are a little beaten with the experience of tempests, their fears do change
into resolution and courage. It is of no small use to remember that those
things which vex most our spirit, are not new, but have already been in times
before our days.

Unto this ground of courage against the vanities and vexations of this life,
Also that it is the work of God. Eccles. 3.14, 15.
the Preacher adds another much more strong. Whatsoever God does it shall be
for ever, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it; for God does
it that men should fear before him, and God requires that which is past. All
these things which now are, which have already been, and again shall be
hereafter, are not only managed and guided by the good hand of our God but
also are so acted by him, that creatures can neither add unto, nor diminish
from these works of justice and mercy which the Almighty arm of the most High
does daily work on the earth for this end, that men may acknowledge and fear,
may love and trust in his holy Name.

The children of God in this land on whom the present war has brought very
heavy affliction, Who often of old has brought the like evils to a happy end.
and who yet are afraid for sadder consequents, cannot but be encouraged, if
they believe that all these fearful accidents are wrought by the hand of
their gracious Father in his deep wisdom and great justice. That as the
counsels of the best men have not diminished any of them, so the plots of the
most malicious have added nothing to the measure which his hand has mete out.
Neither hereafter by all the activity of our enemies, men or devils, shall any
more trouble be brought upon us, then that which the Lord our God by his own
hand shall bring on.

Also that no other miseries shall ever befall us then such as in former times
God has brought about to very happy ends and blessed conclusions: for God now
does require nothing but what is past, the acts of his providence in our days
are but repetitions of his ancient proceedings. Were the Lord now to begin to
guide the world, we might seem to have reason of fear for the issue of many
difficult passages. When a hard piece of work is put in the hand of an
Apprentice for the first assay of his skill, the beholders are justly afraid
for a miscarriage in his young and unexperienced hand; but when the worker is
an old master of Craft, none are afraid but his cunning hand can act again what
so often it has wrought to the contentment of all the beholders. Were our God a
Novice in the great art of governing the world, and of the Church in the bosom
thereof; had he to this day never given any proof of his infinite wisdom,
power, and goodness, in turning about the most terrible accidents to the
welfare and joy of his Saints; we might indeed be amazed when ever we feel our
selves sinking in the dangers wherein the practices of our Enemies often do
plunge us over head and ears: But the Lord having given in times past so many
documents of his uncontroverted skill and most certain will to bring about all
humane affairs, as to his own glory, so to the real good of all that love
him, it would be in us an impious and unexcusable uncharitableness to suspect
the end of any work which he has begun, much less of this great Reformation
now in hand, whose foundation God has laid, whose walls he has so far
advanced, whose gracious and beautiful Capstone in his time must be set on,
maugre all opposition.

These two considerations are very fit to under-prop a weak mind in its
fainting under the weight of griefs and fears, Forgetfulness of what has
been, is the chief cause of disquietnesse. Eccles. 1.11.
but behold a third, which if not removed makes both the former without all use
and fruit. There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any
remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.
However it be most true that all our present troubles of Church and State, be
no other but the selfsame which in former times have befallen the people of
God, and which often the hand of God has wrought to a happy conclusion: yet our
forgetfulness, our ignorance and inconsideration makes all these accidents,
and Gods providence about them to be in vain and fruitless unto us, as if
never such matters had been.

For the remedy of this great evil, The remedy hereof.
the maine cause of many minds perturbation and disquietnesse this day, to
help us to know and remember what has been of old, our merciful Father
beside other very profitable histories in humane writs, has made for us a
perfect Register in his holy Scripture of the ancient passages of his
providence, wherein as in a glass we may behold the clear Image of our days,
and by a judicious comparing of what we read, with what we feel, by a wise
paralelling of times with times, we may attain to such patience and comfort in
our worst days, as will support us with hope and confidence of a glorious
deliverance from all our present affliction.

For this end it is that we have read in your honorable audience this portion
of the Prophet Zachariah: Israel in the days of Zachariah is a pattern of our
present condition.
for as in the whole prophecy, so especially in this third Chapter he sets
down a Register of the estate of old Israel in his days, so like to our times
that we may justly take the one for a type, a pattern, a lively image of the
other. The people of God after a long captivity in Babel, after many years
oppression both in Religion and civil liberties, at last by the hand of God
were delivered: Their Babylonish tyrants, too strong for their weak hands to
deal with, in a sudden were overthrown by the hand of God, so that
afterward these oppressors were never able to stand: The poor captives
returned freemen in great joy to Jerusalem, with full hope to set up quickly
both their Temple and City, to restore without any impediment both their
Church and State to the ancient glory: But incontinently they were troubled
with so many enemies both at home and abroad, that they gave over the work
begun, and for too long a time fainted in a pitiful despair to get either
their Temple or City rebuilded: so great were their crosses and insuperable
their difficulties in their intended and joyfully begun reparation of that
ruined Church and Kingdom; notwithstanding when all hands were hanging down
and all knees were feeble, when a hopeless fainting had stupefied and taken
away the wonted care of the public, from the hearts both of their Princes,
Priests and people, the Lord in mercy wakened them by the ministry of two new
Prophets, Haggai and Zachariah, whereby he put again in all their spirits so
vigorous a life, that they set upon the work with such a magnanimous and
zealous resolution as nothing could withstand them to the very end and
perfection of their endeavors, they never rested till both the Temple and wall
of the City were fully accomplished.

The vision set down in this chapter, The division of the chapter and the
matter of the first part thereof.
was one of these heavenly messages whereby that undaunted courage was inspired
in the breasts of that otherwise languishing and discouraged people; you may
divide it in three parts: In the first you have the great impediments of all
their designs for the reparation of their Church and State.

the removing of these impediments. In the third, the ground and cause of their
removeall.

The first two parts are intertext and woven in together from the beginning to
the eighth verse: the great impediments of all their endeavors were not men,
but spirits; were not foreign, but homebred enemies; not others, but
themselves: Satan stood at Joshua's right hand to resist him: Joshua was
clothed with foul garments, with his own manifold sins, and the sins of
the people, whom he represented before God: these sins were the fountain of all
the opposition they found from any man; many enemies there were to the Work of
God in the midst of Israel, many in the neighboring Countries many in the
Court of the King of Persia; but the Leader of all these was a malignant
spirit, a powerful Devil, so malapert and impudent as to oppose Joshua before
the face of Christ himself. Yet neither men nor devils were their principal
enemies; the great sins that notwithstanding all their troubles the people
still did commit, were the strength of the Devil, whereby he stopped most the
progress of the great and gracious work in their hand.

As for the second part, Of the second
the removal of all the named obstructions, this was in the favor of God,
first in rebuking the Devil that was unsatiable in malice; who not content
with all the fire of tribulation wherein that poor Church and Kingdom was
already made like a Charcoale, a Brand, a Burnt stick taken out of the fire,
did farther assay to burn them to ashes, and without pity went about to
destroy them all utterly. 2. That strong hold of Satan, the sins of the
Priests and People is broken down; the mercy of the Lord freely pardons all
their transgressions. Neither this only, but a third blessing is granted, the
graces of the Spirit are poured out upon them for Sanctification; The foul
garments are pulled off, and change of new glorious garments is put on. In the
fourth place, a gracious Covenant is made with Joshua for two things, 1. His
continuance in service before God in the temple while he lived, next for a
place when he died among the Angels who stand in heaven before the throne of
God.

In this is the great comfort of the repairers of Sion, of all the sincere
friends of Jerusalem, That albeit for a time they have strong and dangerous
wrastlings with men and Devils, they be often vexed with the guilt of bygone
transgressions, with the strength of present corruptions, with the fear of
future mis-accidents in life, in death: yet at last in all these they become
more then Conquerours, the Devil by the mouth of Christ is chased away from
further molesting them, the spots of sin are washed off, as if they never had
been on, the strength of corruption is abated, they are clothed and made
Beautiful with the graces of the Spirit, they are assured of perseverance and
Gods acceptance of continual service at their hand; they have the Lords
Protestation that after all their labors for his honor, the welfare of his
Church and their mother country, they shall be translated to an Evangelick
felicity, to stand before the celestial throne, enjoying the face of God and
all the fullness of joy thence flowing: when others, the opposits of the work
of God, the retarders of the building of the Temple and City, shall be rebuked
with Satan their leader, and cast with him into that utter darkness where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The true procurer of all these favors was Christ the Messiah to come, Of the
third.
spoken of in the third part from the eight verse to the end.

Joshua and his companions were wondered at as mad fools, The builders of Sion
are wonders.
who would venture their peaceable and quiet estate in Babel with the hazard of
a long and dangerous voyage to the desolate Land of Judea, and when they came
there would not rest in ease, but without fear of provoking the great King of
Persia, without regard of plottings within by false friends, of open arms
without by professed foes, not considering their own weakness nor the
greatness of the interprize of building a temple, of fortifying a City, went
on with courage: this by some was derided, by others wondered at: Psalm. 96.7.
Psalm. 124, 8.
yet themselves understood very well what they were doing, The Lord of hosts
was with them, their help was in the name of the Lord.

Michael their Prince was a mediator for them at the throne of God, though yet
he was not borne, Christ the branch.
yet in his divine nature he did execute the office of an intercessor for them
with the Father, and the time did draw near when he was to be brought forth as
a branch: then he did lurk and lie hid within the veil of heaven as a root
under the ground, yea the stock of Iesse whence he was to take flesh, was a
withered tree in a dry Land: yet he was to spring out of it as a branch which
from a small twigg was to become a great boulke, wherein all the plants of God
behoved to be graffed, that by his fatness they might flourish in the Courts
of the Lord and bring forth their fruit in due season. Also he is the carved
stone full of eyes.


This branch was that stone which Joshua did lay in the foundation of the
second temple: for Christ is the rock whereupon the Church is builded so firmly
that the Ports of hell may well assault, but shall not prevail against it; he
is a stone with seven eyes, not a dead, blind stone, but living and seeing,
filled with the Spirit of providence, able to foresee with a multitude, with a
great and perfect number of eyes, all the dangers which can befall that House,
and every living stone therein which is builded upon him; he is a carved and
engraven stone polished and adorned by the hand of the Father with all the
perfection of divine beauty: in which the carvings of his flesh by the wounds
of his cross, the agonies of his Spirit, From his ingraving comes our pardon
and peace.
wherewith it pleased the Father to bruise him, are not of the least
consideration; for from these chiefly flow the two great blessings, Pardon and
Peace, wherewith the Chapter is closed. The Father for the sake of the passion
of Christ put away the sins of the Land, Revel. 13.8. Hebr. 10.4. Hebr. 10.4.
and that in on day: for the sacrifice of the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world was of another nature from these under the Law; these though
continually offered, could never make the comers thereto perfect, but he by
one offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Hence flows a
full and perfect peace, they who had been long vexed with a cruel and bloody
war, by the Prince of peace are reconciled with God, for their sins in one
day being removed by that one sacrifice, Phil. 4.7.
the wrath of the Father was satisfied: Peace with God brings inward peace of
conscience that passes understanding; Prove. 16.7.
and also peace with men so much as the Lord finds expedient, when a man's
ways pleases the Lord he makes his very enemies to be at peace with him:
Esaias 1.11.6.
The branch that sprang from the stem of Jesse makes the wolf and the Lamb to
dwell together, the Leopard to lie down in peace with the kid, the lion to eat
straw with the ox, the sucking child to play on the hole of the Aspe, the
weaned child to lay his hand safely on the cockatrice den: and these men who
have been spoiled of all, and banished from their habitations, to return to
their homes, and quickly so to prosper there, that they can call their
neighbors, as of old, to feast and be glad with them under their Vine and
Fig Tree, without the fear of any enemy, being safe and secure under the
shadow of the Branch, the Prince of peace.

So the Vision of this Chapter, which began with great trouble and danger, ends
with as great peace and joy. Satan in the entry, with the assistance of sin,
vexing the Church with all the opposition his strength and craft was able to
make: Christ in the end by his passion and spirit defeating Satan and sin,
closes the Churches warfare with a happy peace. All these things will be
grounds to intelligent minds of many sweet meditations in these times of
perplexity; but leaving the rest, we will stand on the two first verses.

In the first whereof we have the great impediment of Sions reparation; In the
second, The division of the Text.
the powerful removal of that impediment. The former, for memory and order,
may be divided into three; First, the information of it, he showed unto me:
This strong opposition which Satan made to the work was secret, till God by his
Angel opened the eyes of the Prophet Zachariah to behold it. Secondly, its
time; when Joshua was standing before the Angel of the Lord. Thirdly, its
matter; Satan stood on his right hand to resist him. Consider these three in
order: their sense, the Doctrines arising from them, and the Uses of these
Doctrines.

In the first, three things must be understood: The Informer; The exposition of
the first part.
The way of his Information; And the person informed. This he who informs, by
the most ancient Greek and Latin Interpreters is expressed by the Lord, Who is
this informing Angel.
but our Translators adhere to the Original, and justly omit that addition to
the Hebrew Text; for by adding to the words, they diminish from the sense.
Doubtless the Lord was the giver of all these visions to the Prophet, but
beside the operation of God, the ministry of Angels is here employed: The
Angels are ministering spirits to the Church and all the Saints, as for many
good uses, so for this in special, to reveal and declare the will of God to
his servants the Prophets. That in this place not the Lord only, but also his
Angel, is understood, appears by the beginning of the next Chapter, The Angel
that talked with me, and awaked me, came again; so in this preceding
Revelation he had been with the Prophet, and showed him the Vision.

Consider further, from the first Chapter verse 9. that Zachariah had to do
with three kinds (so to speak) of Angels; one particularly deputed to him for
his information, designed often by this phrase, The Angel that talked with me; A
second, called, a man sitting on a red horse in the bottom of the valley among
the Myrtle-trees; A third, called, horsemen on red, white, and speckled horses,
coming and going as the second Angel employed them in his errands: Our words
must be understood of the first, for the second was Christ, the Angel before
whom Joshua here stands, who in the first Chapter, when there is none to help
the Church, is mounted on the back of his red fiery horse, though he appear
not, but lie in ambush in the bottom among the trees, ready in his season to
make eruption with his Army of the third Angels, to fight against the wicked
oppressors of his poor people.

The next word imports the way of information, How does a sleeping man see.
He showed unto me; In the Original, He made me see: It was in the night, as
is clear from the first Chapter verse 8. I saw by night, and behold: The eyes
of his body were closed, but his imagination was open, so the Angel spoke in
him, as it is in the Original, not to him, in audible sounds to his ear: The
Angel framed the species (as they are called) of these things, which are the
objects of hearing or seeing, or any outward sense within the Prophets
imagination. This was an ordinary way how God of old did communicate himself
to the Prophets, by dreamet and visions, Numbers 6.12. sometimes immediately by
himself alone; sometimes also by the ministry of Angels; by this means a
blind man, a sleeping man, Genesis 15.12, 17
may see: So Abraham, though in a deep sleep, is said to see and hear; Acts 10
11. Acts 9.12.
Peter in a trance saw the sheet full of beasts; Paul, though blind, did see
Ananias. Though God alone who searches the heart and the reins, has power to
work immediately on the understanding, yet Angels, both good and evil, when
God either permits or directs them, have power to work immediately on the
inward senses both of men and beasts, as well sleeping as waking, and to print
upon their fancy all these objects, which use to be transmitted from any of
the outward senses.

As for the third word, the person informed [Me,] What Zachary is this.
it is the Prophet Zachary. There be many Zacharies in Scripture, and which is
considerable, there be two who are called the sons of Barachiah; the one of
whom Christ says, Mat. 23.39.
that he was slain between the Porch and the Altar, the son of Jehojada the
high Priest, called also Johanan and Barachiah: Another Zachary the son of
Barachiah is our Prophet, styled a young man, the grand child of Iddo; that he
was not slain betwixt the Porch and the Altar, many reasons do prove, which
for shortness I omit: This is he who by another name is called, Matthew. 27.12.
Jeremy the Prophet; except you will read that place of Matthew, with the
Syriack Translatour, without the word Jeremy, for it is hard to admit the
corruption of the Original Text, by the negligence of the Transcribers,
mistaking the contracted word (...) for (...), as some will have it; and it is
harder, with Origin and Jerome, to admit any apocrypha parts of the Prophet
Jeremy, now not extant; and hardest of all, with Augustine, to grant a
mnemonick error, a slip of memory in the holy Evangelist.

From these words thus exponed I draw but one doctrine, That God discovers and
makes open to the eye, The doctrine. The most secret plots against the Church
will be discovered.
the most secret plots against his work, and his servants about it: As here,
what the devil himself is acting in greatest privacie against Joshua, is made
open. Wicked men have many deep conspiracies against God and his people; Satan
joins his craft to their counsels, when the deeps of Satan are joined to the
depths of crafty men, whose heart of it self is very profound, the plot is
dug as deep as hell; the plotters become secure, and are not feared for any
discovery; they say in their heart, Who sees us? yet the Lord sees, and brings
all to light for their shame: Isa. 29.13. The wisdom of their wise men shall
perish: Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and
their works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us? Surely your turning
of things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay. The wise men of
this world, by their hid and deep policies, are confident to deceive their
simple neighbors, by the greatness of their wit to turn all business up or
down at their pleasure; but the Lord by his light discovers their deepest and
darkest Mines, by his power he breaks in pieces as a Potters vessel their
subtilest devices: Dan. 2.22. he reveals deep and secret things, he knows
what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him: Proverbs 15.11. Hell
and destruction are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the children
of men? Job 12.22. He discovers deep things out of darkness, and brings
out to light the shadow of death.

In the Scripturall proof you see a clear reason of the point, The first
Reason
the judgment of God upon the profound Politicians of this world, who by their
wit, assisted with Satan's cunning, assay to dig their projects so deeply
under the ground, as the shallow wits of other weak men cannot reach them; but
behold the plague of God upon their projects, his light shines in their
darkness, he draws up their designs, though as deep as hell; he brings out all
their devices, and lays them before the eyes of the Sun, for the contrivers
utter disgrace.

Another reason is, The second Reason.
the goodness of God to his people: the hellish plots of the wicked are to
blow them up on a sudden, Psalm 64. They commune to lay snares privily, they
say, Who shall see us? their thoughts are very deep, that they may shoot
suddenly at the upright in heart. The Lord marks all this wickedness, for he
is the watchman of Israel who never slumbers: his silly sheep would soon be
catched, but his all-seeing eye, to which every creature is naked, is always
employed for their custody: The seven eyes of the Lord run through the earth to
search all the counsels taken against the Church, his eyes pierce the thoughts
and reins of the craftiest foxes, Psalm. 139. 2, 9.
not a word in any man's tongue but he knows it altogether, and their thoughts
afar off: he found means to discover to David, 2 Samuel 17.16.
and to turn into mere folly the counsel of Achitophel, once wise as an
Angel, though after wickedly crafty as a Devil: all the devices of Syria were
made open to the King of Israel, 2 King. 6.12.
no word could be spoken in the bedchamber of the King of Syria, but Elisha
could tell it in Samaria.

The Use of this Doctrine is, first, The first Use,
for thankful acknowledgment: Who has discovered to us the manifold most
mischievous designs of the enemy, these most secret and deeply contrived
counsels, for the overthrow of our Religion, the destruction of our
Parliaments, the inslaving of our persons and posterity? who has brought out
these works before the eyes of the world? None but that God; who here by his
Angel does demonstrate to the eyes of his Prophet, the most secret practices of
the Devil himself against Jerusalem. A catalogue of these discovered plots
would be printed on the Table of our hearts, for the continual praise of the
merciful discoverer.

A second use is for faithful dependence: The second.
we know not what our adversaries this very hour are working under ground: this
we know, that they are restless in their contrivings, like the Sea whose motion
is perpetual, not as the heavens for carrying about of light unto the world,
but for defiling of the earth by casting up always upon it new dirt and tangle:
like Satan their leader who cannot fit still, but goes ever to and fro on the
earth, seeking whom he may devour, beginning ever some new plot where an old
one ends. It is good for us to have our recourse by faith to him, to have our
dependence upon him who is acquainted with all their consultations: when they
dig much deeper then we can reach them, were it to the very hell, our God is
there to see and hear all that is amongst them: we would still be praying that
he would bring out their works of darkness, that by him we may be saved from
their snares, and carried by their pits, that by his providence we may always
escape the nets of these fowlers.

A third use is for advertisement of all, The third.
to be very wary of secret contrivances against that cause which they have
sworn to maintain: let all remember that the seven eyes of the Lord are ever
upon them in the darkest of all their ways; they speak not the word, they
write not the letter in their most secret chambers, which the Lord cannot bring
abroad to the ears of the whole Isle for their perpetual shame: the miscariage
of others should be thy instruction; will thou go on in a way of thine own for
the hurt of those who are engaged against the enemies of Religion and justice?
will thou also correspond in a blind and secret way to undermine upon never so
fair pretexts this poor distressed State? God shall find thee out, and as
many already have made themselves infamous, thy shame likewise shall be
proclaimed to this and after ages, so much the greater as the evident
judgments of God upon many, have not diverted thee from running on to thy own
ruin. Some like Balaam though an Angel from heaven would discharge them from
joining with Moab against Israel, yet upon the deceiving hopes of wealth and
preferment will go on though they should lose in the end both their life and
salvation.

The last use is for wise diligence to have that abolished, The fourth.
which yet in Gods mercy is covered from the eyes of the world: not to speak
of public miscariages against the Church or State, whereof possibly some, of
whom there is no suspicion, may be as guilty as others who publicly are
crucified with deserved infamy: But to hold upon personal faults, thou know
not how soon the Lord may bring forth not only to the light of his own
countenance, but to the eyes of the world thy secret wickedness. This is a day
wherein thou may get a cloak to cover thy nakedness, that thy shame may
never be seen: judge thy self and thou shall not be judged; confess with
hearty sorrow, and the Lord shall be just to forgive; lay hold on that
sacrifice whose blood washes away the spots of sin; hunger and thirst for
that grace and Spirit of Christ, that mortifieth corruptions: lest if after
this days repentance, sin reign in thee, seven worse spirits enter into
thee, and the Lord bring forth not only before this world but which is much
worse before man and angels in the great congregation for thy everlasting
shame, all the works of these devils in thee which now lie hid to the eyes of
men.

So much for the first part, the information and discovery: The exposition of
the second part.
the matter discovered follows, and first the time or action wherein Joshua
was employed when Satan did resist him, he was standing before the Angel of the
Lord: for the exposition of these words consider, first, who was this Joshua
the high Priest; secondly, who this Angel; thirdly, what this standing. For the
first, Joshua the high Priest.
this man was Joshua or Jesus the son of Iosedeck the high Priest, who returned
with the captives from Babel, who set up the altar upon the bases before the
Temple was builded, who did join with Zerubbabel the Prince and supreme
Magistrate of the Jews in founding and perfecting the temple: these two were
the two olive trees, which did contribute the golden oil of all the gifts which
God bestowed on them, in advancing the work of the Lord about the State and
Church of Israel. Sundry of the Ancients will have this Jesus to be Christ our
Savior, but this is a conceit so unconsistent with scripture and many reasons
that it needs no confutation.

This Joshua was a Priest, for before the death of Christ the special
employment of Gods ministers was to offer up those sacrifices, which were types
and figures of that great oblation of the Lamb of God in a true propitiatory:
But when the body came the shadows removed; whosoever would have the Ministers
of the Christian Church to be truly Priests, would by that means bring back
the pedagogie of Moses, would set up the Antichristian sacrifice of the Mass,
denying in deed as the Apostle often reasons, that Christ is yet come, or has
offered a sufficient sacrifice for our redemption. Joshua was the high Priest,
Christ is the Lord of his own house, to order it every day according to his
pleasure: in the new Testament he has appointed all his Ministers to be
brethren and equal, none to be high or a Prince above these of his order: but
in the old Testament the policy is diverse, for there by the express command
of God twenty four Princes the heads of the families of Aaron are set over the
rest of the Priests to rule and govern them, and over them all one great and
high Priest the chief of the house of Aaron was a type of Christ.

This Angel of the Lord is Christ the Son of God, How Christ an Angel.
the Patron of the Church against Satan, he who in the first chapter sends out
a number of Angels as his servants, Michael the Prince who stands for the
children of Israel, that Prince of Angels, Dan. 10.21. Revel. 12.7. Inde 9.
who with his Angels fights against the Dragon and his Angels, styled by Jude
the Archangel. Christ is called an angel, not for his nature, for he took not
upon him the nature of Angels, Hebr. 2.16.
but the seed of Abraham: but for his office; the Father sent him as a
messenger to be a mediator of the new Covenant, Mala. 3.1. The Lord whom ye
seek shall suddenly come into his temple, even the Angel of the Covenant, Exodus
33.14. Exodus 23.21.
called by Moses the Angel of the Lords presence, the face of God the Angel in
whom Gods name did dwell: he it was who wrestled with Jacob, who dwelt in the
Bush, he that appeared to Joshua with a drawn sword; this great Angel is the
Creator of all the Angels, and he in whom they have their subsistence, Col.
1.16. he is the Prince and head of the Angels, even as Mediator: not for
redeeming them from any sin, which they never had but for confirming them in
grace, which they might have lost as their companions did, who left their first
habitation: for to confirm them in their created happiness, he has put them
in that body whereof he is head, and set them in one society with the Saints,
making them fellow-citizens of the same Jerusalem with faithful men; Heb.
12.22.
for we come to the company of innumerable angels, and to the spirits of
righteous men made perfect. This Angel in the first Chapter, appears as a man
riding upon a horse, and often times elsewhere in a humane shape, Prove. 8.31.
for his delight was always with the children of men. And for his more
familiar conversing with men often he put on the likeness of that nature,
which in the fullness of time he was to take on, never more to be laid down:
the body wherein he appeared before the Incarnation, sometimes was real,
created for the performance of such an humane action, and annihilate at that
actions end; sometimes only apparent, as here where all is but a vision in the
night time, which yet does nothing hinder the truth of the prophecy.

Joshua his standing was the gesture of his worship and prayer. What is the
standing before the Angel.
The Priests and Levites when they offered their sacrifices at the Altar, or
prayed publicly for the people, commonly they stood, Deuteronomy. 18.5. The Lord has
chosen the Priest to stand to minister before the Lord, Psalm. 135.2. Ye that
stand in the house of the Lord, Nehem. 9.2. They stood and confessed their
sins, and 5. verse, Stand up and bless the Lord. Hence Elijah 1 Kings 17.1.
and others elsewhere who did most frequently worship the Lord, use this phrase,
The Lord before whom I stand. We take then this standing of Joshua, for the
gesture of his worship, prayer and sacrifice for himself and the people in
these times of desolation. Some take it of his standing, as a Criminal before
the Tribunal of God, where Satan did accuse him of his sins; this is not
incongruous, though it be needful to take it first of his worship, for that
was his end to approach unto God, and being in this action, Satan comes on him
to oppose and accuse.

At this time the Temple was not built, the Altar of Incense was not erected,
the Ark of God before which the high Priest wont to stand, was no more to be
found, yet Joshua had set up the Altar of burnt offerings before it he might
stand, as also in all other his public or private devotions.

His standing before the Angel was not Idolatry, for this Angel was Michael,
One like God, ever equal to the Father, the Angel of Gods face and presence;
the object of adoration, as well as the Father and Holy Ghost: this is the
Angel of whom it is said, Hebr. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him.

From this Portion thus exponed we observe for Doctrine, The first doctrine, In
time of public calamities, the children of God are in a praying posture.
First, the posture of Gods children in the time of public dangers and
miseries: they stand before the Lord, supplicating for Sions welfare, as Joshua
does in this place: The Temple was lying desolate, Jerusalem was an heap of
rubbish, their fair hopes of Reformation were blasted, the Enemies of their
Church and State were so potent with the great King, that by all worldly
appearance, they could never be able to wrestle through their present miseries.
In this case good Joshua will not despair, he betakes himself to his God, and
stands before him, praying and waiting from his omnipotent hand for help and
assistance to carry on, against the opposition of men and devils, that work
which at Gods direction they had begun, but incontinent had found to exceed by
much their strength to perfect.

For this duty there are many reasons; The first reason.
first, it has always bin the practice of the Saints, Daniel Chap. 9 for the
desolations of Sion lies in sackcloth and ashes, crying in the 16.17. verses, O
Lord, I beseech thee that thy anger and fury may be turned away from this City
Jerusalem, and cause thy face to shine on thy Sanctuary that is desolate for
the Lords sake. Ezekiel. 9.8. While they were slaying them and I was left, I fell
on my face and cried, Ah Lord God, will thou destroy all the residue of Israel
in thy pouring out of thy fury on Jerusalem? Ier. 18.20. Remember I stood
before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them.
David in the midst of his private agonies, Psalm. 51. forgets not the public?
Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, Expd. 32.11. Exodus 17.11.
build up the walls of Jerusalem. Mosos lies at the feet of God and wrastles by
prayer to divert wrath from the Camp of Israel, he holds up his hands on the
mount unto God for the people when they were in fight with Amalek, Isa. 62.1.
For Sions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake, I will not
rest, till the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns. When Sion is under a cloud of
trouble, when the darkness of affliction over-shadowes Jerusalem, the godly
cannot rest, they cannot keep silence, but importune their God for the light of
a glorious deliverance.

A second reason, The second reason.
this Practice of the Saints is according to the will of God, Ezekiel. 22.30. I
sought for a man that should make up the hedge and stand in the gap before me
for the land, that I should not destroy it, Isa. 62.6. I have set watchmen on
thy walls O Jerusalem, who shall never hold their peace day nor night, ye that
make mention of the Lord, keep not silence and give him no rest till he
establish and make Jerusalem a praise on the eath.

A third reason, The third reason.
this duty has the promise of a blessing both public and private. Unto the
Elders and Priests while they are assembled, Joel 2. For fasting and prayer is
laid out not only the goodness of God in general that he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness repenting him of the evil; but
particularly in the 18 they are assured he will hear their prayer, and answer
it, he will have pity upon the afflictions of his people, and be zealous for
their deliverance.

Besides the public benefit, the careful practice of this duty procures much
private good: When the salvation of Jerusalem breaks forth as a Lamp, every
Inhabitant shall not be partaker of her joy. Sundry shall see it and not taste
of it, as that Prince of Samaria: 2 Kings 7.2.
when it shall be well with the Church, it may be ill with them. As ravenous
beasts and thieves after their roving up and down in the darkness of the
night at their pleasure, when the morning light does arise, they take them to
their dens and caves wherein often they are hunted to their death. However these
who now stand mourning for Sion, shall rejoice in her joys when they come,
they shall eat the fruit of their present labors, the tears they now sow in
sorrow, shall then be reaped in joy. See an excellent promise of this, Isa.
66.10. Rejoice for joy with Jerusalem, all ye that mourn for her, that ye may
suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may milk
out and be delighted with the abundance of her glory: Ye shall be comforted in
Jerusalem, and when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall
flourish like an herb.

Sometimes it pleases not God to relent his anger toward the public, yet it
goes well in private with the practisers of this duty: the mourners for
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 9. are marked by the Angel and saved in the day of
destruction. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Noah and Lot who vexed their righteous souls for what they heard and saw among
their wicked neighbors, get themselves and their families preserved in the day
of vengeance: Lamenting Jeremiah, Ezekiel. 14.14.
and for his cause his servant Baruch, and friend Ebedmelech are well entreated
by the hand of the most cruel Enemy; yea, when the wrath of God is greatest,
when Noah, Job, and Daniel are not able to save either son or daughter, yet
they shall deliver themselves and have their own soul for a prey.

Another Reason, The fourth. Ezekiel. 10.18.
the neglect of this duty is a dangerous provocation: When the glory of God
goes from the Cherub to the threshold of the Temple, and from thence to the
midst of the City, Hos. 5.15.
and from thence to the mountain, when the Lord goes to his place that he may
be sought after early, and in his going makes frequent stands, looking back if
any will sollow and lay hold upon him that he may return; if so be that none
take notice or care of his removal, it much increases his anger: This is one
of the complaints of Isaiah, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls on thy name,
that stirs up himself to lay hold on thee: This is made a great cause of
the public calamity, Ezekiel. 42. I sought for a man to stand in the gap for the
land, but I found none, therefore have I powered out my indignation upon them, I
have consumed them with the sire of my wrath: and however God should be good to
the public, yet it shall not go well with the private contemners of this
duty, be they more or fewer, be they high or low. Public men, whose peculiar
duty is to meet the Lord, and stand in the gap, when they see the floods of his
wrath coming down to overwhelme the people of their charge, if they run away
like foxes to their holes, being careful for nothing but to provide for their
own heads, woe and vengeance from God is denounced against them, Ezekiel. 13.4. O
Israel, thy Prophets are like the foxes in the desert, who have not gone up to
the hedge, neither made up the gaps for the house of Israel to stand in the
battle in the day of the Lord: Therefore in the third verse, Woe unto them,
and in the ninth, they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall
they be written in the writing of the house of Israel. What extreme woe is it
to be blotted out of the book of life, to be deleted out of the Catalogue of
the people of God. Neither only public men, but the meanest of the people are
plagued for the neglect of this duty, Isa. 22.12, In that day the Lord did call
to weeping and mourning, but behold joy and gladness, the slaying of oxen, the
killing of sheep, and drinking of wine; this iniquity shall not be purged from
you till you dye says the Lord.

The Use of this Doctrine is for your encouragement, The Use. For encouragement
to go on in the present exercise with diligence. Ier. 48.10. Ier. 14 17. Isa.
5.25.
to go on with all diligence in the present work of humble supplication: You
see God is well pleased with this labor, it has been the exercise of all the
Saints on the like occasion it is the Lords special command, he has annexed
to it most comfortable promises, and to the neglect of it very fearful
threats: only let the work be done with diligence and constancy; to do the
work of the Lord negligently procures a curse: wherefore this day when thou
stand before the Angel, in all the bent sail of thy spirit, offer to God
the sacrifice of thy contrite and broken heart; Let thine eyes run down with
tears night and day, for the great breach and grievous blow wherewith the
virgin daughter of thy people is already broken; that notwithstanding the
rivers of blood already shed, the anger of the Lord is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still; that as yet there is no appearance of any
cancelling of that Commission which the Lord has given to the sword, to bathe
it self in the blood of men, without number of all ranks and estates. These
judgments outward and visible, are the causes of great mourning; but the sins
of the land, that have drawn them from the hand of God, are more lamentable;
yet the greatest cause both of lamentation and sear, is that great impenitency
and contempt of repentance which appears in the most of men: Though the
Idolatries, the Adulteries, the Bloodshed, the Rapines, the Ignorance of God,
the profane contempt of the Gospel and many other crying crimes of this Land,
be evident to the eye of all; though the great wrath of God be revealed from
heaven, in his most heavy judgments upon the midst, and all the corners of
this poor country; yet too few do strike upon their thigh, Ier. 31.19.
to be grieved for what they have done; not to speak of the madness of our
enemies, whose heart is plagued with induration, their Court, their Clergy,
their misled people, running on in their wonted ways, as the horse to the
battle. If we will look upon our selves, we shall find that hardness of
heart, that carnal and stupid security, does lie upon the spirits of too many.
It were very good for the people of God to set before their minds the causes of
that heavy wrath, which long has lain upon these Dominions, especially to
search out the grounds of provocation which most nearly concern themselves, to
make a diligent enquiry of those sins which have bin committed within their
doors: with the Lamp of the Word, and the greater light of the Spirit, to go
through all the corners of thy own conscience, and what ever causes of wrath
thou find there, to lay them all out in an humble Confession, earnestly
supplicating for mercy in Christ's blood, for amendment by the power of the
sanctifying Spirit, deprecating wrath, and these fearful effects of it, which
this day are visible upon the estates, upon the bodies, upon the souls, of
many thousands of people.

This duty also would be performed with constancy and perseverance: And with
constancy.
thou must stand in this posture of Prayer, till that cloud be pierced and
dissolved, wherein God long has wrapped himself, Lam. 3.44. Lam. 3.49. Nebem.
7.3, 5. Psalm. 14.7. Lam. 2.18, 19.
that our Prayers should not pass through it; thine eye must trickle down and
not cease, without intermission, until the Lord look down and behold from
heaven. The mourning and separation of the fifth and seventh month must
continue all the years of Sions captivity; when the Lord brings it back, then,
and not before, can Jacob rejoice, and Israel be glad; when the Lord shall be
good to Sion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem, then may we sit down under
our Vine and Figgetree, to eat of the fat, and drink of the sweet: But till
then, tears should run down like a river day and night, we should give our
selves no rest, the apple of our eye should not cease; we should arise and cry
out in the night, in the beginning of the Watches our hearts should be powered
out like water before the face of the Lord, and our hands lifted up to him for
the life of our children, our Husbands, our Fathers, our Brethren, our most
beloved Friends, who all very quickly may be in hazard, if the hand of the Lord
be stretched out still.

Every one would be careful conscientiously to use this means, for hereby the
meanest may be profitable to the distressed and languishing public. The reason
hereof.
When Moneys are wanting, none are able to supply but the Rich; when Errors and
Schisms are to be beaten in pieces by the hammer of the truth of God, none can
be serviceable but the Learned; when State divisions are to be cured, none can
help but the Wise; when Battles are to be fought, none can appear to purpose
but the courageous and strong: But for the duty in hand, which makes more for
the curing of our present evils, then all that either Wealth, or Wit, or
Learning, or Strength is able, by it, I say these may do notable service who
have a very small or no portion in any visible gift; even poor simple unlearned
weak women, if they have the spirit of prayer and will set themselves to
wrestle with God, they may help to remove the obstructions and further the cure
of the public miseries: when all the wealth, wit, learning, force of the
kingdom cannot promove the breadth of an inch, our wished ends: every one must
try and examine his own practice of this most needful duty to be grieved or
comforted according to their performance and care herein.

A Second doctrine from the former ground, in all our approaches to God we must
stand before the Angel, A second doctrine. In all our prayers we would employ
Christ. Isai. 22.22.
Christ the Angel of the covenant must be interposed betwixt God and the soul:
for he is the only way, none can come to the Father but by him, the keys of
the house of David are laid on his shoulder, he is the only door: by a wrong
door or a right door if fast locked there is no entrance, through him we have
both an access to the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. We have boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and living way, Heb. 10.20.

The reason of this is, first, the wisdom and goodness of our God, The first
reason.
who when man by the fall was banished from his presence and could have no more
immediate fellowship with him, has appointed a mid-man for reconciliation to
stand betwixt him and man, that the friendship which could not immediately be
kept, might be renewed and continued by such a mediation: 1 Timothy 2.4. I here is
one God and one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus; Heb. 8.6.
He is the mediator of a better Covenant which was established upon better
promises. However we have promises that God will be our God, and will receive us
as his people that he will remember our sins no more, that he will give us an
eternal inheritance; yet in him only it is that we have any right to any of
these promises, for he only is the mediator of that Covenant, Heb. 9.15.

A second reason, The second.
when we come alone to our God we cannot be welcome, we are so defiled with the
guilt of bygone sins, while we live sin lives in us: and betwixt the holy
pure eyes of God, and our sinfulness, there is so great a contrariety, that
if these two should meet without some interposition, the justice of God would
be a consuming fire to us. When ever therefore we are bold to draw near to him,
it is necessary to have this Angel standing betwixt us, to cover our sins, to
divert wrath: by the sacrifice of his soul for sin to purchase friendship, by
the sprinkling of his blood to extinguish the flames of wrath.

A third reason, The third.
who ever will stand before God who is to speak to that Majesty, who is to walk
or have any fellowship with him, must in some measure be like him, Heb. 12.14.
holy as he is holy, for without holiness none can see his face. such of our
selves we are not, we are like to our Father old Adam, till we become ingraffed
in a new stock, till Christ become to us a head, it is he that sends down into
us as living members the influence of his Spirit, which begins, continues, and
increases in us that life, that light, that love which makes us like our
heavenly Father and partakers of the divine nature: 2. Pet. 1.4. Phil. 2.14.
John 15.5.
Of our selves we cannot think a good thought, It is he that works in us to
will and to do; without him we can do nothing: out of him we are but lifelesse,
saplesse, withered branches, fit for nothing but the fire, but in him we are
the trees of righteousness, bringing forth all manner of fruit in due season.

The use of this doctrine is, The first use
first, for our information of the true cause why much of our devotion is
fruitles: often times we draw near to God but have no access; we cry and call at
the door of heaven, but there is no hearing no opening, no answer: The reason
is, we have mistaken our way, we have gone to the wrong door, we have run ever
alone, in the vehemency of our own spirit, in the fervor of our natural
desires: we have forgotten our Mediator, and gone to the Father without the
Son; or if we have begun to take him with us, at once as foolish children we
have run before our guide. No wonder then we be disciplined for that error,
that Christ permitting us to assay how much we can do of our selves without
him, we feel our labors lost, our prayers in vain; no marvel there comes no
voice no message, no fire from heaven on our sacrifice, to give us any
assurance of our acceptance; Matthew. 3.17.
God will not show himself well pleased with us for any thing we do, when we
come without the Son, in whom alone he is well pleased. A second use.


A second Use is for direction: Hold fast to Christ in all thy ways,
especially in thy approaches to God, most of all in thy solemn Prayers on such
a day as this: Set Christ betwixt thee and God, let all be offered up by his
hand, he is thy only Priest: no man was permitted under the Law, to offer his
own sacrifice, all was put in the Priests hand, who laid all upon the Altar:
Christ is the true Altar which sanctifies and makes acceptable all that is
laid on him. When we draw near to God by him, he covers all our infirmities,
he supplyeth all our defects, he enableth all who seek their life in him to do
every duty in such a way as is well-pleasing in the sight of God; he takes all
our desires and prayers in his hand, put teth them in his golden censer, he
kindles them with his own fire, Revel. 8.3.
and perfumeth them with the incense of his own merits, that so dressed, they
may have a sweet savor in the nostrils of the Father.

A third use is for caution: in our magnifying of Christ, A third use for
caution against the Antinomians.
beware of an old trick of the devil, which of late he has resumed, and by it
done more mischief then ever. Grace and wantounesse in themselves are most
opposite, yet Satan striveth to conjoyn them, To turn the grace of God into
wantonness: Jude 4. Mat. 27.29.
It is no new thing to adore Christ in show, while you buffet him in truth.
There is a generation of people who under the color of magnifying the free
grace of God, of setting Christ in his Throne, of advancing a Gospel way, of
crying down nature, and legal righteousness: with these glorious shows, and
pleasant words they are misled by a spirit of delusion to patronize profanity,
to grieve and extinguish the Spirit of grace, to scoff at repentance and
sorrow for sin, to foster the fruits of the flesh, to bring in the highest
degree of all wickedness, a dedolence of mind, a reprobation of spirit; when
a man has committed all wickedness with greediness to be nothing grieved for
it, as if the Spirit of the just Lord were nothing offended with it. Among the
many devils, who very boldly this day are walking up and down the land, this is
one of the worst, albeit masked with the fairest shows of piety and reason. Who
magnifies not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema maranatha; let Jesus be all
in all to thy soul, make him alone, thy Righteousness, thy Sanctification,
thy Redemption: 1 Cor. 1.30.
but for all that, beware to divide Christ from his Spirit, his death from his
life, his blood from his grace: Separate not faith from repentance dash out
none of thy Lords commandments so long as thou live; were thou never so
holy, thou have need from thy heart to beg pardon for thy sins: whosoever will
neglect repentance must perish, who ever will have true comfort must be a
mourner. Christ eurseth them that laugh now, and no laughter more devilish
then in the act of sin: he blesses them that mourn now, and no mourning in a
child of God more pious then for the offending of God, and grieving of his
Spirit by sin.

I thought to have laid open other stratagems of Satan, by occasion of the
words in hand, and pointed at some other very dangerous errors, where with
lately this land was overgrown, and which to this day are not altogether
evanished: First, that Idolatry of the Papists, in their standing before Angels
and Saints for intercession, before images for adoration: further no Papist
ever went, and thus far Court-Divines here were wont to preach and print.

2. Against the Arminians.
That wickedness of Arminius, denying the commerce of the Israelites with the
Angel of the Covenant, taking away the knowledge of Christ from the very
Patriarchs and Prophets, that however Christ speak expressly of Abraham's seeing
of his day, and reioicing therein, yet the Lord must have the open lie, and
Abraham's both sight and joy must go no further then to his son Isaac, the type
of Christ; they must be terminate in the shadow, and not go through to the
substance. It is the less wonder that this man and his followers should steal
Christ out of the Law, since under the Gospel they really remove him from the
hearts of the people, putting free will in the place of grace, and in stead of
our justification by Christ, would teach us that old fundamental error of the
Papists, justification by works, and inherent righteousness, to wit, by faith
as a work in us. Strange that any Protestant Divines should yet stumble upon
that infamous stone.

3. Against the Socinians.
That horrible wickedness of the Socinians, denying the Angel of our Text to
be Christ, because he had no being before his conception; denying his
Incarnation, abolishing his divine nature, blaspheming the Trinity: A wonder
that so foul a spirit should ever have gotten entrance in any famous Divine, or
other man of note in this I Will, except this were an hour of darkness, wherein
all sorts of devils are crept out of their dens, and walk so familiarly with
men, that they become bold now to speak of petitioning authority for a
toleration, that so this poor kingdom, not only in these times of confusion,
but for ever should be to them all a place of quiet habitation.

A fourth of these, Against Popish Priests.
who press on us the office of a proper Priest, to offer up in a sacrifice
upon the Altar the present body of Christ, not caring to bring back with open
face into our Church that grossest abomination of Popery, the unbloudy
sacrifice of the Mass.

The fifth of these, Against Bishops.
who from the high Priest of the old Testament would infer a Pontife, and an
Ecclesiastic Prince in the new, by this means not only bringing back the
types and figures of Aaron, the pedagogic of Moses; but also with the Papists
(the authors of this argument) re-inducing a Diocesan Bishop, and a Patriarch
above him, with a Pope above all, as Aaron was above the other Priests. How
far this is against the grounds of the Gospel, may be seen by the most simple
in these three plain reasons. First, Christ has made all the officers of the
New Testament, who are of the same order, to be equal, all to be Brethren,
none to be a Prince, or in any degree of superiority above his fellows. This is
not controverted in the three extraordinary officers, no Apostle above an
Apostle, no high Evangelist above a low one, no Prophet superior to a Prophet.
This is also granted in 3 of the ordinary officers, no Deacon above a Deacon,
no Elder above an Elder, no Doctor above a Doctor. That the like is in the
seventh officer, That no Pastor is a high and a great one above a small and a
low Pastor; the rule of proportion, and the analogy of things in the same
kind, will make it clear. Secondly, the nature and essence of Episcopacy, puts
the power of ordination in the hand of one man, expressly against the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.14. where Ordination is put into the hands of many, for it is called the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: however diverse expositions of the
word Presbytery are brought by some, yet no man can expone it of one Bishop.

3. The nature of Episcopacy puts all the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction of a whole
diocese in the hand of one man; but Christ, Matthew. 8. gives it to many, Tell
the Church: none ever did expone the Church of one Bishop, except some Papists,
who understand it of the Pope.

With a good conscience therefore have your Honors rooted up and cast out of
the Church that evil tree, which God never did plant; what further also shall
be found necessary for the full extermination of that cursed weed, if an
Ordinance were requisite to be added to the former Bills, or what else the
heart of good people can require for their full security, from the return of
the least degree of that Popish government, it is fully expected from your
piety and zeal.

What some pleads for the antiquity of this wicked weed, I wish they would
answer ingenuously, if any more antiquity was ever alleged by any for Bishops,
then is confessed by all of Monks and Friars, of Hermits and Nuns, for Abbots and
Priors: also if it can be said with any color of truth, that more hurt did
ever come to this Church and State by the one, then now is seen and felt from
the other. And if England did never repent to this day for altering the old
Laws and casting out of their Church and State these former Locusts, what
greater reason can be imagined they shall have ever to repent the putting of
Bishops and their dependances out of their Laws and Land? All your brethren of
the reformed Churches after almost a hundred years experience have often
rejoiced, but never grieved, for banishing that degree of Antichristianisme. It
cannot be denied but that Episcopacy is such a supporter of Papacy, that where
the one falls, the other cannot stand. Pluck up but this one weed in the
Antichristian Kingdoms over Sea, let Bishops only be removed from Italy, and
Spain, Germany and France, as they are from Britain, the Pope can no more
stand thereafter then a head can without its body or limbs: the maxim is
certain and demonstrable, no Bishop no Pope.

The third part of the first verse contains the opposition made to Joshua, The
third part of the verse expounded.
while he stands before the Lord to advance the interrupted work of Sions
reparation, Satan is at his right hand to cross all his designs Three words
here are to be expounded: who is this Satan; what is his standing on Joshua his
right hand; and how he resists him.

Satan is one of the names of that great Angel who left his first habitation,
Jude 6.
by sinning against his Creator, and therefore with other Angels his followers,
was cast down from the heaven to the lower world to be reserved in chains of
darkness to the day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Mat. 25.71.
when he is to be bound straiter and to be cast into the fire prepared for him
and his Angels. In the mean while he has some liberty in his chain and
prison, he goes always to and fro and walks in the earth, Ioh 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour; he flies in the air spying his prey, ever intent
to assault mankind, and above all, the most godly: for his opposition and
hatred (which gives him the name of Satan) is most against God, and for his
cause, against his children, especially Christ, whose heel he bruised in his
temptations and cross: this is he who in the Revel. 12.8. is called the
Dragon, the old Serpent, the devil and Satan who with his Angels did fight
against Michael and his Angels: this was the wicked spirit who tempted Evah,
who vexed Job, who stirred up David to number the people, who entered into
Judas, and here sets upon Joshua.

The next point is his standing upon Joshua's right hand: I will pass a number
of Allegories, which sundry of the Ancients bring upon this phrase, it seems
without any Mystery to imply an opposition open, but cautelous: I say open, for
Satan lurks not, he stands not behind Joshua his back, but comes up to his
side, and there appears a professed and avowed enemy; yet cautelous, for he
chooses the place of advantage; the right hand is the instrument of Action, it
manages the Sword, and every Weapon: so, who stands upon the right hand, has
the place of advantage.

The third word is to resist him; This was the end why Satan stood in such a
place, the more easily to cross and resist all the good designs of Joshua,
that what ever he did or said, to God or man for advancing the work of the
Temple, or any part of the Churches welfare, he by his craft and might did
assay to countercarve it, and make it fruitless.

That which here is brought by some of Satan his accusing of Joshua, we do not
deny it as one of the means whereby he did cross the high Priest: For he is
styled a Devil, an Accuser, a Calumniator, Revel. 12 10.
who is ever accusing the Brethren to God, as he did Job, sometimes falsely, and
sometimes truly, but ever calumniously, because ever upon malice. The
particular accusation is not expressed in the Text, yet the Chaldee Paraphrasts
put that in their targum on this place, which is most likely, That Satan
pleaded against Joshua, as a man who ought not to be heard of God, or receive
any assistance from him for the building of Sion, since he and the rest of the
people were clothed with the foul Garments of sin, especially that one, of
suffering his Children to marry strange Women. Ezra 9 3.
The marrying with Idolaters was so grievous and dangerous a sin, that it made
Ezra lament very heavily before God: Joshua his tolerating of this fault in his
children, was a matter of a just accusation, and might have hindered the fruit
of his Prayers, and all his endeavors for Sion.

For Doctrine observe, The first Doctrine.
That the great and chief leader of all who oppose the Reformers of a Church or
State, is the Devil.

Jeshua and Zerubbabell in their repairing of the ruins of the Church and
Kingdom of Israel, Satan is the leader in chief to all who oppose the
Reformation of a Church or State. Ezia 4 8.
had opposites of many kinds and conditions, Ezra 1. At the first founding of
the Temple, there appeared against them (at the beginning secretly, and then
openly) First, the common people of the Land, the Samaritanes, the Brethren of
our Cassandrian mixed professors, half Idolaters, half Israelites: With them
joined the Rulers of the Provinces, Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the
Scribe, also the bribed Courtiers of the King; and at last the King himself:
This opposition did so prevail, that the building was marred for many years.
When the work again was set on by the motion of Haggai and Zachariah, Ezra 5.3.
that same profane multitude, and their Governors, Tatnai and Shethar-Boznai
did oppose; yet by the help of God the Temple was finished.

Afterward they went to build the Wall of Jerusalem: Gods order requires,
that the Church be settled before the State.
For this is the holy and happy order of the People of God in their building;
to begin with the Temple, and then to go to the City, to perfect the Temple
before they lay a Stone in the Wall of Jerusalem. It is preposterous to begin
with the State, and end with the Church; that order pleases not God, it is not
suitable to his honor, and will not be blessed by him.

How ever, so soon as Nehemiah began to make up the Wall, there was about him a
swarm of enemies to hinder his progress, Tobia, Sanballat, Geshem, and not
only these profane Forraigners, but also many among themselves that professed
friendship: Nehem. 6 17.
Many of the Nobles of Judah kept correspondence by Letters with the enemies,
and that in a way well near avowed, and open. Sundry of the Priests and
Prophets were plotters against the work: Nehem. 6.14.
Some Women also are noted for Malignant Instruments, by name the Prophetess
Noadia is Registered to her perpetual infamy, The greatest plot of the enemies
of Sion was a subdolus accommodation.
for her correspondence with the enemy, in prejudice of the good work in hand.

Many plots were set on foot to discourage the people of God, and make them
faint in their labor, when the building was near an end; but one was most
likely to prevail, a friendly treaty propounded, by Sanballat to Nehemiah
pretending an Union of Counsels, and an accommodation; but intending to kill
Nehemiah, that the reparation of Jerusalem, wherein he was the prime Agent,
should be interrupted by his death, and quite given over. This plot was assayed
once, Nehem. 6.4.
twice, thrice, four times, but without success; for it was the wisdom of
Nehemiah to distrust them, and never for any persuasion, for any terror, to
enter into conference with them, while the Wall was once perfited; and then the
adversaries perceiving without further haesitation, the hand of God in the work
they opposed, sat down in despair, and gave over their enterprises.

All these oppositions from so many diverse sorts of persons, were clear to the
eye of all; yet when God will discover to the eye of the Prophet, the great and
main hinderer of the work in hand; he sets all other aside, and points at Satan
alone, standing on the right hand of the chief workers, to cross and resist
them. It is clear then, that in all the opposition we feel to the welfare,
either of Church or State, Satan is he on whom the eyes of the godly wise would
principally be fixed.

The Reason of this Doctrine, is this, Satan is the head, The first reason of
the Doctrine.
the prince, the father, the god of all the enemies of the Church, Genesis 3.15. I
will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, betwixt her seed, and thy seed.
The fountain of all the enmity of the wicked against the Church, is here made
the Serpent, deriving his malice to men, as to his seed and posterity. The
wicked in their malicious actions against Christ and his Church, are reputed
the children of Satan, and work according to the nature of their father: Ioh.
8.44.
You are of your father the devil, the lusts of your father you will do. When
the wicked are not ready enough to follow the motions of Satan against the
Church, as children to be directed by their fathers advice, then like a Prince
or Tyrant does he drive them, as captive slaves, to commit mischiefs: For this
Ephesians. 2.2. he is called, the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience. 2 Timothy 2.26. The wicked are in the
snare of the devil, taken captive by him at his will: 2 Cor. 4 4.
He is the god of this world: When servants do the commands of their masters,
what subjects or children are set upon by their prince or father, what is done
by members by the motion of the spirit that animates and moves them, all these
actions must be ascribed chiefly unto their principal agents.

A second reason is, The second Reason.
The interest of Satan in the confusions of a Church and State is greatest:
Interest, advantage, loss, make persons active: when a State is confounded,
and a Church in trouble, there is no restraint of Idolatry, of Heresies, of
Schisms, of Drunkenness, Blasphemics, Oppressions, or any villainy, wherein
the dominion and glory of Satan is openly demonstrate: But when the times of
licentious liberty come to an end; when by the mercies of God, the outward
State is settled; the execution of good Laws banisheth away these abominations;
the outward kingdom of Satan is restrained and broken: But when with the State,
the Church also is settled, when the Gospel in its full liberty, purity, and
power is set up, then the strongest Castles of Satan are invaded, Christ
enters the inmost Cabines of the heart, and subdueth every imagination to his
knowledge, and reformeth not only the outward man, but by bringing his
heavenly Light and Life to the soul, makes the heart humble, chaste, wise,
spiritual, and so subject to the Spirit of Christ, that Satan gets no more
peace in any room of his former possession? No wonder then, that this crafty
spirit foreseeing these evident losses, and clear disadvantages which the
settling of a Church and State will certainly bring upon him, he assay with all
his might to continue disorder and confusion, for in these lies the strength of
his kingdom.

The use of this Doctrine is. The first Use.
1. For affrighting of all these who oppose Reformation of Church or State,
beholding from hence what spirit leads them: For it is clear, that not they
only, who upon the conscience of their mis-deserving to save themselves from
the legal punishment of their crimes, or otherwise blinded by avarice and
ambition, upon desire and hope of these profits and places whereof they
despaired in regular times, for these base ends have been prime counselors in
the first conceiving of this lamentable rupture betwixt the Prince and his best
subjects; but also all they, who either openly have divided from us in siding
with that evil faction, or remaining among us in person, by their means or
counsels do oppose the building of the Temple, and the rearing up the walls of
Jerusalem: The leader of all these opposites appears to be that most
malignant spirit, the devil. We deny not that sundry of these men for their
opinions and practices wherein they differ from us, may have very strong and
plausible arguments; yet they would remember that Satan often times, by strong
delusions, 2 These 2.11.
makes his followers believe lies. We grant also, that sundry of the elect
children of God, before their calling, in the days of their ignorance, may be
withdrawn to serve the devil, in the most wicked employments against God;
Father, forgive them, Luke 23 34.
(says Christ of many of his crucifiers) for they know not what they do. Yea,
for a time, the very regenerate, and these who otherwise walk with God, by the
violence or subtilty of a tentation, may be driven to a very evil way, and may
engage themselves in the worst services of Satan, and oppose in their desires,
counsels and actions the most blessed works of God. Christ admonishes the
chiefest of his Apostles, Luk 9 55. Matthew. 16 23,
that they knew not of what spirit they were: And to Peter he says plainly,
That the devil, from his mouth, did tempt him to spare himself; which was no
other, then to give over the Work of man's Redemption.

However all these things may be, yet all who are in the actual service of
Satan, against God, have great reason of fear, for their present condition: If
God come upon thee in thy act of resisting his servants in his Work, his hand
may suddenly dash thee in pieces, as it has done many already, like a Potters
vessel. How fearful a thing is it to be serving the devil! what can men
expect for their wages, except they recover themselves out of his bonds,
wherein now they lie captive like Gally-slaves, but a part with their master
for ever in his horrible portion? O if the eyes of men were opened, to behold
the face of their master: a clear sight of that ugly leader, would doubtless
move many to lay down their weapons, and with great grief for miscarriages
past, to set themselves to redeem the time, with all diligence to employ heart,
hand, means, and all God has given them, for the furtherance of the building
of Sion, which too long, by Satan's powerful conduct, they have endeavored to
retard.

A second Use is for compassion thus far, The second Use.
on the worst of our opposites, as to take them but for inferior instruments,
acted and driven on by a mighty leader: let the edge of our sharpest anger be
turned from them, on him: These his blindfolded instruments we should heartily
pity, and pray for, remembering the like nature and weakness in our selves,
which had not the grace of God preserved us against tentations, might have made
us ready to have given up our wit, our will, our hands, our means, and all, to
have resisted the Work of God, and furthered the work of Satan, as much as any
of the most active malignants. It is good to have a meek and compassionate
spirit toward persons who have succumbd to a tentation; Gal. 6.1.
considering our selves, lest we also be tempted and overtaken in the same or a
worse fault. The Apostle gives us hope, that sundry who oppose themselves to
God, being instructed in meekness, may peradventure get repentance, to
acknowledge their pernicious ways, and to recover themselves from the snare of
the devil, though for a time they be taken captives by him at his will.

A third Use is, The third Use.
for continual watchfulness. The Prince and General of our opposites is a
restless spirit, who will never give over his malicious contrivings: readily
he may change his instruments, but never his design: When old instruments
become blunt and unserviceable, or when they break in his hand, he can cast
them by, and take up new ones, more dangerous then the former: though all
present and past plots were discovered to the bottom, and fully prevented, yet
there remains in that prime adversary a wit to devise many more, and these
sevenfold worse then any yet we have heard of: we would never be secure,
Ephesians. 6.12.
having to do not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers,
with spiritual wickednesses in higher places. Against spirits spiritual
Weapons must be used: Did we strive only with the craft and force of men, we
might hope by wisdom and policy to countermine their plots, and by just Arms
to overpower and suppress their oppression: But our chief party being Satan,
we must put on the armor of God, The shield of Faith, The helmet of Hope, The
breast plate of Righteousness; and, above all, that Catholic weapon of prayer.
In these Combats, the weakest may do greatest services: many, who cannot go to
the Fields for fighting, to the Houses for counsel, to the Assembly for
disputation, yet may hold up their hands on the mountain with Moses, may
wrestle with God as Jacob, may stand before the Angel with Joshua, and by the
means of the Angel get Satan our prime enemy defeat: when Goliath the Captain
does fall, the rest of the Philistims his followers will not long stand.
However, this Church and State, in these days of darkness, are most helped by
them who set their faces truly to seek the Lord for the Land, in Fasting and
Praying, with Faith and Sanctification: one of these is more precious then a
thousand others, who, notwithstanding all their fighting and disputing for the
common Cause, do continue to grieve the good Spirit of God, to strengthen the
hand of Satan against us, going on, after all these public Humiliations, in
their wonted course of security, neglecting the mortification of their secret
lusts, and all careful walking with God in the Spirit of their mind, to any
true pleasing.

A second Observation might be made on this passage, A second Doctrine, Satan
opposes most our prayers for Sion.
That Satan his invasion of the godly is most in their Worship, and specially
in their prayers for the public; as here he resists Joshua, when he is
standing before God to petition for the ruined estate of Sion.

No wonder the people of God, at these solemn times of public Supplications,
The godly most distracted with temptations in time of public humiliation. Genesis
15.11. Matthew. 13.4.
fall short of their intended services; That their hearts come not up to their
desires in the acts of Worship; That vageing of mind, hardness of heart,
fruitlesnesse of hearing, lie hardest then upon them: The reason is, Satan's
special attendance at these occasions above any. The ravenous birds wait upon
Abraham only at his Sacrifices; the fowls go out with the sower to pick up the
good Seed, to make the Word and the Worship unprofitable. Our heart of it self
is very earthly, carnal, dead, and vain; yet besides all its inward
Malignitie, Satan by his tentations, strives to inspire it at these holy times
with so much of his supernatural wickedness, as he is able. It should add to
our grief, when our sensible miscarriage in so holy an exercise demonstrateth,
not only the presence of a devil with us, but also his prevalence over us for
our great hurt: Also it is a matter of singular comfort when we get grace to
discharge ourselves of these solemn services, in some measure acceptably: When
with a Spirit enlightened, enlivened, enflamed, melted from above, we get our
souls poured out before God, for the public sins, and public distresses: When
with an holy, an honest, and vigorous bent-sail of spirit, we have begged
mercy, and what else we conceive needful for our selves and others: When in an
attentive and faithful heart, we receive the heavenly Seed of the Word, and
feel our selves thereby strengthened to walk in the ways of God, to mourn for,
and fight against the corruptions of our heart, and life. This is a matter of
joy for this cause among others, that hereby we obtain a sensible victory over
that strong spirit, who has not been able, as often at other times, to deprive
us of the comfort and fruit of the Worship. Christ who at such a time makes
thee clearly victorious over Satan, shall shortly make thee to triumph, and
tread him under thy feet.

A third Observation might here also be pointed at, A third Doctrine, Satan
resists most the Ministers of Gods house.
if time did not strait; Satan his special malice is against Joshua the high
Priest; his special enmity is against the servants of Gods House; the
Messenger of Satan buffeteth Paul; it was Peter and the Apostles that Satan
sought to winnow, 2 Co. 12.7. Lu6e 22.31.
and sift as Wheat.

The Reason is, They are the Pastors of Gods flock; The Reason.
when the Shepherd is stricken, the flock will be scattered: They are the
Stewards of Gods House; If the Steward become unfaithful, the children of the
family will be in danger of starving: They are the Officers of Gods Army; if
the Leaders and Standard-Bearers fall, the Soldiers will soon be put to the
flight: They are the light of the World, if the Lamps be extinguished, the
House sits in darkness, and the shadow of death: They are the Salt of the
Earth, if they become unsavory, the people are in danger to become a polluted
and unsavory Sacrifice.

Great care would be had for the assistance and comfort of the servants of Gods
House; The Use.
the people would bear them in their hearts before God, and pray for the
abundance of the Spirit of grace upon them: the grace of God on the Pastors,
turns to the benefit of the people; the ointment poured on the head of Aaron
dropped down to his feet, and drenched the lowest borders of his garment: When
the Lord clothes his Priests with Righteousness and Salvation, then do all the
Saints shout aloud for joy: the people not only by their prayers to God would
assist and hold up the weary hands of their Pastors, as Aaron and Hur did the
hands of Moses; but also, by their loving countenance, their liberal
maintenance, their ready obedience, would give them all encouragement; Heb.
13.17. They watch for your soul; obey them therefore, that they may do their
work with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. When most
of the day, and much of the night they have been with God on the Mount for your
welfare; when much of their time has been spent in combating with Satan for
the safety of your soul, Is it meet that they should be grieved, The honorable
Houses would see to the encouragement of Gods servants.
or their hands weakened by your neglect of them, or miscarriage toward them?

Doubtless it will be the special care of this religious and wise Senate, to
establish such Orders in all this Land for the House of God, that his Ministers
shall be encouraged to set themselves with all cheerfulness about the
salvation of the peoples souls: Your Honors will so provide it, that the Pastors
shall have nothing to do but with God and with souls, and with devils, to hold
off by their Spiritual weapons these roaing Lions from their flocks:
questionles your Pieties will procure so much due respect, and so honorable a
maintenance for every servant of God in this land, that without disquietnes of
mind, or solicitude for the things of this world, they may wait wholly on
their Spiritual Charges: The Pagan Princes of old, the Turkish this day, the
ancient Popish Parliaments, and the late Prelaticall, have demonstrate their
care for that which they esteemed the service of their God: it will be very far
from this most hopeful of all Parliaments, for which the Lord has already
done so many and so great things, which also for time to come has so much need
of the special assistance, and singular help of God, that they should in this
so natural, so reasonable, so Christian a Duty toward the servants of God, be
any ways lacking. Most wisely, and with all reason, have they procured the
Lamps of the House of God to be set in such posture, as their light may best
shine to the use of men: Stars, though otherwise great, and full of light, if
they move in too high a Sphere, become either invisible, or of an obscure and
bad light, for little use to men below upon earth: The Pastors of Gods House,
when they stand too high in worldly pomp above the people, their light in so
great a distance vanishes, and scarce is visible to men so far below them. Yet
it would be carefully considered, That the Lights of the House of God be not
too much brought down, and set too low; to put them under a bushel, to set
them under the feet of the family, were to mar their shineing, and hinder the
communication of their light.

Above all, great care would be used, that when the superfluity of Oil which
did choke and extinguish, rather then maintain the light of some Lamps, shall
be diverted unto better employment, nevertheless that no Candle of God, in any
part of this Land, be permitted to languish, much less to die for want of so
much Oil as is requisite for a convenient subsistence. But a word to wise men,
and half a word of this kind to men so religious, and zealous for the House of
God, is enough.

So much for the Impediments which Satan made to the reparation of Sion: Now
follows their Removal, in the which are three things, i. A Preface, The Lord
said unto Satan. 2. A Paraphrase on the second verse.
The Mean whereby these Impediments were removed, and that Opposition quasht,
Christ's cursing of Satan, or his prayer to the Father to rebuke and repress
him. 3. Two Reasons of this Rebuke, 1. Jerusalems election, then her great
sufferings. For shortness, we shall only give a brief Paraphrase of all the
words together, without long exposition. And for Doctrine, we shall touch but
on some few Observations, which for Use we shall remit to your own meditation.

As for the Preface, The Lord said unto Satan: How Spirits can speak.
Angels and devils communicate with God, and one with another, not by speeches,
for Language requires bodily instruments, which these Spirits want: but as they
apprehend every object without senses, so they express what they have
apprehended without Language, in a way above our humane nature, which we do not
understand. However, in this place, and elsewhere often, where by way of Vision
the communication of one Spirit with another is represented, for our
apprehension all is set done in speeches, as the ordinary way wherein men
communicate their thoughts one to another.

The Lord said unto Satan: Christ the Lord.
He who before was called an Angel, is here named the Lord, even Christ, as we
showed before, the Lord and Creator of all, the Heir (even as he is man) of
all; for there is one God, and one Lord, the man Jesus, 1 Cor. 8.6.
to whom the Father has given a Name above all names, and has set all things
under his feet, Principalities and Powers themselves to be his servants, and he
their Lord and God.

The matter of his speech is an Invocation of the Father to reprove Satan: The
Lord speaks to the Lord, The Lord speaks to the Lord. Psalm. 110 1.
the Son to the Father: so the words of the Psalm are to be taken, The Lord
said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand: And that of Genesis, Genesis 19 24.
The Lord rained down fire upon Sodom from the Lord. The Son leads to the
Father, as to the fountain of the Godhead, and all divine Operations; which
imports no diversity of Essence, Substance, or Matter in the Trinity, but
only a distinction of Persons, and an heavenly Order in these Persons, as in
Being, so in Operation; The Father being the first, The Son the second, The
Spirit the third; but all equally infinite in Glory, Power, Eternity, and all
divine Attributes; in these there is no inequality, no posteriority among them:
This now is to be believed from diverse Scriptures, but not to be thoroughly
understood, till afterward, when we shall see God, as we are seen of him.

The rebuking of Satan imports not only a bitter and sharp reproof of his
malice, What is the rebuking of Satan.
to his confusion and shame, but also a restraint and cohibition of his power,
by the merciful and strong hand of the Father. This is repeated, because of
Christ his zeal to Jerusalems welfare, and his detestation of Satan's wicked
designs against her.

The first Reason of that Reproof is, The Lords choosing of Jerusalem to be the
place of his Worship, The first Reason of the Rebuke.
and Habitation of his Church: Satan had the rest of the earth for his service;
but, not content herewith, that one place which the Lords Election had reserved
for his own little Flock, the malice of that unreasonable spirit would not
leave to God.

The other reason, The second Reason.
That same one place, that one poor people which God had chosen out of all the
families of the earth to be his peculiar Treasure, had been cast in the fiery
furnace of heavy tribulation, and was but lately drawn out of the fire; that
merciless spirit the devil, nothing satisfied with all the miseries of
Jerusalem, went about to procure her utter destruction, and burning down to
ashes, that so on the whole earth there should have been left none at all to
serve the Lord: But Christ remembering his Election, and having compassion upon
their former sufferings, defends their Cause, pours shame on the malice of
Satan, restrains his power, chaseth him away, that he may no longer retard
the welfare of his people.

From the Preface, The first Observation, Christ his wonderful patience toward
the very devil.
observe the great patience and long-suffering of Christ; he holdeh his peace
long, and when he speaks at last to Satan, it is but to rebuke him. This evil
spirit had seduced and destroyed the souls well-neer of the whole world, he
stands here before the Lord for to swallow up the small remnant: Did not such
horrible wickedness require a present destruction from the Lords hand? and not
a reproof only from his mouth.

Consider well the Lord his way of proceeding with all the wicked, both men and
devils: There is a time appointed for their full destruction, and till that day
come, the Lord holds his peace; or if he break out in words or deeds against
them, it is but in a small degree of wrath, in comparison of what is following.
Satan is reserved in chains till the last day, where he is to be bound, and
cast in the lake: One of these spirits could say unto Christ, Matthew. 8.29.
Art thou come to torment us before the time? When the wicked are most proud
and insolent, God laugheth at them, for he secth their day is coming; the day
of their vengeance, the year of recompenses, the morning, the hour of their
calamity.

All of us would consider the state of our soul, the abominations which
conscience tells us we are guilty of: think them not forgotten with God,
though he keep silence, and permit us to go on in the ways of our own heart,
without trouble; or if he reprove, it is but by his Word; Now and then in the
public Ministry chopping upon the slippery and half dead heart: You see in
this place he deals no otherwise with the very devil; but be persuaded there
is a time coming for a more severe reckoning. The seventh of Ezekiel is often
to be read by a secure people, the sixth verse, An end is come, the end is
come, it watches for thee; behold, it is come, the morning is come upn thee,
the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding of the
mountains: In that one verse the coming of the day of vengeance is five or six
times proclaimed: Happy are these who make use of the day of their merciful
Visitation: The Lord has been wonderfully good to us; the War has taken away
the estates of many thousands, the Sword has bereaved many of their lives, we
are yet safe; but can we tell how long? manage well this happy day of grace,
humble your soul before the Lord, make peace with him without further delay;
mourn for your known faults; set your selves to amend the evil of your doings,
that you may be spared in the fearful day of the Lords wrath, when the sword
of the field, the famine and pestilence of the City, may make havoc of people
without number. Blessed are they, who after so many warnings from the mouth of
God in his Word, from the hand of God in his Works, have learned at last to be
wise for their own great good.

Upon the Reproof, The second Observation, Christ's rebuking of the devil will
bring us to a victory over all our enemies.
observe first, The only way to remove all impediments and oppositions to the
reparation of a Church and State, is Christ his intercession with the Father
against the devil. That which hindered Jeshua and Zerubbabel to build the
Temple, to fortify Jerusalem, was that active spirit, which moved and stirred
up all the malignant instruments that appeared against them: The Jews till this
time were never able to overcome their enemies; but behold, so soon as Christ
takes the work in hand, so soon as he rebukes and restrains Satan the
principal enemy, incontinent all the inferior instruments on earth, all these
malignant men and women did fail and succumb, they were no more able to trouble
Gods people in their work.

This is the ground of our hope and comfort, The opposers of the Reformation of
our Church.
in the midst of so huge difficulties as this day on all sides beset us, how
shall our Sion be gotten builded? when we look to the opposers, their strength
is exceeding great, a mighty faction of declared Papists, a great number of
Episcopal Clergy, and people openly joining with Papists against us, and both
avowedly supported by Sovereign Authority: Also a multitude of Sects,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Separatists, and others, pushed on by a deluded
conscience, to oppose with all their skill, with all their might, all solid
Reformation: beside all the former, a great number in all ranks and estates,
profane and loose persons, exceeding unwilling to behold the settling of any
Order which may control them with any power in their wonted licentiousness.

Concerning the walls of Jerusalem, The opposers of the Reformation of our
State.
the establishing of Justice and Peace in the Civil State; with what
insuperable difficulties this work is compassed, woeful experience does teach.
A mighty faction of lawless men, who have drawn away, partly by persuasion,
and partly by force, a great part of the people, the greatest part of the
Nobles, and Sovereign Authority it self: this faction of it self very potent,
is also supported with the help that foreign friends are able to afford: and,
which is more then all yet named, and more terrible then all flesh and blood,
we have to do with Principalities and Powers, who act and guide, with all the
craft and force they are able, our humane adversaries: And, which is yet the
greatest strength of all, the grievous sins of the Land, which provoke the Lord
God to be on the side of our enemies, men and devils, to strengthen their arm
against us.

The sight of these mountains of Impediments would discourage the stoutest
heart, Our Comfort against both.
if above them all we did not see our merciful high Priest entreating the
Father for the remission of our sins, for the rebuking of Satan, with all
vehemence: the favor we know the Son has with the Father, will make him
obtain all his desires. Surely, when these are obtained, when the sins of the
Land are remitted, and Satan restrained, all other impediments will soon be
removed: when the soul is separate from the body, the members languish, and
cannor more stir: when Christ has confounded Satan, men his instruments will
quickly either be persuaded, or forced to reason: It is in vain to deal with
men, so long as a malignant spirit prevails over them: The streams will run
till the fountain be stopped: Our first and main labor would be with Christ,
to restrain Satan, for he is the life that vegetates, he the spirit that
stirs up all our opposites both in Church and State.

Observe again how Christ in his debate with Satan, A third observation. Ioh.
8.50. Ioh. 10 30. 1 Ioh. 5.7.
has recourse to the Father, that he would rebuke him, The Son honors the
Father, he seeks not his own glory, but the honor of the Father, The Father
and the Son are one, for all these three that witness in Heaven, the Father,
the Son, and the Spirit, are one true God; Yet this is the order of the Divine
Persons, that the Father is the first, the Son and the Spirit are both from
him, The Son from Eternity begotten of him, The Spirit from Eternity
proceeding from him and from the Son.

So long as the veil of Flesh covers the eyes of our Soul, we must not
enquire too curiously in this unsearchable Mystery: 1 Kings 19.13.
Elias wrapped his face in his Mantle when the Lord passed by him: God will not
be gazed upon, he discharges it expressly under the pain of death. Exodus 19.21.
The malapart and Irreverent boldness of sundry Divines, subjecting to the
foul feet of their idle speculations, the deepest and most unaccessible
Mysteries of the holy Trinity, is justly plagued with evident and foolish
error: Their eyes who will gaze on the Sun in the noon day, cannot but be
dazzled; and if that madness continue, blindness and excaecation inavoidable
will follow: Faith here, if any where, is the Mother of modesty, The companion
of simplicity and reverence; it sets us limits at the foot of the Mountain
in a far distance, Exodus 19.23.
which we must not break through: When we do behold with the most open face, 1
Cor. 13.12.
the Godhead, we must be looking on our Glass; the eye must never wander from
the Spectacles of the Word: Only what we see of God, let it be holden fast
against all contradiction. Worship the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; one
true God, three truly distinct Persons, whereof the Father is the first, the
Son the second; This Person alone is incarnate, uniting in the fullness of time
to his Divine Person, the nature of Man: The holy Ghost is the third, and yet
all three are equal in Glory, in Eternity, and every Divine attribute.

Hold fast in thy mind these plain Catechetick Scripturall Notions of God:
Beware to make to thy self an Idol in thy brain, to frame a false, erroneous
and unwritten conception of the true God: If thou worship the Trinity as three
diverse Gods, thou becomest a Pagan, abolishing, by the multitude of Gods, the
Unity of the divine Nature: If thou apprehend God so much one, as not three
Persons, thou turnest Turk, a Jew, an old Arian and Macedonian Heretic; and,
which is all these in one, a Socinian, a real Atheist: for it is Christ's own
Conclusion, Who honors not the Son, Ioh. 5 23.
honors not the Father, which has sent him. The neglect, the contempt, the
denial of any one Person, reflecteth alike on all the three, and the whole
Godhead.

A third Observation upon the Reproof, if time did permit, A fourth Observation.
would be the holy and gracious practice of Christ in his hotest zeal; he
brings no false, 2 Pet 1.11.
no railing accusation against the devil himself; the farthest he goes
against this arch-enemy, is to commit him to God to be rebuked: Lies,
calumnies, railings agianst the devil are inexcusable, and would not be
countenanced: It is a foolish policy, and a profane zeal, to advance the Cause
of God by the arts of the devil: Lying calumnies, malicious bitterness, are
hellish weapons; a gracious hand must not take them up, were it against their
very author: The Arsenall of God is not so unprovided of lawful Arms, his
Quiver not so disfurnished of his own Arrows, that we need go borrow from
Askelon or Gath, from hell it self, these poisoned Darts, dipped in the venom
of Asps, in the blood of that old Serpent, the father of Lies, the great
Calumniator from the beginning.

A fourth Observation; A fifth Observation.
God rebukes Satan before his final destruction; his children in this are
heirs to their father; After a little time, death will put all the wicked in a
full possession of their inheritance; their souls first; and after the
Resurrection, their bodies also shall be placed in these lakes of fire: but
before, they are to be infeoffed and seized; they are to have the earnest of
their fathers portion; they are to be rebuked of God, their secret wickedness
is to be brought to light, their well-covered villainies to be proclaimed on the
house tops; shame and confusion to be poured on their faces; their malice and
violence is to be restrained, their pushing horns to be hammered off, by the
Carpenters; Satan and they will be coopt up within so narrow a circle, and be
bound with so short a chain, that all may understand they are rebuked of God.

Also it would be a comfortable consideration to meditate on the zeal of Christ
for Sion, A sixth Observation.
against all her enemies: He speaks here as a man in a passion, repeating and
ingeminating his angry words. The Lord rebuke thee, even the Lord rebuke thee:
The Lord proclaims the sounding of his Bowels, before he got Flesh; the
tenderness of his compassion toward the Church, before his Incarnation.
Certainly, the sympathy of his heart, and his fellow feeling with us in all
our afflictions, is not now diminished, but rather (if possible) increased
after his experimental knowledge on the earth, in his own person, of these
evils which Satan and wicked men inflict upon the godly.

From the Reasons which the Lord uses for Satan's reproof, A seventh
we may behold the Devil his end, and intention in molesting of Joshua; the
thing he seeks is the overthrow of Jerusalem. Satan drives most at the
eversion of the public; Phil. 2 21.
Therefore the preservation of the public ought to go nearest our heart: Many
seek their own things, and not those of Jesus Christ; They mind themselves
much more, then either Church or State. This self-wisedom is foolish, for if
the Ship wherein thou sailest, be drowned, what will become of thy Goods; if
the house wherein thou art locked, be burnt, how shall thy life be saved.

From the first Reason the choosing of Jerusalem observe, An eighth.
That Election is a principal ground of comfort against all Satan's tentations.
True, the difference is wide betwixt a national and personal Election,
betwixt the choice of Jerusalem, or any other place to be the seat and
habitation of the Church; and betwixt the Election of persons to grace and
glory: This I may not stand to clear, only strive to make our personal
Election sure; for upon the grounded assurance thereof, we come to a glorious
confidence, that no creature, neither Satan, nor the World, nor conscience, nor
any other shall ever be able to confound us? Rom 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies: Who is he that condemns: It is Christ that dyed. One of the
sweetest private fruits of such a days exercise, is to get our calling, and
our Election sealed: Verily, a penitent soul who thoroughly has mourned for
sin, and fled to Christ for mercy; who has gotten of his spirit for a real
and sincere beginning of a through Sanctification, and amendment in every
thing, which either within or without has been amiss: A soul this far
proceeded in Grace, uses to receive the stamp of the Spirit; The inward
unction and witness, that they are the Sons of God, Elect, and called; who
shall be glorified, Rom 8.17. 2 Pet. 1.11.
after they have suffered a while, to such an entrance uses to be ministered
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of Christ.

From the last Reason, take but some few brief notes. An ninth.
Jerusalem the Church of God, and Joshua the chief Member of it for the time,
were like a Stick half burnt in the fire of the Babylonish Captivity: Out of
that fire they were pulled in Gods mercy, to be preserved against all the
malicious assaults of Satan, and his instruments. From hence you see the best
beloved people of God, by the Devil and wicked men, may be brought exceeding
low, and so near to utter destruction, as a stick burning in the fire, is to
Ashes: So it was with Israel in Egypt, in Babel, and often elsewhere. We
therefore in our most desperate cases, must not despair; Exodus 3 2. Isai 43 2.
Dan. 3.25.
The burning Bush will not be consumed, God has promised to be with us, in
fire and water: One like the Son of man walks in the fiery Furnace with the
three Children. When to the eye of the World our condition is most desperate,
when sense makes us cry out, Lam. 3.48.^3.
My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord, They have cut of my life in
the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me; yet faith will quickly correct sense,
and make us subjoyn; it is good for a man to have hope, and quietly to wait for
salvation of the Lord; Psalm. 68.13.
and when we are lying among the Pots, to wait for the time, when we shall be
as the Wings of the Dove, covered with silver, and her Feathers with yellow
gold.

Secondly, The tenth.
Consider the exceeding great terror of God, when he is angry, his wrath
burns like fire; It makes the green tree to be like a burnt stick, what will
it do to the dry; It makes the most godly to become like a bottle in the
smoke; Psalm. 119.83 Psalm. 22.15. Psalm 32 4.
It dries up their strength like a Potsheard; It turns their moisture into
the draught of Summer, knowing the terror of the Lord be persuaded to make
peace with him in time; venture not on his hot displeasure. The tasting of the
forbidden Aple will cost thee wonderful dear, Though (which yet in the act of
sin, without madness cannot be supposed) thou should be certain to escape Hell.

Thirdly, The eleventh.
The Church here is a Brand pulled out of the fire, a firebrand to burn her
enemies to Ashes, it is exceeding unhappy to be an instrument of the Churches
trouble. Though God be angry with his people, and he be very just in casting
them in the fiery Furnace of his wrath, yet woe to all these who are Bellows,
or Fuel to that fire, who do vex the Church in any way. Our Prophet Zachary
in his twelfth Chapter shows, That to all these who had taken up Jerusalem
and the people of God, to cast them away from their habitation, as a stone out
of a sling. To all these, Joh. 12.3.
I say, Jerusalem became a heavy, and a burdensome stone, to cut and to crush
them in pieces. Her Neighbors thought to have swallowed her down quick, and to
have drunk her off as a potion of sweet Wine; but she becomes to them a Cup of
trembling, Zach. 12.2.
a draught of poison, which makes them tremble, stagger, and fall without
rising; and which is the Metaphor of our Text, The people of God become a torch
of fire in a Sheaff, Zach. 12.6.
to devour all their enemies round about, on the right hand and on the left.

Nebuchad-nezzars Image, when the little stone did fall upon its feet, was not
only broken all to pieces, Dan. 2.25.
but also made like the chaff, and was carried away so violently by the wind,
that no place was found for any part thereof: All the persecuters of the Saints
have miscarryed for this cause, above any other: The greatest Monarchies and
Kingdoms that have been upon the earth, are vanished, and no re-likes of them
appear this day. None who are wise will touch the people of the Lord, for they
are the apple of Gods eye, the hurt whereof he cannot but avenge. It is extreme
dangerous to be employed by God himself in the chastising of his children; for
usually when the Lord returns in mercy to embrace his chastised child, the
rods of his anger, and staves of his indignation are cast in the fire, Isai.
10.5.16, 17.
till they be burnt to ashes.

Lastly, consider the merciful reasoning of the Angel: The last.
Jerusalem is a brand well-near consumed in the fire of Gods wrath, and
therefore ought to be pitied, and freed from further trouble. How extremely
contrary is this to Satan's logic, and his instruments conclusions? they add
affliction to the most afflicted; they press most the godly, when they find
them weakest, and on the brink of ruin; we have their language in the 71 Psa.
11. God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver
him: Psalm. 83 4.
It is then when they say, Come, and let us eut them off from being a Nation,
that the name of Israel be no more in remembrance. Long sufferings, and extreme
misery are to Satan and wicked men provocations of further persecution; but to
God they be arguments of favor and deliverance: Hence it is, that the godly
lay out before the face of God in their mourning their sufferings to the full,
as most pregnant incitements to compassion: Behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, Lam. 1.12.
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger; Dan 9.12.
under the whole heaven has not been done as has been done upon Jerusalem.
The Lord allows us to spread out before him all the matter of our present
grief, and of our future fears, hereby, as it were, to stir up the
compassionate bowels of his mercy: We would be crying to him, not only to
pull the tree of our Church and State out of that fire which has already burnt
up very many Branches, and is like, if not quickly quenched, to go to the very
Root; but further we would be earnest for that burnt stick, when it is pulled
out of the flame, that the dews of heaven, and the Sunshine of divine favor,
may fall so plentifully upon it, that it may yet again flourish, and bring
forth fruits better and more abundant then ever, and it may become a pleasant
and fruitful Vine, under whose shadow we all may lie down in peace, enjoying
the blessings of God, and singing with a loud voice his praises for our
deliverance from all our present afflictions.

FINIS.

