A Brief Confession or Declaration of FAITH. (Lately Presented to KING CHARLES
the Second:)
Set forth by many of us, who are (falsely) called Ana-Baptists, to inform all
men (in these days of scandal and reproach) of our innocent Belief and
Practice; for which we are not only resolved to Suffer Persecution, to the
loss of our Goods, but also Life it Self, rather than to decline the same.
Subscribed by certain Elders, Deacons, and Brethren, met at London, in the
behalf of themselves, and many others unto whom they belong; in London, and in
several Counties of this Nation, who are of the same Faith with us.
I. WE Believe and are very confident, that there is but one God the Father,
of whom are all things, from everlasting to everlasting, glorious, and
unwordable in all his Attributes, 1 Cor. 8.6. Isa. 40.28.

II. That God in the beginning made man upright, and put him into a state and
condition of Glory, without the least mixture of misery, from which he by
transgression fell, and so came into a miserable and mortal estate, subject
unto the first death, Genesis 1.31. Eccles. 7.29. Genesis 2.17.3.17, 18, 19.

III. That there is one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, who is the
only begotten Son of God, born of the Virgin Mary; yet as truly David's Lord,
and David's root, as David's Son, and David's Offspring, Luke 20.44. Rev. 22.16.
whom God freely sent into the World (because of his great love unto the World)
who as freely gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. tasting death for
every man, Heb. 3.9. a propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole World, 1 John. 2.2.

IV. That God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
^o repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. and the knowledge of the truth, that they might be
saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. For which end Christ has commanded, that the Gospel (to
wit, the glad tidings of remission of sins) should be preached to every
creature, Mark. 16.15. So that no man shall eternally suffer in Hell (that is,
the second death) for want of a Christ that dyed for them, but as the Scripture
says, for denying the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. or because they
believe not in the name of the only begotten Son of God, John. 3.18. Unbelief
therefore being the cause why the just and righteous God, will condemn the
children of men; it follows against all contradiction, that all men at one time
or other, are put into such a capacity, as that (through the grace of God) they
may be eternally saved, John. 1.7. Acts 17.30. Mar 6.6. Heb. 3.10, 18, 19. 1
Job. 5.10. Job. 3.17.

V. That such who first orderly comes into, and are brought up in the School of
Christ's Church, and waiting there, comes to degrees of Christianity, rightly
qualified, and considerably gifted by Gods Spirit; ought to exercise their
gifts not only in the Church, but also (as occasion serves) to preach to the
World (they being approved of by the Church so to do) Acts. 11.22, 23, 24.
Acts. 11.19, 20. and that among such some are to be chosen by the Church, and
ordained by Fasting, Prayer, and Laying on of Hands, for the work of the
Ministry, Acts. 13.2, 3. Acts. 1.23. Such so ordained, (and abiding faithful in
their works) we own as Ministers of the Gospel; but all such who come not first
to repent of their sins, believe on the Lord Jesus, and so Baptized in his name
for the remission of Sins, but are only brought up in the Schools of hum^ne
learning, to the attaining humane arts, and variety of languages, with many
vain curiosities of speech, 1 Cor. 1.19, 21.2.1, 4, 5. seeking rather the gain
of large revenues, than the gain of souls to God: such (we say) we utterly
d^ny, being such as have need rather to be taught themselves, than fit to teach
others, Romans 2.21.

VI. That the way set forth by God for men to be justified in, is by Faith in
Christ, Romans 5.1.

That is to say, when men shall assent to the truth of the Gospel, believing
with all their hearts, that there is remission of sins, and eternal life to
be had in Christ.

And that Christ therefore is most worthy their constant affections, and
subjection to all his Commandments, and therefore resolve with purpose of
heart so to subject unto him in all things, and no longer unto themselves, 2
Cor. 5.15

And so, shall (with all godly sorrow for the sins past) commit themselves to
his grace, confidently depending upon him for that which they believe is to be
had in him: such so believing are justified from all their sins, their faith
shall be accounted unto them for righteousness, Romans 4.22, 23, 24. and 3.25,
26.

VII. That there is one Holy Spirit, the precious gift of God, freely given to
such as obey him, Ephesians. 4.4. Act. 5.32. that thereby they may be thoroughly
sanctified, and made able (without which they are altogether unable) to abide
steadfast in the faith, and to honor the Father, and his Son Christ, the
Author and finisher of their Faith; 1 Cor. 6.11. There are three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father the Word, the Holy Spirit, and these three are
one; 1 John 5.7. which Spirit of Promise such have not yet received, (though
they speak much of him) that are so far out of Love, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, and Temperance, (the fruits of the Spirit,
Gal. 5.22, 23.) as that they breathe out much cruelty, and great envy against
the Liberties, and peaceable living of such, as are not of their judgment,
though holy as to their conversations.

VIII. That God has even before the foundation of the World chosen, (or
elected) to eternal life, such as believe, and so are in Christ, John. 3.16.
Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. yet confident we are, that the purpose of God
according to election, was not in the least arising from foreseen faith in, or
works of Righteousness done by the creature, but only from the mercy,
goodness, and compassion dwelling in God, and so it is of him that calls,
Romans 9.11. whose purity and unwordable holiness, cannot admit of any unclean
person (or thing) to be in his presence, therefore his decree of mercy reaches
only the godly man, whom (says David) God has set a part for himself, Psalm.
4.3.

IX. That men not considered simply as men, but ungodly men, were of old
ordained to condemnation, considered as such, who turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4. God
indeed sends a strong delusion to men, that they might be damned; but ^ee
observe that they are such (as says the Apostle) that received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. and so the
indignation and wrath of God, is upon every soul of man that does evil, (living
and dying therein) for there is no respect of persons with God, Romans 2.9, 10,
11.

X. That all Children dying in Infancy, having not actually transgressed
against the Law of God in their own persons, are only subject to the first
death which comes upon them by the sin of the first Adam, from whence they
shall be all raised by the second Adam, and not that any one of them (dying in
that estate) shall suffer for Adams sin, eternal punishment in Hell, (which is
the second death) for to such b^longs the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 5.22. Mat.
19.14. not daring to conclude with that uncharitable opinion of others, who
though they plead much for the bringing of Children into the Visible Church
here on earth by Baptism, yet nevertheless by their Doctrine, that Christ dyed
but for some, shut a great part of them out of the Kingdom of Heaven for ever.

XI. That the right and only way of gathering Churches, (according to Christ's
apointment, Mat. 28.19, 20.) is first to teach, or preach the Gospel, Mark.
16.16. to the Sons and Daughters of men; and then to Baptize (that ^s in
English to Dip) in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, or in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, such only of them, as profess repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lo^d Jesus Christ, Acts. 2.38. Acts, 8.12. Acts. 18.8.
And as for all such who preach not this Doctrine, but instead thereof, that
Scriptureless thing of sprinkling of Infants (falsely called Baptism) whereby
the pure word of God is made of no effect, and the new Testament-way of
bringing in Members, into the Church by regeneration, cast out; when as the
bondwoman and her son, that is to say, the old Testament way of bringing in
Children into the Church by generation, is cast out, as says the Scripture,
Gal. 4.30, 22, 23.24. Mat. 3.8, 9. all such we utterly deny, forasmuch as we
are commanded to have no fellowship with the unf^uitful works of darkness, but
rather to reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11.

XII. That it is the duty of all such who are Believers Baptized, to draw nigh
unto God in submission to that principle of Christ's Doctrine, to wit, Prayer
and laying on of Hands, that they may receive the promise of the Holy Spirit,
Heb. 6.1, 2. Act. 8.12, 15, 17. chap. 19.6. 2 Timothy ^.6. Whereby they may
mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13. and live in all things answerable to
their professed intentions, and desires, even to the honor of him, who has
called them out of darkness into his mavelous light.

XIII. That it is the duty of such, who are constituted as aforesaid, to
continue steadfastly in Christ's and the Apostles doctrine, and assembling
together, in fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayers, Act. 2.42.

XIV. That although we thus declare for the primitive way, and order of
constituting Churches, yet we verily believe, and also declare, that unless
men so professing, and practizing the form and order of Christ's Doctrine, shall
also beautify the same with a Holy and Wise conversation, in all godl^nesse
and honesty; the profession of the visible form will be rendered to them of no
effect; for without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Isa. 1.11,
12, 15, 16.

XV. That the Elders or Pastors which God has appointed to oversee, and feed
his Church (constituted as aforesaid) are such, who first being of the number
of Disciples, shall in time appear to be vigilent, sober, of good behavior,
given to hospitality, apt to teach, etc not greedy of filthy lucre (as too many
National Ministers are) but patient; not a brawler, not covet^^^ (...) and as
such chose, and ordained to office (according to the order of Scripture, Acts.
14.23.) who are to feed the flock with meat in due season, and in much love to
rule over them, with all care, seeking after such as go astray; but as for all
such who labor to feed themselves with the fat, more than to feed the flock,
Ezeck. 34.2, 3. seeking more after theirs than them, expressly contrary to the
practice of the Ministers of old, who said, we seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor.
12.14. All such we utterly deny, and hereby bear our continued Testimony
against them, as such whom the Prophets of old bore Testimony against, Ezekiel. 34.

XVI. That the Ministers of Christ, that have freely received from God, ought
freely to minister to others, 1 Cor. 9.17. and that such who have spiritual
things freely ministered to them, ought freely to communicate necessary things
to the Ministers (upon the account of their charge) 1 Cor. 9.11. Gal. 6.6. And
as for Tithes, or any forced Maintenance, we utterly deny to be the
Maintenance of Gospel Ministers.

XVII. That the true Church of Christ, ought after the first and second
admonition, to reject all Heretics, Th. 3.10, 11. and in the name of the Lord
to withdraw from all such, as profess the way of the Lord, but walks
disorderly in their conversations, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. or any ways causes divisions
or offenses, contrary to the Doctrine (of Christ) which they have learned, Romans
16.17.

XVIII. That such who are true Believers, even Branches in Christ the Vine (and
that in his account, whom he exhorts to abide in him, Job. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.)
or such who have charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of
Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. may nevertheless for want of watchfulness,
swerve and turn aside from the same, verse. 6, 7. and become as withered
branches, cast into the fire and burned, Job 15.6. But such who add unto their
Faith Virtue, and unto Virtue Knowledge, and unto Knowledge Temperance, etc. 2
Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. such shall never fall, ver. 8, 9, 10. it is impossible for all
the false Christ's, and false Prophets, that are, and are to come, to deceive
such, for they are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5.

XIX. That the poor Saints belonging to the Church of Christ, are to be
sufficiently provided for by the Churches, that they neither want food or
raiment, and this by a free and voluntary contribution (and not of necessity,
or by the constraint or power of the Magistrate) 2 Cor. 9.7. 1 Cor. 8.11, 12.
and this through the free and voluntary help of the Deacons, (called Overseers
of the poor) being faithful men, chosen by the Church, and ordained by Prayer
and Laying on of Hands, to that Work, Act. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So that there is
no need in the Church of Christ, of a Magisteriall compulsion in this case, as
there is among others, who being constituted in a fleshly and generation all
way, are necessitated to make use of a carnal sword, to compel even a small,
mean, and short Maintenance for their poor; when as many other members of their
Churches, can and do part with great and large Sums of Money, to maintain their
vain fashions, Gold, Pearls, and costly Array, which is expressly contrary to
the Word of God, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 3.3. Alas, What will such do when God
rises up, and when he visits, what will they answer him? Job 31.14.

XX. That there shall be (through Christ who was dead, but is alive again from
the dead) a Resurrection of all men from the graves of the Earth, Isa. 26.19.
both the just and the unjust, Acts 24.15. that is, the fleshly bodies of men,
sown into the graves of the Earth, corruptible, dishonorable, weak, natural
(which so considered cannot inherit the Kingdom of God) shall be raised
again, incorruptable, in glory, in power, spiritual, and so considered, the
bodies of the Saints (united again to their spirits) which here suffer for
Christ, shall inherit the Kingdom, reigning together with Christ, 1 Cor. 15.21,
22, 42, 43, 44, 49.

XXI. That there shall be after the Resurrection from the graves of the Earth,
An eternal judgment, at the appearing of Christ, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1.
Heb. 9.27. at which time of judgment, which is unalterable, and irrevocable,
every man shall receive according to the things done in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10.

XXII. That the same Lord Jesus, who showed himself alive after his passion, by
many infallible proofs, Act. 1.3. which was taken up from the Disciples, and
carried up into Heaven, Luke 24.51. Shall so come in like manner as be was
seen go into Heaven, Act. 1.9, 10, 11. And when Christ who is our life shall
appear, we shall also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. For then shall he
be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. for the Kingdom is his, and
he is the Governor among the Nations, Psalm. 22.28. and King over all the
Earth, Zech 14.9. And we shall reign (with him) on the Earth, Rev. 5.10 the
Kingdoms of this world (which men so mightily strive after here to enjoy) shall
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Christ, Rev. 11.15. for all is yours,
(O ye that overcome this world) for ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; 1
Cor. 3.22, 23. For unto the Saints shall be given the Kingdom, and the
greatness of the Kingdom, under (mark that) the whole Heaven, Dan. 7.27.
Though (alas) now many men be scarce content that the Saints should have so
much as a being among them; But when Christ shall appear, then shall be their
day, then shall be given unto them power over the Nations, to rule them with a
Rod of Iron, Rev. 2.26, 27. then shall they receive a Crown of life, which no
man shall take from them, nor they by any means turned, on overturned from it,
for the oppressor shall be broken in pieces, Psalm. 72.4 and their now vain
rejoycings turned into mourning, and bitter Lamentations, as it is written Job
20.5, 6, 7. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite
but for a moment; though his Excellency mount up to the Heavens, and his head
reach unto the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever, like his own dung; they
which have seen him, shall say, where is he?

XXIII. That the holy Scripture is the rule whereby Saints both in matters of
Faith, and conversation, are to be regulated, they being able to make men wise
unto salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus, profitable for Doctrine for
reproof, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. John. 20.31. Isa.
8.20.

XXIV. That it is the will, and mind of God (in these Gospel times) that all
men should have the free liberty of their own Consciences in matters of
Religion, or Worship, without the least oppression, or persecution, as simply
upon that account; and that for any in Authority otherwise to act, we
confidently believe is expressly contrary to the mind of Christ, who requires
that whatsoever men would that others should do unto them, they should even so
do unto others, Mat 7.12. and that the Tares and the Wheat should grow together
in the field, (which is the world) until the harvest (which is the end of the
world,) Mat. 13.29, 30, 38, 39.

XXV. We believe that there ought to be Civil Magistrates in all Nations, for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, 1. Pet.
2.14. and that all wicked lewdness, and fleshly filthiness, contrary to just
and wholesome (Civil) Laws, ought to be punished according to the nature of the
offenses; and this without respect of any Persons, Religion, or profession
whatsoever; and (...) we and all men are obliged by Gospel rules, to be subject
to the higher Powers, to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3.1. and to submit to every
Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, as says Peter. 2.13. But in case the
Civil Power do, or shall at any time impose things about matters of Religion,
which we through conscience to God cannot actually obey, then we with Peter
also do say, that we ought (in such cases) to obey God rather than men, Acts
5.29 and accordingly do hereby declare our whole, and holy intent and purpose,
that (through the help of grace) we will not yield, nor (in such cases) in the
least actually obey them; yet humbly purposing (in the Lords strength)
patiently to suffer whatsoever shall be inflicted upon us, for our conscionable
forbearance.

These things (O ye Sons and Daughters of Men) we verily believe to b^ the
Lords will and mind, and therefore cannot but speak, and if herein we differ
from many, yea from multitudes, from the learned, the wise and prudent of this
World, we (with Peter and John) do herein make our solemn, and scrious
appeal, namely, whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto men,
(of a contrary persuasion) more than unto God? Oh let the judicious, judge
righteous judgment! Acts. 4.19, 20.

And in the belief, and practice of these things, (it being the good old
Apostolical way) our souls have found that rest, and soul peace, which the
world knows not, and which they cannot take from us; of whom then should we be
afraid? God is become our strength, our light, our salvation; therefore, are
we resolved (through grace) to seal the truth of these things in way of
suffering persecution, not only to the loss of our goods, freedoms, or
liberties, but with our lives also (if called thereunto.)

Moreover we do utterly, and from our very hearts in the Lords fear, declare
against all those wicked, and devilish reports, and reproaches, fasly cast
upon us, as though some of us (in and about the City of London) had lately
gotten Knives, hooked Knives, and the like, and great store of Arms besides
what was given forth by order of Parliament, intending to cut the throats of
such as were contrary minded to us in matters of Religion, and that many such
Knives, and Arms, for the carrying on some secret design, has been found in
some of our houses by search; we say, from truth of heart, in the Lords fear,
that we do utterly abhor, and abominate the thoughts thereof, and much more
the actions; and do hereby challenge both City, and Country (in our innocence
herein) as being not able to prove the things whereof they accuse us; and do
for evermore declare the Inventors of such reports, to be liars, and wicked
devisers of mischief, and corrupt designs: God that is above all will justify
our innocence herein, who well knows our integrity, in what we here declare;
the Lord lay it not to their charge.

In the time of building the decayed House of God, Sanballat, and Tobiah,
(wicked Counselors) hired Shemaiah to make good Nehemiah afraid; and labored
against him, that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might
reproach him, and hinder the building of the house of God, Neh. 6.12. For I
have heard (says the Prophet) the defaming of many, Report, say they, and we
will report it, Jer. 20.10.

Subscribed by certain Elders, Deacons, and Brethren met at London, in the
first Month (called March, 1660.) in the behalf of themselves, and many others
unto whom they belong, in London, and in several Counties of this Nation, who
are of the same Faith with us.

Joseph Wright. William Jeffery, Thomas Monck, John Hartnol, Benjamine Morley,
Francis Stanley, George Hammon, William Smart, John Reeve, Thomas Parrot, John
Wood, Francis Smith, Edward Jones, Humphrey Jones Matthew Caffen, Samuel
Loveday, John Parsons, Senior, Thomas Stacy, Edward Stanley, Jonathan Gennings,
John Hammersly, William Russel, Joseph Keeich, Nicholas Newberry, Samuel Lover,
George Wright. John Parsons, Junior, Thomas Grantham, John Claton, Thomas
Seele, Michael Whiticar Giles Brown, John Wells, Stephen Torie, Thomas
Lathwel, William Chadwel, William Raph, Henry Brown, William Pain, Richard
Bowin, Thomas Smith,

Owned and approved by more than 20000.
LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near
Temple-Barre. MDCLX.


