A BRIEF RELATION OF the present Troubles in ENGLAND:

Written from LONDON the 22. of January 1644 to a Minister of one of the
Reformed Churches in FRANCE.

Wherein, Is clearly set down who are the Authors of them, and whereto the
Innovations both in Church and State there do tend.

Faithfully translated out of the French.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1645.

A LETTER CONCERNING the present Troubles in ENGLAND:

Written from LONDON the 22. of January 1644. to a Minister of one of the
Reformed Churches in FRANCE.

Wherein, Is clearly set down who are the Authors of them, and whereto the
Innovations both in Church and State there do tend.

Faithfully Translated out of the French.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1645.

To the READER.
NO sooner did this Letter fall into my ^ands, but straight I had a thought to
publish it; to the end that all the world might be acquainted with the
deportment of that Faction in England, which for these three or four years
together has caused the effusion of so much blo^d there. Some happily of our
religion in France will at first glance disrelish my design: but after they
have thoroughly weighed it, I am confident they will all jointly acknowledge
their engagements to me for presenting them with a work which undeceives their
credulity, who strongly fancy that we countenance their irregular proceedings,
and meet in the same thoughts with those that have been the unhappy contrivers
of them. And it may be also that some among the Catholics will be ready to
say this is but the opinion merely of some one particular Person, and that all
Protestants will not subscribe unto it. But I protest before God, that I never
heard of any knowing judicious man with us, whose discourse agrees not with
that of the Author here; and it were to be wished that the whole world would
conform it self to the example of the Reformed in France. Were it so, there
should no Prince stand in need of guards, or be forced to levy Armies for the
defense of his Person against the insolence and Rebellion of Subjects. There
would be no more undermining the peace of the Church, which would now cherish a
complete union and absolute correspondency betwixt its own and the secular
government, confining it self to its proper limits, and having still a
special regard to that subordination which is required of it. I speak this,
Reader, because it is true; though sundry conceive otherwise of it, either
merely out of a custom they have embraced wholly to surrender themselves unto
the sway of other men's judgment: or because they have a strong prejudice
against the Discipline we practice, as if it were not altogether so agreeable
with Monarchy. Judge of it by the grounds thereof, and pause a while in
comparing our actions with our doctrine (without resting upon any other
consideration) and thou can not but conclude, that the sole drift of our
intentions has ever been to defend our selves rather by the weapons of the
Spirit, then those of the flesh, and that we join in an unanimous detestation
of all such as maintain it lawful to make use of temporal violence for
promoting the truth of the Gospel. This Letter I here present thee with, is
cast in the mould of the true Protestants. It appears in defense of their
doctrine touching the power of Kings, and the obedience of Subjects; withal
condemning their proceedings, who under a pretense of purging the Church from
its errors and enormities, and reinstating Christians in their lost Liberty,
mask a design of engaging the whole world in a horrible confusion. I cannot
inform thee, who is the author of it. Thus much only thou may know, that
sojourning in England, a certain Minister, (a friend of his, and a man of
great abilities) requested of him a large account in writing of the present
distempers there. He has done it, thou see. He paints them in their proper
colors, points out the contrivers of them, and their aims. He makes it
legible to the world, that this Parliament is nothing, in generality, but a
seditious Crew, bending all their endeavors against the Laws of the Realm,
with a design to turn all ^opsieturvy; nor this Synod but (for the greatest
part also) an Assembly of Heretics and Ignoramusses, that trample upon all
the maxims of Christianity, and entertain no thoughts, but of an Epidemicall
confusion. That the People (in gross) are wholly set upon Anarchy, being
cosened by a consent wrought in them by the Parliament touching the Tyranny (as
they phrase it) of Kings; and intoxicated by the Synod with the hopes of a most
blessed condition, were they but once freed from that insupportable yoke of
the Clergy. If happily out of this throng God has sequestered some wellaffected
persons for himself, they are so thin a company, that they dare not declare
themselves, for fear of being overborne by the malice and number of the rest,
as diverse have already been. Weigh by this, Reader, if the malady be not
great, the remedy difficult.

A LETTER CONCERNing the present troubles in England.
Sir,
WHEN I had the Honor to give you an account in writing of my abode here in
England, I had not the least intention to acquaint you with all my thoughs
touching the present distempers of the same. Not that the fear of any censure
could amate me, although I am not ignorant, that he who would give a faithful
indifferent relation thereof, must oppose himself to those ordinary
impressions, which men have already entertained concerning them. And if this
amuse them (as no doubt but it will) that I cannot prevail with my self to
nous^e them on in an error, whereinto the malice or ignorance of their
misinformers has so deeply plunged them, I shall for a long time run the
hazard of their disfavour, as being resolved not to write any thing but of what
I have been an eyewitness, and which you will find to bear no great
harmony with the common voice. It is undoubtedly a matter of no trivial
concernment to provide that the world be herein disabused, and that the truth
of a business of this nature be no longer liable to misapprehension. Wherein
you are somewhat interessed your self by that common profession you make in
the list of such conscientious Persons as are designed to superintend the good
of People, and to steer their Consciences aright. And I hope you (with many
more besides) will not be wanting to give the world satisfaction what a
disparity you conceive betwixt the proceedings of most of these Novell
Reformers, and of those who in former ages attempted to rescue the Church from
that Tyranny, under which for so long a time it groaned.

For my part I find so little conformity in these latter to our first
Reformers, that I think it concerns them to guild over with some specious
pretext the poison they diffuse, as being their Enemies, not their Followers;
or if perhaps they make a show of treading the same path, it is not out of any
intention to join and associate with them, but rather to mar and undo the
work which by their means was set on foot in the world. And in truth, Sir,
what can be hoped for from such a Rabble as this (naturally so insolent and
headstrong) but the marks of Rebellion both against God and Man? it being
their sole employment to advance factions and fidings, when ever the affairs
either of Religion or Policy are brought into agitation. So that if you abate
hence all who have, either (out of haughtines and unbridlednesse of Spirit)
combined against their Prince, or nourished the Schisms and ruptures of the
Church in broaching their empty and wild Fancies, I dare not promise that the
residue shall afford you either a Body of Subjects, or a Congregation of
Christians.

I intend not to discourse of those of the King's Party; wherein ('it is true)
there be some apparently culpable, but yet more of such as I may call really
unfortunate, those alone I mean, that make up the greatest number of Reformed
and Honest men in that Kingdom. I shall confine my Discourse to those, who
bear the World in hand, they are at odds with nothing but Popery, which in
their jealous apprehensions was taking root in England again. With this
pretty cheat they have got the approbation of not a few Protestants, who
(without sifting their design) are by this means engaged to applaude a
pa^^icidiall attempt upon the Sovereign Majesty, and a villainous plot against
the Sacred Overseers of the Church. Either of which two crimes is doubtless
one of the most essential notes of reprobation; nor is it possible for him to
make good the profession of Christianity, who complies or holds any the least
correspondence with such as are knowingly guilty of the same.

Your newfangled Ministers of London are mostly involved in the equal guilt
of both. For who knows not how at the very first rise of these troubles they
preached openly to the People, That Kings are not to be obeyed if once they
assault their Liberties and Privileges (which in their construction is the
first step to Tyranny) or taking upon them to intermeddle in Church affairs,
they fall upon any absurd and impious opinion. Wherein they came nothing short
of Cardinal Bellarmine, who writes, That if Princes shall once apply
themselves to the protection of Heresy or exercise of Tyranny, they are left to
the mercy of the Pope, and the Church, who are first to excommunicate them,
then to absolve the Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and they upon this
discharge, as soon as they can be provided of a competent strength are to
employ it against them, to expose them to punishment, and by all means
feisible to dethrone them. A wonderful thing that they who are such professed
enemies to the Jesuits, that use their persons (when they seize them) with so
much inhumanity, and for the continued revolution of so many years have
exposed their bodies quartered to all passengers (as a spectacle of horror)
upon their most eminent Gates, should notwithstanding shake hands with them in
a point for the which at first they did so much abhor them. Would you not
conclude that they are all alike the Disciples of Mariana, and the Agents of a
Boniface? what affinity is there betwixt these Doctors and Saint Ambrose? when
this great Saint, this real Christian perceived that the Arians were about to
possess themselves of the Church in Milan, with the approbation of the
Emperor Valentinian, he addressed himself unto that Prince in these terms;
Royal Sir, we entreat, we presume not to fight. If the Prince will needs make
use of his Supreme power, I am ready to discharge the duty of a Prelate. I
shall stand upon my defense, but it is in the petitions of the poor. I can
^emoane me, I can weep, I can ^igh; but against Arms, against Soldiers,
against the Goths, my only weapons are tears, nor ought I to use any other
manner of resistance whatsoever. And in another place, If the Kingdom shall
lie panting under the pressures of Tyranny, I am ready to suffer any kind of
violence, even Death it self. Besides that universal injunction laid upon
Christians, to put up injuries with patience, (God having reserved unto
himself the right of revenging by the power of his Justice, as Saint Gregory
upon Job speaks, Man being incapable of performing it, but with a heart
fraught with malice) he knew I say besides this what David once sung to God;
against thee only have I sinned: upon which passage (in the Apology he
compiled for him) he thus comments; He was a King, and so not within the reach
of the Laws: Vi^^^lis delictorum liberi sunt reges; if I may borrow the
attestation of so divine a pen. Now if David were not mistaken, if Saint
Ambrose spoke reason in this point, with Saint Chrysostom, who assures us so
punctually, that Kings are above the Laws; What shall we think of our upstart
Reformers, that have placed Kings below their People, and stir up the People
against their Kings? It is a pregnant evidence they are swayed by that spirit
of rebellion, which heretofore animated the Gregory's, the Bonifaces, the
Mariana's, the Bellarmines, to attempt upon the Honor and life of Kings,
rather then by that spirit of wisdom and meekness, which moved Solomon to
leave this divine precept behind him, (equally obliging all that have not
forfeited their reason) never to divorce the respect due unto Kings from that
which they owe unto God himself; and in case they shall presume to do
otherwise, associating themselves with such Libertines as refuse to pay the
tribute of obedience, to be afraid their calamity do not arise suddenly. The
Pulpits here are full of none but Preachers of discord and division betwixt the
King and his Subjects. In lieu of praises, magnifying the name of God,
Invocation of the Holy Spirit, Confession of Sins, sighs and groans for the
commission thereof, here is nothing to be heard but reproaches, revilings and
accusations. Charity in all other places throws her skirt over the Errors she
discovers, be they as great and numerous as can be. It Is charity here to lay
them naked in the view of the world, and if there be no real ones, to devise
some, that so they may never be destitute of a forgery wherewith to traduce
their Prince. His Person and Actions are both exposed to public reproaches:
The Churches Ring of nothing but declamations against Him; and if happily some
small relickes of shame have ever slacked the heat of those bawling
Predicants, or railing Scriblers, impudence makes others in compensation to
double the Cry. This yet is nothing in comparison of their usual Execrations,
as if that Law pronounced by the mouth of God himself, which forbids to curse
the Prince of his People, no not so much as in thought, did not at all concern
them. That detestable League which in the memory of our Fathers was attended
with such tragique effects in three or four of our Kings reigns, and against
which our Protestants have always so eagerly declaimed, laying their grounds
upon certain proofs drawn from the corruption of Rome, which gave life unto
it, had nothing in it of more venomous consequence, then this we see here, save
that the Emissaries and Boute-feus of the English Confederacy have not as yet
imbrued their hands in the blood of their King.

And can it suite with their profession, who talk so much of reducing
Christian Religion to it is primitive purity, and reviving the Innocence and
Simplicity of the Apostolic times, who call him their Master that reconciled
the world to God, and united men in the same mutual affections, who are not
ignorant that Peace and Concord are the essential characters of a Christian,
and that such should never be the occasioners of war, to employ the sword in
such a manner as this?

I cannot think there is any man so credulous as to believe, that such courses
can find any welcome among those that are Protestants indeed; they may with
many who are such in show only, of which sort are all the opposers, not of
monarchy alone, but indefinitely of any secular authority whatsoever. There
were some in the infancy of the Church, who strained Christian liberty so
far, that they condemned it as unjust for the Enfranchised of God, and such
as were guided by his spirit, to be subject to the command of any creature.

The Donatists sucked the same poison from them, which afterward diffused it
self among the Anabaptists; and in fine reached us also, by means of some who
gave a second birth to this Heresy, which now walks up and down here in great
bravery, under pretenses very specious in the apprehension of some shallow
Judgments. And though I conceive this will not be to the general prejudice of
the Reformed Churches in Europe (by reason of that just jealousy which Princes
ought to entertain, that they hold no intelligence amongst themselves, and
that they do not all bandy togethr against the rights and prerogatives of
their respective dominions.) Yet it must needs (...) to their shame atleast, if
they do not openly declare against the villainy of their proceedings, and the
iniquity of their designs; especially since they have had the impudence to
invite them to an imitation of their example, and to step in for the support
of their faction. I am not ignorant what grounds we go upon, and how little
resemblance ours ^eare to theirs; but the world will not pass sentence upon us
by our positions, but either by our actions or by our silence. For if we be
silent when they are bragging of (...) with us, and yet appearing in the field
against their Soverai^^, who will not be ready to conclude that had we the like
power ^^ our hands, we would do as much every w^^it our selves^ but if (...)
the contrary we speak our minds, condemning the unlawfullnesse and
horridness of their design, (our actions suiting still with (...) doctrine)
in stead of exasperating the secular powers, we shall (...) them: for it cannot
be but they will take part with us, and (...) off such as make them so
subordinate either to the people in gro^^^, or to some select parcel of the
whole body, who (let them talk what they will) are no less Subjects then the
rest. In breife, ^ need but demand whether of the two are the better
Christians; those that wast so much blood to subvert the right of Kings, and to
cherish a war (under counterfeit pretenses) for the suppression of all order,
and engaging the whole world to the same common confusion? Or they of the
Primitive times, who maintained, that to sh^^ blood was to violate
Christianity; to oppose Kings, was to disobey God, and to contest with
Superiors, was to fight against that Order, which he established. I believe
they will hardly be swayed by examples, less by reason; nor that they put any
great value upon the authority, which the practice of the first ages may
challenge over us. If they do, I would exhort such preachers of fire and sword,
to call to mind how the ancient disciplien of the Church denied their
communion to such as had slain an Enemy in a lawful war, and that they
would hence collect how those times stood affected to such as voluntarily
embroyled themselves in an unlawful and unjust one.

See, Sir, in part what I have to say to you upon this argument. It will not be
amiss, if in the next place I acquaint you with the innovations they make in
Religion, and what fruits Christianity is like to reap from the labors of
such doughty Reformers. It Is a truly impious design to per^ue a Reformation in
such manner as these men do, and which tends only to the subversion of an
order established by God, under a pretense of pulling down one devised by man,
which they call Tyranny, because indeed it is the only means whereby to check
them in that full ca^c^^^ of unbridled licentiousness, unto which they are
naturally so much devo^^^. Not but that there is always matter enough for a
reformation both in manners and government, and that it is extremely necessary
to correct the evils and disorders of the present times, and withal to
prevent that corruption which may be feared from the future. But who will be
the fittest to go through with this task? will the Parliament? no, in as much
as the Bishops, that is the Clergy are no longer a part of it. Will the Synod
be able to supply this defect? no, not they, because the whole body is composed
of persons interessed; besides that ignorance and blindness are there (for
the most part) in their greatest exaltation^ or if perhaps there be some
knowing, there is a great dearth of honest men, most of them being possessed with
the spirit of division, which has drawn them into the bypaths of Heretics,
as well ancient, as modern. Well then, shall the People bear the burden?
this is altogether impossible, unless first there be made an universal
resignation of all sense and reason, because (of themselves) they are incapable
of all manner of order and conduct. Neither can the King, assisted only by his
Counsel and Magistrates, be thought a ^it instrument to manage the business,
for fear he make Religion wait upon his own private interest, and by
consequent bring the spirit under the command of the Flesh. The issue then will
be to find out a just and lawful way for the advancing of this Reformation;
which in my opinion can be no other then that of a general Assembly, indicted
by the Prince; wherein the Boroughs shall have their Deputies, whose voices are
to be heard, and their suffrages admitted; The Church it is Bishops and Doctors;
The Parliament diverse of the Nobility, which they may choose out of their
several Houses; and the King his principal Officers. And to make the action
more Authentic to establish in the Church that uniformity, which ought to be
in a body in which the Spirit of Union and Concord is the Moderatour (as that
of Christians is) there may be called thither the most eminent Protestants from
foreign parts, by whose assistance all doubts and scruples may be solved.
This in my judgment is the way, to maintain the several rights of each order
in the State of England, as also in the whole body of Christendom, entire. I
know none that can dislike the project, but your new Independants, and the
fanatique Illuminat^es, commonly called Brownists, who in truth are no other
but the Brats or Brethren of the Munster-Faction. These men have fancied to
themselves a monstrous Commonwealth, an absurd and motley State, in which
there should not be the least cognizance of civil Authority, nor any other
spiritual power acknowledged, but such as the Son of God should by an
insensible and ^idden influence exercise over them. Collect now from these
Premises, how such kind of people stand affected to Royalty, and then what
reckoning they make of Councels, and the Persons they consist of. Their aim
indeed is to ruin both; to have no Rulers or Overseers at all, either
Temporal or Spiritual, Secular or Ecclesiastical. They want no specious
colors to blanch the blackness of their Design. They make their King a
Demy-Apostate, and little better then a Tyrant: They proclaim to the world,
that he had a resolution to violate Religion, and to destroy their Liberties
and Privileges. That he has supplanted the Fundamental Laws of the Realm,
and falsified the Oath made to his Subjects, the observation of which alone
must entitle him to a Dominion over them. As for the Overseers of the Church,
it has no need (say they) of any at all, in as much as the Founder and Head
thereof has skill enough to govern, as he had to establish it. That it is
enough if there be mere Pastors only to preach, without being lifted above
others, or others above them. Such be the Authors and Abettours of this Fancy
who gave the first blow at Episcopacy. A strange thing that some even of the
honester sort, should so rashly mingle with the enemies of that Order,
transported in the simplicity of their hearts by this groundless conceit, that
it is the Prelates alone who have opened the gap to wickedness in the Church,
as if where there are no Bishops at all, Innocence and purity bare an absolute
and sovereign command in the Souls of men. Ferrier, P^tes, with many more
besides in France will be perpetual attestours to the world, that your Church
Government lies no less open to the assaults and stratagems of the Devil,
then that which has been settled from all Antiquity. Were it my drift to
search it to the bottom, it would be easy to demonstrate this with advantage,
and that had it been a few years elder, and lived in a Country where the
Laws of the Prince are not so rigorous against Innovatours, as they be in
France (which permits but two sorts of Religion) or at least if God had not
from time to time raised some eminently guifted Persons therein, (in which
respect I must needs confidently affirm, that it flourishes now more then
ever) there could not have wanted matter, through the many visible
inconveniences thereof, to embroyle the Church in a tedious and perpetual
task. I shall but point at one* it is the equality of Pastors, which indeed at
first blush presents you with a comely gloss, and has a wonderful influence
upon the fancy, when it beholds it at a distance, but (in truth) is the source
of disorder, the fountain of negligence, and the bane of that laudable
emulation among the virtuous to outstrip one another in goodness. It is to
shut the door against the perfection of life, in denying the strictest
observers of their masters injunctions those advantages and prerogatives which
himself has designed them. What a block is it in the way to all those eminent
persons without, who were a coming toward us? You know better then I how
memorable to this purpose is the example of the Archbishop of Spalata? Being
to be honored with no rank at all above others, can you think they will quit
that which they enjoy where they are? There can be no humility so great but may
justly take offense at this. How can any Genius, acquainted thoroughly with it
self, and borne to a pre-eminence over others with some singular endowments of
Nature, be allured over to a profession, whose sweetest bai^e is but a voice
with the meanest, and where its resolutions shall be valued as cheap as those
of any other particular Person^. The world is not to learn what a train of
inconveniences attend these kind of suffrages and Deliberations, and how there
must needs follow many far worse upon the neck of those, so long as there is
nothing but a ba^^ supputation of Votes, without any endowed with Power and
Abilities to poyse them. Put case their Assemblies consist of a hundred
Persons; will there in truth be found ten, who will not rather be opinionate to
cover their several defects, then be conformable to the example of their
fellows, or endeavor to better themselves by their Counsels? Such is that
self-love and radical inclination we have to sooth our selves, that we do not
easily hearken to the commands of reason, till we be awed thereunto. And seeing
this distinction of degrees is so necessary for the good of the Church, how
shall that end be obtained, if there be not some delegated both in and out of
those Assemblies, to represent the power of the whole, to exact upon all
emergencies an account of their proceedings, to have the right of proposing,
and collecting Votes, of ratifying Decrees, of promulgating and putting them in
execution, and daring to the field whatsoever opposers of the same? Is this
feisible without a Bishop, seeing that in such Synods as ours all enjoy an
equality of Power and Authority, and where (according to that proverbiall
censure of the Assemblies of Carthage.) The greater number carries it from the
better? Besides, when the Synod is dissolved, each Minister is left to his own
liberty, to do what his fancy shall suggest unto him. Put case he be found
hipping either in manners or Doctrine, he i^ accountable to none but those of
his own Consistory, who are allwaies in readiness, like so many rotten
Pillars, to support a crazie Wall; or so many blind guides, that will needs
undertake to reduce straglers into the way, or such as lead men upon a
praecipice. So that by this means the offender wants no invitations nor
advantages to inv^igle those that lend an care to him, he being no way
accountable but to another Assembly. In the interim he is proling for parties
to his crimes, and Abettours to his Opinions; so that instead of fearing the
rigor of a Judge in the Synod, he is often provided of an Advocate, which
would be altogether impossible were there one enabled to stifle such disorders
in the womb. This hints me of what I have read in Calvin upon this Argument.
That the Presbyters, to wit, all such as had the cure of Souls, were
accustomed in every City to cull out one amongst the rest, upon whom in
particular they bestowed the title of Bishop, to prevent (says he) those
ordinary Divisions, which flow from a Parity. Notwithstanding this Bishop was
not so far li^ted up above his fellows in honor and degree, a^ that he
might exercise any act of jurisdiction over them. His proper function resembled
that of a Consul in the Senate. He made relation of proceedings in a full
House, ^e advised, informed, exhorted: He ruled a^ by his authority, managed
the whole Action, and put the general and unanimous results of the Senate in
execution, whereto he subjoyneth, that according to the universal attestation
of all Antiquity, the necessity of the times was the first Authoriser of this
Custom. Now this necessity was nothing but those divisions which crept in
among the Pastors of the Church for want of some principal Overseers, which
is now far greater in this Nation, then ever it was with them, as you shall
see anon.

But let us feel a little more the pulses of these men that will have no
degrees or pre-eminence in the Church. They be the very same that would have
none in the State also: They strike at Episcopacy for the same ends they have
assaulted Royalty. They are no strangers to the frowardness of their own
dispositions, but are sufficiently convicted how far each of them in
particular has degenerated from the Maxims, and even from the very grain of
their Ancestors. That they are generally odious and destructive to the
Public, nor can ever build any hopes to themselves but such as must have their
foundation in perpetual discords. That seeing their expectations frustrate,
and themselves consequently in a wretched condition, their only way is to
advance a general confusion, and so to involve all order and constitution of
former ages (which cross their wicked inclinations) in the same common ruin.
The very complexion of these R^k^ ^ells speaks the worth of what they oppose
so eagerly. To which if you add^ the manner how they have from the beginning
invaded it, with what violence they have proceeded, you may easily infer the
baseness of those who put them upon that employment. No sooner had they notice
of those jealo^sies betwixt the King and his Parliament (wherein at that time
there were not a few sick of the same disease with themselves) but they
readily embraced the opportunity, to make their Sovereign and the Bishops
sensible of their inveterate spleen toward them. Having first set some of the
other sex a work, (which in the open streets renounced all shame and modesty,
in lieu of benedictions (wherewith the custom was to greet Princes) to belch
out with a deliberate impudence most traitorous expressions against their King:
the impunity of that sex (whose insolence is oftener slighted, then punished)
animated the other to a desperate resolution of offering violence unto his
Person. To which purpose they invest his Palace, seize upon White hall gates,
and had not the well managed providence of some of the Lords (though strongly
suspected by that frantique multitude) quashed their design, he could not have
escaped their hands. The King having given them the slip, immediately they
divert the stream of their fury upon the Bishops; and as if they had been of
a Jewish descent, and some Pilates were upon the bench to give judgment, they
cried, away with those followers of Christ, as the other had cried, away with
Christ himself. The Parliament endeavoring in a ^rudent way to settle this
disorder, found a rub at the first from some among themselves that had a maine
hand in the business, giving private intelligence to that seditio^s Rabble,
how their proceedings were disliked, and how the House of Lords had carried the
matter in favor of the Bishops, and that they likewise were seconded by a
considerable party of the House of Commons. This set them all on fire in a
moment; insomuch that of Accus^^s and Prosecuters they had turned Executioners,
if those pious men had not by keeping out of the way given place to their fury.
In the mean time they are still urgent, they bawle, they threaten. But
perceiving how that great Body would hardly be forced without destroying it,
and throwing themselves also into danger, they join subtilty to open violence.
The Bishops must be impeached of High Treason against King and Kingdom, and of
subverting the Fundamental Laws of the Land. This prodigrous calumny
nourished the boldness of their Abettours in Parliament, and drew over to them
all the faint hearted, debarred the liberty of protecting justice, and rendering
her venerable to such as had yet freely withstood those violent courses. From
that very hour they are interdicted all resort to Parliament. Their Houses are
plundered, their persons imprisoned, their complaints derided. In a word, there
is not any outrage imaginable which they did not exercise upon them; insomuch
that the very reasons they alleged to clear themselves, were brought under
the compass of a high misdemeanour, albeit they knew not how to proceed
against them; For even in their greatest hear they were forced to leave the
matter undecided, and so it continues to this day. They are never more
gravelled, then when they fall upon debate of that. The Parliament, that is to
say, the Lower House, and the Synod, do both join heads together to put an
end to the Question. The one, in debarting those a place in their Assembly, who
have a light to sit there from the first institution of Parliaments, and whose
votes in that place are so fundamentally necessary, that without them all the
decrees of the other are null, and the original constitution of the Kingdoms
infringed thereby. The other, contributes to their total extirpation, and to
shake off all obedience to them, that so they may open a gappe to their
Libertinisme, and force upon the Church that disorder and confusion which the
spirit of giddiness, they are possessed with, has ever aimed at.

Judge, Sir, by these proceedings what sincerity there it in these Novelists,
and if any honest man can shake hands with them.

Suppose the Bishops had indeed transgressed in matter of State, this is but a
poor plea for the proscription of Episcopacy in self. The Persons should be
punished, not the Profession abolished; after the example of those Emperors,
who having upon good ground, (such at least as appeared so to them) ejected
certain of their Bishops, did forthwith substitute others in their rooms, to
let the world know, that if with one hand they put the law in execution against
the crimes of men, with the the other they would still maintain the reverence due
unto an Order in their esteem so sacred, that those they had divested of it,
they adjudged altogether unworthy of the same. Suppose now they were found
peccant in point of Religion; this they may be as Men, and as Sinners, not as
Bishops.

The Ministry among us was never arraigned for those strange crimes, which
have been proved upon some of it is Professors. The Church is here to employ
her authority, which stretches not beyond suspension or deprivation, and that
of the Persons, not of the Function. How many Bishops has Antiquity beheld
shamelesly profaneing the holiness of their Profession? How many tainted with
avarice, ambition, tyranny, heresy, sorcety? and yet never man saw any
considerable number of them condemned; never durst or would any prefer a Bill
for the suppression of the Order.

I am not ignorant of what is here commonly objected, that absolute authority
and supers^uity of riches are the usual bane of the Soul; and that there be
but few men of rank, upon whom they have not a corruptive influence. That
these two, being as it were inseparable Accidents, cannot be sequestered from
the Church without destroying the Subject which contains them. That the
Waldenses and Albigenses concurred in the same judgment, and that of late they
have received a total proscription among our selves.

For the first, it is granted by all, that Riches and Authority suite not
indeed with a narrow soul, incapable either of rightly understanding, or
knowingly valuing the pure and true dictates of Christianity.

To the second, who denies but there may be Bishops without either investing
them with an absolute Power, or affording them any such excess of riches?

In the whole Primitive Church there were none but indigent and necessitous
ones, enabled with no other authority, then to dispense the graces of God, and
to proclaim his Judgments unto the People. And yet no doubt but if choice
were made of consci(...) men after the example of the Primitive Fathers, there
would be little ground to grudge them what the bounty of Kings and the consent
of the People has suffered them for so many ages successively to enjoy.

If they be such as are indeed worthy of a Bishop^icke, they will employ their
authority in executing Justice upon the vicious, expend their riches in
accommodating the needy, as the Prelates here do generally at this day. Their
very Adversaries confess them to have ever been most strict inquisitours
after crimes, and most severe ^^nishers of the same. Nor can they deny, that
the poor and unfortunate, the Widows and Orphans have ever found somewhat
either in their Counsel or credit to protect them from scorn and reproach.
And they must needs farther acknowledge, that besides those works of Charity,
(which call for a reverent esteem, and even a kind of veneration to the memory
of an infinite train of Bishops) the public monuments founded by them both
for the Honor and the profit of that Kingdom, are so many pregnant arguments,
that they have employed their great revenues, rather as just Stewards for the
benefit of others, then as the vassals of their own pleasures. Witness so
many stately Churches, famous Colleges, rich Hospitals, so many Bridges,
Foundations, Dotations, Edifices, which owe their being to that Order.

It Is true; the Waldenses and Albigenses were generally against Bishops: but
who can give us the true meaning of those we desire may pass for our
patterns? How many were there amongst them whom it would be a great crime to
propose for our imitation? I cannot be induced to believe, that they of the
most rational sort among them, who were best acquainted with the Errors which
had then stole into the Church, were the same with those who at that time made
war upon the Bishops. Nor can I think, that they who massacred Trincavell,
their Viscount in Besiers, and dashed out their Prelates teeth, (having taken
Sanctuary in Saint Magdalen's Church) were in the number of those whose
successors we glory to be called. If so, what may we think of the Divine
Providence which forty two years after gave these bloodthirsty men into the
hands of the Croissades (as very bloud-suckers as themselves) who sacrificed
them in the self same Church, wherein they had spilled the blood of others.
Vengeance pursued them into the place they had chosen for a Sanctuary, and
where they had exercised their cruelty, there they received their punishment. A
remarkable circumstance to assure us that the finger of God's Justice was
there. In the History of the Kings, the Books of Chronicles and M^ocab^^s,
there are sundry notable examples of God's particular indignation against some,
upon whom he executed Justice in the same places where they had committed their
several crimes. The like you have in Josephus, and generally every Author
abounds with such examples; all which I will baulke with silence, that I may
not pass over two or three remarkable accidents to this purpose, in such
fresh memory and knowledge of all the People here, that even at this day they
strike the consciences of the most with astonishment, however they still
continue in defiance to such visible summons from that providence which
endeavors by this means to awake them.

The death of Hampden is one. This man whom all your Novelists looked upon as
one of the chief Actours in the managing of their design, and who was the
first that put them in a posture of Arms against their Prince, received his
Deaths-wound in the very same * Chalgrove field.
field where first he put the Militia in execution. That of the Lord Brooks is
another, and perhaps you will think it a greater miracle. In the very moment
he threatened to demolish the Cathedral of Lichfield, the same day whereon they
celebrated the memory of the Saint Ghad.
Saint that founded it, he was slain with the glance of a bullet sent him from
the hands of a dumb person, and that too just as he was peeping out at a door;
which I think has not been hither to observed. These circumstances are not to
pass our attention, being so many infallible testimonies of a Divine vengeance
I might add to the list of such examples that horrible disease of Py^^. At the
same time that his Conscience was gnawed with the vermin of ambition,
affecting a Tyrannicke power, God gave him for food to lice, and made him
perish by such a kind of death, as once he did those monstrous Tyrants, Herod
and Philip the second, who both imbrued their hands in the blood of their own
sons.

It remains now, that I should answer to such objections as are drawn from
the custom of France, wherein you can spare men labor your self with many
more besides, that are acquainted with the present inconveniences which attend
that way, and foresee such as may be feared for the future.

In the mean time I will proceed to examine the grounds of Episcopacy. And
first of all I say that Episcopacy is either of Divine, or at least of
Ecclesiastical Institution. If of the former, then ought Bishops to be
continued where they are, and restored where they are not. Put case it be of
the latter only, we are to examine whether it was established upon good
grounds, or no; and if so, whether those grounds be not of equal validity with
us, and we obliged as much thereupon to maintain it, I intend not at this time
to discuss either of these two questions: that task has already been so
amply performed by sundry eminent writers of this age, that there remains
little more to be done to it. Nor will I deliver my own opinion, I shall only
insist upon two others. Saint Hierome says that Episcopacy was instituted as
the only means to stop the current of those Divisions which sprung at first
among Christians. Before (says he) that by the instigation of the Devil there
were any fidings in Religion, and People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of
Cephas, and I of Apollos, the Churches were ruled by the joint resolutions of
Pre^sbyters. But when every one began to fancy, that those he baptized were his
own, and not Christ's, it was ordained throughout the whole world, that there
should be one chosen out of the rest with whom the cure of the Church was to be
entrusted for the rooting up of Schisms, and taking away all matter of
dissension. What this great Doctor spoke so punctually of the Baptism of Paul,
of Cephas, and Apollo^, is nothing (in my judgment) but an allusion to what we
read in one of the Epistles to the Corinthians, and ought to be construed of
all those seeds of division, which the Devil scattered among Christians in the
infancy of the Church, and such as he has thrown amongst them ever since.
Thus we see so many monstrous Heresies have been strangled by means of this
Order; some ^^^oone as they saw the light others, after they had in a sort
empoisoned the whole Earth. And if still there have continued some in the
World, or any slips of the old root have been remaining, it has generally
happened in such places where Episcopacy had not it is full force, and where
Counsels have not enjoyed their due liberty, as in some of the Southern and
Eastern Countries, and some also of the North, where Christian Religion has
suffered either a total extirpation, or at least some notable alteration by
(...)

If then Episcopacy has produced fruits answerable to their hopes who did
first institute it (as beyond all contradiction it has) to what course shall
we betake our selves in these distractive times, wherein the Devil is so busy
at his old game, in^omenting Divisions among all those whom the Spirit of God
has freed from the yoke and slavery of Rome? now especially when there are so
many visible Factions amongst us, some siding with Luther, others with Calvin,
and most of the rest following no other guides, then their own apish unruly
Fancies? what course I say shall we now fly to for remedy, but the example of
all antiquity, in tracing their Steps, and conforming to their rules, withal
applying our selves to those Antidotes wherewith they healed the like
distempers we suffer, and are upon the point to perish under? In those times
the unity of the Head begat an Unity of Mission, this an Unity of Doctrine, and
both together an Unity of all the Faithful among themselves. But in these
days of ours, from the multitude of Pastors equal in authority, there flows
a diversity of Mission, from this a repugnancy of Doctrines, and from both
jointly the Schisms and sidings of People; which could never have befallen us,
had men contented themselves with a mere Reformation of Episcopacy, and not
utterly abolished it; Or if during their Division, they had established it in
such places as they had made themselves Masters of, or where they enjoyed a
Toleration. This is clear from the example of Rome, whose Disciples are never
at odds with themselves, but still keep the Body close and well compacted in
all it is Members, through the skill of their Conductours, who have the sole
power of deciding controversies amongst them, and they neither have authority,
nor any the least badge thereof, but what they derive from their Heads. So that
it is a rare thing to behold any Innovation of Religion with them, either in
Doctrine or Discipline, and if any should arise, that Order does so hedge it
in, that it cannot proceed a step further, then they please themselves.

If examples borrowed from our Enemies be odious, let us insist only upon that
of England. So long as the Bishops were not molested in their Function^ that
Kingdom was not disquieted with any Schisms or disorders in the Church. There
durst not a Sectarie show his head, till those Christian Guides were overborne
with violence, and all superiority among Pastors decryed. Now if their
conjecture be sound; who say that Saint Hierome builds not a bare allusion upon
the words of Saint Paul, but a clear observation, that immediately after the
Apostles times there arose certain jarres among their Disciples, some
pretending to a right of greater pre-eminence by reason of some better
endowments (which every one in particular ascribed to him who had baptized and
instructed him) and that upon this foundation the Devil attempted to build a
multiplicity of bodies, and prevailed so far, that he seemed to have got a
share in the Church then in her Infancy; have not we reason every moment to
fear the like now from so many upstart Doctrines (...) Religion, and so many
different sects in Europe, resulting from that variety of Opinion^ which is
every where to be seen amongst out Teachers? The malady is so great, that it
seems to be arrived at its height, and so little care is taken of applying a
remedy, as if men had a design palpably to betray the cause of God. The
greatest mischeife I find herein is, that so long as our exterior government
shall continue in the same posture it is at this present, it will be impossible
to heal the distemper, and if we go about to alter the Order established, it
must needs be from better to worse, in as much as every sect will be busy in
tempting others after it, and so make a rupture in the Body, and tear the
Church in pieces.

Let us once more reflect a little upon Antiquity. Had there been ought amiss
in the first institution of Episcopacy, and had not indeed the spirit of God
been the sole contriver of it for the common benefit of the Church, could his
providence have given way to that general unanimous approbation it received
from Christians in every corner of the Universe? We see clearly, that of all
the new Laws and several alterations devised by the wisdom and prudence of
man, there is not any one but has been opposed in some part of the world, or
other. Witness what (...) has been ^^^^uded upon the Church either against
the custom of Antiquity or the rules of Scripture, such as ar^ the Supreme
authority of one Person in cases spiritual, the several te^^^s about the
Encharist, Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, with many other. But
this decree which enables one of those that are employed in the disp^^s^tion of
the Heavenly treasures with a power above his fellow^^ has continued
inviolable among all the Nations of the earth for well nigh the space of
fourteen hundred years together, not a man in all this time opening his mouth
against it, (what ever difference of opinions, Schisms and Heresies the Spirit
of blindness introduced within the pale of Christianity) till this age of our
Reformers, who persuaded themselves they could by humane prudence setle among
the Ministers of the Gospel an equality of merit, of zeal, of charity and
affection, by ordaining an equality of Power and Authority, and were further
confident by this means to cut the throat of that Tyranny, under which our
Fathers for so long a time had groaned, as also to re-invite into the world
that sweetness and ^ffability, wherewith the founders of the Church so
expressly charged it should be governed. And lastly they presumed, that if the
Prelates were once outed, integrity, innocence, and good manners would be
restored to their place in the Church again, nor should luxury, incontinence,
or any other kind of lewdness usurp their Rooms any more for ever.

These indeed were good wishes and desires, but the means of persuing them
stark naught. Neither did they meet with a general likeing, diverse having
rejected them as fighting with that success which others had promised
themselves in the use of them. Did not Germany, which first threw the Pope out
of the Saddle, and where the purity of the Gospel was first restored to its
ancient Liberty, retain still in her Churches that superiority, against which
they declaime here? It Is inviolably maintained in most countries of the North.
Did the Patriarch of Constantinople abjure or condemn it, Cyrill.
when he reformed himself after the example of the Protestants in the West? Or
dare any of us deny him our Communion, because he retained it? Nay was he ever
so much as advised to forgo it? The luster and majesty of the title he bare
was no impediment to him from being both a confessor and a martyr of the same
Christ we worship.

But let us herein consult with our most eminent Reformers. Luther a most
violent opposer of the Authors of ruin and corruption in the Church, after he
has spent himself in heaping reproaches upon the Bishops, calling them
Idols, and dumb Statues, idle puppets, deceitful maskes, trunkes without
branches or roots, empty shadows, stage players, such as were so far from
knowing the honor of their Function, and how to discharge it aright, that they
did not understand the Etymology of the name they bare; wolfes; briefly:
tray^ours, (...), murderers, the monsters of the Universe, the burden of the
earth* the Apostles of Antichrist, molded and fitted for the destruction of
the world and extinguishing the light of the Gospel, at last he comes to
himself again; and tells us that he inveighs only against the corruption of
their liver, and their palpable Ignorance, as for the r^st, the he harbored
not a thought against the Order and frame of the Church, and that nothing he
had spoken of those idle drousie Animalls and filthy belly(...) Gods ought to
be applied to the honest Pastors, and real Bishops, whom he there calls the
Head^ and Overseers of the Christian Church. In other places, as namely in his
Captivity of Babylon, he overthrowes the sacrament of Order, and rejects (as
a groundless fancy) their indelible character. But he quarrels not there with
Bishops alone, but even with Priests and Deacons, avouching all the faithful
equally to be Priests and Deacons, and endowed with equal Authority.
Notwithstanding recollecting himself, he concludes for the exellency of
Episcopacy, acknowledging the name thereof to be sacred and ancient: and that
if he deny it those against whom he declaimes, it is because he thinks it
unlawful to bestow it on such, whose corruption and filthiness vendors them
so unworthy of it. In the Tract he compiled for the instruction of Ministers,
he closes hi^ reformation with an establishment of Bishops, to which he would
have the Cities of Bohemia conform themselves in electing one or two, and
enabling them with Authority over the rest, to go in visitation about the
Churches after the example of Saint Peter in the Acts, which he styles a
lawful and Evangelicall Archiepiscopacy. But if men ^e so vainly timorous
that they dare not adventure upon the reestablishing of an Apostolical
Institution, he permits them to retain the custom of Rome, in having Bishops
to call, ordain, and confirm^ such a they shall find capable according to the
platform and Doctrine of Saint Paul. So likewise you may see diverse examples
of that age, which testify that the opinions of those times were much different
from ours about the point in Question. We find in one of Peter Martyrs
Epistles to Beza, that a certain Bishop of Troy making a scruple of continuing
in that profession after his conversion to the Reformation, was unanimously
received and acknowledged of all for a lawful Prelate, whose Authority
together with his Piety proved a maine advancement of the Churches good. This
worthy Author not condemning Episcopacy in general, passes only this verdict
upon it, that in as much as none are raised to that dignity but by the favor
of Princes, Christians can have but faint hopes of reaping any great benefit
thereby. In the same place he concludes for the necessity of their visitations,
as a present remedy to curethe natural infirmity of man, who is ever declining
from bad to worse, and be speaks there of Primates and Archbishops, as of
those, who for Sanctity of life and Purity of Doctrine were designed to this
Function in the several Cities and Sees of greatest note: withal condemning
those who intrude at their own pleasures into the Ministry, and concludeing
it is not without some emphaticall ground, that in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus the several conditions and qualifications of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons are so punctually described. Where it is worth your observation, that
he marshalls all three in their proper ranks, a pregnant evidence that he made
more then two degrees of Ecclesiastical Order. And so likewise does the Author
of our reformed discipline in France, who in the first Article acquaints us
with three sorts of Ministers, Bishops or Pastors, Deacons, and Presbyters,
quoting to this purpose the same Epistles with Peter Martyr. Where two things
deserve our notice, first the name of Bishops, and next that of Presbyters. As
for the former I cannot but wonder why he should confound it with that of
Pastors, and then after distinguish both from Presbyters, if it be true (as
many would have it) that Presbyters, Pastors, and Bishops, were but one and
the self same thing in the Primitive Church. As for the name of Presbyters, it
is misapplyed with us to such whose Function speaks them to be no more then
Deacons. A thing utterly repugnant to the practice all ages. Whence it
appears, that he was somewhat ashamed to baulke an Order which he knew the
Primitive and purer Christians held in such singular estimation, and the
Church, maugre the several corruptions in it, has ever since maintained. At
least we may shrewdly suspect, that he afforded this name a place there, as the
print or shadow (at least) of a Function which had been before, and the seed
or basis of that which ought to have been established among the Churches in
his time; then especially when it might be done with the least prejudice to
manners or doctrine, both which it was constantly believed were most of all
undermined by Episcopacy. The truth is, all the Divines of greatest note with
us have been driven upon this conclusion, whenever they have fallen upon the
same Question. They all jointly condemned with extremest rigor the
corruptions, which in their times were (in a sort) the individual companions
of that Profession, but they never deny it its due reverence, considered
abstractively in it self. Calvin after he himself had executed the Office of
a Bishop in Geneva, Instit l. 4. c. 4. 4.
discourseing of the ancient institution of Bishops in Cities, of Archbishops
above them in Provinces, and in fine of Patriarchs advanced at the Council of
Nice above both the former, says, that this was done ^^ order to the
discipline of the Church, and withal acknowledges, that Antiquity
notwithstanding such innovations, had not the least thought of obtruding upon
the Church any other form of government, then what God himself had prescribed
in his word. That howsoever they bestowed on that form of their own the name
of Hierarchy, a word not extant in Scripture, yet we are not to dwell upon the
notion, but to weigh the nature of the thing it self. By which passage, Sir,
you may easily infer, how this worthy Author stood affected to the Order we
speak of. That of Beza an able judicious writer (if we reflect upon the times
he lived in) is no less for our purpose, then the former. He grants in one
place, that Episcopacy was useful in the Church, and that the distinction of
Bishops and Archbishops was first instituted for the read^er conv^^^ing of
Synods, and managing the affairs of the Church with more steadiness. To wave
what this able Auth or has farther delivered upon the Question, who will not
hence conclude (if he cast but an eye upon the many difficulties they meet with
that are to steer the inclinations of men either in Religion or Policy) that
he was so far from disallowing Episcopacy, that on the contrary he approved
it as an Institution of highest consequence to Christianity? And in the
particular case of England, every body knows, that these two eminent Persons
absolutely sub^^^ibed to its continuance there. The one of which has published
so much to the world in a Tract against Saravia^ and does not the other also
speak expressly in behalf of those in that Kingdom, which the men of this
generation would quite extirpate?

But let us farther examine their opinion who speak of the thing in general,
Pol^^^^ is pe^emptory, that to make up those breathes in the Church which
happened after the Apostles times, there was one set ever the rest of the
Presbyters, and called by way of eminence Bishop, whereto he subjoyneth, that
in relation to that primitive order and discipline of the Church, there has
ever been one ranked before the rest of his Brethren to keep them within
compass, and to prevent the broaching of any new doctrines. Melanchton is yet
more express. The policy of the Church (says he) that is the exterior face
thereof, is compounded of two ingredients. The first is the Ministry, a thing
of Gods own immediate institution, (and it contains five parts, 1. The right
of calling and ordaining Ministers. 2. The injunction to preach the Gospel. 3.
The power of remitting sins. 4. of administering the Sacraments, and 5. The
right of exercising Jurisdiction upon Offenders by excommunication.) The second
is the humane Constitutions of Bishops, and Counsels, who are to regulate the
degrees of Ministers, and the difference of time and place when and where to
execute their Functions. Now (says he) those constitutions are to be
maintained for the cherishing of good Order, yet so as they be drained from all
tincture of superstition, And he gives the reason, because they have a kind of
right natural, the very law of nature obligeing us to the constant observation
of good order in the conduct of our lives. A passage very part for Episcopacy,
as noting unto us the impossibility of composing any Church* disorders without
it. For the Members will then tear one another in pieces, and the body which
kept them together in so close and strict an union, cannot long mal^taine the
peace and harmony which that order as the soul infused into them, as Saint
Basil somewhere speaks. I cannot wave neither a passage I have sometimes read
in Hierome Savanarola, a bitter enemy to the corruption of the Clergy, and one
that vehemently declaimed against the disorders of the Church. If (faith he in
his book de veritate Fidei) there shall happen any kno^ty difficult scruple in
the Assemblies of the faithful, the Bishops are they that must decide the
Question: which must needs be construed of that superiority, whereby they are
to bridle the boldness and insolence of such as being hurried on with a spirit
of confusion, disquiet ^he Church with maladies hard to be cured. This moved
the other Hierome about 1200 years ago to avouch, that the prosperity of the
Church did so mainely depend upon the superior Minister, that were it
otherwise, there would be as many Schisms among Christians, as Presbyters.
Which consequent (says the Archbishop of Spalata) is manifestly seen in such
of the reformed Churches as have abandoned Episcopacy. This was the reason why
the Princes and all those of the Clergy that subscribed to the Ausburge
Confession, did join in such an open Protestation before God and Man, that
they sought not for the extirpation of it. They were as well acquainted as we
with the corruption of the Bishops, and had as much (at least) to fear from
their continuance, as we can possibly have. And yet to prevent the unavoidable
necessity of that confusion, into which they would otherwise have fallen, they
unanimously agreed upon the defense of that Ancient Order, and to oppose with
all eagerness such as should endeavor the abolition of the same. This they
hotly pursued, not barely in order to Religion which they labored to rescue
from Romish slavery, but also for some secular considerations, intwisted with
Religion it self; as the union and concord of the People, without which it
would be a very hard task for them to preserve their several Rights and
Prerogatives entire. This also is the reason why the succeeding Emperors made
so many attempts to bereave the German Protestants of this Order, being taught
by experience that Episcopacy keeps them closer together, and that this union
of the People is the greatest obstacle to their ambitious designs. Had there
been any Bishops in the Palatinate, all the rest of the reformed parts in
Germany would have struck in for their defense, and engaged themselves in the
same quarrel, France it self would not have suffered them to be made such an
easy prey to the house of Austria. But all things seemed to conspire the ruin
of that State, which to the prejudice of it is own particular interests, the
interests of Christendom, and of all those of the North (who had declared
themselves both against Rome, and against all such as aimed at an universal
Monarchy) would needs set on foot new maxims, and pursue the project of a
reformation, from which it had so many visible evils to fear.

I have long since exceeded the bounds of a Letter, and (contrary to my first
thoughts) have well-nigh swelled it into a Volume. The fear I have to
trespass upon your patience makes me pass by a whole cloud of our first
Reformers, all jointly subscribing to the same conclusion. And besides, the
small remnant of time behind will not suffer me to recall into your memory what
those of our Age determine upon the Question.

I have scarce heard of any able and judicious Divine with us, who values not
this Ancient Order as the band and instrument of that piece which Christ
preached. I know very well that all your narrow and popular Judgments do
lean another way, and that the number of these exceeds by much that of the
more knowing sort. Nor am I ignorant, that there be some able malicious heads
amongst us, which clearly see the truth, but cannot affect it; they are so
transported with the love of an unlawful and counterfeite liberty, that they
never busy themselves about the prevention of that disorder which it will
inevitably (sooner or later) pull upon them and all such as adhere to them.

Mounsieur du Mouli^ is none of that number. This gallant man (whom God
honored with so many eminent gifts above all that were either the Authors or
Abettours of such corruptions as had crept into the Church) is peremptory in
the point (appealing to the general suffrage of Ecclesiastical story) that
immediately after the times of the Apostles, or indeed while they were yet
living, there begun in every City to be one of the Pastors set over the rest,
distinguished by the Title of Bishop, and invested with a power above his
fellows, to prevent that confusion which ordinarily flows from equality, and
this institution met with a general approbation; whence (says He) we cannot
excuse Aerius for opposing the determination of the Church in his time, when
the difference stood only in point of Discipline. A little after he concludes,
that in England God made use of certain Bishops out of the Church of Rome for
accomplishing that glorious work of the Reformation; whereupon the name and
dignity Episcopal has been derived successively unto such his Ministers,
whom he has raised up to discover the errors and corruption of men. That in
other places where God made choice of Presbyters and Doctors, the Pastors of
the Church are barely styled Ministers, the People with us being not able to
digest the names of Priests and Bishops, the bad conversation of such as went
under that name having rendered them so extremely ^dious. Which yet is but a
slender ground for their extirpation, as I shall clear anon.

Antonius de Dominis, an able m^n without question, and a professed adversary
to the Romish Tyranny (under which in fine he perished) maintains with great
force of reason, that the Election of Ministers, to wit, of Bishops and
Priests, was made by the Apostles according to the institution of Christ; that
the Church has always acknowledged and professed a difference betwixt them;
the diversity of their functions and the general practice of antiquity having
ever ranked Bishops before Presbyters.

And in the same place he takes the paints to collect and salve the several
passages of Scripture which seemingly speak the contrary, as also those in the
Fathers, and Canons of Councels. Whereupon he gives us a very remarkable
observation (which I gave you a light touch of before) and it is this, That all
such as forsook the Communion of the Catholic Church (as the Novatians and
Donatists) would yet still retain their Bishops, knowing very well that the
Church could not possibly subsist without them, as being absolutely necessary
in the Catholic Church, of which every one in particular would pretend to be
a Member.

And hence is it that in Rome there have sometimes been three at once; one of
the Catholics, who was the lawful and true one; the other two, of those two
bodies (or rather dismembered pieces of the Church) which they set up for no
other reason, but because they would otherwise have been convicted to be
without the pale of the Church of Christ.

I hope Monsieur Blondell and Salmasius, when they have once purged Episcopacy
from such corruptions as the spirit of lying had fastened upon it (on purpose
to render it as pernicious in the use, is it was sacred in the institution)
will no longer keep aloose in th^^ opinions from us, ^ut sadly laying to heart
the evils which will inevitably oppress the whole Church, if once it be
deprived of it is ancient form of government, they will contribute such advice
to this miserable Country, as their knowledge and honesty shall suggest unto
them: nor continue to stifle a known truth, as many at this day (strangers to
neither of us) so unconscionably do. Let the Monks grumble (as long as they
please) against that Order, to which they cannot endure their own extravagant
rules should be any way subordinate. Let the insolent and saucy Jesuit oppose
their authority, and slinke out of their sight for fear they should take
notice of his Corruption. But let us whose thoughts ought to be most pure, and
actions most regular, submit unto those maxims to which these fifteen last
Centuries have paid an universal obedience. Who knows not that if the Power
delegated to the Ministers of the Gospel should be equally shared amongst all,
Confusion and Division must needs be the issue? Had not the Jews (who were but
an inconsiderable Body in respect of us Christians) their High Priest,
answerable to our Bishop in every particular Church? who marched before the
rest, enjoyed diverse peculiar prerogatives above his Brethren, and had certain
distinct functions in point of Religion apperteining to him. Does not even
reason inform us, that it is impossible for any Congregation or Society of men
to keep long together, if there be not some one set over the rest, that (like
an indissoluble chain) is to restrain the several members (how different and
disagreeing soever among themselves) within the limits of their proper
callings. What would be the issue of all our Assemblyes, had they not a
president over them? by means whereof we still retain an Idea of that
Churches practice, which we have abandoned for it is impurities. And this indeed
is the only Antidote for all sores and distempers in the Church; no remedy so
present and Sovereign; it being impossible for the same man to differ from
himself. We see that Families are ever at unity when they bear an orderly
subjection to the Master of the House, be there never so many private jarrings
of opinions among the several members.

Examine we the matter yet a little further. Is there any thing more agreeable
to reason, then that the less depend upon the greater, the weak and feeble
upon the strong? in a word, to behold that subordination in the world, that
where any prejudicial counsel^^ or resolutions shall happen to ^e proposed,
they may be timously checked by some intervening authority, and kept within the
bounds prescribed them.

How many may we every day see attempting to pass the bounds of their
abilities and professions? and of what a banefull consequence the impunity of
such irregularities may prove, I leave it for any man to determine. This I Am
sure made the Divine Providence speak by the mouth of Saint Paul, that 1 Cor.
14. 29.
when the Prophets speak, there should be some to judge. That which follows
is very observable; v 33.
The spirits of the Prophets are subject unto the Prophets; whereof presently
he renders the reason, For v. 34.
God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all Churches of the
Saints.

Behold, Sir, at a nearer distance the reasons for which this Order was first
established, which in my judgment are of equal force for the continuance of
it to all ages; seeing you have as great cause now as ever to fear those
inconveniences which attend on equality. You have Councels to be assembled,
Schisms to be composed. Heretics to be convinced, and many ill appointed
Churches to be visited.

But there is yet a more special and pressing motive in the case of England,
to wit, the Genius of the People, who being accustomed to gaze upon a gorgeous
outside, will not without much reluctance be drawn to yield any manner of
reverence and submission to such as stand not upon the vantage-ground of
honor. Witness their Divines and all the gowned tribe. Let their virtues be
never so legible, the Great ones look upon them but as so many silly fellows
in black, extracted out of the scumme of the People, who for their part think
they do them a great honor, if they shall vouchsafe to use them as their
companions. The case being thus, what may we think would attend the
extirpation of Episcopacy out of that Kingdom, but the utter contempt of
Christianity?

From vilifying the persons, it is ordinary to proceed next to a slighting of
the Profession, though never so sacred. And if they put such a cheap esteem
upon the Persons of those that are to direct the Conscience, and watch over the
soul, with what oscitancy and indevotion will all their counsels and
instructions be entertained amongst them? It Is indeed the dignity of the
Prelates which has hitherto supported the dignity of Religion, and if any
manner of respect has been paid them, it was first excited by the Majesty and
luster of that superiority wherewith God has invested them, as the most
natural means to keep in an Evangelicall awe a People, whose very Genius
seconded with excess of riches and security, has merited them the name of the
most insolent People in the world.

But they tell us, that the Bishops of mere Overseers were become absolute
Lords; and of Rulers had transformed themselves into Tyrants: which indeed may
be true of some, but not of all. How many have there been in England since the
Reformation so far from the least smacke of their Predecessors or any of
their fellow brethrens vanity, that on the contrary in examples of modesty and
and humility they have left most of the truly Reformed Pastors in Europe
behind them? who knows not that the now Bishop of Dur^a^, notwithstanding the
large revenues he formerly enjoyed, and the several titles of honor
particularly annexed to that Bishopric, has manifested to the world that he
is cast in the same mould with those untainted souls of the Primitive Church.

All men may read his temper, and what spirit swayed him in his greatest
prosperity, inasmuch as now sharing in the common calamity, deprived of all his
livelihood, and brought to indigence, thrown down from so high a pitch of
greatness to so low an ebb, from so much honor to so much infamy, shut up,
as it were in a prison, without ease, without liberty, and almost without a
friend too, aged about fourscore and five or six years; he bears it all out
with such composedness of spirit, such an absolute resignation of himself to
the Divine Providence in the midst of these his trialls, that he seems to have
no part in the corruption of the Times, and those impurities wherewith they
charge his Brethren: such a large portion he has in the innocence and virtues
of the Primitive Martyrs.

Did ever any man behold a more Apostolic man, then the present Bishop usher.
Primate of Ireland? I applaud not now the learning either of the one, or
other. I speak only of their piety, that characteristicall virtue of the
Saints.

Could any the most active and noted adversaries of Episcopacy ever blemish the
conversation of Doctor Bromhall Bishop of Derry, of Jewel, Bilson, Hall,
Downham, Davenant, Sands, Abbot, Andrews, Usher, Prideaux, and a large
Catalogue besides of such whose virtues are not yet come to my knowledge, no
more then their names? For all those prerogatives they enjoy above other men by
reason of the Character they bear, for all that superiority and those titles
full of pomp and magnificence the Laws of the Land have allowed them; did
ever any know them give the least scandal to the most scrupulous conscience,
or the least occasion for the meanest Subject to complain of them? On the
contrary, the whole course of their lives is a copy worthy the imitation not
only of such as had need to reform themselves, but even of the most
unblameable persons. I should but wrong their modesties in proceeding any
further. And I would be loath to distaste them, having no other intent then
simply to describe them. However I shall confidently a vouch thus much, that
they live in Episcopacy with much more integrity, then any of their
Persecutours do in their professions; as being conformable to their intention
who first gave life unto it. The Divine Authors of so sacred ^n Ordinance knew
well enough what high conceits are apt to surprise the souls of men when once
they are lifted up above others: and hence was it that of so many names
wherewith the Apostles invested the Rulers of the Church, they pitched upon the
name of Bishop, for such as were to fit at the Stern. There were others that
carried more state and luster with them, as that of ^astour, wherewith homer
honors his King, of Elder, of Doctor, of President, of Chief. But this is a
name of toil and diligence, by which the first imposers of it intended to
contain such as they had exalted above the rank of others within the bounds
of their c^lling. And agreeable hereunto, what pains have the men we named
ever denied to consecrate unto the Church? Have they ever thwarted the Rules of
their first Institution? And if the name they bear speaks them engaged to a
perpetual task in managing of public affairs, have they not ever applied
all the powers of their souls to the pursuance of the same? Yes, they have
done it with a flaming and saint-like zeal, and have made the world read in
their Actions their constant readiness to sacrifice their lives and fortunes
to the good of their Brethren.

But they are traduced for countenancing Popery where it was already, and
scattering some new seeds thereof where it had been extirpate.

This may be true of some, but is a gross slander upon the most of them.

If it had a simple toleration, this was done mostly out of a charitable regard
toward the Reformed Churches in Popish Dominio^^; nay further for the good of
the Papists themselves whom they so tolerated. Their examples, their
conversation, their affable deportment might happily one day draw them over to
a Profession from which banishments and other the like rigorous courses do
commonly divert them. Religion cannot be forced upon the soul. God must either
Infuse it himself, or persuade it by men. Had the Bishops leaned never so
little to the Popish Party, and could they have been induced by any warping in
opinion to favor those of that Religion when the Protestants were overborne in
Ireland, they would certainly have used them with more humanity when they had
them at their mercy; as an argument of that good correspondence betwixt them.

But the case was much otherwise, so as never were any in a more deplorable
condition, then they. There is no manner of reproach, disgrace, loss and
persecution, which has not befallen them. Had the Bishops there been such as
the common voice proclaims them, would they not have bee^ spared? And if they
had not been Protestants indeed, would they not have gone over to the
Conquetours, and have followed the prevailing party? was there for all this, I
will not say a Bishop, but even any well affected to Episcopacy, whom the
threats of Fire and Sword could prevail with to embrace Popery, and renounce
the Reformed Religion?

They further tell us, that they doated too much upon titles of pride and
ambition, and such honors as the superstition and Idolatry of blinder times
bestowed on them. Beshrew their hearts that did so. But the Innocent have
reason to complain of hard dealing, if they must be listed with the guilty,
were there indeed any such at all. You will pardon me if I shall hereupon
avouch, that many even of our own men have sometimes picked a quarrel where
there needed none. I remember we once fell in discourse upon this argument, and
how after some slight debate you agreed with me in the upshot, that the
Overseers of the Church ought in all reason to be invested with some distinct
and peculiar character to draw respect from inferiors; That this was ever the
practice of the Church, and the very intention of those that established a
superiority therein. Whence arose the several appellations of Father,
Paternity, Pope, Holiness, with many such in use with antiquity. Nor is
Episcopacy and the respects due unto it commended unto us with more
earnestness, then formerly they were. As God seems to have graven his image
in a more eminent manner upon the face of such as are in authority, thereby
representing his unity, (an unity not to be paralleled with any thing in the
world) in like sort has the Church universal honored them with such
prerogatives as might best denote the obedience due to God himself who
conferred that function upon them. Hence does the Author of that Epistle to the
Trallians, which goes under the name of Saint Ignatius, use these express
terms; Reverence your Bishop as ye do Christ, reserving also a share in the
honor to the Presbyters, that so by your subjection to the Bishop and the
Presbytery, y^ may be sanctified in all things. This Presbytery, as he there
interprets it himself, is the College of Presbyters, a sacred Assembly, the
Bisoaps Counselors, and such as we call Assessours in civil Courts, to whom
he enjoynes obedience as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ. Where the distinction
he makes betwixt the honor due to Bishops and that appertaining to Presbyters
is worth our observation. For he says that the former are to be reverenced as
Christ, the other as his Apostles; which he would never have done had he not
presumed that they, who were entrusted with the care of the Church, did govern
it according to the rules of their Master, surrendering themselves to the
obedience of his holy spirit, and these holding fast to their head, won
authority to their Ministry and all their instructions by that conformity
betwixt them.

I am not Ignorant that some cavil at this exhortation, and take occasion
hereby to condemn that age of having first attempted upon the honor and
respect due unto Christ; as if by such expressions the Bishops were put into
the balance with him; but these men consider not how all this was grounded
upon Scripture; He that hears you hears me; They have not rejected you but
me; Obey th^^ that have the rule over you. And besides, what Ignatius enjoines
in behalf of Bishops, Polycarpus a disciple of the Apostles expressly
recommendeth in behalf of Priests and Deacons, in that excellent Epistle he
wrote to the Philippians; which we have only seen in manuscript. Abstaining
(says he) from these things, be ye subject to the Priests and to the Deacons,
as unto God and Christ: the like expression was used by the Primitive Doctors
of the Church in exhorting the People to obey their Kings and Princes, which
they borrowed from an Epistle fathered upon Barnabas, not This Epistle of
Barnabas was (...) first printed at Oxford by the Lord Primate of Ireland, and
since at Paris.
yet published to the world. What inconvenience can there be in bestowing that
upon one which has been given to many, and allowing as much to a Bishop, as
has been granted an Assembly of Presbyters, seeing that (in the language of
antiquity) the care of the Church which was dispersed in the whole body, is
united in him, and that authority which had been scattered amongst so many,
wholly devolved upon him? Suppose this corruption in manners they talk of were
such indeed, or worse; suppose farther, that the Bishops were guilty of some
errors in Doctrine; may we for all this suppress them? nothing less, nay we
are not so much as to decline theirs or any man^ company upon this ground
alone, if we will believe one of our most able and judicious writers; (...) I
mean, who in his Lecture^. Of the Church, has this passage, that we ought not
to deny a diseased Person the benefit of our society, if the malady be not
mortal and contagious. That in the body the separation of any one part is
dangerous, what error soever has infected it, except it be Heresy or
Superstition, otherwise there can be no just cause of doing so. As for the
depravation of manners he is yet more express, affirmeing it downeright folly
for any man to conceive that a sufficient ground of separation, and alleging
the words of Christ, they sit in Moses chairs, what therefore they bid you,
that do; and he gives the reason, wheresoever there is purity of Doctrine, God
must needs have a Church, though encombred with a multitude of faults. Now if
this eminent writer had occasion to speak thus, what a gross shame is it for
such as have nothing to object against their Bishops, but the bare corruption
of manners, to endeavor not only a simple separation from them, but a total
suppression of them? As for their Doctrine, that is Scot-free from censure; it is
indeed so pure, that it agrees in every particular with that of our best
reformed Divines, witness their several Tracts of the Eucharist, The power of
the Pope, The right of Kings, The adoration of Images, and the like; which
assure us, that those which at this day advance the purity of Religion, are
their deserving successors that labored so much in the first establishing of
it. Such were the Prelates God employed in this great work, the Archbishops
of Canterbury, and York, the Bishops of London, Worcester, in Peter Martyrs
time, Cran^er, Ridley, Lati^er, Hooper, men all famous in their generations,
and such as knew how to weild a Bishopric. Most of which dyed martyrs in that
hot Combat they maintained against the Errors and impieties of their times.
Before them (when men durst scarce mutter of a Reformation) one of the Bishops
of Lincoln^ courageously entered the Lists with the Idolatry Gros^head.
and Superstition into which the Church was then plunged. And he performed the
Combat with so much gallantry, that the common suffrage of all good men after
him gave him this honorary title. The Hammer of Rome. Yet for all this they of
London ma^^e him and the rest I have named you the common the (...) of their
Invectives, both in the Press, and in the Pulpit. They spare not to call them
in public a pack of impostours, and Hypocrites, such as never traced the
paths of Christianity but in a r^^ling posture, their souls being drunk with
the cup of abdomination, what fellowship can we have with such a generation as
this? We, who have ever paid so much honor and esteem to the memory of those
worthy men, that we have placed them in the rank and calendar of our Marty^^^
Nay our most upright and conscientious Divines have proposed each circumstance
of their lives and deaths, as the most exquisite patterns in all Europe (and
perhaps in the whole world besides) of an unwearied constancy in asserting
Truth and suppressing falsehood.

Finally, they are accused for intermedling too much in State affairs. They
will needs have it unlawful for them to bear any share in the administration
of Justice, and that such privileges should be annexed to Episcopacy, which
(say they) are incompatible with ^^y but the Secular Authority, and therefore
they took care to d^vest them of the same in the beginning of this Parliament.
They which harp so much upon this string are the very same malignant Spirits
of which I have formerly given you the character. Had they but any shadow of
reason, is it possible they should thus fight against the custom and example
of so many ages both in their own and foreign Countries? Who knows not that
the Constitutions of greatest consequence in any State have bin made in
Counsels and Assemblies of Bishops? What else means that ancient Ordinance
(of almost 900 years standing) which pronounces all Elections of Kings void,
where the Bishops and chief of the People are denied their (...) And whence
arose the custom, in all debates of preserving inheritances and successions in
families of having as much recourse to Episcopal as Regal Authority in that
behalf? We find that King Aethelstant ^^^. 928. by express Statute joined
the Bishops in Commission with the Justices Secular, to stop the current of
Injustice, and to root out all the seeds thereof. Those employments did not
divert them from the care of the Church Councels were no whit (...).

On the contrary, we find that in this Age (or a little before) wh^^ the
barbarism of the Saxons had almost spent it self and men begu^ to taste the
sweetness of Christianity, that the Bishops (thereupon resuming their
Authority, and following the advice of one B^nif^^^, Archbishop of Mayence)
ordained, that every Presbyter should yearly give an account of his Ministry
to the Bishop, who likewise for his part was yearly to visit his Diocese, and
in like manner to yield an account of his proceedings to the Metropolitan;
these and many other Ordinances (tending all to the establishment of purity in
manners) were with all rigor put in execution, notwithstanding they set a part
some time for secular affairs. And this is further very remarkable, that
Bishops themselves made laws for the government of the People; We find it
amongst others in one Odon Archbishop of Canterbury, who exhorts the Prince
to yield all manner of obedience and submission to the Bishops, which speaks
the antiquity of their Power in this Kingdom: a power which I can see no cause
should be denied them, if those that are invested with it be sincere Professors
of true Christianity (as they ought to be who are preferred to Bishoprics) no
more then their right of ^itting in Parliaments, a right common to them with
all the Bishops that ever have been in the world, and to which those of this
Kingdom have a stronger title, it being but the small remnant of that great
power they had once, and which they managed wit^ (...) much discretion. Nor
was it ever known that either King or People endeavored their extirpation
heretofore, no not so much as to exercise my rigor upon their persons, for
about eleven hundred years together, since the tyranny of the Saxon Kings
forced them to quit the Realm and retire themselves to France, that they might
enjoy more case and liberty of Conscience in the service of God.

If ever their Votes in Parliament were liable to suspicion, it was doubtless
in the reign of Henry the 8, when they had so straight a dependence upon Rome;
that Prince having in a manner shaken off the Romish yoke, and by his own
sole authority taken upon him the government of the Church of England (which
Pope Nicholas had heretofore freely resigned to Edward the Confessor) had just
cause to fear that in those Conventions they would betray his interests^or of
the Holy See's sake, (as they call it) and so by consequent that he run a
great hazard of his own Prerogative in not excluding them. Notwithstanding be
never had such a thought. No more had Edward the Sixth, nor Queen Elizabeth;
and certainly those Princes had more to fear for the Rights of their Crown,
(which they rescued from the Romish Subjection) then the People at this day can
possibly have for their liberties and Privileges. Their Religion then bound
them to what (in all probability) was very prejudicial to the Rights of their
Kings nothing does now oblig^ them to the least disadvantage of the People.

Then they swore obedience to the Bishop of Rome; now they do it to none but to
God himself. Then the discipline of the Church had well-nigh suffered a total
subversion, and England (after the example of Poland) might have conceived that
the Nobility alone, without Bishops, were entrusted with the Reformation of the
Church, and that there was no more need of Prelates for Counselors of State,
that is, to sit in Parliament. Notwithstanding neither did that Example nor
these considerations prove prejudicial to the Bishops: The Fundamental law of
the Realm, by which they are established, together with the necessity of
maintainin^ them, and besides that sundry the most eminent amongst them had
courageously sacrificed their lives in behalf of Christianity, o^^poysed all
other considerations whatsoever. And the law which first seated them in
Parliament, expects them there still; now especially, when God (...) leased to
make use of Public votes for the government of the Church, they are of more
importance then eve^. They are in England, as in our Assemblies of State, or as
the Clergy in our highest Courts of Justice. Which of our Kings, (who are
absolute Monarchs, without sharing their Power, either with People or
Parliaments (as they do in other places) which of them I say, did ever
entertain a thought of debarring the Bishops this Privilege. We find indeed
in a certain old Constitution, that one of our Kings out of a zealous and
pious intent, making (it seems) a conscience of diverting them from the
service of God, discharged the^ all, except the Abbat of Saint Denis, from
assisting at Parliamen^^ and hearing criminal cases; but we find not that
this Ordinan^^ was ever put in execution: but on the contrary that the
weigh^ie^ employments of those times were wholly devolved upon Churchmen, whose
abilities and honesty won them such a general repu^^ that the custom then was
for Princes to select, among others, two Bishops for the chief of their
retinue, to be the (...) of the Court, and withal to see that justice were
exactly and due (...) administered. They had likewise two Masters of Requests
continually attending on them, one of which was always ^ Clergy-m^^ who gave
present Justice. And we find in a certain Constitution of one of our Philips,
that of five appointed to give answer (...) such Petitions as were presented in
Parliaments, two were to be Laymen, and three Clerks.

But what need we go farther then England to warrant the equity of this
custom? debar the Bishops their right of sitting in Parliament, and what
respect will a proud licentious People afford the Clergy? you may assure your
self none at all. Let them use what means they can to make them, their
Synods, or Counsels, of any esteem with them, they will conform no further
to them then they please themselves. Indeed to disvote Bishops in such
Assemblies, is to bereave them of all Authority, and to open a gap for any
wild Chrochers in point of Religion to enter in that Kingdom. It Is in a word,
to suppress the Bishops themselves, to throw down the Pillars of the Church,
and so to render the conservation of Christian Purity impossible.

Perhaps Sir, you may think I speak in this more then comes to my share,
being one who profess to have no portion in the corruptions of Rome, and so
much to abhor the Superstition of embracing such things as some upon diverse
pretenses, (either out of ignorance or malice) have introduced into the world,
to the great prejudice and disquiet thereof, and in derogation to the just
liberty of Conscience. But if you please to reflect a little upon that
prodigious clashing of opinions, which at this day divides England into so many
several sects, you will certainly conclude with me, that in case this Order
be once abolished, neither innocence of manners, nor integrity of doctrine, can
any longer enjoy a place in that Church. The reason (...) obvious, if it be but
considered how, since the discontinuing of Episcopal Power in that Kingdom,
those that owe obedience and should be accountable for their doctrines to the
Bishops, do now live in such a horrible fashion (as I have already informed
you) that we may safely believe the most of them are the spawne of such as were
once disgorged out of the mouth of Hell, and dispersed in the Church to stifle
Christianity in her Cradle, rather then the successors of those that have been
the constant assertors of truth and opposers of falsehood. Witness the several
impieties and heresies both ancient and modern, where with they empoyson the
souls of that People, who (in the common confusion) listen to them, blindely
swallowing down (under pretense of Reformation) all sorts of fancies and
doctrines indifferently. The most absurd dreams of the old Chiliasts, the most
pernicious ertours of Origin, the most infamous libertinisme of the
Anabaptists, and the most execrable impieties of the Soci^ians, do usually
take up the greatest part of their Sermons, the rest being designed either for
inflaming the Auditors with the coals of sedition, and setting both parties
at an irreconcilable distance; or else to embase all manners to the lowest
degree of corruption. Yet in this general depravation, God has reserved for
himself some well disposed persons, and endued them with courage to enquire
into their actions, and to brand the crimes of the Age.

They have stoutly expressed their dislike of what has been constantly
delivered by many hundred Preachers in that Kingdom. I will not present you
with an exact list of all they have published.

Judge with your self, if there be any impiety those men will make scruple of,
many of whom (out of an extreme unheard of impudence) have had the boldness
to defame in the open pulpit some of the other sex, whom they could not tempt
to lewdness in their private Houses. I am very credibly informed that their
names were presented to the Parliament, but could never hear o^ any punishment
so much as intended them* this in my opinion was the (...) crying sin, then
that of the Ghostly Father, who seduced a (...) in time of confession. There is
in this an unparalled kind of scandal, and such as you will find far to
surpass the greatest crim^^ which have ever been charged upon any Heretic
in the World. Such disorders were not to be heard of till (...) Bishops were
outed of their Jurisdiction, and ill Church discipline robbed of it is force and
virtue, notwithstanding the natural irregularity of that People.

Three years Anarchy and Independance in the Church have plunged that State
into more confusion then all the Civil Wa^^, the case, prosperity, and long
enjoyed plenty, the wildness and debauchednesse of many of their Princes in
former times could do^. There be some, I know, that lay all the blame upon the
negligence of the Prelates, accusing them of betraying that care where with
they were entrusted for the good of the People; and are therefore urgent to
have th^^ made the first examples of Justice, as having (...) led the Churches
with a company of scandalous deb^ist fellows, instead of honest and faithful
Pastors. But were this true, the evil they complain of would have showed it
self during their Authority, and while these monsters were in place, and not
only within these few years, as it has done.

Not would this shameless ca^umny deserve any other answer, were it not
expedient to let the world know, that at the very moment the peace of the
Church was molested, the Devil shook off his chains, and has ever since
without all control disgorged his venime in the midst of it.

So long as there was a perfect harmony of affections betwixt the People and
their Pastors, and an absolute conformity to those rules which were
unanimously observed for the space of a whole age and upwards; such as had any
seeds of a corrupt and depraved soul, were at least overawed, and so not
daring to appear abroad, they were made incapable of doing any mischeife.
Those who are best acquainted with the Innovations of the times, and that make
any conscience of a Lie, will all conclude with me, that the disorder which at
this day has overcast all England with an everlasting shame, owed it is
beginning to none but such as have usurped the place of those ancient Divines
and Pastors which they drive to their Cures. They are for the most part but a
schismatic and factious Crew, which the madness of a brutish and seditious
People has confusedly thrust up into the pulpit: Men of a far different
temper from those, who were in a peaceable and Legal way preferred to those
places before: Such at Land. were Holdsworth, Hacket, Featley, Marsh, Shoot,
Squire, all men of abilities, and such as the Puritans themselves, before ever
these troubles began, followed with admiration. These worthy persons who have
by their learning and conversation so much advanced the Protestant cause, when
to satisfy their Conscience and discharge the duty of their callings, they
endeavored to prevent the growing evils, and to choke the Ieeds of that fatal
and deadly division among all the members of this Kingdom, were shamefully
debarred of their Liberty, the exercise of their profession, and to complete
their miseries, having first made them spectatours of such ignorant, malicious
and turbulent Firebrands as were preferred to their Benefices, and possessed of
their Houses, they thrust them into Dungeons, where they still continue loaded
with chains and ^^ons, bemoa^ing their own and their Countries misery. The
most of the Cambridge Doctors have well nigh been in as bad condition for
refusing to take up arms against their Prince.

Above all Doctor Ward, who after he had been Professor of Divinity in that
famous University for the space of thirty years, reputed generally for one of
the most pious and knowing men ^^ his time, and who had with much vehemence
opposed Popery and Arminianisme, and all other Innovations of our age, has
suffered diverse torments by their cruelty, who endeavored to extort his
approbation of that tyranny which they exercised upon the Souls of all those
they sought to engage in their faction. In fine, he died, having been kept in
bonds as a vile Malefactor: His last words acquaint us sufficiently with the
nature of his crime. -- I will never (said he, giving up the Ghost) be a Rebel
to my King, nor well I ever contribute to that outrage which is done to my
Prince. Those be the deb^ist f^ll^wes the Bishops set up; these be the Monsters
whom they chase out of their Pulpits, and banish the Churches. The (...) which
the Parliament, or rather a frantic people, have put in the^^ rooms, are
such as I have formerly described you, who preach nothing but injuries, and
denounce nothing but cursings; and yet, for all this, talk of agreement with
us in France.

Certainly it highly concerns us to entertain no manner of commerce or
alliance with them.

I speak only of the outward conformity; as for that within, what fellowship
and unity of spirit can there be betwixt us and those that are enemies to all
Order, and harbor so many impurities amongst them? These are they of which
your Synods must henceforth consist, (if the Independents do not quite
suppress them) and who must prescribe Rules to Christendom. These be they who
must mould the Discipline and dispose of the Government of the Church. Judge
now with what wisdom and holiness it is like to be governed. Let them
ordain or execute what they please, the Magistrates must be no better then
Lookers on, in as much as the Clergy and themselves are two distinct bodies,
which must needs draw along with it such consequences as are most pernicious
both to Church and State; For by this ^^nes a door is opened not only to
sedition, tumults, and civil wars, but even to all excess of (...) and
licentiousness, to which that Nation is naturally devoted. There would be
less cause to fear any such disorder, might the Bishops be still continued,
and enjoy their Privilege of sitting in Parliament. The People would
entertain better correspondence one with another, and Peace would sooner
flourish amongst them.

The Prelates (like faithful Pastors) preaching innocence as well by their
practice as their doctrine, and as members of a Convention representing the
whole State, would by their authority nourish good agreement and perfect
harmony in all the inferior Clergy. This your Boutefeus and opposers of
Episcopacy perceive well enough; and therefore would have no Rulers at all,
neither Bishop, nor Magistrate. In which respect they are far worse then the
Ministers of that Tyrant of the Church, who in shaking off, as much as in them
lies, all obedience to secular Princes, acknowledge a multiplicity of Heads
amongst themselves, and by the several ascents and power of superi^^ity, which
they call Hierarchy, (and which they have prudently established for prevention
of discords and confusion) they arrive at last at one, to whom all
indifferently are bound to submit, as to their spiritual Monarch.

They brag withal of an intended conformity to Geneva; But let me tell them,
before they can do this, they must abjure that Independence which they are so
hot in pursuit of; and in stead of being Masters and Lords Paramount in their
Consistories, they must submit to their just Authority, whom God has in every
State deputed to represent his Authority, to wit, Princes, and their
Vicegerents: For so it is in Geneva, where in the place they issue forth their
spiritual censures, one of the chief Senators is always appointed to pass
sentence upon offenders, without the concurrence of any one besides, which
denotes the subordination of the Consistory, and it is subjection to the
Magistrate. I instance not in this Custom, as if I thought it worthy the
imitation: no, it has it is blemishes as well as those in other places, and is
perhaps as repugnant to the ancient practice of the Church. That which I most
dislike in it (as a matter of dangerous consequence) is, that instead of the
usual Discipline among the Faithful in winning the Soul from vice by sweet
alluring means (after the example of God, who draws us with the cords of
love) they exercise a temporal Jurisdiction, and practice the severity of
Judges merely secular; which begets two evils at once; the first, an
intrenching upon the Churches function, in depriving her of the liberty of
censuring crimes: The second is, that by the rigor of that Custom Offenders
are many times driven to such desperate resolutions, that they choose rather to
flee the City, then to abide the haz^rd of a trial; whence commonly arises a
third; namely, that by the intercession of Parents or Friends, they are
permitted to compound with their purses, and so that repose and security which
should be found only in the goodness of men (such especially as would be
accounted Saints) i^ often to be had in the corruption and venality of the
Judges: the ready way to impenitency and hardness of heart.

Can they now after all this object against the Bishops of England, that either
avarice or corruption has prevailed with them to connive at the vicious, or
that they used too much rigor and precipitation in the execution of their
authority? If so be they have any design to make Geneva their pattern, For my
part I find nothing commendable in their Discipline, but this; that our first
Reformers have hereby given the world sufficient proof of their absolute
aversion from infringing the force of Laws, or undermining the Authority of
the Magistrates; And that they never dreamt of being endowed with a power (so
directly opposite to all secular authority) which might any way disoblige them
from obedience due to Princes.

The custom they have in their monthly Assemblies is yet more for our
purpose. For besides that they never conveene without the consent of their
Senators, either expressed or employed, (no more then our assemblyes do in
France) the several results and acts of those meetings are altogether invalid,
till the same Powers have approved and ratified them; which is yet more
remarkable, in as much as there they confine themselves to the cognition of
such causes alone, as reflect either upon manners, or Religion.

The Palatinate went beyond Geneva in this particular, where in the
Ecclesiastical Assembly at Heidelberg, the Prince had always his Officers, or
Overseers, as I may truly call them: Nor was there ever any Synod held within
the verge of his Dominions, where there was not a President deputed by Him; and
besides what ever was agreed upon, nothing could be put in execution, till it
had passed the examination of his Counsel, and received his own approbation,
A custom very conformable to the practice of all^ges since the infancy of the
Church, whenever any Counsels at all were held, or where there was any
Prince, or such as either might or would challenge any interest in them.

Would our Reformers here walk in the same Track, they would abate of that
insolence, whereby they maintain, that the power they exercise is no other
then the power of Heaven, nor would they any longer call their Conventicles the
Tribunal, and their Censures the Decrees of Christ. They would talk no more
of a right of conv^^ning in despite of their Magistrates, or Princes: and when
they were conveened by their authority, they would attend their approbation, as
necessary to the execution of what they had determined. And in case they were
at first denied it, they would no^ straight pick a quarrel, and excommunicate
them, much less would they dare to depose them for any opposition whatsoever.
They would confine themselves simply to a power over the conscience, without
encroaching upon the civil Magistrate, and under a pretense of advanceing
piety toward God, and charity toward their neighbor, would no longer abuse
such weak silly people, as suffer themselves to be inveigled by the persons
they sustain as Ministers of the Gospel.

But we may lawfully conclude, they think of nothing less; they have a
quarrel with the temporal laws, and down they must sooner or later, if this
torrent be not maturely opposed. They will destroy all Legal Parliaments and
overturne all secular authority.

This is the mischeife which all the sound Members of the present Parliament
should eagerly struggle with, and not consent so slavish ^y (as their manner
has been) to such things as threaten the whole with inevitable ruin.

All the care they take and the pains they bestow here to reestablish, as they
pretend, the freedom of their Votes, the Liberty of the Subject, and the
purity of Religion, are indeed but so many attempts to involve themselves, with
all the ancient rights of Church and State in the same common destruction; the
Capital Enemies thereof insensibly gathering ground, and notwithstanding all
their fair pretenses, making their party so strong, that when the Parliament
shall have fancyed themselves at the very ^op of their design, (thinking now
they have plucked up all Tyranny and superstition by the roots,) they will
find in the issue, that they have entangled the State in so much confusion as
all the wit of man will never be able to compose, There is no Law here, but
Arbitrary. What house is secure? What person free? What wise man regarded? What
honest man imitated? What vice punished? What virtue rewarded? What stranger
priviledg'd? What Minister of State unviolated, contrary to the Law of Nations?
All professions, degrees and qualities, are hudled up together in the common
confusion. The People which used to receive Laws, in this general hurliburly
prescribes them, ignorant, malicious, and giddy headed rabble that it is; it
must be shaping a monster which the whole world cries out of; nay, it is
already formed. The London ^out being now the sole Moderatours to all the
Rebellious part of the Kingdom. They have ruined the Nobility, despoiling them
partly of their means, and partly of their power. Such of the Peers as
continue still amongst them, are neither of any account, no^ Authority. You
shall have three or four seditious rascals of the City, who are of no
extraction, no merit, no name, (but what they have purchased in traduceing
honest men, in murdering the innocent, and turning each place that lies within
the reach of their fury into a disconsolate Wilderness) more listened to, and
draw more abettours after them, then all the House of Lords can do. So that me
thinks I hear some interpose and say, certainly this convention you tell us
of, has nothing but a counterfeit name; and is no more then the shadow and
empty picture of a true Parliament: things are carried there with so much
precipitation and violence, that for any man but to talk of moderation, and to
endeavor the recalling of some humanity into the minds of men, is the ready
way to be accounted a Malignant: and they that have attempted any such matter
have been used accordingly: Witness the many Members of Parliament, who being
returned thither upon a free Election, according to the Laws of the Land, have
nevertheless been chased thence, some by the bare Votes of such as complied
with the popular madness, and others by some outrage or injury done to their
persons. And how many of these have for their honesty and integrity sat in six
or seven Parliaments with a general applause? What kind of People now have
they substituted in their places? Even such as the laws of the Realm did ever
exclude thence, ^^ the known instruments of malice and fury.

They have not indeed quite suppressed the House of Peers, but they have
notoriously vilified it, in so much as they will no longer allow them a share
in the public consultations. No share I say, there being but two or three of
the Lords left to their liberty, and that for no other reason, but because they
combine with the faction. The rest are forced to swim with the stream, and
they have not spirit enough to contradict the major part in any thing, though
their Conscience prompt them never so much unto it.

Things could never have come to this pass, had not the Bishops been outed,
and therefore (as I informed you before) they begun at them; a piece of the
most notorious violence and injustice that ever was heard of, condemned by all
the honest men I know, that are acquainted with the Principles of Christianity,
and the Laws of a well-grounded Policy, agreeable to both which they were
first seated in Parliament, and ought to have been continued there, as the
only Pillars to support Order and Uniformity, and consequently to hinder the
State from falling to pieces, especially to prevent the downfall of Monarchy,
all other forms of government being hereso utterly repugnant to it. But I
ground not only upon those advantages which Monarchy enjoyes in their
conservation to work your dislike of those that outed them, nor upon the sole
interests of the whole Church, which was so much concerned to keep them in
their places. I stand altogether for their personal rights, which are as
ancient as those of the State, the Bishops having as strong a title to a place
in Parliament, as either the Lords, or Commons. For if with the rest of the
Clergy they make a part of the State (as undenyably they do) who can question
their share in the rights of the State? So that to exclude them is to set up
one distinct State in the midst of another, which is all one as to dismember
and divide the same State from it self, and by consequent to engage it to its
own inevitable destruction. Besides, as the Nobility and the Clergy (though
both concurring) cannot without violation of the Public Right exclude the
Commons from public conventions where Laws are to be made for all, so neither
can the Nobility and Commons (though both agreeing) debar the Clergy, no more
then the Clergy and the Commons can exclude the Nobility.

The case being thus, who sees not, that in the expulsion of Bishops all the
rights of the State are infringed, and that this is the act of an unruly
multitude: which (being empoysoned with a spirit of Libertinisme) did at the
first extort the approbation of those Lords that stayed amongst them, and then
rewarded their Cowardice with the loss of their Power, and reducing them unto
such a low contemptible condition, that they could scarce be more vilified were
they quite expelled the House.

Weigh a little (I beseech you) with what pretenses they ma^ke this outrage.
They will needs persuade us, that Holy orders are inconsistent with secular
employments, and that it is a thing below the Ministers of the Gospel to
intermeddle in civil Affairs. To which purpose they quote us several
passages of Scripture, and urge with all the example of a certain Church man,
whom Cyprian would not allow any commemoration, because he had taken upon him
to be Guardian to a ward. But this rigor which they press so hotly upon the
Clergy is neither consequent, nor character of true Sanctity. It Is indeed the
issue of an Anabaptisticall brain. Henderson and Marshall (two of their most
able and expert Divines) proclaim to the world by their secular employments in
England and Scotland, that they make but a mock of these Arguments, and that
they believe those of their profession may without wounding their conscience,
or transgressing the rules of Christianity embrace all opportunities to promote
the good of the Church, though it be in the conduct of temporal affairs. They
have their general Commissions, as if they had never entered upon holy Orders,
by which they are enabled to hear and determine any matter of State, even to
the advanceing of a war.

But granting these men the inconsistence they dream of, would not you
concur with me in this, that though the Bishops Votes in Parliament be not
simply necessary as a part of the civil government, yet they ought to be
granted them as the undeniable consequent of that universal privilege which
all freeborn Subjects enjoy, which is, not to be bound by any Law they never
assented to, either in their own persons, or by their proxies.

Besides it was ever till now thought but reason and equity, that to such
conventions where both spiritual and temporal affairs are to be jointly
agitated, there should be summoned not only your secular Sca^^^-men to judge
of the utility, or (as they phrase it here) the convenience of Laws, nor such
only as are skillful in that profession to give verdict of their legality, but
withal some wise and honest Divines, to judge for matter of piety in enacting
them. The truth is, these cavillers bewray both in their speeches and in all
their proceedings an absolute incapacity of any sound judgment, blindly
hurried on to an alteration of government, out of a fond conceit, that their
design will succeed so fortunately as to lead the dance for all the people in
Europe to follow, to which they sollici^^ them in their Covenant. But they have
more wit, I trow, then to be their Apes. They have better rules to follow of
their own; especially we Protestants of France, When they of London were told,
that the rigorous courses they ^ooke against the Papists here, would sooner or
later be practiced upon the Protestants in France: their answer was, Let others
look to themselves and let us alone for looking to our selves.
with whose inter^^s those Gentlemen were very little affected, when they used
the Papists with so much inhumanity, so as it seems they would not acknowledge
us for their brethren, or that their charity was very cold toward us.

We have learned both from Christ and his Apostles, the Doctors of the Church,
and all our first Reformers, that such as be Incendiaries either of the Church
or State have no portion amongst the faithful, nor the Saints of God; and for
this very reason I cannot be persuaded they have any favorers or Abettours
amongst us, or that any to whom God has given the least grain of
understanding or honesty, will not condemn their design, and all their
proceedings, and having once advised them to quit such courses, will not
utterly detest them if they persevere.

You will say now, that though they have put down Episcopacy, and undermined
the power of the Nobility, yet they are not any way disaffected to Royalty. Can
any man believe this after so many thousand seditious Propositions, which they
daily publish both in Press and Pulpit? peruse them, I beseech you, for my
sake, though I know you cannot do it without horror, and ever and anon
turning your eyes from them; so full of venime are they against all the Princes
in the world; so contrary to the doctrine and practice of Christians, and so
injuriuos to the name and profession of all true and sincere Protestants, such
are these* Though the King be greater then any one of his Subjects in
particular, yet he is far less then the body collective of all his Subjects:
The King is for the people, and not the people for the King; and by consequent,
the people are of more worth and value then he, in as much as the means are
always subordinate to that end to which they are directed, and from whence
they derive their worth: The power and authority of any usu^^ing Tyrant is as
much from God, as that of lawful Kings: The Power of Princes (those especially
which by inheritance are such) flows from the people, and consequently is more
deeply rooted and eminently seated in them, then it is in the Person of the
Prince; because, Quod efficit tale est magis tale. (I am forced to make use of
their own barbarous terms, that I may the better express the barbarousnesse
of their conceptions.) As Kings receive their power from the people, so they
may be divested of it by them, either in the body collective of all, or in the
body representative in Parliament, or by the major part of either. In case the
King shall falsify the Oath he takes at his Coronation, the people are
thereupon discharged, and freed from their alleagiance to him; Positions so
much the more absurd, because the Laws of that Land have provided to the
contrary, and that all the world have acknowledged it as a maxim, that the
King of England never dies; that without all distinction of time, as well
before as after his Coronation, he receives all such homages and services, as
are due to the Crown; that he is not King upon condition, as if by violation
thereof, he should fall from his Right to the Kingdom, but upon bare promises,
the non performance of which is enough to denominate him unjust, but not to
depose him. They proceed, No son may with more equity bind the hand of his
distracted father, no mariner more justly remove a Pilot from the Stern, who
would wrack the ship (either out of ignorance, or malice) then Subjects may by
force of arms dethrone their Prince, if he shall once apparently hearken to
any counsels pernicious to the State, and that the Common^wealth either by his
weakness, or negligence, be in danger of ruin. Saint Paul does not command,
but barely exhort a^ery soul to be subject to the higher powers. This was but
a prudentiall counsel of one that was to rule a People at such a time as they
had neither strength nor means to do otherwise, and that to think the
contrary were to put such a yoke upon the conscience, as he never dreamed of;
By the higher powers Saint Paul speaks of, we are not to understand the Person
of a King, but his charge and office, as it is represented in his Courts, and
in the Parliament; insomuch that the Subjects of England, according to this
doctrine, may bear arms against CHARLES STEVVART, residing at Oxford, and yet
still observe that alleagiance which is due to the King in his Parliament at
Land. Which is as much of a true body to make an idle phantasme, of a King a
Chimera, as some have done of Christ himself, transubstantiating him from a
true man to an imaginary, senseless, and absurd I know not what. The Authors
of these pernicious opinions might learn a little more wisdom, were they but
capable of weighing (as they ought) the rules of that State; which inform us
that every treason respects either mediately or immediately the person of the
King. There can none of them be ignorant, how that before these fatal
distractions, all the Judges were of opinion, and have so determined the case,
that the Subjects of England are clearly and absolutely bound to obey their
Prince even in his natural capacity, that is, the person of CHARLES STEVVART,
and not only in his politic capacity, as he is I know not what imaginary and
Platonicke King. Besides they need not be informed how this very doctrine which
the Parliamenteers at this day publish to the world, and upon which they ground
all their several acts of violence, is both in the Magna Charta, and those
acts concerning the banisHment of Hugh Spencer, condemned in full Parliament,
and rejected as a principle of Treason, fraud, and Rebellion. They proceed yet
further, and tell us. That the Parliament may in case of necessity ordain
laws for peace and war in spite of the Prince, which shall equally oblige
every member of the State; And in case the King refuse to confirm them, the
same Parliament is to be the sole arbitratour and judge of that necessity; and
of the time how long it ought or can continue; That the King is bound to
ratify all presented to him by the Parliament, notwithstanding all the
objections which either his Counsel or his own reason and Conscience shall
suggest unto Him. That the Civil Government ought always to give place to the
Ecclesiastical. Were it so, that the government of the Church here were partly
Democraticall, as the Brownists would have it, or partly Aristocraticall, and
partly Democraticall, as it is amongst the Presbyterians, it is easy to
infer, what would become of the Civil Magistrate.

These are the holy maxims and pious Doctrines of those that pretend to purity
of life, and talk of restoring the Laws and Ordinances framed by our first
Reformers to that vigor and Authority, which the Tyrants of the Conscience,
and enemies of all secular power have wrested from them. I am sure neither
Christ, nor Moses, nor Paul, nor Peter, taught them any such lesson, but
Maria^^, Bellarmine, Bourchier, Brutus, Buchanan, and the rest of those Hellish
finebrands employed by the Devil to disturb that Order, which the Eternal
providence of Heaven had set up in the World.

Let me hereunto add that notable demonstration of their Affection toward
their Queen. They have expressly prohibited all prayers both public and
private for Her Conversion. A horrible thing that they should plot the
destruction of Her soul, and endeavor to extend the fruits of their Rebellion
against Her in another world. Will you not say it had been enough to persecute
Her in thi^ but I have not yet told you all. They have also basely and
insolently stained Her Reputation, and, in a way which all honest men will
account no better then parricide, attempted to murder a Princess, a Daughter
of France, to whom the winds and the sea had showed more pity but an hour
before.

And yet forsooth they must needs have all the Reformed Churches to make them
their Precedent: inviting us, whom they rank among such as groan under the
yoke of Anti Christian Tyranny, to The express words of the Covenant.
join with them in the same or like Association and Covenant, and to use our
utmost endeavors for the recovery of Peace and quiet in every part of
Christendom. What is this but to solicit us to shake off the yoke of
Sovereignty? to deny all subjection to our Princes, and at once to destroy both
their Authority and their Persons? For all which they pretend the Advancement
of the Kingdom of Christ.

It Is indeed mightily advanced since these men, who call themselves his
Disciples, have subverted all secular Authority amongst them, scattering abroad
such positions as ought to render them odious to us, in as much as they
convince them before all the Powers of God's establisHing to be sowers of
sedition, Libertinisme, and Rebellion.

But granting them that all this combustion they make in the world is to
advance the Kingdom of Christ; Have they any warrant from the example of the
Primitive Christians to pursue that and by such means? no, it was never in
their thoughts to arm themselves so much as against those Pagan Monsters,
whose calmest d^meanour toward them far surpassed in rigor and cruelty all
the outrage and persecution which we can be imagined to have s^ffered from any
of our Princes, for above five hundred years together. Saint Peter was
reproved for presuming to defend his Master with the sword. This example l'me
sure is authentic; nor is that of the Christians under the Emperor Julia^
much inferior to it. Their number was great, and their power formidable, but
their Religion restrained them from employing it against their Prince, though
in their own defense. Please you to call to mind the Theban Legion.

Doubtless they had all heard and weighed that injunction of our Savior; But
I say unto you, that ye resist not evil. They had learned also, that the
Powers are ordained of God, and that whosoever resists the Power resists
the ordinance of God. Not as if that prohibition to resist Princes employed a
Command of obeying them against Conscience. All that can be deduced thence is
this, That in case they shall persecute their Subjects out of any
considerations whatsoever, whether sacred or civil, it were better to endure a
thousand deaths then to lift up a hand against them.

The crime of these men will appear far more horrid, if notice be taken,
that the King against whom the combination is made, did never attempt the least
innovation either in Religion, or Liberty. I speak only of England.

As for Scotland, I am not ignorant what has passed there, of which I intend
to give you a particular relation.

They cannot produce any innovation here, Indeed the It is to be presumed, that
the Author, being a stranger, was too fair transported with the vulgar
outcryes against this worthy Prelate: whose many pious actions, and the
sincerity of whose intentions had he truly known, he would readily have given
another character of him. And when he shall understand and consider his
constant perseverance to Death in the same resolutions of zeal for the true
Protestant Religion, and exemplary loyalty to his King, (for which he became a
willing sacrifice) no doubt but he ^ill be as ready to retract this rash
censure, as we to admonish.
Archbishop of Canterbury was shrewdly suspected to have been contriving
some. That weak, ill-temperd, and fondly ambitious soul, would perhaps have
presumed to be tampering, had he continued longer in place, which is therefore
now the principal charge against him.

But as for the King, what signal demonstrations has he not ever given the
world of an extreme a version from Popery? How many Protestations has he made
of sticking close to the Protestant Religion? How careful is he to perform
all those duties to which the Faith he professes obliges him? He has filled
the Churches and Sees with men whose piety, knowledge, and conversation, are
patterns worthy the imitation of the most Orthodox Christians. His house has
ever abounded with men of Learning and Honesty. Besides, what would it
advantage him to reestablish Popery? Is he weary of being a free Monarch? Would
he do homage again to Rome, and acknowledge a Sovereignty above his own? The
Interests of his Crown as well as those of his Conscience would not suffer him
to entertain such a thought. But this is not all, he would have cause to fear
a far greater mischeife from Scotland, which all the advantages he could hope
for from all the Papists in the world would never be able to counterpoise. He
must further shake off them of the Palatinate, and in doing that, forfeit all
his reputation in Germany; He must break with Denmark; Nay he must not
entertain any commerce, either with his nearest allies, or his dearest friends.

The marrying of his Daughter to the Prince of Orange's Son, is a pregnant
evidence of his affection to the Protestant Religion. But to make good their
Calumny, they accuse him of favoring Papists; and yet who knows not, that the
exchequer was never fuller with their composition-money, then now? In the
Reigns of King Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, they were not used
with half the rigor. When this King showed them most favor it came short of
what they have done. But I pray, by what principle of Christianity are we bound
to destroy such as are of a different Religion? There is no forceing of any
man's belief, none that can subdue the Liberty of the soul, God only
excepted. Our French Kings are well instructed in this point, they might with a
like equity destroy or banish us, as here they do Papists, did they not know
that the conscience neither can nor ought to be forced. Most true it is, that
the Protestants in France, never attempted any thing upon the persons of their
Princes, what violence soever has been practiced upon them by such as abused
their Authority; on the contrary for all their sufferings they have made it
legible to the world, that they would rather part with all the blood in their
veins in their defense, then hazard the least drop to be revenged of them,
even then when some strange counsels had prevailed with them to sign their
destruction. A very pressing consideration wherewith to refute all pretended
interests of Religion, and to procure them a toleration, notwithstanding the
differences of opinions. The Papists case in England is much unlike theirs, in
as much as they are ever and a non plotting the destruction of their Prince; a
crime I am so far from excusing, that I detest it as one of the most
execrable which the veriest ^ake-hell in the world can be guilty of. But
withal let me add, that it had never been so much in use, had those, who
could not conform to the Reformation, been dealt with more favourarably. The
Law here is unjust only in condemning their persons to death, as such, but
just in proceeding against their treasonable machinations. Let it in God's name
have its full course upon them as they are Traitors, but not barely as
mis-beleevers. God gave to his Apostles no Commission to propagate the Gospel
of his son by force of Arms; much less to our States and Kingdoms now:
would but Christians lay this seriously to heart, they would never make use of
any but the Arms of the spirit against those that are reprobate to the truth;
and so there would be some difference made betwixt Papists that are only
offenders against God, and such as are so both against God and the Princes
which he has set over them. How many of them bear as much respect to their
Sovereigns as we can possibly do to ours, and are as zealous for the good of
Kingdoms and the Peace of People? Others indeed there be that have sucked the
same venime with these new emissaries of Hell, who take this for a Maxim: That
Kings are no longer Kings, but real Tyrants, when they cease to be
Catholics; and that it is a meritorious Act to embrew their bands in their
blood, and to free the People from their dominion over them. Let the Law be
executed against such without mercy, not let any Princes or States give the
least toleration to such abominable Incendiaries. But as for the rest, let the
unblameable conversation and integrity of those that are in authority over
them, preach a Reformation to them, until their hour be come, and grace from
Heaven be shed amongst them. If the Religion they profess be not of it self
destructive, and that in all other considerations they submit to the Laws and
maintain the Interests of the State in which they live, all the power which
can be challenged over them, is but to restrain them within the public
rules: it being an act of the greatest injustice, to deprive them either of
their lives or estates, for no other reason but because they are incapable of
the knowledge and piety of another person. This was one of the worms that
gnawed upon the conscience of Philip the second, that he had attempted by force
of Arms to propagate Christianity in the new world, where the Devil was their
only deity. And how heavy should this example lie upon the Consciences of all
such Princes and Magistrates as exercise the same cruelties upon their
Subjects, or on those that differ not in the foundation from them, worshipping
the same Christ, acknowleding him to be what he is, and all expecting salvation
by him?

But if such pressing motives cannot work upon England, let them at least
consider what must necessarily befall to many thousand honest Protestants that
live under the dominion of Popish Princes, who certainly will revenge upon
them all the outrage done the Papists under Protestant Princes. And the number
of the former is far greater, then the number of these; so that for one
Priest who out of a fond distempered zeal shall be put to death here, there
will be in other places f^^ty Protestant Ministers in danger to perish. Besides
this, France at the first led the way in abstaining from all cruelty toward
those of the Reformation there; but was afterward implacably mad against them
near upon the time that those rigorous Laws were enacted against Recusants in
this Kingdom. And if in France such courses were thought fit to be utterly
abandoned, why should they be continued in England?

If none of these considerations will move them, let them forbear at least out
of charity to us. And to this purpose they may recall into their memories what
Justin and Theoderick did in the case of the Catholics and the Arians. The
former vehemently persecuted the Arians in all quarters of his Dominions, and
the latter did as much to the Catholics in the West, where he commanded. But
both at last were content to supersede from bloodshed, and by the advice of
their Doctors, in the year 525 (If I mistake not) allowed them case and
liberty of Conscience, whom they could not master by torments and violence.
John Bishop of Rome was one that interposed in the business, and the first who
persuaded the Orthodox Prince to more mildness, and to quit all thoughts of
rigor and courses of cruelty. The Christians of those times judged aright,
that violence did not suit with the Gospel, and that steel was no fit
instrument to make impression upon obdurate hearts. And though their Princes
would sometimes arm them against Pagans or Soctaries, it was merely for the
interests and safety of their Crowns; as in particular, that Justine, I named
you, when he saw the Empire ready to fall in pieces, and that the most warlike
nations (who had subdued the rest) were fallen off to such Princes, as indeed
bore the name of Christians, but were by reason of their Heretical opinions
divided from them, had great reason to be afraid that many of his own Subjects
agreeing with them in the same Principles, would follow their example. It
concerned him not to destroy them, and to harbor them near himself was to
nourish so many vipers in his own bosom. Yet in as much as he was the
occasion that many Orthodox Christians lost their lives, and because he had no
jurisdiction over the Consciences of those that were not such, he relinquished
all former courses of violence and persecution. 'Twere well, if this example
could work the Kings of England and all other Princes in the world to the like
moderation. Do not even the Turk and the Persian tolerate us in their
Dominions? Shall humanity be found in Barbarians, and not in Christian and
civilized Princes? What? does the Reformation oblige us to be cruel? I cannot
think it, no more then that any Protestant in France (who has not renounced
his reason) will not subscribe with me to the same opinion.

I speak not this to dissuade from the use of such means (...) necessary for
abolishing of Superstition, and reestablisHing the purity of Christian
Religion. There be other courses enough besides violence to reduce stragglers
into the way. And if there were not, should they find a toleration, might they
not be prevented from seducing others? If there be any just cause to fear the
consequents of the Maxims and Doctrines they maintain, it concerns the
Magistrate prudently to provide a remedy, and to stop them from proceeding
further; but above all to take care that their Priests ^^atter not any
rebellious Doctrine, a thing very familiar with such as have had their breeding
at Rome, in Spain, or in any Schools of the Jesuits. Had they their
education at home, they would breath nothing but affection to the place of
their nativity; and the liberty which would be indulged them among their
Parents and kindred (without the least jealousy of suffering for any
differences in opinions) would nourish respect in them toward their King and
all other their Superiors; whereas rigor does but harden them the more, and
imbolden them to redeem themselves at any rate from that irksome necessity
(which is commonly imposed on them) to believe otherwise then they will, and
perhaps too then they can.

Let me but add a word of the Liberties they talk of, and for which they make
so much noise in the world. I am not altogether ignorant what they be, as
having seen a great part of the Laws and Customs of that Kingdom.
Certainly those gentlemen may with much credit charge their King with the
violation of them, who have themselves so insolently trampled upon whatsoever
has the face either of Public or private right. I shall attend an
opportunity to give you a distinct information of their baseness in this
particular. For the present I shall only assure you thus much in general;
that their complaints are most groundless, as flowing from the same spirit by
whose instigation they have slandered the religion and piety of their Prince.
Did he ever during that peaceable part of his reign over them, endeavor to
stretch his prerog^tive, or to protect any of his Creatures, that encroached, I
will not say upon the Laws of the Realm, but even upon the propriety of the
meanest Subject? Was there ever in any Kings Reign known fewer escheats,
except those from Recusants? or fewer proscriptions and banishments? fewer
executions? less disorder and violence? less repining? fewer impositions? in
a word, fewer Innovations? And therefore it concerned them to fancy (as they
have done) a thousand illegal and tyrannical actions in that Prince, that so
they might more easily delude the People; and in the issue engage them (as in
their own defense) to a resolution of making head against him, either wholly
to divest him of all rule, or to reign a while in his stead, or at least to
have a constant share with him in the government. That blind unruly Beast is
never more servilely tame, then when abused with lies, ever repining and ready
to mutine at any extraordinary imposition, though never so reasonable and
advantageous: You may lead it whither you please with a specious pretense; so
willing at this time to sacrifice it self to the ambition of some factious
spirits, intoxicated by their oaths and protestations, that they aim at
nothing but the good of the People. In like manner have the Pesantry of France
sometimes inconsiderately engaged themselves in the service of a King of
Navarr^, a Duke of Normandy, and another of Burgogne, who having in effect no
other design then to advance their own greatness, would notwithstanding have
nothing more in their mouths then the public liberty, of which (to speak
truth) they were the most pernicious if not the only enemies. Just so it is
here now. They that have undertaken the protection of Privilege, possessing
their abettours and Disciples with the hopes of securing their liberties,
think of nothing less then the interests of others; and that very thing which
they pretend to appear in the field for, has been more violated and
infringed by them, then ever it was by all the Kings of England.

And yet they have so varnisht over their actions, that by this trick they have
got the estates, the lives, the hearts, nay and the consciences to boot of the
People here, wholly into their own disposal. It may be those unfortunate
Wretches will be one day sensible of the Imposture, and perceive at last how
they have approved and engaged themselves to what will be their destruction, if
they repent not. For those that flatter them with the hopes of liberty, will
either get the upper hand, and so (...) them their vassals, or else plunge them
into a condition far more intolerable then the most irksome slavery: were it
not for that Anabaptisticall venime, which has intermixed it self with the
natural propension of this people to Libertinisme, there might be some hopes
of remedy. But there have been the like disorders here to fore in this Kingdom.
And a man would think that the souls of the Earl of Leicester, and the Duke
of Gloucester, had by a kind of transmigration possessed the ringleaders of
this present Rebellion. But the former were so much the more excusable, in that
they made not Religion the screene to their Ambition, which sooner put on end
to those troubles.

That you may the better remember the chief circumstances of that History,
give me leave to acquaint you how in the reign of King Henry the third there
was a Parliament held at Oxford, which Posterity justly branded with an
infamous name, calling it. The mad Parliament. (except me but the general
superstition of those times, and it will mervailously resemble that at
Westminster) At which time the Lords and Commons fore'd that King to consent to
the nominating of certain persons amongst them, whom they styled Commissioners
and G^^rdi^^s of the Peace. Whereupon under pretense of that extraordinary
power, and by virtue not only of an Ordinance of the two Houses, but of a
complete Act of Parliament, they rose up in Arms against their Prince, and
molested him with a long and bloody War, like this.

After the various success of which insolent attempt, and the several
innovations which distracted the Kingdom, the review of the whole business
was committed to a free Parliament, in which the Authors and Promoters of that
war were condemned of High Treason, and all the Rebels Estates by a solemn
Act confiscate. But the extent of the crime abated of the punishment, lest
otherwise the greatest part of England should have been made a desolation. And
certainly were there any hopes of a free Parliament now, the trai^^^ous attempt
of those who make up that shadow of a Parliament, would be proceeded against
with all rigor, and the example of that at Oxford be renewed, seeing they have
dared to renew the cri^^. And were the punishment proportioned to the offense,
these men should be used with more severity then the other, they have so (...)
outdone them. For their attempt was only against their own Prince, but the
design of these against all the Princes in the World. They were contented to
be Rebe^^ themselves, but these must have all the Protestants in Christendom
to be so likewise. They medl^^ not with Religion, nor thought to disquiet the
Church; these h^^^ violated Religion, and torn the Church in pieces. They
offered (...) violence to any of the three States in Parliament, suppressing
only the votes of some particular persons which crossed their design. These
have outed the whole Body of the Clergy, chased away diverse of the Peers,
despoiled others of their Estates and Authority, sparing none but such as will
be then Fellow-traitours. In breife, the former indeed advanced their Rebellion
under a pretense o^ maintaining the public Liberties, but they exposed not
all the Kings that were to succeed to the madness and cruelty of the People,
as these men do.

I know you have often seen diverse of their Positions, but I have reserved one
to this (...), which is worse then all the rest. They maintain. That Subjects
may in ^^^suanc^ of their Liberty take (...) Arms and employ all their
strength against any that shall endeavor is reduce them to slavery. That there
is no yoke of which they may not lawfully rid themselves, whosoever imposed
it, whether some Conqueror, or their own natural Prince. That nature it
self dictates unto the whole world the recovery of it is lost liberty,
notwithstanding any former contracts, or any laws to which they have sworue
obedience, or even the express approbation of some preceding ages. That
whosoever shall have power enough and not employ it to that end, men should be
so far from startling at their back rardnesse, that on the contrary they are
to hold them for no other then Rebels against that nature, which commands them
to dispense in this case with all former obligations whatsoever.

Sir, were not this ground enough for all the Magistrates in the Universe to
arm against such Pests as these? You will now rest fully satisfied, that it is
not Religion they fight for, and that by the conservation of those Privileges
they talk of, they intend nothing but the ruin and destruction of such as are
in Authority over them. What else can we expect from such maxims? They who
complain so much of abusing Monarchy have infringed all the rights of it
themselves. There was a Parliament in Scotland held in despite of the King,
and the Acts of it are daily put in execution, contrary to his express
commands, which is utterly to abolish all Regal Power, and to annihilate the
Fundamental Laws of the State. This Parliament in England was indeed
conveencd by his Authority, but they bound his hands from dissolving it when he
ought and would have done. No sooner were the Members met, but he was chased
from London, and they upon this possess themselves of the Houses, Forts,
Castles, Ports, Navy and Ammunition of their Prince. They put the Earl of
Strafford to Death upon pretenses of their own devising, that so they might
have some color for the design against the person of their Sovereign. They
have forced his consent to an Act, which infringeth all the prerogatives of the
Crown. They will needs have the disposal and ordering of his family, murder
his friends and trusty Ministers, and so hinder all from being such. They will
clip his Revenues as they please, not suffer him to dispose of vacant offices.
They will not allow him any power in Church-affaires; bereave him of his
Bishops, that so they may render him incapable of discerning all factious
contrivances under color of Religion; and consequently of all means to
prevent the execution of them. At this very present they are consulting how to
deprive him of his Wardships, which you know is one of the fairest Flowers of
the Crown of England, and the most proper character of Sovereignty.

I have almost spent my self in limning you the designs and practices of
these men; but I hope you will not be weary in perusing and weighing them. I
have besides many things of great consequence to tell you, which I reserve for
some better opportunity, when I may have more leisure and liberty then is
allowed me at this present.

In the interim let me earnestly request you to make what use you can of the
truth of this Relation in behalf of Reason and Justice.

In God's name employ your utmost endeavors to blast those false pretenses of
Zeal and Religion, that none of ours be carried away with them. I believe it
was to that end you desired this Letter from me, which I have dispatched
toward you in persuance of your commands, and withal to satisfy my Conscience.

I will say nothing what is like to be the success of our Ambassador here.
You may easily guess by this Relation. The H^ll^^^^rs have as weak hopes, as
we: and I Am confident both of the^ desire to testify unto the world their love
and inclination to Peace although some accuse them of an aversonesse from it,
and that all their designs tend to the nourishing of this War. But certainly
they desire to see and end of it, were it but for this reason, that the King of
England might engage himself in the interests of Germany, and employ his
strength there in behalf of all the oppressed Princes, those especially which
are more near unto him. I will discourse with you more at large upon this,
when I shall have the opportunity to give you an account of those other
passages mentioned in your Letter.

In this and all things else you shall read the constant desire I have to
assure you, that I am unfeinedly.

From London, Jan. 22. 1644. Sir, Your most humble and most affectionate
Servant.

FINIS.

