THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF PAEDOBAPTISME, Asserted and Vindicated. By a
large and full improovement of some principal Arguments for it, and a brief
Resolution of such material Objections as are made against it.

Whereunto is annexed a brief and plain Enarration, both Doctrinall and
Practical, upon Mark 10. v. 13. 14. 15. 16. As it was some time since Preached
in the Church of Great Yarmouth: Now published for an Antidote against those
yet spreading Errors of the times, Anabaptisme and Catabaptisme.

By JOH. BRINSLEY.

Tanto magis proinfantibus loqui debemus, quanto minus ipsi pro se loqui
possunt.

August. ad Hill. Ep. 89. London, Printed for Charles Green, and are to be sold
at his shop in Ivy Lane at the sign of the Gun. 1645.

I Have perused this Vindication of The Doctrine and Practice of Paedobaptisme,
in which the Reverend Author has also handled some things not us^ally treated
on by any, in our Language, which he submits to the judgment of the learned
and judicious; And I commend to be Imprinted.

Ja. Cranford.
May 22. 1645.
To all the true Lovers of Truth and Peace in the Church of England, Specially
those in the Town of Great Yarmouth.
TO You have I dedicated this part of my labors, to whom I have devoted all.
What sad and dangerous distempers have invaded the Ecclesiastical body of this
Kingdom in this springtime of Reformation, I shall not need to tell you;
there being scarce any part of it but feels of them, and labors under them.
Hereupon it has been, and is my highest ambition, to show my self (what one
of Col. 4. 14. Lucas de Medico corporum factus jam erat Medicus animarum.
Hieron. in ep. ad Phil.
the Penmen of sacred Writ is said to have been, and what every Minister of the
Gospel, (at this time specially) ought to be) both an Evangelist, and a
Physician. To this end I have already adventured abroad some Counsels and
Prescripts, The healing of Isreal's breaches An. 1642 Church-Reformation.

An. Church-Remedy.

An. 1644,


which being proper for the place where Providence has laid out my Practice,
may also (if rightly applied) prove not unusefull to others. And to the same
end it is that I have now sent this Tractate after them; wherein you have a
Topicall Remedy for that spreading Gangrene of Anabaptism, which, unless
timely prevented, may prove fa^all to the whole body both of this Church and
State. This evil beginning to show it self as in some other parts adjacent,
so) in this place, which God has in part committed to my Cure, I was induced
sometime since to encounter with it in the Pulpit. My endeavors herein (I
bless God) I found not altogether unsuccessefull. And hereupon I am now the
rather encouraged to present them to a more public view. Wherein, if any shall
conceive my service M. Marshals Sermon.

M. Cook.

D^. Featly etc. Genesis 38. 30. 31


needless, in regard of the diverse learned Treatises of this kind already
published, I shall only desire them to believe, that (as, however those
Pharezzes were first brought forth, yet this Zarah put forth the hand before
most of them, the Pulpit being for most part delivered of the one, before the
Press was of the other s^^ they shall meet with somewhat here, which they may
yet call New. Amongst other passages I shall humbly take leave to Apologize for
one, which possibly may rise in the stomach of some, viz. the Holding forth of
Confirmation (as it is called) in the primitive simplicity of it, for an
Apostolical Ordinance. This (I confess) I cook the first hint of from
learned and judicious M. Calvin, as he himself, though he would Non inficior,
in co nonnihil hallucinari Hieronymum, quod Apostolicam esse observationem
dicit, viz. Confi^mationem. Calv instit. l. 4 c. 19. S. 4.
not from St. Hieron contra Lucif.
Jerome, yet after upon second thoughts, did from S^ Heb. 6. 2. Hic unus locus
abunde testatur hujus Ceremoniae (sc. Impositionis manuum in Confirmatione)
originem fluxisse ab Apostolis. Cat. Com. in ep. ad Heb. ca. 6. v. 2.
Paul. And finding it a point so useful, not only in the present controversy
o^ Paedobaptisme, but also for the healing of some of the chief differences of
the times, viz* about mixed.Communion, and Church*Covenant, I could not but hold
forth that little light concerning it, which I have received from some others,
such as were in their times magna Ecclesiae lumina, Rev. 1. 16. 20.
stars of the first magnitude, Joh. 5. 35.
burning and shining Lamps. If any shall not hereby see what others have
done, and my self imagine to do, I shall only crave of them, first to take
off that filme of prejudice which possibly the gross corruption of this
supposed Ordinance in the former practice of it, both in the Church of Rome,
and amongst our selves, may have drawn over their eyes, and then I shall
freely leave them to believe and report what they see. For my self, let the
World know, all that herein I desire and aim at, to be only this, That If
there be any thing Apostolical in this Ordinance, it may be revived and
received: otherwise if merely Prudentiall, (as an explicit^ Church Covenant
(so far forth as distinct from the Covenant of Grace) is supposed to be) then
how far to be embraced or rejected, I leave it to those who have Authority
and Ability, to judge: With the submissive tender of which humble motion, I
shall fit down, and rest

Yours in the service of Christ, Ioh. Brinsley.
Yarmouth June 26. Anno 1645.
THE Doctrine and Practice OF PAEDOBAPTISME Asserted and Vindicated.
HEB. 6. 2. The Doctrine of Baptismes.


Baptism, it is a Sacrament, a Sacrament of the New Testament, the first
Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, to be dispensed by his
Ministers; upon these particulars I have already insisted. It remains now that
we come The Subject of Baptism.
in the next place to the Subject of Baptism, which because at the present it
is made the subject of great debate and controversy, I shall therefore take
leave to dwell a little the longer upon it.

Q. Who may and ought to be baptized.
Q. The Question is, Who they are that may and ought to be baptized?

A. Such as are in Covenant with God.
A. To this we may return a general answer; viz. Such as are in Covenant with
God. Baptism it is a seal of the Covenant, even as Circumcision was; which is
therefore called by the name of the Covenant [My Covenant Genesis 17. 13. 14
shall be in your flesh.] So is Baptism a seal of the Covenant, viz. the
Covenant of Grace, and of that Covenant Baptism a seal of the Covenant
already made.
already made. Mark that: A Covenant is first agreed upon, the writings
drawn, before it be sealed. Thus men must first be in Covenant with God,
before Genesis 17. 1. 2.
they partake of this Seal. Thus it was in Circumcision, God first makes a
Covenant with Abraham and his Seed; then for the confirmation of it he
commands Verse. 9. 10.
him and his to be circumcised. And thus it is in Baptism, persons must first
be in Covenant with God before they be baptized. They must be such as lie under
Act. 2. 38.
the promise. [Repent and be baptized (says Peter to the Jews) for the promise
is to you and to your children.]

Persons to be baptized must be [such as are in Covenant] Such; understand it
as we will, Inclusively, Exclusively: All such, and only such. Both true.

All such as are in Covenant, may and ought ^o be baptized.
1. All such, of what Nation, sex, age, condition soever; Jew or Gentile, male
or female, young or old, bond or free, etc. being in Covenant with God, they
both may, and ought to partake of this Seal of the Covenant. When God
instituted the Sacrament of Circumcision, Abraham and all his family were
circumcised. [In the ^en. 17. 26. 27
self same day was Abraham circumcised, and all the men of his house.] And the
like we read of Baptism: As it came in the ro^me of Circumcision, being the
initiall seal of the Covenant as Circumcision was, so it was administered after
the same manner, to the whole family. Where the head of the family believed,
presently we read that they, and all theirs were baptized. Thus we read in that
16. of the Acts; first of Lydia, v. 15. God having opened her heart, she was
baptized and her household.] Then of the Iaylour, v. 33. being wrought upon by
the Apostles Ministry, [he came and was baptized, he and all his.] Thus, be
they what they will, being once in Covenant, they may and ought to be baptized.
So runs the Apostles Commission, [Go teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19.]

R.
And will you have the ground and reason of it, why the administration of this
Ordinance should be so universal, consider but these two things; 1. The
universality of man's sin and misery: and secondly, The universality of Gods
offer of grace and mercy.

1. Man's sin and misery universal.
1. Man's misery is universal. [All have sinned. Romans 3. 23.] And sinning died.
[Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5. 12.] Such is the
condition of all the sons of men by nature. They are all concluded, and shut
up under sin and death; so shut Gal. 3. 22.
up, as without the free grace of God in Christ pardoning their sins, and
healing their natures, they cannot possibly be saved. Even Infants that never
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, viz. by committing Romans 5.
14.
actual sin, yet being sinners by nature, by nature Ephesians. 2. 3.
children of wrath, they stand in need of Christ as well as any other. And
consequently they stand in Tit. 3. 5.
need of this laver of regeneration, this Sacrament of initiation, whereby their
spiritual washing from the guilt and spot of sin, and their ingrafting into
Christ may be sealed up unto them, and declared unto others. All sorts of
persons stand in need of Christ, and consequently of this Sacrament which
seals up their interest in Christ.

2. The tender of Gods grace and mercy universal.
2. And secondly, as man's misery is universal, so is the tender of Gods grace
and mercy, held forth to all men, [Goe teach all Nations, Mat. 28.] [Goe preach
the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16. 15.] Thus Christ sent forth his
Apostles; and thus he now sends forth his Ministers, with Commission to offer
Christ and salvation by Christ, to all that will receive him, believe on him,
submit to him. And reaching forth the thing signified, he also reaches forth
the sign, even this Sacrament of Baptism, which is therefore to be
administered alike unto all, because Christ is offered alike unto all, (I mean
Gal. 3. 28.
all sorts of persons) and is alike to all. [There is neither Jew, nor Greek,
(i. e. Gentile) there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.] Being all alike in Christ, they
ought alike to be 1* Cor. 12. 13.
baptized into him. [By one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, etc.] Thus all that are in Covenant ought to be baptized.

2. Only such as are in Covenant may be baptized.
2. And (in the second place.) Only they. This being a seal of the Covenant
ought not to be administered unto any, but unto those which are, or in the
judgment of charity may be thought to be within the Covenant. By this rule
must the Church proceed in dispencing of this Ordinance, not by the judgment
of Infallibility, The Churches rule, the rule of charity.
and Certainty, but of Charity. To know infallibly who is within the Covenant,
this none can do but God, and a man's own soul. The Churches rule is the rule
of charity. Those who by the law of charity may be thought, and are to be
reputed within the Covenant of Grace, they, all they, and only they may, and
ought to partake of this Ordinance.

Q Who may be thought to be within the Covenant.
Q. Here then the great Question now falls in: Who they are that in the
judgment of charity are to be thought to be within the Covenant?

A. All that profess the faith of Christ, and their children.
A. Hereunto we answer: All that profess the faith of Christ and their
children. Both these the eye of charity looks upon as Christians, and being
such, it cannot deny them the badge of their Christianity, the seal of that
Covenant wherein they are presumed to be.

Professors of the faith baptiseable.
As for the former of these, we shall meet with no great difference about them.
Persons professing the faith of Christ may, and ought to be baptized. For this
Scripture is express: when the Eunuch put the question to Philip, Act. 8. 36.
[See here is water* what does hinder me to be baptized?] Philip returns him
this answer: If thou beleevest with all Verse. 37.
thine heart, thou may. Those three thousand Converts Act. 2. 41. upon the
receiving of Peter's word, his doctrine, they were baptized. Thus Simon Magus,
and the rest of Samaria, upon their believing, i. e. making Act. 12. 1^.
a profession of faith, they were baptized both men and women. Thus all that
profess the faith of Christ (professing it with their mouths, and not denying
it in their lives) they have a right unto Baptism. And why? Because in
judgment of charity they are to be reputed Christians, and to be within the
Covenant.

General profession makes a Christian.
True it is, if we speak of Christians in truth, in reality, then they only
are Christians who have received Christ into their hearts by faith and love, in
whose hearts Christ is formed. [He is not a Jew* (says the Apostle) which is
one outwardly.] And so may we say, He Romans 2. Gal. 4. 19.
is not a Christian that is one outwardly, that has only the name and
profession of a Christian. Yet in a large sense, they which make so much as a
general profession Act. 11* 26.
of Christ, of faith in Christ, and subjection to Christ, they are to be
accounted Christians. And by virtue thereof they may and ought to be baptized.
Upon this profession Mat. 3.
John the Baptist baptized those that came unto him. And so did the Apostles
those which came unto them, Act 5. and 8.
however in some of them, that profession was hypocritical and unsound, as in
Simon Magus, Ananias and Saphira, etc. yet the Apostles looking upon them with
an eye of charity, and judging of them according to their profession, they
admitted them unto this Ordinance. Neither do we read of any whom they
refused, or yet brought to an exacter scrutiny and trial, touching the inward
work of grace in their hearts, who did make such a profession and confession.

Persons come to years of discretion how they ought to be admitted to Baptism.
And thus ought all those who are come to years of discretion before they are
baptized, be admitted to it. As viz. Pagans and Infidels, such as are borne and
brought up without the pale of the Church, not descended from Christian
parents. Before they be admitted to this Sacrament, they ought first to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, in the principles and rudiments of Christian
Religion. Being thus instructed then they are to declare and testify their
voluntary embracing of that faith, together with their repentance, by open
Profession and Confession. Such was the manner of John's baptism* having to
deal with unbeleeving Jews: He Mat. 3. 6. Act. 19. 4.
baptized them confessing their sins, and professing their faith in the
Messiah: Thus the Apostles having to deal with unbeleeving Gentiles, heathens,
they first preached to them as John the Baptist did, and then baptized them
upon the confession of their sins, and profession of their faith. And such
was the practice of the Pri^^^i^e Church in like cases. Having to deal with
Infidels, they first catechized them, instructed them in the principles of
Christian Religion (whence they were called by the name of Catechumeni, persons
that were to be catechized.) That being done, and they brought to some measure
of knowledge, then they declared and testified their repentance and faith by an
open and public confession in the congregation where they were to be baptized.
And this they did (as it seems) by answering unto some questions which were
propounded to them by the Minister. To which practice St. Peter seems to
allude, 1 Pet. 3. 21. where speaking of Baptism, he calls it, (...) the
answer of a good conscience toward The answer of a good conscience in
Baptism, what.
God.] So our translation renders it; though (as Beza notes upon the place) not
so fully expressing the force of the word (...) which properly signifies an
Interrogating, a Questioning. So the vulgar Latin there renders it,
Interrogatio bonae conscientiae, the Interrogation of a good conscience. Which
though it be somewhat obscure, yet it will lead us to the right understanding
of that phrase. Beza translates it, Stipulatio bon^ conscientiae, the
stipulation of a good conscience. Now stipulation properly it is an answer to
an Interrogation; when one being demanded concerning a thing, he returns
answer, and by his answer ingageth himself to do somewhat that is demanded
and required of him. Such a Stipulation there was in Baptism, where the party
to be baptized being demanded by the Minister concerning his repentance and
faith, he made answer before the congregation, professing both, and obliging
himself to both. Such an (...) such a stipulation we find betwixt Philip and
the Eunuch, Act. 8. 37. 38. The Eunuch desiring Baptism, Philip interrogates
him concerning his faith, [If thou beleevest, etc.] To this the Eunuch
answers, [I believe that Jesus is the Son of God.] And such was the
practice of the Primitive times. Those which tendered themselves to Baptism,
being Adulti, able to answer for themselves, (of which sort then there were
many) they had certain questions propounded to them, to which they made
answer; as, Credis? Credo. Abrenuncias? Abrenuncio. Do thou believe? (says
the Minister) I do believe (says the party) Do thou renounce the Devil and
his pompes? etc. I do renounce them. Such was their manner then of Baptizing
persons come Beza Annot. in 1 Pet. 3. 21.
to years of discretion; which as Beza notes upon that place of Peter) after
ages out of a (...), a perverse imitation, drew down and applied to the
Baptism of Infants; but not so fitly, they being not able to answer for
themselves. And this was the stipulation which St. Peter there speaks of, and
to which he attributes that saving property, [it saves us,] which is the fruit
and effect not of the outward Baptism, the putting away the filth of the
flesh, bodily washing: but the inward Baptism testified by the answer or
stipulation of a good conscience toward God. To which agrees that of
Tertullian cited there by Beza as an apt gloss upon that Text. Anima non
lavatione, sed responsione sanatur. In Baptism the soul is healed not by
washing, but by answering; even by that answer of a good conscience. Thus were
their Adulti, persons come to years of discretion baptized then. And after the
same manner ought they to be baptized now. But I will not dwell upon this,
wherein we are all agreed.

Baptism of Infants.
The maine business we have to deal with, and that which I chiefly aimed at,
when I fell upon this Subject, is touching the Baptism of Infants; whether
they, or any of them may be baptized. Here the Anabaptists and we are at
variance. We allow it to some, they deny it to all. Whence it is they are
called by the name both of Anabaptists and Catabaptists; because they oppose
the Baptism of all Infants, as a thing not only inconvenient, but unlawful;
and in case any of them be baptized in their infancy, they look upon that
Baptism as a nullity, and so impose upon them a Rebaptization when they come
to years of discretion.

Anabaptisme a dangerous error.
With this Error of theirs I am now to encounter. An Error not only opposing
the constant and universal practice of all the Churches of God in the world,
but dangerous and pernicious to them, tending directly not only to the
unchurching, but unchristianing of them. Of such consequence is this doctrine
of theirs, that if it be true, there are but a few Christians to be found this
day in the world.

To vindicate the truth of God, and the practice of the Churches; as also for
the staying of unstable souls, who are subject in these unsettled times to be
carried away into this Error amongst others: Come we as plainly as we can to
join issue with them, putting it to the trial, whether any Infants be
baptizeable or no.

Q. Whether Infants be baptizeable, or no.
So I shall state the controversy, and that to prevent impertinent disputes,
and collateral differences, which otherwise might fall in betwixt us, and the
Semi-Anabaptist, or else some others of our Brethren, who deny baptism unto
some Infants, though borne of believing parents, upon other grounds, which now
I forbear to mention. My quarrel here is with the complete Anabaptist, who
holds that Infants qua Infants are not baptizeable, let their parents be
never so holy, and the administration in all other respects never so pure, and
regular. To meet with them, I propound the question in these terms.

The Question stated.
Q. Whether children of the holiest parents, and in the purest Churches, may
and ought to be baptized in their infancy? Of this Question we maintain the
Affirmative, that they may, and ought; they the Negative, that they neither
ought, nor may. It remains then that we come to see what can be said of either
side. I shall begin with the Affirmative, showing you what grounds, what
warrant we have for our doctrine and practice. Then come to the Negative,
showing what they can say by way of opposition against it.

Infan^s of believing parents are subjects capable of Baptism.
Begin with the former, pleading for our selves, and all the Churches of
Christ; whose very practice in all ages, in all places of the world for so many
hundred years together ought not to be despised by us. But letting that pass.
Infants of believing parents are subjects capable of baptism. This we might
prove by diverse Proved by arguments.
arguments. Take but two or three of the principal; and those no new ones. New
arguments in this cause are not to be expected, only the improving of old
ones, the driving home of those nails which have been heretofore fastened in
the head of this Sisera by the Masters of the Assemblies.

(...) Children may be baptized, because within the Covenant.
The first whereof is that which I have already laid down in the description
of baptism, where I make the subject of baptism to be persons that are in
covenant. From hence we argue, that if children of believing parents be within
the Covenant then they may be baptized: But they are within the Covenant;
Therefore they may be baptized.

The former of these is evident (and I think it will not be denied.) To
whomsoever the covenant it self belongs, to them belongs this seal of the
Covenant. Abraham's posterity being in Covenant, they were to receive the seal
of the Covenant, viz. the sign of circumcision. Thus Christians the spiritual
seed of faithful Abraham, being in Covenant with God, they are capable of
baptism, this initiall seal, which seals up unto them, and testifies unto
others their entrance into Covenant.

The maine difference here betwixt us and the Anabaptist will lie about the
second of these; viz. Whether Infants of believing parents be in Covenant or
no? This Infants of believing parents, are to be reputed in Covenant.
they deny, alleging that the Covenant, being a Covenant of Grace, it does not
run along with the blood, it is not transmitted from the parent to the
child, neither is it intayled upon any family, any kindred. No, That which is
borne of the flesh is flesh] (say they.) As for children, they are all alike
borne children of wrath; neither are the children of believing parents herein
privileged. [There is no difference (says the Apostle) for all have sinned,
and are deprived of the glory of God.] No Romans 3. 22. 23.
difference here between the children of Christians, and Pagans; Believers, and
Infidels; the one is no more in Covenant then the other by nature. Neither are
men brought into Covenant by natural generation, but by spiritual
Regeneration. They must first be borne again; otherwise they have nothing to
do with the Covenant. Thus they. But with what truth, it will appear by these
Proved by 3 Arguments.
two or three arguments.

Arg. 1. Taken from Act. 2. 38. 39.
Children of believing parents are within the covenant. What else (in the first
place) means that of the Apostle St. Peter in that known place? Act. 2. where
he tells those new Converts, that The promise was to them, and to their
children, v. 39. and thereupon inviteth them to come and be baptized, as you
have it in the verse foregoing. [The promise is unto you and to your children.]

Explication.
For the explicating of that Text, and for the vindicating of it from the
cavills and evasions of our Adversaries, I shall open and unfold unto you these
two things: 1. What is there meant by the Promise; and secondly, what by their
Children.

Q 1. What meant by the Promise.
1. For the former of these, we find the An abaptists nibling at it; some of
them referring it to the words immediately foregoing, viz. [The receiving of
the Holy Verse. 38.
Ghost.] This is the promise (say they) here spoken of, A.
viz. of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. But against them the evidence
is clear. The Promise here spoken of is the great Promise of the Gospel,
called here by way (...).
of emphasis, [The Promise,] viz. the promise of Remission of sins, which he
wills them to seek, in, by, and thorough Christ. This promise he here
holds forth unto them; and for the bearing up of their drooping dejected
spirits, he tells them that that Promise belonged to them, and their children.
Not the promise of the Holy Ghost in those extraordinary gifts, which was
peculiar to that age, and to some peculiar persons therein, not common to all
that were baptized into the name of Jesus Christ.

Q. 2. What by children.
But what is here meant by their Children?

To this the Anabaptist answers, not Children in age, young Infants. Who then?
Why either children by regeneration, (So Calvin tells us some of them expound
Calv. ad lo^. Not children by Regeneration, Or Succession.
the word there in a metaphorical sense, purposely to evade and elude the force
of it:) Or else (as the greatest part of them carry i^) children by succession,
their posterity that should come after them being come to years of discretion.
So they allege the word (Children) to be often used in Scripture. Act. 3. 25.
Ye are the children of the Prophets. Act. 13. 26. Men and brethren, Children of
the stock of Abraham.] Thus would they have the word here understood. [You and
your Children] i. e. (say they) the lineally descended sons of Abraham, men and
women of full age.

But children in Age.
A. But to this cavil of theirs we reply. The word (Children) there must be
taken literally and properly, and be understood of Infants, Children in age.

Vid. Robinson Bap. of Infants Arg. 5.
For proof of this, I find the scope and drift of the place brought in by
some, which seems (I confess) to favor this construction. But in as much as
I find that variously carried according to diverse apprehensions of it, I shall
pass it by, fastening upon that which I conceive to be more demonstrative and
convincing. I take it from the words themselves, Wherein we may take notice of
three several ranks or conditions of persons to The Promise said to belong to
three sorts of persons.
whom the Apostle here affirms this promise to belong. 1. The Jews themselves
there present; 2. Their Children; 3. Those which were a far off; But who were
they?

Q. Who were those a far off; Calvin; Piscator. A Lapide.
Q. Who were those a far off?

The opening of that clause will conduce much to the clearing of the former.
[Them which are a far off.] This I know Expositors generally, both Protestant
and Papist, understand of the Gentiles, who were then afar off, at a great
distance from Not the Gentiles, as it is usually expounded.

Ephesians. 2 17.


the Jew in point of Religion. For countenance of this exposition, they bring
in that known place of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 17. where speaking of the Jews and
Gentiles, he describes each by a Periphrasis, the one a people a far off, the
other near. The Gentiles before the coming of verse. 13.
Christ they were a far off. [Ye who sometimes were a far off are made nigh by
the blood of Christ. 13. of that 2. Ephesians.] Thus they expound Peter by Paul,
generally looking upon these texts in 2. Ephesians. as a Comment upon that in the
2. of the Acts.

Beza ad loc.
But herein I find Mr. Beza dissenting from them, and that (as I conceive) not
without good ground and warrant. By those a far off in that place (says he)
cannot be Proved by two reasons.
understood the Gentiles. Why not? Take a double reason for it, each convincing.

Peter was not yet fully instructed in this mystery touching the calling of the
Gentiles.

Act. 10. Verse 13. 28. 34.


1. The calling of the Gentiles was as yet in a great part a mystery to Peter
himself, A secret which was not yet clearly unfolded unto him. So much we may
collect from that vision presented to him, Act. 10. whereby taking away the
difference betwixt the clean beasts and unclean, bidding him slay and eat,
etc. The Lord taught him not to put a difference betwixt Jew and Gentile. So as
it is evident, Peter was not so well instructed in this mystery before, as
that he should tell the Jews so expressly, that the promise belonged as well to
the Gentiles, as to them.

Peter had understood this mystery, yet No fit time to preach this doctrine.
was this no fit time to have preached and published this doctrine to these weak
Jews, being then but novices, beginning to look toward Christ; to whom it
might rather have been a stumbling block to keep them back, then any
encouragement to bring them to Christ. To hear that the Gentiles were alike
interested in the Promise with them, it could be no argument to persuade them
to come in unto Christ. Upon these grounds he concludes (and I think very
rationally) that by those a far off cannot be meant the Gentiles.

But the posterity of the Jews, a far off in time.
Who then? Why the posterity of these Jews, who were to succeed them in the
ages to come, who were then afar off in time. Mark it. Not Gentiles a far off
in state and condition, but Jews afar off in time, such as were to be born in
afterages. That the phrase here must be so understood, Beza well evinceth it
from the original: where he takes notice of a remarkable difference betwixt
Paul's words, and Peter's: Paul speaking of the Gentiles in that 2 Ephesians. he
calls them (...) but Peter's words here are (...) the one importing a distance
of state, the other of time. And so indeed the Greek phrase (...) properly
signifies; such as are a far off in time, (...) (as Piscator makes it out)
long post futuris (as Beza translates it) such as were to be born a long time
after.

What meant by Children.
Now then (to wind up what I have ravelled) If by those a f^r off, be meant
not the Gentiles, but the Jews afar off in time, then by their Children here
must be understood, not their Posterity which was to come after; but their
present issue, the children that already were, or should be born of their
bodies, what ever they were, whether of riper, or younger years, even Infants.
To them (says the Apostle) as well as you, belongs this promise, this great
promise, the promise of the Messiah, of life and salvation by Christ. So ran
the promise made to Abraham: It took in his seed, his children: and to you
shall that promise be made good, in case you repent and believe, and so approve
your selves the children of faithful Abraham, the promise will reach both you
and your children. So then, (to close up this Argument) the promise belonging
unto the children of believers, they are also in Covenant, and being in
Covenant, the Seal of the Covenant is appliable unto them.

Object. [As many as the Lord our God shall call] how to be understood.
Here I am not ignorant of that beaten muse which the Anabaptists generally think
to creep out at, that evasion whereby they think to elude the force of this
argument. They find it (as they conceive) in the last clause of the verse,
which they make use of as the Seaman of his Rudder in the Stern, whereby he
turns about the whole Ship; so they think hereby to turn about the whole
Argument. This promise (say they) it belonged to them, and their children, and
to those a far off, but how? viz. upon their Calling, So run the words; [As
many as the Lord our God shall call.] Now indeed (say they) be they who, or
what they will, they may lay claim to the promise, being once called, out not
else.

A. To this we answer, That this Cavil of theirs, what force soever there may
seem to be in it, yet it cannot reach the Argument in hand, inasmuch as that
clause stands in reference only to the clause next foregoing, viz. [Those which
are afar off] not reaching to the former, [them and their children.] As for
them, the words run roundly and absolutely, putting them and their children
together, without any note of distinction betwixt them, (as it is observable in
all the original copies that I can meet with) extending the promise alike unto
both, and that without any limitation or restriction, [The promise is unto you
and your children] Not to as many of them as the Lord shall call, (as they
would restrain it) but indefinitely to all of them; and [to those which are
afar off, even as many as the Lord shall call,] as many of them that should
succeed in after-generations, as the Lord should effectually call to repent and
believe, they should partake in the same privilege, The Promise should reach
to them and to their children. So that let our adversary make what improvement
he can of this allegation, unless he stretch it beyond the staple, and extend
the words of the Apostle further then ever they were intended, and further then
with any congruity they can reach, it cannot so much as touch, much less shake
the Argument now laid down.

I pass to a 2d, a second Argument to prove Infants of believing Parents to be
within the Covenant.

Arg. 2. Some Infants were in Covenant under the Old Testament.
Infants of believing parents were in Covenant under the Old Testament,
therefore they are so under the New.

As for the Antecedent, the former part of this Enthymeme, viz. That some
Children were in Covenant under the Old Testament, I think it will not be
denied. If it should, the evidence is clear^* wherefore else were they
circumcised? God did not put that this his Seal, to a Blank. [This is my
Covenant] (says the Lord) viz. a Genesis 17. 10, 11
sign, a seal, a token of the Covenant, not to be administered unto any but
such as were presumed to be in Covenant with God. Now from hence we infer,
Therefore some are in covenant now. Proved by 3 Arguments.
If they were in Covenant then, then they are in Covenant now; If under the Old
Testament, then under the New. This inference I shall evince and make good by
three arguments.

Otherwise Infants should be losers by the coming of Christ.
Arg. 1. Otherwise, Children now under the New Testament should be in a worse
condition then they were under the Old; and so in stead of receiving benefit by
the coming of Christ, they should be indamaged by it; They should be losers by
Christ, which is monstrous to conceive. Nisi forte arbitramur Christum in suo
adve^^u Patris gratiam imminu^sse aut decurtasse, quod execrab^li blasphem^a
non vacat. Calv. Instit, l 4. c. 16. S. 4.
That the Fathers were gainers by the coming of Christ, brought into a better
condition, Papists maintain: but that their Children should be losers by it,
methinks Anabaptists should not dare to affirm. But so they must be, and great
losers too, if whereas they were in Covenant before his coming, since his
coming they should be excluded. Certainly, little cause had John the Baptist
to have sprung for joy in his mothers womb at the presence of Christ in his
conception, had his birth been so disadvantagious to him, and others in that
condition. Far be it from us to give way to such a thought. The coming of
Christ, it Luke 2. 10.
was joyous to all, to all nations, all sexes, all conditions, all ages;
advantageous to all, even to Infants.

Robinson, bap. of Infants.
It is well observed, Christ did not only take the nature of man upon him, but
the ages of man also, viz. Childhood, Youth, Manhood. He passed through all
these estates, to show that he was the Savior, the Redeemer of all, and that
some of all these estates should have benefit by him, and amongst others,
Children; to whom he showed a peculiar affection when he was upon earth, (as
God willing I shall show you hereafter.) A plain evidence that he came not to
disadvantage them in the great business of salvation, but to promote and
further it.

The grace of God should be more large under the Old Testament, ^hen the New.
under the Old Testament, and not under the New, then the grace of God under the
Old Testament should be more large then under the New; and under the New more
strait then under the Old. Under the Old Testament, the Covenant was, [I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed.] The grace of God then extended not to the
Parent only, but to the Child. Now, if this grace should now be restrained
only to the Parent, not reaching unto the Child, then the grace of the New
Testament should be more strait then of the Old, which cannot be imagined
without great wrong and injury to Christ himself, and his Gospel. As for
Christ, we know he brought grace Joh. 1. 17.
along with him, (as the Sun does his beams.) Grace and Truth came by (and
with) Jesus Christ.] Grace, and that ample grace. Such is the grace of the New
Testament, reaching and spreading further then that of the Old. [The grace of
God which brings salvation, has appeared Tit. 2. 12.
to all men] (says the Apostle) i. e. to all sorts, ages, and conditions of
men. Therein is this grace more ample then it was under the Law. There the
grace of God in an ordinary dispensation it was appropriated to the Jews. They
were then the (...), Gods favorites, to whom his grace in Christ was
manifested. But now that grace has appeared to all men. The grace of the
Gospel is more ample, and every ways greater grace then that before, or under
the Law [God having provided Heb. 11. 40.
some better thing for us] (says the Apostle.) The privileges of the Gospel
are more, and greater, and better, then those under the Law. Surely therefore,
Infants being in Covenant then, they are not excluded now. Which if they be,

Infants no where cast out of the Covenant.
3. Let it be showed (in the third place) by what act they are excluded. If
once they were in Covenant, let it be showed when, and how they came to be
ejected: how this Magna Charta, this Great Charter, granted first to Abraham,
came to be forfeited, or when it was called in. How they who were once of Gods
family, and wore his livery, came to be cashiered: How they, who were once
members of the mystical Body, came to be cut off. If our adversaries can show
us a special warrant for the calling in of this act of grace toward them (as
they must, before we can give way to it) a special and express order to
prohibit Infants from laying any further claim to that privilege under the
Gospel, which for so many ages they had been peaceably possessed of under the
Law; then we will hearken to them. Otherwise we must hold Infants to be in
statu quo, in the same, or in a better state and condition now, then they were
in under the Old Testament. Being in Covenant with God then, they are in
Covenant with him now. And being in Covenant, they have right to this initiall
seal of the Covenant.

I know what the Anabaptist will here reply to this Argument. Give me leave to
meet with it, that I may clear the way as I go.

Replic. These are two distinct Covenants.
That Infants should be in Covenant under the New Testament, because they were
so under the old, it follows not (say they;) why? In as much as these are two
distinct Covenants, not the same. For this (say Jer. 31. 31. Heb. 8. 6.
they) Scripture is express; calling this Covenant which we have under the
Gospel, a New Covenant, and a better Covenant, established upon better
promises, etc. As The old Covenant abolished.

Heb. 7. 18.


for that old Covenant it is antiquated, and abrogated, being (as the Apostle
tells us) disanulled by reason of the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof.]
That Covenant then is now determined, neither have we any thing to do with it
under the Gospel. This is a new Covenant, nor like the former.

A. The old Covenant, what.
A. For answer to this, in as much as it will make much to the clearing of this
doctrine, and tend greatly to the satisfaction of those who desire it, give me
leave briefly to show you what the old Covenant was, which is there opposed to
this new Covenant, and said to be abrogated, and abolished, etc.

Where, let God himself be his own Interpreter In that 31. of Jeremy, v. 32.
cited by the Apostle, Heb. 8. v. 9. the words are express. [Behold the days
come (says the Lord) that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel,
etc.] What Covenant? why mark what follows. Not according to the Covenant
which I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to
bring them out of Egypt, etc.] Mark it. This Not that made with Abraham, but
the Covenant at Mount Sina which were
was the old Covenant so much spoken of in that Epistle to the Hebrews. Not
that Covenant which God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. But that Covenant which he
made with Israel at their coming out of Egypt, Exodus 19. These were two
distinct Covenants: distinct, I say, whether in kind, or only in manner of
administration, Two distinct Covenants.
I will not contend. A point worthy to be observed, as letting in much light to
the controversy now in hand.

Six differences betwixt them.
Many remarkable differences there are betwixt them. To glean some of the
handfulls that others have let fall.

1. (In the first place) they differ in time. The Covenant Vid. Mr. Robinson
Bap. of Infants, p. 77.
made with Abraham was long before that other Covenant, even four hundred and
thirty years. So the Apostle tells us expressly, Gal. 3. 17. The Covenant In
time.
that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred
and thirty years after cannot disanull. So long was this Covenant after that
Covenant made with Abraham.

Place.
2. As they differ in time, so in place. The one made at Mount Sina, Exodus 19.
the other first made with Abraham in Vr of the Caldees, Genesis 12. after renewed,
and confirmed in Canaan, Genesis 15. and 17.

Manner of making and dispensing. Exodus 19.
3. They differ in the manner both of their making, and dispensing. The Law was
given after a terrible manner, to declare the Justice of God against the
violaters and transgressors of that Covenant. But the Covenant made with
Abraham, was made with all sweetness of love and mercy, breathing forth nothing
but free grace. And for the manner of their dispensation; that legal Covenant
it was dispensed under types and figures, and ceremonial observances. It had
Ordinances of divine service, and a wordly Sanctuary, etc. (as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 9. 1.) But the Covenant made with Abraham was more plainly and
simply dispensed, having no other Ceremony annexed to it, but only
Circumcision, which was a seal of that Covenant.

Conditions. The condition Conditions. Mr Robinson ibid.
of that legal Covenant at Mount Sina, was even the same for substance with
that which God made with Adam in Paradise. [Doe this and live.] A legal
condition; promising life, all earthly and heavenly blessings, upon the
condition of perfect obedience to all the Commandments. Whereupon this
Covenant, through man's corruption, and inability to keep it, it is said to be
weak. [It was weak through the flesh, Romans 8. 3. and unprofitable, Heb. 7.
18. It was disanulled for the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof.] But now
the condition of that Covenant made with Abraham was Evangelicall, viz. Faith,
and Evangelicall obedience. Romans 4. 11.
Faith; Circumcision the seal of that Covenant was to Abraham a seal of the
righteousness of Faith; sealing up unto him righteousness and life, not upon
the condition of doing, working, but believing, which was accounted to him for
Righteousness, (as the Apostle sets it Verse. 9. 22.
forth, Romans 4.) Obedience; not exactness, but uprightness, Genesis 17. 1. Walk
before me, and be upright, or sincere.

End and use.
5. Again (fifthly) they differ in the end, and use of transgressions. So the
Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 19. wherefore then serves the Law, it was added
because of transgressions. viz. to discover them, to bridle and restrain men
from them, to denounce punishments for them (for that is a threefold use of the
Law, 1. Detegit. 2. Fraenat. 3. Punit.) to convince men of sin, and of their
misery by reason of sin, that so they might come to see the need they have of
Christ, and be driven to him, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 24. The
Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ. But that other Covenant made
with Abraham, it was to assure him, and his seed of their interest in the
Messiah, and the promise of life through him.

Continuance.
Sixthly, and lastly, They differ in their duration and continuance. That legal
Covenant it was but temporary, to continue but till Christ should come. So
says the Apostle, Gal. 3. 19. The law was added because of transgressions,
until the seed should come to whom the promise was made.] i. e. until Christ
should come. Then that legal Covenant as a Covenant with the Church, ceased.
But the Covenant made with Abraham it was an everlasting Covenant. So the Lord
tells him, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee for an everlasting Covenant, etc.

So then you see that these Covenants were two distinet Covenants. That
Covenant which God made with Israel at Mount Sina, it was not the same with
that which he had made with Abraham before.

And of that Covenant it is that the Apostle there speaks in the 7. and 8.
chap. of the Hebrews. Not of the Covenant made with Abraham, which was an
Evangelicall Covenant, and for substance the same with that which we are now
under; But of the Covenant made at Mount Sina, that legal Covenant. That is
the Covenant which the Apostle there compares with the new Covenant, and of
which he tells us that it is now disanulled and abolished.

Q. The Covenant at Mount Sina, why called the old Covenant, and first Covenant
A. 1. In opposition to the Covenant of Grace under the New Testament.
Q. Why but (says our Adversary) how could that be called the old Covenant,
and the first Covenant, when as it was 430. years after the Covenant made with
Abraham? This was rather the first Covenant, and old Covenant.

A. To this it is answered: That legal Covenant is called the old Covenant, 1.
In opposition to the Covenant of the Gospel under the new Testament, which
because it was revived and renewed, and confirmed by the coming of Christ, the
promised seed, it is therefore peculiarly called the new Covenant, and that
legal Heb 8. 13.
Covenant in opposition to it, is called the old Covenant.

Waxing old.
2. The old Covenant, because it waxed old, and through age decayed. So says
the Apostle of it in the place last named. Heb. 8. last. [In that he says a
new Covenant, he has made the first old, new that which decays, and waxes
old is ready to vanish aw^y.]

The same for substance with the first Covenant made with Adam in state of
innocence.
3. The old Covenant, and the first Covenant, because for substance it was
partly the same with that first Covenant which God made with Adam in state of
innocence. The Law (the moral part of it) published upon Mount Sina, it was
no other but the same Law that was given to Adam at the first. What was there
written in Tables of stone was but a counterpane of 2 Cor. 3. 3.
what was written in the fleshy Tables of the heart of man at the beginning. And
being so, well might it be called the old Covenant, and the first Covenant,
being before the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, I, or with Adam either.

The old Covenant disanulled.
You see then what the old Covenant is, that legal Covenant whereof Moses was
the Mediator. And of this Covenant it is true, it is disanulled, abrogated, so
as there is now no more use of the Law as a Covenant to the Church. Mark that,
as a Covenant: Other uses there are of it many, which are still in force as
much as ever: But it is no longer a Covenant. This Covenant is disanulled. But
so is not that Evangelicall Covenant Not the Covenant with Abraham.
made with Abraham, which is (as I told you) an Everlasting Covenant, and for
substance the very same with that which Believers are now under; viz. the
Covenant of Grace promising life and salvation upon the condition of believing.
So much the Apostle tells us expressly, Gal. 3. v. 8. The Scripture (i. e. the
Spirit of God speaking in Scripture) foreseeing that God would justify the
heathen (the Gentiles) through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed.] Mark it. When God made this
Covenant with Abraham, declaring and promising that in his seed all the Nations
of the earth should be blessed, he then preached the Gospel to him, making a
Covenant with him concerning Christ, and salvation by Christ. So much Zacharias
in his song acknowledges, Luke 1. 72, 73. where speaking of the exhibiting and
sending of Christ into the world, he calls it, An holy Covenant, the oath which
God swear unto our father Abraham. The Covenant made with Abraham then was no
other but the Covenant of Grace, even the same Covenant that we are now under.
All the difference is, the Covenant now is new drawn, and so put into another
form, set forth and expressed more clearly and fully, then that with Abraham
was, (even as our evidences and conveyances, now they are more large and full
then they were wont to be in the days of our forefathers, though in effect the
same) but for substance they are one and the same.

And being so, (to close up this second Argument) that Covenant is an
everlasting Covenant, (I will make Jer. 32. 40.
an everlasting Covenant with them, says the Lord, speaking of the renewing of
the Covenant of Grace with them, Ier. 32. 40.) A Covenant that is not waxed old
(as that legal Covenant did) that is not, nor ever shall be disanulled, but is
in force still as much as ever. And consequently children of Believers being
once in Covenant, they are still in Covenant. And being in Covenant, they have
a right to this seal of the Covenant.

Arg. 3. Proving some Infants to be within the Covenant:
Arg. 3. I pass now to a third Argument to prove children of Believers to be
within the Covenant. I take it from that known place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
where he tells us expressly that the children of holy Because they are holy.
and believing parents, (I, if but one of them be a believer) are Holy. [Else
were your children unclean, but now they are holy, v. 14.

A Text which neither Papist nor Anabaptist can look upon, but it will make
their eyes dazzle. In this Text the Papist (unless he shut his eyes) cannot but
see, that children of believing parents may be in a state of salvation, though
they dye without Baptism. Why? because they are to be accounted holy by birth.
And in this text the Anabaptist (if he will not (as he said) Quaerere festucam,
seek strawes to put out his own eyes withal, as indeed in this point they
do) cannot but see that Infants of believing parents are within the Covenant,
and consequently have a right to the seal of the Covenant, and that because
they are holy.

Q. How Infants of believing parents are said to be holy.

A. Not free from original sin.


Q. Holy? but how holy? what are all the Infants of believing parents inwardly
inherently holy, truly sanctified by the Grace and Spirit of Christ? and born
such?

A. Not so. Herein, what ever the Anabaptists hold about original sin, which
most of them deny, (for that is their doctrine (I will not say of all, but of
many, of most of them) that, no Infants are conceived and borne in original
sin, (point blank to that of David, Ps. 51. 5.) neither are children of wrath
by nature, etc. we freely acknowledge it, that in this there is no difference.
The child of a believer is as well conceived in sin as any other, all being
alike sinners by nature, and guilty of eternal condemnation. In this sense
children of believing parents are not said to be holy. Not but that God may and
sometimes does sanctify children from, and in the womb, as it is said of
Jeremy and John the Baptist. But that is not the holiness which the Apostle
there speaks of.

But visibly holy.
What then? why an outward, visible holiness. Herein the Anabaptists (most of
them) and we agree. But what outward Holiness is it? whether a Civil or
Religious holiness. Here is the difference. The Anabaptist to evade the blow
of this Text, takes the former way, understanding the Apostle there to speak
only of a Civil Evasion.
holiness, opposite to a Civil uncleanness. [Now are Not only with a Civil
Holiness.
your children holy.] i. e. (say they) they are legitimate, no bastards. Thus
generally they construe that place. And for countenance of that interpretation
they bring that Text of the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 2. 15. where the Prophet
tells us, that at the first, God made but one man and one woman, joining them
together in marriage, viz. that he might seek a godly seed (or holy seed) i.
e. such as should be borne in lawful marriage: And by that they interpret this
Text of the Apostle, [Now are your children holy,] i. e. legitimate, lawfully
begotten, not spurious, no bastards.

A. Vide P. Mart. and Parae. ad l^oc.
To this we reply, that this interpretation (however it must be acknowledged to
have some considerable advocates for it, both ancient and modern) yet it
cannot be the sense of the Apostle in that place. We shall not need to spend
much time about it. The error will soon appear if we do but oppose the
parts of the Apostles dis-junction there one against the other. [Else were your
children unclean, but now they are holy] That is, (say they) else were they
bastards, but now they are legitimate. Now the former of these is not true,
viz. that in case the unbeleeving wife were not sanctified by the believing
husband, but both were unbeleevers, then their children should be unclean, i.
e. Bastards. This is not true. For the children of Pagans, where both parents
are Infidels, yet being borne in lawful wedlock, they are no more bastards
then the children of Christians are, but are as legitimate, and as free from
civil uncleanness as any other.

So that (whatever sense be put upon that place of the Prophet Malachy) yet
this cannot be the sense of the Apostle in this place, where he speaks of a
holiness that was peculiar to believers, not common to Infidels as well as
them. The case is clear to them who will not here shut their eyes against the
light.

Evasion.
2. Others there are of them who would elude the force of that place another
way. They will tell us that Nor only sanctified to the use of the parents.
Paul in telling them their children were holy, he meant no more, but that they
were sanctified unto them. Even as the unbeleeving wife (say they) is
sanctified to the believing husband, i. e. sanctified to his use, even so, and
no otherwise, are their children said to be holy, i. e. sanctified to the use
of their parents in the duties of relation; so as the parents may both own
them, and keep them, and use them as children, and that in a Christian and
comfortable way.

A.
A. But to this it is as soon answered as to the former. (Besides that these
children cannot be said to be sanctified to both parents, the one being an
unbeleever, to Tit. 1. 15.
whom nothing is pure* nothing holy, besides that,) There is a broad difference
between being sanctified to the use of one, and being holy. To a believer all
things are sanctified. [Every creature of God is go^^, for it is sanctified by
the Word, and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 5.] [To the pure all things are pure, Tit. 2.
15.] (...), but not (...), Pure, but not Holy. This cannot be said of all
creatures that they should be holy, holy in themselves, as here it is said of
the children of believing parents, who are said to be not only (...), but
(...), not only sanctificati, but sancti, not only sanctified to the use of
the parent, but holy, holy in themselves.

Q. But what holiness then is it that that the Apostle here means?

But holy in respect of federall holiness.
A. Why, briefly; It must be a Federall holiness, the holiness of the
Covenant. So Calvin, Beza, P. Martyr, Paraeus, and almost the whole stream of
Protestant Expositors carry it. As for Papists indeed, they here Vid. A Lapid.
ad loc.
join hands with the Anabaptist. Not enduring to hear of the holiness of
Children, holiness by birth, because that being admitted, their absolute
necessity of Baptism, whereof they are rigid and cruel patrons, must fall to
the ground. But amongst Protestant Interpreters it is generally received. And
that not without good warrant from the word, which usually calls them holy
who are borne under a holy Covenant. The Covenant it self is holy; so called by
Zacharias in that place prealleadged, 1. Luke 72. And so are they which are
borne under it. Thus were the Jews holy. [Thou art a holy people unto the Lord
thy God.] Ye have it often repeated in Deuteronomy. 7. 6 c. 14* 2. 21.
that book of Deuteronomy, i. e. under a holy Covenant, And in this respect they
were all alike holy. It is that which Corah and his company tell Moses and
Aaron. Number. 16. 3.
[All the Congregation is holy every one of them.] A truth in it self, though
not as they intended it. They were all holy in respect of a federall holiness,
though not so holy as Moses and Aaron whom God had sanctified and set apart to
special and peculiar services. The Jews being in Covenant they were said to
be a holy people, and a holy seed. So you have it Ezra 9. 2. where it is said
that the Holy seed had mingled themselves with the people of the land.] And in
this sense the Apostle (speaking in the known phrase, and language of the
Scripture) calls the children of believing parents holy, viz. so holy as the
children of the Jews formerly were. This was the privilege of the Jews; they
were a holy seed, they and their children: In that differing from Gentiles that
were out of Covenant. [We (says the Apostle) Gal. 2. 15.
who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.] the Gentiles being
out of Covenant, their children were borne sinners, i. e. aliens and strangers
to the Covenant. But it was otherwise with the Jews, their children were holy,
borne such, viz. in respect of a federall holiness. In this privilege do
believing Gentiles now partake with them, (the partition wall being now broken
down,) Ephesians. 2. 14.
they being incorporated into the same body with them, being made Burgesses of
the same heavenly Jerusalem with them, they are also infranchized and made
partakers of the same privileges and prerogatives that they were. Amongst
which this is one, that they and their seed are holy: that is, they are no
longer Pagans and Heathens, but Christians, members of the Church, in Covenant
with God, so to be taken, so to be reputed.

The Anabaptist injurious to Infants.
Where, before we pass any further, take notice how injurious the Anabaptist
is unto the children of believers, whom they bereave of this spiritual
privilege, this excellent Prerogative, casting them out amongst the children
of Heathens and Infidels: peremptorily affirming, That there is no difference
betwixt the one and the other: The one as holy as the other, the one no more in
Covenant then the other; and consequently the one has no more right to the
seal of the Covenant then the other.

Infants of Believers and Infidels differ.
No difference? True, by nature we yield it, there is none. [There is no
difference (says the Apostle) for all have sinned, Romans 3. 22.] I, and all
have alike sinned; all alike guilty of Adams sin by a just imputation; and
all alike tainted and stained with Adams corruption by a real communication.
But has Grace made no difference? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
[Who makes thee to differ from another? (says the Apostle.) Not nature, but
grace. This made the Jew to differ from the Gentile, and the children of the
one from the children of the other: And this is that makes as believers
themselves, so their children to differ from Infidells: Of whom the Apostle
says that they are holy. And what? Is there yet no difference? Will our
Adversaries say the same of the children of Infidels and Pagans, that they are
Holy?

But we shall not need to wonder at this, that they equalize them with the
children of Pagans and Infidels, when as they do not stick to compare them
with Dogs and Cats, boldly affirming, (so some of that way have lately done)
that the one has as much right to Baptism as the other. To which blasphemy of
theirs, I shall return no other reply but that of Michael to the Devil, when
Jude 9.
he strove with him, The Lord rebuke thee.]

Thus you see this first and grand Argument for the Baptism of Infants
sufficiently supported. If Infants of believing parents be in Covenant, then
they have right to this Seal of the Covenant: But they are in Covenant. This
we have made good by three subordinate Arguments. 1. The Promise belongs unto
them. 2. If they were in Covenant under the Old Testament, then also under the
New. 3. They are holy.

To these many other might yet be added. That of the Apostle to his Romans
seconds that to his Corinthians. If the root be holy, so are the branches,
Romans 11. 16.] Holy parents, a holy seed. The one being in Covenant so is the
other.

1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
Again, if they be not in Covenant they are without hope (as Paul says of
unbeleeving Gentiles) there being no way whereby salvation can be obtained but
by the Covenant of free grace in Jesus Christ. But to exclude all Infants dying
in their infancy from salvation, I think is greater cruelty then the
Anabaptist will own. Nay clean contrary to their doctrine, who by denying
Original sin, (as many of them do) put all Infants dying in their infancy
into a state of salvation, (larger charity then the Scripture will maintain)
and if saved, then they must first be in Covenant.

Q. Whether (...) Infants of believing parents be in Covenant.
Q. But what then (it may be said) are all Infants of believing parents in
Covenant?

A. I answer in the outward visible Covenant they are. As for the Covenant it
self, to speak properly, and strictly it depends upon Gods election. Neither
does it A. Visibly they are.
belong to any but those who are elected. But this is to us a secret. Now the
rule is, De ^ccultis non judicat Ecclesia. [Secret things belong unto the Lord,
but things revealed Deuteronomy. 29 29.
to us and our children.] Amongst which this is one, [I will be thy God, and
the God of thy Seed.] And this are we to hope and believe touching all the
children of believers, that they are Gods children as well as theirs, until
the contrary be some ways manifested.

Q. How the Covenant is transmitted.
Q. But how comes this Covenant to be transmitted from the parent to the
child? what does it run along with the blood? Is it transmitted by the way of
natural generation?

A. Not by natural generation.
A. Not so. This (what ever our Adversaries in this particular would fasten
upon us, both Anabaptists and Papists (for in this they are agreed) we renounce
and disclaim. Foedus non transfundit^r per carne^, says P. Mart. in 1. Cor.
7. 14.
P. Martyr rightly. The Covenant is not propagated, and transmitted by the way
of natural generation. No. [That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh.] The
parent communicates his nature and the corruption of it unto his child, But by
virtue of the promise.
but nothing of Grace. That is the free gift of God. And this it is that
brings the child of the believer into Covenant as well as the parent, even
the free and gracious promise of God made both to the parent, and to the
child: making over the heavenly inheritance unto both as joint heirs of the
Kingdom of God.

To draw to a conclusion of this first Argument. You see that Infants of
believers are in Covenant, and how they come to be so. Now being in Covenant,
they have right to this initiall seal of the Covenant.

Repl. Infants have no right to the Lords Supper.
Repl. But to this the Anabaptist will yet once more reply, that by the same
reason they should have right to the other Sacrament as well as this, to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that being also a seal of the Covenant.

A. They have a right to it, though not in it.
A. To this I answer briefly. A right they have to both the seals of the
Covenant, both to Baptism and the Lords Supper. Though for the present they be
not capable of the latter, yet they have a right in it, or rather a right to
it. I^s adrem, though not I^s in re. A right to it, though not in it. Even as a
child under age, an Infant lying in the cradle, being an heir, he has right
to such a house or land, which yet he cannot for the present take up, and make
use of. Even such a right have the children of believers in, or to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, a right to it, and a right to partake of it,
when they are capable of it, which for the present they are not.

Q. Infants, why not capable of both Sacraments.
Q. And why not as capable of the one Sacrament, as of the other?

A. Because the one is a Passive, the other an active Ordinance.
A. I answer, because the one is a passive, the other an active Ordinance in
reference to the receivers. Baptism is a passive Ordinance, even as
Circumcision was, which required nothing in the person to be actually done by
him, but only to suffer the flesh of his foreskin to be cut: So in Baptism
now, the person baptized is a mere patient in the act of baptizing: But it is
otherwise in the Lords supper. Even as in the Passover there was somewhat more
required then a bare suffering, viz. a taking, and eating, etc. Even so in the
Lords supper, the Communicant is more then a mere patient, he must be active in
that Ordinance. Take and eat, take and drink, both in remembrance of Christ.
This must the Communicant do in the act of receiving. Besides, in way of
preparation to it he must examine himself, and that as for other things, so
for his ability to discern the Lords body. Which because Infants cannot do,
therefore they are debarred from that Sacrament, though received to the other.

Baptism is a passive ordinance, wherein the person baptized is a mere
patient. Such is a man in the beginning of the new birth, the first act of
conversion, a mere patient; As in Generation, so in Regeneration. Now
Baptism, we know, is a Sacrament of our Regeneration, and consequently Infants
are capable of this Sacrament, thoughnot of the other, even as Infants under
the Old Testament were capable of Circumcision at eight days old, when they
were not capable of eating the Passover, though they had a right to the one,
as well as the other.

But I shall dwell no longer upon it. I pass to a second general Argument.

Arg. 2. from Genesis 17. 12.

[ He that is eight days old shall be circumcised.]

Arg. 2. Infants were circumcised, ergo, may be baptized.
AN Argument which I question not but it would alone bear the weight of this
whole Controversy, if it were laid upon it. It is taken from the analogy and
proportion betwixt Baptism and Circumcision: the one a Sacrament of the Old
Testament, the other of the New.

The Argument is framed thus: Infants under the Old Testament were circumcised;
therefore Infants under the New Testament may be baptized. The Proposition or
former part of this Enthymeme, the words which I have now read hold forth unto
your, That Infants were circumcised* So runs the Order and Injunction here in
the Text. [He that is eight days old, shall be circumcised etc.]

Wherein for the opening of the words, we may take notice of the Ordinance it
self, and the time assigned for the administration of it. The Ordinance,
Circumcision; the time, the eight day. Briefly of each.

Circumcision, what.
1. For the Ordinance it self, Circumcision, you know what it was. The first
Sacrament of the Old Testament signifying and sealing up to the people of the
Jews their entrance into Covenant with God; Thence called by the name of the
Covenant. [My Covenant shall be in your Genesis 17. 13.
flesh, Genesis 17.]

For further opening of it, I might show you both what was the sign, and what
the thing signified by it. v. 11.
The outward sign, the cutting away the foreskin of the flesh. The thing
signified by it; Generally, their entrance into Covenant* More particularly,
their Justification and Sanctification. Justification, in the remission of all
their sins, and gracious acceptance of their persons in and through the
blessed seed, being now marked out for God. Sanctification, in the mortifying
of their lusts. And hence it was, that that mark was set upon that part of the
body, to represent both the pardoning and mortifying of all their sinful
lusts; both which were hereby not only signified, but sealed up unto them.

Diverse mysteries shadowed out by Circumcision.
Many other uses there were of this Sacrament. Diverse mysteries were shadowed
out and signified by it: As,

1. The Corruption of their natures, viz. That they foreskin was from the
presence of men.

Heb. 9. 22.
2. The means of their Redemption, viz. by the shedding without which there is
no remission, no redemption. It is a general observation: All blood shed in
the Old Testament, was typical; and so was this. The blood shed in
Circumcision, a type of the blood of Christ shed in his Passion.

3. The nature of Mortification, which is a painful

obligation and duty, viz. That they should be ready to shed their blood for
God, who had taken them into Covenant with himself.

Ends of the Institution.
These and diverse other mystical significations it had; besides diverse other
ends of the Institution.

initiall seal of the Covenant, making them visible members of the Church.

note of distinction, to difference and distinguish them from all other nations
and people.

obligation upon them, binding them to the observation of the whole Law, not
only Moral, but Ceremonial.

pledge and assurance of their right to, and interest in the earthly Canaan,
which was the type of a heavenly. These and many more ends and uses might be
reckoned up, but I shall not dwell upon them.

The time appointed for administering of Circumcision, the eight day.
Pass we to the second thing, (which is here principally aimed at) viz. the
Circumstance of Time, when this Sacrament was to be administered, and that was
upon the eight day. [He that is eight days old.] Filius ^ct^ di^rum, the son
of eight days, (so the Original has it) i. e. a Child of eight days old:
That was the day appointed for the administering of this Sacrament, the eight
day: which was precisely commanded* and as precisely observed, upon what day
soever it fell, I, though upon Joh. 7. 22, 23.
the Sabbath day. [Moses gave you Circumcision (says our Savior to the Jews)
and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man;] viz. that the Law of Circumcision
might not be broken. Thus it was.

Q. Why the eight day?
Q. But the question may be touching the reason of it; why God would have it
so? why he chooses out that time, that day? why no sooner? why no later?

A. For answer, Know we it is not good, nor safe to be too curious in our
enquiries after God, in seeking a reason of all his Injunctions and Commands.
He that is the Lord of time, may dispose of time as he pleases, neither is he
bound to give an account of it. Yet in as much as there is a reason in all his
actions, make we a sober and modest enquiry after it here.

Q. Why no sooner A. Diverse reasons alleged.

Some Physical Perer. ad loc. ex Plutarcho.


Q. 1. Why no sooner? Why not before the 8th. day?

A. Diverse reasons I find given for it; some physical or natural, others
spiritual and mystical:

In a physical way, The Physician will tell us, that the seventh day is a
Cryticall day, and so a dangerous day, in special to Infants; so as till that
day be past, no wound, no incision can safely be made in the body of a tender
Infant.

Other mystical.
In a mystical way; Augustine will tell us, that this had reference to the
resurrection of Christ, who rose again the eight day, by whom we have the true
Circumcision. The Master of the Sentences, and others after him, will tell us,
that this eight day shadowed out the last day. Octava dies eterna dies, (says
Luther.) The eight day an Luther ad loc.
emblem of Eternity, which comes not within the compass of the seven days,
which are the measurers of time. Then shall we have a full and perfect
Circumcision, having put off this sinful flesh.

The Hebrew Doctors have yet another conceit. The eight day was assigned (say
they) to the end that a Sabbath (which to the Jews was a sign of their
Sanctification) Exodus 31. 13.
might pass over the head of the Infant, before it was circumcised, which it
does ever in eight days. But I will not avouch any of these.

Two reasons insisted on.
More plainly and simply, take a double reason for it. The one natural, the
other ceremonial and mystical.

R. 1. The natural Reason.
1. God puts off Circumcision to the eight day, because before that, the child
being tender could not without hazard or hardship endure so painful a wound.
From whence we might (by the way) take up a double observation, each useful.

Obs. 1. God proportions trials to strength.
Obs. 1. See here the truth of that which St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
That God will not suffer his people to be tempted, (tried above their strength,
above what they are able to bear. He knows their frames and their tempers,
and he will deal with them accordingly. [Hee Psalm. 103. 14.
knows our frame (says the Psalmist) and he remembers that we are but dust.
And therefore what ever sense and reason may dictate, God will deal tenderly
with his people, the people that are in Covenant with him, not 1 Pet. 1. 6.
afflicting them but when and where needis, and in such a measure as they shall
be able to bear it. Giving them such breathings, such intervals, and
intermissions as he shall see fitting for them. Thus deals he here with these
young Covenanters, the Hebrew Infants, he gives them a breathing time betwixt
their Birth and Circumcision, that so they might recover the soarnesse of the
one, before he put them upon a new smart. Even so tenderly is God pleased to
deal with his people: He will not suffer them to have sorrow upon sorrow but
where need is. Paul writing to his Philippians tells them of Epap^roditus his
sickness, [He was sick nigh unto death, but Phil. 2. 27.
(says he) God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I
should have sorrow upon sorrow. Herein God de^leth with them, as the wary
Physician with his patient; who if he be driven to repeat his Phlebotomie, his
blood letting, yet he affordes his patient such intermission as the case will
permit. Thus though God do sometimes follow his people with a succession of
trials, their need requiring it, yet he allows them such respites, and such
breathings as he in his wisdom sees fit f^r them. True it is, flesh and blood
sometimes thinks otherwise. It is Jobs complaint as touching himself, that
[God multiplied his wounds without cause, and that he would not suffer him to
take his breath, Job 9. 17, 18] But this was Jobs infirmity, (as Asaph says of
himself in a Psalm. 77. 10.
like case) a fit of passion. Certainly God is no delighted in the miseries of
his creatures, much less in the sufferings of his people, and therefore they
shall have such intermissions as he sees fit for them, that so they may not
sink under their burdens.

Obs. 2. God will have mercy rather then sacrifice.
Obs. 2. See here the truth of that which the Prophet Hosea tells us, Hos 6 6*
The Lord desires mercy, and not sacrifice, i. e. mercy rather then sacrifice.
God requires that the Hebrew Infants should be circumcised, but he will not
have them circumcised before the eight day; before that, they were not able to
bear it. It might be a hazard, at least a hardship to them, and therefore he
requires it not. Nay, he requires the contrary. By no means upon what pretense
soever, they might not administer it before that day.

Applic.
Applic. Which may serve both as a warrant, and direction unto us about our
baptizing of Infants.

A warrant for baptizing by sprinkling.
1. As a warrant, viz. to bear out our manner of sprinkling rather then
dipping. Dipping being a Ceremony which in these colder Climates cannot be used
without eminent hazard and danger unto children. Now the Rule is. Necessity
and charity disp^nce with ceremonial observances. Such is this rite, this
manner of baptizing, a Ceremony. Now the duties of the Ceremonial Law were
ever to give way to the Moral, and so must they still. To preserve life is a
duty of the Moral Law; no Ceremony but must give way to it. He that would not
have Infants circumcised, will not have them baptized to the hazard of their
lives.

A direction about the time for baptizing Infants.
2. Here is a direction to parents about the time for baptizing their children.
Therein let them not be over hasty in thrusting their children upon this
Ordinance so soon as ever they are borne, though not without some hazard and
danger to their persons. But let them be content to wait Gods time.

Q. Gods time, I, but when is that?

Gods time, the time convenient.
A. When it is most convenient. That is Gods time. Therefore it was that God
made choice of the eight day for Circumcision, because that day was most
convenient. In Baptism now there is no set day appointed, it may be
administered sooner or later, before the eight day, or after. But the time
convenient, that is the day.

Q. Time convenient; when is that? A. Why when the child may safely and
conveniently receive it, and when the Ordinance may be had according to
Christ's Institution. Now is the time convenient, which is Gods time; and this
time Christians should wait for.

Children dying without Baptism, whether endangered.
Q. But what if the child dye in the mean time? is it not hereby damni^ied or
endangered?

A. To this we answer by making the like Querie out of the Text. What if an
Hebrew child dyed before the eight day? The same case of danger might have
been objected, because the child dyed without the seal of the Covenant: yet
were not the Jews upon that pretext of necessity to hasten the time, to baptize
before the eight day. But in this case they must leave their children unto that
God who has not tied himself (though he has done us) to Ordinances and means,
but is able inwardly to supply what is outwardly wanting. And the like ought
Christians to do where Baptism cannot be conveniently had, with safety to
the child, and according to the Ordinance of Christ, there are they to commit
and commend it unto that God, who both can and will make good his Covenant,
though unsealed. Obj. Genesis 17. 14. The uncircumcised man-child was to be cut
off.


Obj. Why but it is objected: The uncircumcised manchilde was to be cut off: So
you have it v. 14. [The uncircumcised manchilde shall be cut off from his
people.] i. e. separated from the fellowship of the Saints both here and
hereafter. Now by proportion it may seem there may be the like danger in a
child unbaptized.

Arg. 1. It reached not to Infants under eight days old.
A. To this we answer, that that Text, should it be understood of children,
yet is it not to be extended to Infants under eight days old. Such as dyed
before they could receive this Ordinance according to the Institution, they
were not within the compass of this commination and threatening. No more are
children which are taken away before they can be made partakers of Baptism
according to Christ's Institution, this endangereth them not.

Not yet to children, but to persons of age contemning or neglecting that
Ordinance.

Jun. and Trem, ad loc.


2. But (secondly) that place is not properly to be Infants, but of persons
come to years of discretion. Not of Infants merely wanting Circumcision, but
of persons neglecting and contemning that Ordinance. The words in the Original
import no more. Praeputiatus mas. The uncircumcised male, (so Iunius conceives
the word there to be taken, with reference only to the sex, not to the age;)
Such a one shall be cu^ off; when? not in his Infancy, but afterward, when
he comes to years of discretion. If then he shall neglect Circumcision, so
approving of his parents neglect, then he shall be cut off.

That this is the sense of the place, Iunius makes it good by two arguments.

Proved by two Arguments.
1. From the word in the Original which (says he) passively, (as our
Translation reads it) [Whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised:] but
actively; [Who shall not circumcise his foreskin*] Not Circumcidetur, but
Circumciderit. Not, shall not be Circumcised, but shall not Circumcise, or
cause to be circumcised the foreskin of his flesh, viz. when he is come to
years of discretion, If then he shall contemn or neglect this Ordinance, etc.

Reason which God himself there gives why the uncircumcised person should be
cut off, viz. Because he has broken my Covenant. Iritum fecit faedus meum. He
has made void my Covenant. Now this is not incident to children. And the^e^ore
the punishment should not be (...) where the offence*could not be committed. If
the Infant were not circumcised, it was the Parents fault in omitting it, not
the Infants in wanting it. And in this case the Parent might be cut off, not
the Child. The Exodus 4. 24.
truth whereof we see in Moses; his child being uncircumcised, the Lord proceeds
not against the child, but him.

Not the want, but contempt or neglect of ^^^ti^me.
And surely thus stands the case in Baptism: If persons being come to years
of discretion shall remain unbaptized, either contemning or neglecting of this
Ordinance of God; in this case God threatens them with a Cutting off. But as
for Infants, let their Parents look to it: If there be any default, any
contempt, any neglect in them, let them see to it; God will have a controversy
with them they may smart for it. But as for Infants themselves, I have more
charity then to fear their miscariage for their Parents neglect. No: As the
father shall not bear the iniquity of the son, so neither shall the son bear
the iniquity of the father. The soul that sins Ez^l
that shall dye. The uncircumcised male should be cut off: Non Infans, sed
adultus: not being an Infant, but being come to years of understanding.

It is not the want, but the neglect, the contempt of an Ordinance, that is
dangerous and damnable. Not the want of Circumcision, nor yet the want of
Baptism, where it cannot be had according to the Institution of Christ. This
is our rule, which we may not transgress upon any pretense whatever. (Better
no Ordinance, then to corrupt an Ordinance.) The Israelites might not upon any
pretext or opinion of necessity hasten the circumcising of their Children
before the time appointed, the eight day. This was the time convenient. There
was the natural reason of this Institution.

(...)
R. 2. Besides this, I told you of a Ceremonial Reason: Infants were not to be
circumcised before the eight day: Why? Because till then they were counted as
in their blood polluted and unclean. So was it with the rest of the Creatures,
being newborn, they were accounted unclean for seven days, the eight day
they might be offered up unto the Lord, and not before. So you have it, Lev.
22. And as it was with other Creatures, so Lev. 22. 27.
with mankind: For the first seven days the male-childe was accounted as
unclean; the eight day it might be circumcised Lev. 12. 2* 3.
and so offered up unto the Lord. And what see we here?

Obs. God will have no communion with impure creatures.
Obs. God will have no communion with impure and unholy creatures. There is the
substance of this shadow. God is in himself a pure and a holy God; being so,
hewil have no communion with polluted and defiled creatures, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
men that are in their blood, the blood of their nativity, in whom the
corruption of nature rules and reigns. Thence Isa. 1. 16.
is that of the Prophet; Wash ye, make ye clean etc. then come and reason with
me. Infants under the Law were first to be washed and cleansed from the blood
of their nativity, their Birth-uncleannesse before they came to receive the
seal of Gods Covenant. Who ever would strike Covenant with God, or partake of
the seals of his Covenant, they must be pure and holy.

Appl. Psalm. 50. 16. Let not such meddle with the seals of the Covenants
Appl. O labor we all to be such, Otherwise never take the Covenant of God in
our mouths. Quid tibi? [What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth,
etc. Ps. 50.] Never boast that we are in Covenant with God; dare not to meddle
with the seals of the Covenant, which so long as we continue in an unreformed,
unsanctified state and condition, we have no right unto. The Infant during the
time of the Ceremonial uncleanness of it, it had no right to this seal of
the Covenant, Circumcision. No more have you, who ever you are, so long as you
lie under a spiritual uncleanness, not purged, and cleansed, and washed from
your filthiness, you have no right to this Ordinance of God, the Sacrament of
the Lords supper. And therefore take you heed how you intrude upon what you
have no right unto: But first get your souls washen; first with the blood,
then with the spirit of Christ: with the blood of Christ washing away the guilt
of your fins unto Justification; with the spirit of Christ washing away the
pollution and power of sin unto Sanctification. Being thus washen, then, and
not before, have you right to have communion with God, and so may comfortably
partake in the means of your Communion, amongst which the Sacrament of the
Lords supper is one, being a seal of the Covenant. And thus have I resolved
unto you the first branch of this question: Why the Hebrew Infants were not to
be circumcised before the eight day; Why no sooner?

Q. 2. The latter branch yet remains. Why no later? Q. 2. Why no later?
They might not do it before, neither might they defer it beyond that day. The
Text is express for the one as well as the other; [He that is eight days old
shall be circumcised,] i. e. upon the eight day: So you have it explained, Lev.
12. Lev. 12. 3.


Not but that in cases of necessity it might be deferred: So was it in the
wilderness for forty years together. The reason whereof you have insinuated,
Josh. 5. Their children were uncircumcised, for (says the Text) Josh. 5. 7.
they had not circumcised them by the way.] Being in itinere, every day
marching and journeying from place to place, and subject to daily encounters
with the Enemy, they could not conveniently be circumcised. In this case then,
(the case of necessity) it might be deferred; otherwise it was to be
administered precisely upon the eight day.

And why not upon the 9. 10. 20.? why not the next month, the next year?

A. Reasons alleged.

1. Natural. Peter. ad loc.


A. For this I find diverse reasons alleged: one physical or natu^all, the
other moral or mystical.

1. In a Physical way (say some) this was a more convenient time then
afterward; inasmuch as afterward the body of the Infant growing more firm
and solid, his Circumcision would have been more painful and grievous to him:
Now God is not delighted in the smart and torment of his creatures, much less
of the people that are in Covenant with him. Letting that pass:

Moral and Mystical Reasons.

Paraeus ad loc. (...) Parents (...).


Other Reasons yielded are moral or mystical. Of them I find Paraeus
reckoning up three:

1. God would not have it any longer deferred, for the consolation of the
parents; that they might have an early assurance of Gods grace and favor
toward their Infants, viz. that he had received them into Covenant, and did
look upon them as confederates with himself, and with his people.

Appl. A special Privilege, and so to be accounted by all that profess the
name of Christ; who ought to use all means to have the Covenant sealed up, as
to themselves, so to their Children, not omitting the first opportunity that
God offers them for that purpose. Were it a temporal estate, an inheritance
that were to be settled upon posterity, and to be confirmed by some Decree in
Chancery under Seal, in this case a careful and provident parent would not
let slip the first sealing day. No more should Christian parents willingly
baulk the first opportunity for the sealing up of the Covenant of Grace, and
therein of the heavenly inheritance, unto their children. The sooner it is
done, the more comfortable to the parent.

(...) the (...) sake, (...) might fleigh*
2. As God did this for the Parents, so for the Ordinances sake, viz. that that
might not be slighted, might not be neglected. Had there been a liberty left
for parents to have deferred and put off the circumcising of their children so
long as they pleased, the Ordinance by this means would have been brought into
contempt, and have been reputed as unnecessary, as needless. Now God cannot
endure that any ordinance of his should fall into disrespect and disrepute
among his people. Be it Word, be it Sacrament, be it Prayer. etc. God would
have the due estimation of them all maintained.

Take heed of sl^ighting Ordinances.
Applic. And take we heed how any of us have a hand in impairing it. How any of
us be any occasion of laying any ordinance of God under disrepute and
disesteem. This is done to the Word, when men come to hear i^, as if they
cared not whether they came or no: Come sometimes (it may be) for fashions
sake, if they Word.
like the person of the Preacher; otherwise their own house, or their neighbors
house, is as good to them as Gods house, the Public Congregation. When they
do come, yet they care not how late they come, when the Sermon is begun, half
done. Thus is it with some, who suffer every slight occasion to detain them,
As we see it too ordinary in diverse cases, and particularly in that which I
cannot but touch upon, your Baptizings; where civil ceremony, and outward
solemnity steals away the time from Religious service: And what is this but
to bring a disrepute, a disrespect upon this ordinance of God? as if it were
not a thing of any such necessity as it is pretended to be.

Baptism.
The like I may say of Baptism, when children are detained from it week after
week, month after month. What does this imply, but that Baptism surely
either is not proper for Infants, or at least it is not of any such necessity,
but that they may be well enough without it?

The Lords supper.
And so for the Lords supper. When Christians upon slight grounds shall absent
themselves, laying aside that ordinance, not coming to the Sacrament year
after year: What is this but to bring a disesteem upon that ordinance? as if
it were not of any such worth, of any such necessity as it is pretended to be.

In the fear of God every of us take we heed of every of these, or the like.
Take heed how we be any occasion of bringing an evil report upon any of the
ways of God: But by all means be careful to uphold the reverence and
estimation that is due to his ordinances. This was one end why God would not
have Circumcision deferred beyond the eight day, that he might preserve that
ordinance from neglect and contempt.

To order the administration of Baptism afterward.
God did (says he) not without a reference and respect unto Baptism under the
New Testament, which was to succeed in the room and place of Circumcision.
Herein taking order also for the administration of the Sacrament, viz. that it
should be administered unto Infants, though not precisely upon the eight day*
(that was Ceremonial, and being so, it is ceased as touching any obligation)
yet in time s^tting and convenient. That was the substance and morality of that
command, and that still abides; By virtue whereof Infants in their infancy
both may, and ought to be baptized. And so I am fallen upon the later part of
the Enthymeme.

The Consequence of the Argument proved.
Infants under the Old Testament were circumcised: [Therefore under the New
Testament they may and ought to be baptized.]

Q. But how prove you this Consequence, (says the Anabaptist.)

Baptism succeeds Circumcision.
A. Why, the ground of it is this: Because Baptism succeeds and comes in the
room and place of Circumcision, answering to it.

Q. How prove we that?

Col. ^. 11. 12. explained.
A. From the Apostle himself, Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised,
etc. v. 11. Buried with him in Baptism, v. 12.] For the opening of which Text,
know we briefly what the Apostles scope and drift there is, viz. to prove
against the Jews that Circumcision is not now necessary nor useful unto
Christians under the Gospel. The reason he gives for it, is, because
Christians have a more excellent Circumcision then that of Moses. That you
have, v. 11. proved and made good by three Arguments. 1. From the Author of
their Circumcision; Not Moses, who was but a servant, nor any other man, but
Christ himself. [In (or by) whom ye are circumcised: [By the circumcision of
Christ.] 2. From the kind of it. It was not an outward, but an inward
circumcision, (...); a circumcision not made with hands, as that Mosaicall
circumcision was; but made without hands, viz. the circumcision of the heart,
of the inward man by the spirit of Christ. 3. From the fruit and effect of it,
which is far different from that Legal circumcision. There was only the
cutting off of one small part of the body, the foreskin of the flesh: but here
is a cutting or putting off the whole body of sin: [In whom also ye are
circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body
of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ*]

Why but the Jews here might object: This Reason is of no force; that because
Christians were spiritually circumcised, therefore they should not need the
outward circumcision: For so was Abraham, and yet he received the outward
circumcision; He had the inward grace, and yet he received the outward sign.
And thus Christians, though they be made partakers of this great benefit by
Christ, yet they may stand in need of an outward seal to assure them of their
partaking herein.

To this the Apostle answers, v. 12. showing that Christ has not left his
people under the New Testament destitute of such an outward sign and seal:
For hoever Circumcision be taken away, yet there is another Sacrament
substituted and appointed in the room and place of it, a more excellent and
lively Sacrament then ever Circumcision was, a Sacrament resembling it, and
answering to it, viz. Baptism. [Buried with him in Baptisme] viz.
Sacramentally, Baptism being a Sacrament of Regeneration, signifying and
sealing up both our mortification, and vivification. [Being buried with him in
(or by) Baptism; wherein also ye are risen with him.] Thus then Baptism
succeeds Circumcision, and supplies the place of it.

Q. Whether Circumcision was a type of Baptism.
Q. What then (says the Anabaptist) was Circumcision a type of Baptism? That
cannot be (says one of them) for then one Type might type out another, and so
be a Type of a Type.

A. Not so, yet Baptism succeeds it, and answers to it
A. To this we answer, that we do not say that Circumcision properly was a
type of Baptism: Both Circumcision and Baptism are types of one and the same
thing, viz. the mystery of our Regeneration, which is the truth of those types.
But this we say, that the one succeeded the other; Baptism succeeded
Circumcision, Baptism an Antitype to Circumcision.
came in the room and place of it, withal answering to it, and so may be called
an antitype to it. This we say with warrant from S. Peter, who says the same
of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. ^1.
and the Ark wherein Noah was saved, 1 Pet. 3. [The like figure whereunto even
Baptism does now save us.] The like figure, (...), the antitype, i. e. Typus
correspondens, (as Beza explaineth it) a Type answering to a Type. That
deliverance in and from the flood, and our Baptism, they are two several
types, both typifying and shadowing out one and the same thing, viz. our
deliverance by Christ: but that being the former type, carried with it a
resemblance of this; and this coming after, answers unto that. Even so may
we say of Circumcision and Baptism: Baptism is to Circumcision (...), an
antitype, though not properly typified by it, yet a type coming in the place
of it, and answering to it.

Obj. Answering to it? (says the Anabaptist) True, in some things it does, but
not in all: Nay in many things there is a vast difference betwixt them. And
therefore (say they) to reason from Circumcision to Baptism, can be no
convincing Argument.

Baptism and Circumcision compared.
A. In way of reply to this, it will be both expedient and necessary to bring
the Type and the Antitype, Baptism and Circumcision, (as I may say) face to
face, to compare the one with the other, that so we may see both wherein they
differ, and wherein they agree. We will begin with the former.

Wherein they differ.
Wherein they differ. That there are differences betwixt circumstantiall; For
substance we shall still find them one and the same. The differences are many.

1. In outward Ceremony.
1. They differ in the outward ceremony or sign; which in the one, was a
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh; in the other, the washing of the body
with water.

2. In some circumstances about the subject.
2. In some circumstances about the subject, As 1. Circumcision was to be
administered only to the males, Baptism to male and female. 2. Circumcision was
enjoined only to Abraham's posterity, to his seed according to the flesh. As for
others, however they might come in and join themselves with Abraham, and be
confederates with him, yet were they not enjoined to Genesis 17. 9.
be circumcised: The command reached only to Abraham and his seed. But Baptism,
that extends to all, both Jews and Gentiles. [Goe teach all nations
baptizing them.] i. e. not administering Baptism to the Jews only, as
Circumcision was, but to all nations, Jews and Gentiles.

3. Time of administration.
3. In the circumstance of Time appointed for their administration.
Circumcision was to be administered precisely upon the eight day, neither
sooner, nor later, (as I have showed you:) But in Baptism there is a liberty
left, no set day appointed.

4. Manner of signification.
4. In their manner of signification. Circumcision looked at Christ to come;
Baptism, at Christ already come: The one signifying and sealing the remission
of sins by and through the blood of Christ to be shed; the other, through that
blood already shed.

5. Matter sealed.
5. In the matter sealed. Circumcision sealed up unto Abraham and his seed a
temporal promise, viz. touching the Land of Canaan: So you have it, v. 8. of
this Genesis 17. 8.
Chap. [I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the Land wherein thou
art a stranger, all the Land of Canaan.] Not that this was the only thing which
Circumcision sealed up, (as the Anabaptists would have it) or yet the main
thing; For in the verse foregoing, God promises Abraham to be his God, and the
God of his seed. This ver. 7.
was the grand promise, the main of the Covenant which Circumcision sealed up.
As for that temporal inheritance, it was but an accessory, an appendix, an
additament. But Baptism seals up only spiritual and heavenly benefits,
Grace and Glory.

6. Duration.
6. And lastly, (to name no more) they differ in their duration and
continuance. Circumcision was but a temporary ordinance, the temporary seal of
an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 19. 7. 13.
being to continue in force only till the coming of Christ, in whom all the
Ceremonies of the Old Testament determined. Paul speaking of the whole
Pedagogie of the Law, the Legal Covenant, tells us, It was Gal. 3. 19.
added because of Transgressions, until the seed should come to whom the
Promise was made:] i. e. till Christ should Romans 10. 4.
come who was the end of the Law. But Baptism, it is a perpetual ordinance.
Such is the Gospel it self, an everlasting Gospel (as it is called Rev. 14.
6.) And such are all Gospel ordinances, everlasting ordinances, to continue in
force till the second coming of Christ at the end of the world.

All these differences we confess and acknowledge: And we think our
Adversaries cannot truly assign any more, at least not material. Now for
these differences, he that looks upon them shall see them to be but
circumstantiall, so as for substance these two may still remain one and the
same, and so we shall find them, the one in all materials answering the other.
That will appear Wherein they agree.
by comparing of them in the things wherein they agree.

1. In ends and uses.
And here we shall find them agreeing (first) in the maine and principal ends
and uses, for which they were instituted and ordained. As

Seal of the Covenant. So was Each a seal of the same Covenant.

Verse. 11.


Circumcision. [It shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you.] And so
is Baptism a Token and Seal of the Covenant: And that of the same Covenant
that Romans 4. 11.
Circumcision was, viz. the Covenant of Grace, sealing up to the believer his
interest in the grace and favor of God through Christ. Each a Seal of the
Covenant, of the same Covenant.

Initiall Seal, the first Seal of the Covenant; Each an initiall Seal.
each sealing up an entrance into Covenant. So did Circumcision, and so does
Baptism.

Each a note of distinction.
3. Each a note of distinction, to difference and distinguish Gods people from
all other people. So did Circumcision; it was the distinguishing mark,
distinguishing Gal. 2. 15.
betwixt Jews by nature, and sinners of the Gentiles. And so does Baptism now
to Christians, distinguishing them from Pagans, Turks and Infidels.

Each an obligation to obedience.
4. Each of them an Obligation, binding to the same condition, the condition of
Obedience, and that, Evangelicall obedience. Such was the condition of the
Covenant Genesis 17. 1.
which God made with Abraham. [Walke before me and be thou perfect,] i. e.
upright, or sincere. Hereunto was he obliged by his Circumcision. And hereunto
are Christians obliged by their Baptism to the same condition. Thus they agree
in their maine ends and uses.

In their signification, shadowing out the same mysteries.
2. We shall find them agreeing in their signification. Each shadowing out the
same mysteries. As

1. The corruption of nature. This was shadowed out in Circumcision, by cutting
off the foreskin of the flesh. The corruption of nature.
And the same mystery is shadowed out in Baptism, by the washing of the body
with water.

The mystery of Redemption.
2. The mystery of our Redemption through the shedding Circumcision by the
shedding of blood: And the same is shadowed out in Baptism by the water; both
representing and signifying the blood of Christ.

The mystery of Regen e^tion.
3. The mystery of our spiritual regeneration. This Circumcision, wherein the
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh signified the mortifying of sinful
lusts: And the same is signified in Baptism, where by the washing of the body
with water, is signified the washing of the soul from the stain and pollution
of sin by the spirit of Christ. Whence it is called a Tit. 3. 5.
Laver, (...), The laver of Regeneration, the washing of the new birth. Thus
each of them holds forth the same mysteries.

3. Agreements in the Subject.
3. We shall find them agreeing in the Subject. Each of them being to be
administered to all, and only Confederates; such, all such, only such as are
within the compass of the Covenant. So was Circumcision to Abraham and all his
posterity, to Infants as well as others, they being also confederates. And
even so is it with Baptism: it is to be administered to all, and only such as
may in the judgment of charity be reputed confederates; amongst which Infants
also are to be reckoned (as I have already proved it at large.) Upon this
ground were they circumcised, because within the Covenant; and upon this ground
they may and ought to be baptized.

Replic. Circumcision was grounded upon an express command.
Repl. But to this the Anabaptist replieth, that it was not the Covenant that
made Infants capable of Circumcision. What then? Why, an express Command from
God. Even that in the Text: [He that is eight days old shall be circumcised.]
Here is an express Mandamus (say they) an express order for the Circumcision
of Infants; and by virtue hereof it was, that they were circumcised: not
because they were in Covenant, but because God had given an express command
concerning it.

Sol. That command was grounded upon the Covenant.
A. To this we answer. It is true, here is an express command for the
Circumcision of Infants: but it is with reference to the Covenant, which was
the ground of this Injunction, and the ground of Infants circumcision. This it
was that made Infants capable of Circumcision; not merely this Mandamus, this
Command in the Text, (as abstracting Anabaptists would have it) without
reference to the Covenant, but their being in Covenant. They were confederates
with God: God had taken them into Covenant, and therefore he would have the
seal of his Covenant set upon them. So much may be clearly collected (as from
diverse other passages in this Chapter, so) from the 10. 13. and 14. verses,
where Circumcision is still called by the name of the Covenant: [My Covenant
shall be in your flesh* etc.] Clearly importing that this was the ground of
their Circumcision, even the Covenant, not simply the Command.

Note.
As for the Command here in the Text, it is to be noted, that it only
determines the time, assigns the day upon which Infants were to be
circumcised, limiting it to the eight day. But as for their Circumcision it
self, that was ordered before, being comprehended in the Covenant it self,
which was the ground of their Circumcision.

Repl. Here is a command for Circumcision, not the like for baptism of Infants.
Repl. Why but (says the Anabaptist) however, here is an express mandamus, an
express order and command for the circumcision of Infants. Now (say they)
could you show us the like for the baptism of Infants, then the controversy
were at an end. But such command, such injunction, or direction there is none.

Sol. No prohibition to forbid the seal of the Covenant to Infants under the
New Testament, more then under the Old.
A. To this Allegation of theirs (Godwilling) I shall answer more fully
hereafter. For the present I shall only retort it upon them, and demand of them
to show us a Prohibition, or Inhibition, where it is any ways forbidden that
children should partake of the seal of the Covenant under the New Testament,
as well as under the Old; That they who were circumcised then, should be
baptized now. That Baptism succeeded, and came in the room of Circumcision,
we have sufficiently proved it already, and I think our adversaries being
pressed upon it, they will not, they cannot deny it. Now if it came in the
place of Circumcision, then it tyeth upon our Adversaries to show what special
proviso, what caeveat is put in to debar children from the one, who had so
undoubted a right to, and so long a continued possession of the other. How they
come to be cut off from this privilege which was once so firmly intailed upon
them: Which if they cannot show, then must we still conclude it to be their
right.

All material differences betwixt Circumcision and Baptism held forth in the
Word.
As for other alterations wherein Baptism differs from Circumcision, we can
show good warrant for them out of the Scriptures: As viz.

1. Why, whereas Circumcision was administered only to males, Baptism should be
administered to both sexes, both to male and female. For this, we have both
Philips Baptizing of both sexes.
preaching to the Samaritanes, they believing his doctrine, were baptized both
men and women, Act. 8. 11.) and we have the Apostles reason for it, Gal. 3. 28.
[As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; For in
Christ Jesus there is neither male, nor female, etc.]

Of all Nations.
2. So secondly, for baptizing of all Nations. Whereas Circumcision was
restrained peculiarly to one Nation, Baptism is to be tendered to all. For this
we have our Mat. 28. 19.
Saviors own commission and warrant, [G^e teach all Nations baptizing them;]
i. e. Not Jews only, but Gentiles also. And we have the Apostles reason for it
also Gal. 3. 28. Act. 10. 35.
in the place forenamed: [For in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor Greek,
etc.]

Upon any day.
3. So again for the circumstance of time. That we do not tie the
administration of Baptism to any certain day, as it was in Circumcision, but
administer it before the eight day, or after: For this also we have the
Apostles warrant, who tells us that it is not for Christians now to observe
days as the Jews did; reckoning up this amongst those weak and beggarly
rudiments, as Gal. 4. 9. 10.
he calls them. [Yee observe months and days, and times and years.] Herein
Christians have a liberty, a liberty purchased for them by the blood of Christ;
and that liberty Gal 5. 1.
they must stand fast in.

Thus in what ever other changes and alterations herein we meet with, we can
still show good warrant No warrant for this alteration that Infants should not
be baptized as well as Circumcised.
for it out of Scripture. Now if our Adversaries can do the like for this great
alteration, why Baptism should not be administered to Infants as well as
Circumcision was, then indeed we will hearken to them. In the mean time it is
not for them to press us for a special warrant, an express and particular
order and command in this case. This we conceive to be altogether needless;
having such a standing order and direction touching Circumcision, showing us to
whom this seal of the Covenant belongs, and to whom it is to be administered;
viz. to all that are in Covenant, Infants as well as others, what needs any
new order in this particular? This order for the substance of it is perpetual
of force under the New Testament as well as under the Old. Further answer to
this question I shall defer till hereafter, conceiving this sufficient for the
present.

One allegation is yet behind which our Adversaries by way of reply here cast
in our way, I shall only touch briefly, and so dismiss this second Argument
with it.

Replic. By a like reason children should now eat the Lords Supper because they
eat the Passover.
Repl. If this be a good Argument (say they) that Infants may be baptized,
because they were Circumcised, then by a like reason they should now be
admitted to the Lords Table, because under the Old Testament they eat the
Passover. The reason (say they) is a like for both. So as if it hold in the
one, why not in the other?

Sol. Childrens eating of the Supper an ancient practice.
Ans. To part of this I have in part answered already; give me leave now to do
it a little more fully. For childrens eating of the Lords Supper, whether
lawful or no, it has been, and yet is a Question. Anciently it is well
known it was allowed and practiced in the Roman Aug. l. de Eccl. Dogm. c. 52.
and Ephesians. 23. Cyprian de Lapsis Sermon. 5
and African Churches. Those ancient Doctors Augustine and Cyprian are Advocates
in this cause, pleading not only for the lawfulness, but Expediencie of it. At
this day the practice is (or at least lately was, as Peter P. Martyr Com. in 1
Cor. 11. 24.
Martyr informs me) retained amongst the Grecian, Bohemian, Moravian Churches.
How warrantable this has been, or may be, is disputable. P. Martyr for his In
ista causa pro neutra part vehementer contenderim.

P. M. ibid. Non enim damnare ausim Ecclesiam veterem, etc. ibid.


part professes that he will not be zealous in siding with either part in this
quarrel. As for the custom of those ancient Churches in admitting them, he
will not, he dare not condemn it; and as for the practice of other Churches in
debarring them, he cannot but allow it. The latter not so warrantable is
amongst us, and most of the Churches at this day, and that upon good ground (as
we conceive) concluded to be the more safe, the more warrantable. For their
admission Scripture will not bear it out. As for that place cited and made use
of by those Ancients as a ground for this practice, Joh. 6. 53. Except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood ye have no life in you,] it
makes nothing for it; our Savior there speaking not of a Sacramental, but a
Spiritual Communion, a Spiritual feeding upon him, which is done by faith,
fetching refreshment and nourishment from Christ, by the application of his
merits unto the soul. Much in Scripture that seems to make against it. Paul
tells us of diverse Qualifications requisite in Communicants; and diverse
actions to be performed by them in, and about the supper of the Lord, which
Infants are not capable of, as viz. (besides the eating and drinking of the
Elements which young Infants cannot do) the examining 1 Cor. 11. v. 24 25, 26,
28, 29.
of themselves, the discerning of the Lords body, the showing forth the Lords
death, the doing what they do in remembrance of him etc. All these actions are
actually to be performed by worthy Communicants. So as there is just reason why
Infants though they be baptized, yet they should not be admitted to the Supper
of the Lord; this being as you see an active Ordinance, consisting mostly in
doing, [Doe this as often as you eat it, etc.]

Q. But what say we then to the Argument? Infants eat the Passover, why not
then the Lords Supper, as well as be baptized, because they were circumcised?

A. 1. To this we answer (i.) should it be granted that Infants did partake of
the one, yet we see good reason why they should not be admitted to the other,
being not subjects capable of the aforesaid Qualifications.

Children did not eat the Passover.
2. But (secondly) how can it be proved that Infants did eat the Passover? I
know it is an opinion that has been received (swallowed down I suppose
without chewing, as many other of this nature have been) and that by some of
note; but upon what ground, I know Aret. Censura contra Paedobaptist.
not: Scripture I am sure will not make it out. True, we find an order that
there should be a Lamb for a house, and in case that one family were too
little to eat it up, Exodus 12. 3. 4.
the next family was to be joined to it; they must take it according to the
number of the souls, (says the Text) Joseph. de B^llo Judai. l. 7. c. 17.
reckoning (say the Hebrews) ten to a Lamb: But that must be understood not
universally of all the persons in a family, but only such as were meet to eat
thereof. Amongst Aynsworth Annot. ad loc.
which (say the Hebrews) sick persons and young children were not to be
reckoned, (no more then persons uncircumcised and unclean) being not fit to
eat thereof.

1. Not fit to partake in the outward elements: This could not young Infants
do, eat the flesh and unleavened bread, much less that unpleasing salade of
sour or Exodus 12. 8.
bitter herbs which was to be eaten with it. These were no fit food for
Infants.

2. Much less (in the second place) could they understand the mystery and
meaning thereof, which (as it seems) they ought to do, before they were
admitted Bucan. de Baptism. sect 36.
to communicate therein. So much (at least with great probability) is collected
from the 26. v. of that (...) d. 12. 26.
Chapter, where it is said, It shall come to pass when your children shall say
unto you, What mean you by this service? Ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of
the Lords Passover, etc.] So it seems that none were to partake of this
Sacrament, but such as were of age and capacity to interrogate concerning the
meaning of it: And that they were to be instructed concerning it, before such
time as they were admitted to it. So much the Jewish Doctors will tell us
concerning this Feast, viz. That such children as were able to go up with
their parents from the Gates of Jerusalem Aynsworth ib.
to the Temple, they were to appear before the Lord, that being first
catechized in the Commandments, they might celebrate the Feast.

The Argument retorted.
So that this Argument may now be retorted, and returned with great advantage
against the Adversary, (as Bucan. de Baptismo loc. 47. q. 36. Tilen. de
Baptismo Disp. 2 These. 24.
I find it by some of our modern Divines.) Infants under the Law were
circumcised the eight day, but not admitted to the eating of the Passover,
until they were of capacity to understand the mystery and meaning of it. Even
so n^w under the Gospel, Infants of believing parents may and ought to be
baptized, but not admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, until they be
able to understand the mystery and meaning of that Sacrament, to discern the
Lords Body. Which parallel being duly weighed, it makes very much for the
clearing of the warrantablenesse of the Churches practice in both these
particulars, both in administering unto Infants the one Sacrament, and in
withholding from them the other. But I will no longer dwell upon it.

Objections Answered.
MAny other Arguments might yet be produced for the vindicating of this cause,
but I will not overload it, or tire your patience. Probably we shall yet meet
with some more in returning Answer to the Objections of the Adversary. That is
the second Act which I propounded to my self, and promised to you, when I
first undertook this Subject. Let me discharge my self of it with as much
brevity as conveniently I may; not reckoning up all the shadows of Arguments
that are made use of, of which there are diverse not worth the naming much less
the answering, but only some of the chief and principal which may seem to
carry the greatest show of strength and reason with them.

Obj. 1. Paedobaptism a humane, Antichristian, ^ovell invention.
Arg. 1. In the first place, against the Baptism of Infants, it is alleged,
that it is but a humane, and that a novel invention, a mere device of
Antichrist, and that of a very late impression, not practiced in the Church
till at least a thousand years after Christ; first brought in by Pope
Innocentius 3. qui vivit An. 1215. A. R. In his vanity of childish baptism.

Sol. Gross or wilful ignorance.


Innocent. Thus it is confidently charged by some, who blush not to bring in M.
Luther to vouch this their bold assertion.

A. But herein how grossly (if not wilfully) ignorant they are, it is but too
apparent. Certainly they who in good earnest charge Paedobaptisme with novelty,
show Page 72. 73.
themselves to be little seen in antiquity. I told you heretofore that in
Augustines, nay in Cyprianus floruit Anno Dom. 250.
Cyprians time (who lived in the third Centurie, within less then three
hundred years after Christ) Children were admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper: Surely then much more to Baptism, without which they were not
capable of the Eucharist, no more then an uncircumcised Antiquity pleading for
Paedobaptism.
person was of the Passover. In this cause the testimony of those Ancients are
commonly cited. Augustine speaking of Infants baptism calls it a Common Aug.
Epl. 28. l. 3. de P^c. Merit. and Remiss. e. 6. 7. 8. 9. ubi totam fere
Cypriani Epistolam recitat. and alibi passim: vide Pamel. Annot. in Cyprian.
Ep. 69. Cyprian us Epist. 69. Orig. in Levi. Hom. 8. in Lu. in Epist. ^d Romans
c. 6.
custom of the Church; showing that it was universally received in his time.
Cyprian in an Epistle sent from himself, and diverse other Presbyters, his
Colleagues met together in a Council to the number of sixty six, to his friend
Fidus, pleads for it, averring and proving that it was not necessary that
Baptism should be deferred till the eight day as Circumc^sion was. To the same
purpose Origin before them (who lived in the beginning of the third Centurie,
not much above two hundred years after Christ) mentions this as a received
custom in the Church, approving of it, and giving a reason for it, viz.
because even Infants are not free from spiritual pollution and uncleanenesse,
no though they have lived but one day Cy^ill. Hieros. Catech. mist. Greg* Naz.
Orat. 3. in Sanctum lavacrum Ambros. in Luc. Council. Mile. can. 2. citat per
Pam. in Annot. super Epistol. Cypr. 69.
upon earth. So that this cannot be justly charged with novelty that has
these, and many more of the Ancients speaking of it, and for it.

Obj. Why but Tertullian, who was as ancient as any of them, the first Writer
of note of the Latin Church, he was of another mind, disallowing and
condemning this practice.

A. To this it is answered by P. Martyr, that so he did some other things,
which yet the word has not Tertull lib. de Baptism.

P. Martyr. lo^. Com. clas 4. lo. 8. sect. 5.


condemned, as viz. second marriages, etc. so as his authority in this case is
not so much to be regarded, he being then (when he wrote that book) fallen
from the Church, and from the orthodox faith (fallen into Montanisme) specially
seeing he denied Baptism not only to Infants, but to all others until they
were well stricken in years, viz. to young men, nay to young widows: But even
from him (as the foresaid Author observes) it may be collected that baptism
of Infants was then in use in the Church, otherwise he would never have
reprehended the practice of it. So it was, and before his time. So much is
testified by some of the Greek Fathers who Irenaeus contra haeretic. l* 2. c.
39. Just. mar. quae. 56. cum allis citat. per Pamel. ub^ susupra.

Repl. Paedobaptisme an Ecclesiastical constitution.


were before him, viz. Irenaeus and Iustine Martyr (who lived in the second
Centurie, about an hundred and fifty years after Christ) both making mention
of it.

Repl. But it is replied that though it be acknowledged to be ancient, yet
still is it a humane invention, no divine Apostolical Ordinance, but a mere
Ecclesiastical constitution. So says the Papist, and so says the Anabaptist,
in this not unlike Sampsons foxes, joined together by the tails, whilst their
heads look several ways; both asserting the same position though to
different ends, the one to establish humane traditions, the other to undermine
a divine Ordinance. But how prove they what they say? Why the Authors
prealledged some of them say as much in express words. Origin calls it a
Ceremony, or Tradition of the Church. Augustine, a custom of the Church.

Sol. Paedobaptism how called a Ceremony.
A. To grant all, what advantage can hence be taken? Baptism of Infants is a
Ceremony. Why, so in a large and yet proper acceptance of the word may all
Religious Rites be called, not only of humane but divine institution. Thus not
only the Sacrifices, but the Sacraments under the Old Testament were
Ceremonies. And so may the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord be called, and that without any offense to those who
understand the language of the Ancients, or the proper signification of the
Ceremonia, ^ Cere Italiae oppido, ubi sacra Romanorum ^e^pore tumultus Gallici
summa circa reservata erant, Live. l. 5.
word.

Repl. But it is called a Tradition.

A. So are some Apostolical institutions, and doctrines and that by the
Apostle himself.

Repl. Why, but it is called a Ceremony and Tradition of the Church.

A. True, but how? not of the Church as the Author, How a Tradition.

1 Cor. 11. 2. 2 These. 2. 15. How a Ceremony and tradition of the Church.

Origin in Ep ad Romans l. 5. August. contra Do^^. l. 4 c 24 and de Genesis ad lit.
l. 10. c. 23. f^tent^ Pamelio ubi supra.


but as the Subject of it. A Ceremony, a Rite religiously observed by the
Church, and a Tradition delivered to the Church, viz* from the Apostles
themselves. So much the forenamed Doctors do expressly aver. So says Origin*
so says Augustine. The Church received this Tradition of baptizing of Infants
from the Apostles. And Augustines rule is a reason for it little less then
demonstrative; Quod univers a tenet Ecclesia, etc.] That which is universally
received and practiced by the Church, and had not its first institution from
some Council, but has been ever retained, may well be believed to be an
Apostolical Tradition.]

Repl. Pope Higinus the author of it.
Repl. But say some the more learned Anabaptists (at least pretenders to it)
though this be ancient, and a very ancient custom, yet the pedigree of it does
not arise so high as to claim kindred of the Apostles. The first father of it
was a Bishop of Rome, Pope Higinus by name.

Sol.
A. If so, then by their own confession it comes somewhat near to the
Apostles times; this Higinus being the eight Bishop of Rome, living in the
days of the Emperor Eusebius. l* 4. c. 9.
Antoninus Pius, about a hundred and forty years after Christ.

P. Mart. loc. com Clas. 4. lo 8. sect. 5.
2. But (in the second place) let P. Martyr in this return them answer, that
upon search he finds no such thing in the Decretals. Only this he finds,
that that Bishop was the first that made a law concerning Godfathers and
Godmothers (as we call them) in Baptism. (An Ecclesiastical constitution,
though not necessary, yet Utile sane Institutum. P. M. ibid.

Vide Bu^an. de B^ptismo, loc. 48. q. 47.


in the judgment of that great Divine, and diverse others, both lawful and
profitable.) Hereof that Bishop is supposed to be the Author. What then? shall
it be thence collected that he was the first author of Infants baptism. Nay
rather (as P. Martyr observes) in as much as he made such a provision for
Infants that were to be baptized, appointing them some to be guardians unto
them in their pupillage, who should by solemn promise be engaged to take care
of them, either instead of their parents, or together with them, for their
religious educacation in that Faith whereinto they were baptized, it is most
probable that the baptizing of them was a thing in use before, and so no other
but an Apostolical Ordinance by them ordained, and from them transmitted to
the Church, where the practice of it has been uninterruptedly continued ever
since.

Arg. 2. No precept or president for Paedobaptism in the New Testament.
Arg* 2. But (says the Anabaptist) this is strange, that this should be
conceived to be Apostolical, and of divine authority, when as we have neither
precept nor president for it in all the New Testament. Here is their great and
common argument, wherewith they shake and disquiet the minds of many
conscientious and simple hearted Christians, who defire to see (what all
Christians ought to do) the pillar of fire, the light of the word going before
them for their direction and warrant, in what ever they do in or about any
Ordinance of God. Give me leave therefore to join issue with them about it.

Sol. Not necessary that there should be any express precept or president in
the New Testament.
A. 1. Minding them (in the first place) that it is not necessary that there
should be any express either precept or president for this practice in the New
Testament. Let it be demanded of them, what express precept do they find
there for the observation of a Christian Sabbath? what either precept or
president do they meet with for women's receiving of the Lords Supper? yet both
are agreed upon, that they may be done, ought to be done. And the like we may
say for the baptism of Infants, should it be granted (as indeed it must) that
there is no express syllabicall either command or example in the New Teftament
for it, yet it is warrantable. How so? In as much as it finds so clear a
ground, so firm a bottom in the Old Testament. Even as it is in those two
other particulars. The observation of a Sabbath, though it has no express
command in the New Testament, yet it has one in the Old, viz. in the fourth
Commandment, which for the substance of it is moral, and so unrepealeable, of
perpetual observation. For women's receiving of the Lords Supper, though we
find neither command nor example for it in the New Testament, yet we find
that in the Old which will bear it out, viz. their eating of the Passover to
which this Sacrament answers. Even so is it in the baptism of Infants,
though the New Testament be silent in it, yet the Old Testament holds it
forth clearly enough, viz. in the Sacrament of Circumcision, to which Baptism
answers. There we have both precept and example, and those so clear and
express, as that it is not necessary that we should have them renewed again
in the New Testament.

A. ^. The New Testament has not left us wholly destiture of either.
A. 2. But (in the second place) come we to see what the New Testament will
afford us as touching each of these; it for precept, then for president. In
both we shall find that the Spirit of God has not left us so naked, so
destitute as they imagine.

For precept.
1. For precept. Though we have not any express ^itterall command, or
particular direction concerning the baptizing of Infants, yet we have an
impli^ite, and a general one, which comprehends, and takes them in. This
you shall find in that known place Mat. 28. 19. where our Blessed Savior
upon his last farewell to the world, renewing and enlarging his Disciples
Commission, he bids them, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.

For the clear and right understanding of which M^t. 28. 19. explained.
words, we must know that we have not in them the first institution of Baptism,
(which must be observed against our Adversaries, who look upon those words
under that notion.) No, Baptism was instituted, and administered long before
both by John the Baptist, and other of the Disciples. Only our Savior here (as
I said) renews and inlargeth to his Apostles their former Commission, giving
unto them one particular direction touching the subject, the persons, whom they
were in the course of their Ministry to apply themselves unto, viz. Non ut
hactenu^ solos Judaeos. H. Grot. Annot. in lo^.
to all Nations, i. e. not only to the Jews as formerly they had done, but to
the Gentiles also. Go teach and baptize them, i. e. Go and do unto them, all
of them, as heretofore has been done to one of them. Go teach them, instruct
them, (...), Disciple them, make the^ Disciples; which being done, then baptize
them, and theirs. Thus was it before done unto the Jews, and to all that were
proselites amongst them. The parents embracing the faith of Abraham, they were
circumcised with their Children also. The like course our Savio^r here orders
his Disciples now to take with all Nations: Go teach and baptize them all. By
your teaching and instructing of them labor to bring them to the knowledge and
faith of Christ, to bring them into Covenant, which being done, then administer
the Seal of the Covenant to them and theirs. Not to the Parents only: If so,
certainly our Savior would have put in a special caveat to interdict and
forbid them the baptizing of children, that they should not administer the
S^ale of the Covenant to them, as formerly had been accustomed amongst the
Jews.

Repl. Teach and baptize.
Repl. Why but (say they) there should need no such caveat, when as the very
words of the Commission are so expressly against this practice. Go teach and
baptize, i. e. first teach and then baptize. So as none are capable of the one,
but such as are capable of the other; none capable of Baptism, but such as are
capable of Instruction; they must first be taught, then baptized.

Sol. How to be understood.
A. To this it is truly answered, that there can no such thing be collected out
of these words. [Goe teach all Nations, baptizing them.] i. e. Teach all
Nations, and baptize all Nations. As before was done to one Nation, so do ye
now to all. As the word was preached to the Jews only, so do ye now preach it
to all Nations. As the Seal of the Covenant was administered only to that one
Nation, so do ye now administer it to all Nations. More then this cannot be
inferred from it.

Not that all must necessarily be first i^structed before they were baptized.
That cannot be gathered from the words there, as will easily appear by the
changing but of Note.
one word in this Commission. Suppose the words to run thus, [Go teach all
Nations circumcising them.] Suppose (I say) that our Savior had given such a
Commission to his Apostles, that whereas before circumcision was proper only to
the Jew, now they should press it upon all Nations, and should have delivered
them their Commission in these words, [Goe teach all Nations circumcising them]
would any thence infer that therefore none should be circumcised, but only
such as were first instructed, and so consequently Infants should not be
circumcised. This inference (I suppose) every one will disclaim. And why not
the other? Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, i. e. Teach all Nations, and
b^ptize all Nations; Teach those that are teachable, and baptize those that are
baptizeable. More then this cannot be made of it. Now that Infants are a part,
and a considerable part of a Nation, none will deny; and that they are
baptize^ble, I have already proved. So as here we have, though not an express,
yet an implicit ^arrant and command, which being rightly understood (what ever
use the Adversary makes of it to the contrary) will be sufficient to bear ou^
this practice.

Presidents in ^he New Testament for Paedobaptism.
In the second place enquire we what presidents, what examples the New
Testament will hold forth unto us. And here again, (as in the former) it must
be acknowledged that as for any particular persons who were baptized in their
Infancy, we have not any left upon record; yet have we that which is
equivalent, some general records, holding forth unto us (at least with great
probability) that this was the practice of the Church in the Infancy of it,
even in the Apostles times. For this, see two evidences.

The baptizing of whole families.
1. The former is that common one, not to be fleighted, viz. the baptizing of
whole families, whereof we find frequent mention in Scripture. Paul tells
us of himself that he baptized the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1. 16. Lydia
being converted, she was baptized and her household, Act. 16. 15. The like we
read of the Iailour in the same Chapter, being converted, he was baptized
(says the Text) and all his, v. 33. Thus was this Sacrament then ordinarily
administered to whole families, to whole households: Even as Circumcision was
under the Old Testament. Abraham believing, and entering Covenant with God, he
and his whole family were circumcised, from the oldest to the youngest, as you
have it, Genesis 17. 23. 27. And thus where the head of a family became a
proselite, ordinarily he and his were circumcised. Even so under the New
Testament, where the parent or head of the family embraced the faith, the whole
family was baptized. Now in all these families, it cannot rationally be
imagined but that there should be some Children.

Repl.
Repl. To this our Adversaries reply, that this phrase will not carry it, no
more then that will prove that Infants eat the Passover, because it is said
that the whole family was to eat it, Exodus 12. 3. 4. Or that Infants have
actual faith, because it is said that C^is^us believed with all his house,
Act. 18. 8.

Answ. But this muse is soon stopped: In as much as the phrase comprehends
^ll, and only such in the family, as are capable of the thing spoken of. Now
this Infants are not of either of those Acts, whether of eating the Passover,
or of believing; and therefore the phrase there must be restrained to persons
of riper age. But of Baptism they are, as has been already sufficiently
proved: In as much as this Sacrament being a Sacrament of Initiation and
Regeneration, a Seal of our Incision, and ingrafting into Christ, is only a
passive Ordinance, as Circumcision was. And therefore, when it is said that
those of Abraham's family were circumcised, and those of Stephana's and Lydiaes,
and the Iailours families were baptized, we are to understand it of children,
as well as any other.

Note. No children of believing parents baptized afterward
To render this conjecture more probable, that Infants then were baptized in
their Infancy, let it be observed and considered that we no where find any
mention made of any children of believing parents who were baptized afterward.
An argument sufficient, if not to convince, yet to stop the mouth of the
Adversaries. They press us to show where we read of any children that were
baptized in their Infancy, and unless we can show them some particular
instances for it, they will not believe that any were. Now to retort this
negative argument upon themselves; let it be demanded of them, where they find
any mention in Scripture of any children of believing parents, who were
baptized when they came to years of discretion, and not before? That they were
baptized, I presume they will not deny; and if so, let them show where, and
when. For this let all the sacred Register be searched, from the time that John
the Baptist began his Ministry, to the time that John the Evangelist ended
his, (which was above sixty years, during which time millions of children of
believing parents were grown up to maturity) and if in all that time they can
but show any one instance of any child borne of a believing parent, whose
Baptism was deferred till he came to years of discretion, and that then he
was baptized, we will then acknowledge that there is some strength in their
negative allegation. In the mean time, having such general instances of the
baptizing of whole families, sure we are we have more reason to believe that
Infants were comprehended, and are to be reckoned in that number, then they
have any for the contrary.

The Apostolical practice of confirmation. Heb. 6. 2.
2. For a second evidence that this was the Apostolical practice, I will not
go far from this word in the Text which I have now in hand. Possibly we may
find somewhat that makes for this practice nearer hand then we were aware of:
Even in the words immediately following, [The doctrine of Baptismes, and [laying
on of hands.] (...). Hic locus ad Paed^baptismi approbationem Calvin Com. in
loc.
facit. (It is Calvin's hint upon it.) This place makes for the baptism of
Infants. How so? To show you how, give me leave to touch upon that clause a
little. Though it be a long, yet I hope it will be a useful Parenthesis,
serviceable not only to our present, but to some other purposes of great, and
special concernment.

Laying on of hands.
[The doctrine of Baptismes, and laying on of hands.] What is here meant by the
latter of these? I confess it is not agreed by Expositors. To boult out the
truth as near as we may, [laying on of hands] in it self we know it was,
and is a Ceremony; a Ceremony of very ancient use in the Church of God, and
that in diverse cases. To let pass the former; In the New Testament we meet
with a twofold imposition of hands: The one miraculous In the New Testament
twofold.
and extraordinary, the other ordinary. The former was practiced by the
Apostles, and other extraordinary Extraordinary and miraculous.
cases: 1. In conferring of extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. Of this you may
read Act. 8. 17. 18. and elsewhere. 2. In bestowing some temp^rall blessing, as
viz. Healing of the sick. Of this speaks St. James, Iam. 5. 14. [Is any sick
among you let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him.] Not only pray [for] him, (as Beza, and the Geneva render it) but [over]
him. (...), (says the Original) super eum, over or upon; i. e. holding their
hands over, or laying them upon the sick person. So was it frequently
practiced before, as by our Savior himself, so by other of the Apostles, (as
the Mat. 9. 18. Mar. 5. 23. Mar. 16. 18. Luke 4. 40. Act. 28. 8.
Evangelists inform us) in healing of the sick; working some miraculous cures
upon the bodies of men, they imposed their hands upon them. In both these cases
was this Ceremony then used. You may see them both together in that act of
Ananias, his, Act. 9. 17. where coming unto Saul (or Paul) he put his hands on
him, and said, Brother saul, the Lord has sent me that thou might receive
thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.] But this was extraordinary, and
consequently but temporary, to continue only so long as that miraculous power
was continued to the Church; which ceasing, the Ceremony from thence forth in
these cases is of no more use.

Ordinary, used in two cases,
In the second place, there is another imposition of hands, which was, and is
more ordinary. And that again in two cases: In the case of Ordination, and
Confirmation.

In Ordination*
1. In case of Ordination, the ordaining of Ministers, Church Officers, setting
them apart to their Ministerial office and function. This, for the greater
solemnity of it, was performed with this significant Ceremony, the laying on of
hands. Thus were the seven Deacons ordained, Act. 6. 6. [When the Apostles had
prayed, they laid their hands on them, v. 6.] Thus were Paul and Barn^bas
separated to the work which God had called them (viz. to the exercise of their
Ministry amongst Acts 13. 3.
the Gentiles.) [When they had fasted and prayed, they (viz. the Prophets and
Teachers in the Church of Antioch spoken of in the ^. v.) laid then hands on
them, and sent them away.] Thus was Timothy himself ordained by Paul, 2 Timothy
1. 6. And thus did Timothy ordain others. And thence is the whole action
denominated from this Ceremony, and called a laying on of hands 1 Timothy 5. 22.
[Lay hands suddenly on no man,] says Paul to Timothy, speaking of the
Ordination of Ministers.

Confirmation. So it is usually In confirmation*
(how fitly I will not dispute) called. Let* not the name prejudice any against
the thing: which (without question) is of very ancient use in the Church of
God. That Hujus moris sae^e mentionem fa^iunt veteres, vid. Calv. Instet. l. 4.
4. c. 19. s 4. Confirmation whether an Apostolical ordinance.

Hieron contra Luc^f^r. Non inficior* in eo no^^ihil ^^llucinari


I presume will be granted at all hands. Neither can it be denied, there being
so many of the Ancients making mention of it. But whether Apostolical; o^ no*
that is the Question.

I know many have looked upon it merely as an Ecclesiastical constitution. Of
this opinion was Calvin in his former time, who in his book of Institutions
declares his dissallowance of Ieromes authority and judgment in this
particular, in holding this forth for an Apostlicall Ordinance. But others I
find of another mind.

I, Calvin himself in his latter time; who coming to write upon the words of
the Text, upon second Hieronimum, quod Apostolicam esse observationem dicit.
Calv* Inst. lib. 4. c. 19. s. 4.
thoughts (which are the more to be regarded; secundae cogitationes) he
retracts what before he had dubiously averred; affirming and that positively,
and confidently, that this Ordinance was no other but Apostolical; grounding
it upon these words, [the doctrine of Baptism, Hic u^us locus abunde testatur
hujus ceremoniae originem fluxisse ab Apostolis: quae tamen pos^ea in
superstiti^ nem versa fuit: ut mundus semper fere ^b optimis Institutis ad
^orruptelas degenerat. Calv. Com. in Heb. 6. 2. Beza Annot. ad loc. Piscator
observe. ad loc. Chemnitius Exam. Council. Trid. de confir. Hemin. Com. ad loc.
Ursin* Catech. Pro^^g. 2. Dr. Fulk Ann. in Rhem. ad lo. Dr. Willet synops.
Contr* 16
and laying on of hands.] Hic unus locus abunde testator, etc.] This one place
(says he) does abundantly testify, that this Ceremony (viz. the Imposition of
hands in confirmation) how ever in after times it was superstitiously perverted
and abused (as the best Institutions are apt to degenerate into foul
corruptions,) yet it had its first original from the Apostles themselves.] Of
this mind are diverse others (as of the Ancients, so) of our modern Divines of
note, viz. Beza, Piscator, Chemnitius, Hemingius, Vrsine, Dr. Fulk, Dr. Willet;
and many others, men of singular both Learning and Piety, who all expound this
Text in this sense. I know there are some few Mr. Cartwright Annot. in Rhem. ad
loc. D. Ames Bell. Enerv. de confirm. cap. 1*
others (whose names and memories I honor) who are of a different judgment*
who being distasted with the corruption of this Ordinance as practiced in the
Church of Rome, and amongst our selves, and so possibly prejudiced against it,
carry the Text another way, conceiving that by [laying on of hands] here, we
are rather to understand the totum Ministerium, the whole Ministry of the
Church, which was wont to be ordained by Imposition of hands. A usual trope or
metonimie (say they) one Ceremony put for the whole Service.

But to this supposition I must profess I cannot freely subscribe: In as much
(1.) as I cannot look upon this as one of the fundamentalls of Christian
Religion, as these six heads here named, (and this amongst the Metonymi^
a^juncti Cart. Ibid.

Laying on of hands here cannot be understood of Ordination.

R. 1. Ordination none of the first Rudiments.

Ista impositio manuum ad prima fidei fundamenta spectabat in primitiva
Ecclesia. C^^et ad loc. Fundamentu^ quartum fuit Impositio manuum: Paiaeus ad
loc.


rest) are by some conceived to be, and that not without some color from the
Apostles own words, [n^t laying again the foundation etc. v. 1.] Nor yet can I
look upon it as one of those (...) (as the Apostle has it, v. 12. of the
Chapter foregoing) those prima elementa, those first rudiments and principles
of Christian Religion (as the Apostle calls all these six in the 1. v. of
this Chapter, [the principles of the doctrine of Christ; (...), the word of the
beginning of Christ, the A, B, C, (as it were) of Christianity) one of those
heads of Catechism that children, novices, should be first taught and
instructed in; as part of that milk which the Apostle in the 12. v. of the
Chapter foregoing tells us is fit for Babes. If this be milk, viz. the
doctrine of Church Discipline, Church Officers, Church Government, etc. what
shall we call or count strong meat? Certainly (were there no other argument)
the sad differences of the times about this point, and that betwixt those who
are no Babes, but strong men, judicious and conscientious, learned and holy
men, show this doctrine to be nothing less then milk.

R 2. Laying on of hands here has reference to baptism. Manuum Impositionem
^u^ Baptisma conjungit etc. Call. ad loc. Genesis 7. 9. 10.
2. Besides (in the second place) the very putting of these two together
[Baptisme, and laying on of hands] seems in Calvin's judgment to import some
reference and relation that the one should have to the other. A point that is
observable how the Apostle here brings forth these doctrines (even as the
creatures went into the Arc) by payres: Repentance and Faith; Baptismes and
laying on of hands; Resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment; each
having a near reference and relation to his mate. So it is in the two other
payres: Repentance and Faith; Resurrection and Judgment, the one relates to
the other. And so it seems to be here, Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of
hands; the latter seems to have a reference to the former; so as what shall
we, or can we understand by it, but that ancient and universal practice of the
Church, viz. Confirmation rightly administered and used? Confirmation what?


Q. But what was, or is this Confirmation?

A. Here not to regard what the Church of Rome holds forth unto us concerning
it, as viz. that is a Sacrament; a Sacrament in some respect superior to
Baptism; that it is the consummation of Baptism, so as without it Baptism is
incomplete and imperfect; that in and by this Sacrament the Holy Ghost is
conferred, and given for strength and corr^boration against spiritual enemies;
that it ought to be performed with such Ceremonies as Chrisma, Fa^ci^, Alapa,
etc.
are in use amongst them, most of which are very superstitious and ridiculous
toys, none of them (imposition of hands only excepted) finding any footing in
Scripture. Thus have they dealt with this Ordinance, even as Mical sometime
dealt with David, when having conveyed him away, she put an Image in his room,
with a pillow of goats hair for a boulster under the head of it, 1 Sa^. 19.
12. 13. Even thus (I say) have they dealt with this Ordinance; taking away the
Ordinance it self as it was first instituted, they have substituted an Image
in the room of it, which they have boulstred up with Ceremony* and inventions
of their own (no better then la^a Caprina) all to deceive the vulgar. So as
their confirmation as by them used, is no more that which was first instituted,
and which the word holds forth unto us, then that Ship Argos was the same
that it was first built, when as by often repairing it had scarce a piece of
the first materials, Alexander Halensis and Bonaventura fatentur ingenue
Sacramen^um confirmationis, ^t est sacramentum, neque (...) Domino, neque ab
Apostolis institutum and dispensatum fuisse, quia in Scriptura non legitur, sed
postea in concilio Meldensi inventum esse scribunt.

Whitak contra Du^aeu* ^. 8. sect. 61.


left in it. And so much is ing^^ously* confessed and acknowledged by some of
their own* as is observed against them by our learned Whitaker. And
therefore*to leave them* plow we with our own Heifers; consult we with the
Authors aforesaid. Calvin, Beza, Chemnit. Pis^. Pareus, ubi sup^a.

The original and primitive use of confirmation.


Some of them will inform us, how that in the Primiti^e Church there were two
sorts of Cat^ch^meni (as they called them) persons that were catechized and
instructed in the principles of Christian Religion. The first sort were
Extranei, such as were without; strangers to the C^v^nant, Heathens, Infidells
by birth, borne out of the Church. Now as for these, the manner was; they were
first taught and instructed in the faith, so as in their own persons they
might make an open confession of it, which accordingly they did before they
were admitted unto Baptism. The other were the children of believing parents,
who being borne in the Church, and looked upon as members of it, they were
baptized in their Infancy. Now they* not being able to make such a confession
in their own persons before Baptism, when they were grown up and come to
years of discretion, they were then catechized and instructed in that faith
whereinto they had been baptized; which being done, they gave an account of
that faith in the public congregation* ratifying that Covenant which they had
entered in Baptism; and so they were admitted and received in ^^^les^am
adul^orum, to further degre^^ of communion with the Church; as viz. to partake
of the Lords Supper etc. For the greater solemnity of which admission, and that
Solennis precandi rit^s: Calv. in Text. ex August.
the action might be had in more respect and reverence, it was performed with
this ceremony, the laying on of hands upon the person so received, who was
dismissed with a solemn benediction*

Confirmation a useful Ordinance to the Church in diverse respects.
This was (as it is conceived by them) the simplicity of this Ordinance in the
first institution and primitive practice of it. An Ordinance (as Calvin and the
forenamed Authors conceive of it* of great and singular use unto the Church of
God. And surely so it would be, were it but restored to primitive purity.

1. By this means the exercise of catechizing would Chemnit. Co. in Mark 10. 14
God has ever had singular need, and use.

Calv. Inst^t. lib* (...) 19. s. 13
2. By this means the unity of the faith would be

Calvin Ibid.
3. By this means parents would be quickened up to

And 4. Children themselves would be put on to knowledge, that they may be
able to give an account of that faith whereinto they were baptized, when they
shall be called to do it before the public congregation.

5. By this means persons ignorant or scandalous Supper of the Lord.

A sovereign remedy against mixed communion.
In which respect, of what consequence it might be for the healing of our
present breaches, may be easily apprehended. I shall not need to tell you,
what a stumbling block in the way of many, our mixed communion (as they call
it) has been, and is. At this stone many have tripped* and some have fallen,
and others are daily in danger of it. Now, of all remedies for the healing and
preventing hereof, I know none more promising, then this Ordinance being duly
practiced according to the institution of it. By this means that sacred
Ordinance might be freed and kept pure from that pollution, (so much (and that
not without cause) complained of) through a promiscuous participation; and so
this scandal being removed, we might hope that many who are upon this ground
departed from the unity of the Church, at least have broke off communion with
it, might in a little time be reduced, and brought home again; and others who
are staggering might be confirmed and established.

The difference about Church Covenant reconciled.
6. And lastly, by this means also that difference of the times about the
formality of a Church Covenant in receiving in of members* (as they call them)
would soon be compremized, and taken up: There being here the Vtinam vero
morem retineremus quem ^pud veteres fuisse admonui pri^squam haec Sacramenti
la^va nasceretur. Calv. Inst. de Confirm. l. 4 c. 19. s. 13. Talem ergo* manuum
impos^ion^m, quae* simplicity loco been dictionis fiar, laud, and resti*tu^am
hodie in pu^um usum ^^lim* Calv. Just. l. 4. ^. 19* 3. 4.
substance of what is there desired and contended for, and that better bottomed
(as I conceive) then the former.

In all which regards (besides many other) for my own part I cannot but join
with Calvin and Chemnitius, and diverse other of our Divines, in desiring the
restitution and restoring of this Ordinance to the Church, which through the
gross corruption of it in the Church of Rome, and too apparent abuse of it
amongst our selves (it being generally turned into a mere formality) has
grown into great dislike and distaste. Certainly, what ever any through
prejudice may think of it, were this Ordinance stripped of those rags which
superstition has put upon it, and restored to naked purity and simplicity, the
Church of God should have no cause to be ashamed to own it* specially seeing
the Apostle himself in the words of the Text s^emeth to give such countenance
to it, laying it down for one of those first principles concerning the nature
and use whereof children Hodieretinenda pura institutio est: superstitio autem
corrigenda. Calv. ad Tex* Nostri saepe ostenderunt, ritum confirmationis
remotis inutilibus, superstitiosis, and cum Scriptura pugnantibus
^^aditionibus, pie and ad Ecclesiae aedificatio^em, juxta scripturae consen^um
usurpari polle, Chem. Exam. de Confirm* Ob nugas Pon^ificias in pri^a Evangelii
reformatione totu^ actus confirmationis est abrogatus, quae res^^ssis is^is
(...) Pontificiis non male retineri potu^sset. Che^^it. Harm. in Mark. 10. 16.
should be instructed and taught.

Confirmation presupposes Paedobaptisme
Q. But all this while, what is this to the purpose in hand? what makes this
for P^d^baptisme, the baptism of Infants?

A. Surely yes, very much. This being granted that there was such an Ordinance
in use in the Apostles times practiced after the manner that you have heard, it
may from thence be demonstratively inferred, that some children were then
baptized in their Infancy. To what purpose else should this subsequent act
serve? wherefore should there be such a public confession, and such a solemn
restipulation, and engagement after Baptism, were it not that Baptism was
administered unto them in their Infancy, before they came to years of
discretion. Otherwise, had they been able to anser for themselves, and to
stipulate in their own persons when they were baptized (as those that were
adulti did) what need would there have been of such a subsequent solemnity, to
bring them actum agere, to do that again which they had once done before. But
I will not dwell any longer upon it.

You see now what Precept, and what Presidents the Spirit of God in the New
Testament will afford us for the countenancing, and bearing out of this
practice, the baptizing of Infants. True it is, express and particular they
are not; nor yet so demonstrative and convincing, but that the Adversary may
take up some cavills against them. Yet are they such evidences as may give
satisfaction to those who are willing to receive it. However, sure we are, they
make more for the warrant*blenesse of this practice, then ought that the
Adversary can produce, will against it.

Object. Infants are not capable of repentance and faith, ergo not of Baptism.
Not so (say they) for as for Infants they are not subjects capable of
Baptism. And why not? Why, because they are not capable of those
qualifications which should dispose them to the receiving of this Sacrament.
And what are they? why, Repentance and Faith. These are the conditions which
the Spirit of God requires in all persons that are to be baptized;
Repentance. [Repent Acts 2. 38.
ye therefore and be baptized] (says ^eter to the Jews.) Faith [if thou
beleevest with all thine heart thou may.] Acts 8. 3^.
(says Philip to the Eunuch concerning his Baptism.)

Ans. In persons of years actual repentance and faith is requisite before
baptism, not so in Infants.
A. To these Texts of Scripture it is soon answered, that here both Peter and
Philip had to deal with persons of years, and those such as had no other
title to the Covenant, but such as their own actual repentance and faith
conferred upon them. Now had we to deal with such, we should run the same
course, not admitting them unto this Sacrament, but upon the testification of
their Repentance and Faith. But in the mean time, this is ill applied to
Infants, the children of believing parents, who have a title to, and interest
in the Covenant, and consequently a right to the seal of the Covenant, by
virtue of their fathers charter.

Repl.
Repl. But it will be replied; This is a general, universal condition,
required of all that are to be baptized; They must first believe* Our Saviors
own words (say the) are express for it. [He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. So that it seems Mark 16. 16. cleared.
faith is a condition absolutely requisite in persons to be baptized, and must
go before Baptism. Here is one of the great arguments, which the Adversary
puts a great deal of confidence in. But what strength (or rather weakness)
is in it, will soon appear.

Sol. P. Matt. loc. Com. Clas. 4. loc. 11. sect. 13.
A. In the 1. place, it is truly answered by P. Martyr, and others, that Ordo
verborum non necessario infert ordinem rerum, The order of words does not
necessarily infer the same order in things. For instance, Mark 1. 4. it is
said, [Iohn did baptize and preach the baptism of Repentance.] Here is
baptizing put before preaching, (which may serve to balance that in the last
of Matthew. 19. Go teach all Nations baptizing them; where teaching is put before
baptizing;) yet will it not thence follow, that John baptized before he
preached. So here in those words of our Savior* believing is put before
baptizing in the order of the words. Yet it will not thence follow that faith
must always go before baptism in the reality of the thing. Should we thus
precisely stand upon the order of Siquis urgeat (...), (quicunque crediderit
and baptizatus fuerit) reponemus ei, si placet syllabas numerare, dictum Chri.
Joh. 3. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex Aqua and Spirit. Aret. Censura contra Anab.
words, what should we say to that of our Savior, Ioh. 3. 5. [Except a man be
borne of water, and of the Spirit, etc. (a Text which is brought to balance
that other) where water is put before the spirit.

A. 2. In the second place, we grant it; Faith and actual faith is requisite
in persons capable of it, before they be admitted to Baptism. And of such and
only such* is that place to be understood; [He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved.] Which cannot extend unto Infants, as the latter part of the
verse will sufficiently evidence. [Hee that believes not shall be damned*]
Which to apply to Infants, and so for want of actual faith (which they are not
capable of) to exclude them from all hopes of salvation, I presume it were
greater cruelty then the Anabaptists will willingly own. The place it self
being consulted with makes it clear; showing that this is spoken of all and
only such as were capable of the Gospel preached to them, and consequently
capable of faith; as the verse foregoing explaines it, v. 15. [Goe ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.] And what Gospel should
they preach? Why, even this; [He that believes, and is baptized shall be
saved, etc.] Which must be restrained to those who were capable of hearing, and
receiving that Gospel; not extended to Infants, who though they be not
capable of actual faith, yet are they capable of salvation, and consequently
of Baptism.

Bucan. loc. co^. loc. 48 q. 35. s 7 Tilen. syntag. de Baptismo Disput* 2. s.
30.
This place I find paralleld and compared with that of the Apostle to the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 3. 10. where he gives order that those which would not
work should not be relieved; [We commanded you that if any man would not
work, he should not eat.] What then shall become of Infants, and sick, and
impotent persons? must they be starved? Not so. That place must be restrained
to such as are able to work, but will not. So here, [He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned.] What
then shall become of Infants* may they not be baptized, and so must be damned?
Not so. The place is to be restrained to such persons as are capable of faith,
may believe, but will not.

The parents faith how available for Infants.
A. 3. In the third place it is answered by some; that Infants though they have
no faith of their own, yet the faith of their parents may be sufficient for
them. Even as the sin of another (their first parent) was enough Sharp.
Cu^su^ Theolog. de Bap ismo Contro^. ^.
to make them sinners, reputed such by a just imputation; so the faith of
another (of their next parents) may be enough to make them believers, reputed
such by a gracious acceptance. Of this opinion was Augustine Vid. P. Mart.
loc. com. clas. 4
and the ancient Church. And not without some truth; in as much as the faith of
the parent is sufficient to bring the child within the compass of the
Covenant, and so to make it baptizeable. However (as P. Martyr states it
rightly) in point of salvation, every one (who is capable of it) must be saved
by his own faith. [The just shall Heb* 2. 4.
live by his faith.] Not the faith of another.

Infants n^^ wholly incapable of faith.
A. 4. But (in the fourth place) it may be truly affirmed concerning* Infants
that they are not wholly incapable of faith. True, of the outward profession,
and inward exercise of it, they are. But not altogether of the grace it self.
This, (at least the seed and root of it) may be infused and implanted in the
soul even in Infancy, by the secret work of the Spirit regenerating and
sanctifying of it. So as though Infants have not faith actually, by way of
manifestation or exercise; yet vertually they may, by way of inch^ation and
inclination. Thus may Infants have a gracious disposition which in time will
come to be fides formata, formed in the habit and act of De fide Infant^um
faederatoru^, idem dic^^us quod de ipsorum ratione. Utraque ipsis inest acta
primo, non secundo: in semente, non in mess: in radi^e, non in fructu: inter^a
spiritus virtute, non externa operis ^emonstr^tione: Tilen. Sy^t. de Bapt.
Disp. 2. sect. 27 I^fantes que madmodum dicuntur habere rationem ita h^be^^
fi^^m dici possunt. Imo firmiori quadam ratione, quum sit De^ occulta and
secret^ elect. o. Aret. contr. Anabap.
faith. A truth which is well illustrated by some by comparing faith and reason
together, which Infants may be conceived to be both alike. Infants have not
the use of reason, they cannot reason and discourse, etc. yet a principle of
reason they have, being endued with a reasonable soul, which has an
inclination to discourse, and afterward actually does it. And from hence they
are called reasonable creatures, though for present they have no more
understanding then the bruit creatures, nay seemingly not so much as some of
them of like age seem to have. A young Lamb will sooner know the damme, then
a child the mother. Even so is it with faith. Infants have not the use and
exercise of faith, yet may they have an inward principle of faith, the seed and
beginning of faith, wrought in the heart by the secret work of the Spirit, an
inclination to believe, and to show forth their faith when they come to years
of maturity. And from hence may they be called, Quada^ locutione possunt dici
parvuli sidelium fideles, quemadmodum nonnunquam Infantes rationales
appellamus; non quod reipsa valiant ratio^inari, verum quod animam habeant,
quae, cum per aetatem fieri poterit ratiocinabitur, etc. P. Matt. loc. Com.
Clas. 4. loc. 8* de Baptismo, sect. 14* Infants of believing parents no
Infidels.

Infidelis ^ifariam dicitur, negative, and positive, Til. disp. 2. de Baptism.
sect. 28.


Believers.

A. 5. However, (in the fifth place) Infants of believing parents, though they
have neither actual nor yet habitual faith, yet are they not to be looked
upon as Infidels, and unbeleevers.

For the opening and clearing of which, we must know that there is a twofold
infidelity, viz. positive and negative. positive or privative, the habit of
Infidelity; when men being capable of faith, and having means of faith offered
to them, yet will not believe, but continue in unbelief. Negative. Carentia
fidei, a mere absence of faith, but without any contrary habit of infidelity.
Now the former of these are properly called Infidels, and unbelievers. Not so
the other. As for Infants, though they may be called nonbelievers, yet properly
unbelievers they are not. Neither does this simple absence of faith being in a
subject as yet not capable of it* exclude them either from salvation, or from
baptism. True, the former does both. That positive or privitive Infidelity,
the habit of unbelief, shuts men out of the Kingdom, both of Grace and
Glory. The Israelites Heb. 3. last.
could not enter into Canaan (a type of both) because of their unbelief. Not
so this negative unbelief. Infants of believing parents, though for the
present they be destitute of faith, yet are they not thereby shut out of the
Kingdom of Glory, nor yet to be debarred from the privilege of the Kingdom
of Grace, which are agreeable to their condition. Neither are they to be
reckoned, or reputed as Infidels. Being born of believing parents, they are an
holy seed, members of the Church within the Covenant; which is all that is to
be looked at in the dispencing of this Ordinance. Not the inward sanctification
of the heart, whether present or future; but the outward state and condition of
the person. This is that which the Ministers of the Gospel are to be regulated
by in the administration of this Sacrament.

The rule for dispensing Sacraments, not the inward, but outward state.
Which (by the way) let it be taken notice of against some more moderate
Anabaptists, who will not stick to indulge thus much unto us, that did they
know what Infants do belong to Gods election of grace, or were after that
manner endued with the spirit, they would not be against the baptizing of them.
For this, let them know, that this is not the rule which we are to walk by.
Not the inward, but the outward state. Suppose a Minister had the spirit of
discerning, and could discern the inward state of men (as certainly our
Savior did Judas his, and possibly the Apostles did some of those who were
baptized of them) yet were he not to withold the outward privilege from any
for want of inward grace, they having right and title thereunto by virtue of
their visible state, their being under the Covenant outwardly. But I hasten to
a conclusion of this point. One or two objections more, and I have done.

Obj. Infants not capable of benefit by Baptism.
Obj. Infants are not subjects capable of any benefit by baptism, and
therefore why should they be baptized?

Answ. To this I have in part answered heretofore. Let me now do it a little
more fully, yet briefly.

A. 1. As much as by Circumcision.
1. Demanding of the Adversaries, what benefit Infants under the Old Testament
had by Circumcision? Let them show me the one, I will show them the other.

A. 2. Baptism beneficial to the parents.
2. Though Baptism at present should not be beneficial unto Infants
themselves, yet to their parents it may be; serving exceedingly for their
consolation, when they shall see their children thus marked out for God, having
Gods distinguishing mark, his Seal set upon them; which is to them an
assurance that God is not only their God, but the God of their seed: That he
does acknowledge them in Covenant, and will make good the Covenant unto theirs,
in case they do not afterward by some act of their own ponereobicem, put a
bar in the way, so nullifying the Covenant, and frustrating Gods gracious
intentions toward them. Thus it is useful to the parent.

A. 3. Baptism beneficial to children for the present.
3. Neither (in the third place) is it altogether unusefull to the child, who
by this means:

1. Is distingu^shed from Heathens, and Infidels, and marked out for Gods
special service.

Romans 6. 4. 5.
2. Is hereby visibly ingrafted into Christ, and acknowledged as a visible
member of the Church: And consequently hereby comes to have a share, and
interest in the communion of Saints; being now daily remembered at the Throne
of Grace by all those who pray for the welfare of the Church.

3. Besides this (in the third place) who knows how, and in what way God may
be pleased to concur, and work together with his Ordinance? Certainly, herein
Gods ways are (as the Apostle says of them) (...), past our finding out. And
therefore stand not Romans 11. 34.
in this case to reason with flesh and blond, to consult with sense and reason
about it. Had those women in the Gospel so done, surely they would never have
brought their children unto Christ to be touched of him. But in this set faith
on work (as they did) and let that command obedience, obedience in submitting
unto this Ordinance of God.

A. 4. Baptism beneficial in the future.
4. In the 4. and last place: Though this Ordinance have not any present effect
upon Infants, yet afterward it may have: viz. when they shall come to
apprehend this stipulation, and engagement between God and them: then this
Sacrament will be useful unto them, as in other respects, so specially as a
strong obligation upon them, to bind them for ever to the service of that God,
who was pleased to take them into his service, before ever they were able to
do him any service: To take and acknowledge them as his, before they knew
themselves: To take and seal them for his children, before they were capable
to know their father. A peculiar favor, and so a peculiar obligation.

Obj. How shall Infants afterward know that they are baptized.
Obj. But how shall children afterward know that they are made partakers of
this Ordinance? An objection which possibly may take much with some. Those who
are thus baptized in their Infancy, how shall they know, and be assured that
they are baptized?

Even as an Israelite knew that he was circumcised:
A. I answer; Even as the Israelites knew, were assured that they were
circumcised.

Repl. Not so (says the Adversary.) Circumcision was a permanent, Baptism is
a transient sign. The one left an impression behind it, not so the other. The
Israelites carried a sensible mark in their flesh to mind them of their
Circumcision.

A. True: Such a sensible mark they had. But Viz. by the testimony of others.
how did they know, that that mark was given them for any such religious end,
and purpose? That they received it as a Sacrament, a seal of the Covenant
betwixt The inhabitants of Colchis, the Ethiopians, the Trogloditae, and the
Egyptians.

Alex ab Alex. l. 2. c. 25 Her. l. 2. Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. c. 1. It. l. 4. c.
3. Witnesses in Circumcision.

Vide Goodwins Moses and Aaron. l. 6 c. 1.


God and them. Other Nations there were (and that many) who used Circumcision
(even as the Turks do at this day) but not to any such intent, not as a
Sacrament. How did the Israelites know that theirs was given them with such an
intent? Why, herein they were to give credit unto the testimony of others, viz.
their parents, and other witnesses. Amongst whom (as it seems) some were
specially appointed for that purpose. So much the Jewish Doctors will inform
us of; describing to us the manner of Circumcision, they will tell us, that
when a child was to be circumcised, one who supplied the place of a witness
(whom they called by the name of Baal. Berith, and Sandak, that is, the master
of the Covenant) he held the child in his arms whilst it was circumcised,
that so he might bear witness both of the Circumcision, and of the name given
the child at that time. Such was the use of the latter Jews. And it seems
that the practice was ancient, as ancient as the Prophet Isaies time. So that
learned pair of Expositours, Iunius and Tremellius interpret that place of
that Prophet, Is. 8. 2. where the Prophet tells us, that he took unto him
faithful i. e. Vir^s nominatim advocatos ut ^est^rentur nomen illud filio meo
imposi^u^ in Ecclesia, quum circumcid^retur. Jun. and Tremel. ad loc Verse. 1.
3. The original of wit^^^^es in Baptism. A^q* ex hoc ^itu prof^ctum ^sse illum
nostrum constat, quo certi homine^ speciatim, maxi^e ve^o i^ calamitosis
temporibus (ut ista futura erant) adhibentur testes accessus ad Christum, and
ad Ecclesiam per Baptismum and nominis in Baptismo indit^. Hos vulgus
compatres, et commat^es, Graeci olim (...), appellarunt.

Jun. and Tr^ib. Repl. A humane testimony is no ground for faith.

Sol. A humane testimony sufficient for a humane faith.


witnesses: viz. Vzziah the Priest, and Zachariah.] Witnesses to what? Why to
the Circumcision of his Son, of whom he speaks in the verse before and
after. Such as might bear witness that he gave him that name in his
Circumcision, which the Lord had appointed him: viz. Mahershalal hash baz.
Which, whether it was a thing really done, or only represented to the Prophet
in a vision, is not material. It seems however, that this was a practice
then in use in those times. And from hence (as judicious Authors with good
probability conjecture) came that custom so anciently and universally received
amongst the Churches (till of very late times): viz. The having of Godfathers
and Godmothers (as we call them) in Baptism. Some persons specially appointed
to bear witness of the receiving of such a person into the Church of God by
Baptism, and of the Name then given unto him. But this by the way.

From these did children amongst the Israelites receive the testimony of their
Circumcision. Which they were induced the more to give credit to, because they
saw the same practiced upon others daily. And even such a testimony have
children now concerning their Baptism, besides the testimony of the whole
Congregation, which many have, and others ought to have.

Repl. But this is but a humane testimony, and consequently fallible. How shall
I build my faith upon it?

A. I answer. A Humane testimony is sufficient to build a Humane faith upon.
True, a Divine faith must have a Divine testimony, But to a humane faith a
humane testimony may suffice. Now such is this faith. To believe that I was
Baptized; this is but a humane faith, being concerning a matter of humane fact.

Repl. What if a man should believe that he is baptized when he is not?

Sol. Such an error being invincible shall not ^^nder salvation.


Repl. But what if I should be deceived herein? as it is possible I may be?
think and believe that I was baptized, when as I was not.

A. To this I answer, that such an error being invincible, shall not be
prejudicial in point of salvation. In this case the apprehension of the thing
shall be in stead of the thing it self. As in the case of persons dying before
they can have the Sacrament of Baptism administered unto them: In this case it
is determined that the desire of Baptism (viz. by Parents for their children,
by persons of age for themselves) shall supply the want of it. So said Ambrose
concerning the Emperor Valentinian, who coming to him to be baptized, dyed by
the way; Baptizatus voto and voluntate licet non reipsa per aquae lavacrum. Am.
lib. de vita Valent.

2 Co^. 8. 12.


He was baptized (says he) in vow and desire, though not by the wa^hing of
water; which he concluded to be as effectual as if he had been made partaker
of the thing it self. And it is no more then what the Apostle will bear him
out in, who tells us, That where there is a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that which he has not.
Desire of Baptism, (where it cannot be had) is baptism in Gods accep^ation,
Minime salvari possunt qu^ nec re, nec voto baptismi Sacramen um susciperint:
qu^ vero saltem voto Sacramentum baptismi sus^eperint, e^s^ non re s^lvari
poss^nt Thom. pars. 3. q. 68. Act. 2. con
supplying the want of this Sacrament. So much even Papists (however standing
much upon the absolute nec^ssity of Baptism) will yield. Even so here. In the
case of such an invincible error and mistake, (which is only possible, not
probable, much less ordinary) the very apprehension of the thing as done, with
the appl^cation of the thing signified by it, shall be effectual unto the
person to all intents and purposes, as if he had been really made partaker of
that Sacrament.

And thus have I endeavored as briefly, and yet as fully as I could, to give
satisfaction to all the chief Arguments or Objections which are brought
against this Doctrine and Practice of Baptizing of Infants.

An antidote against Rebaptization.
Only let me yet speak one word or two, to the Anabaptist properly so called.
For you must know, that of this Sect (as usually in all Sects it is) there are
diverse sorts. Amongst other, some Catabaptists, others Anabaptists. The former
opposes the Baptism of Infants, as a thing not meet, not lawful, at least
not expedient to be done; yet being done, he allows it as valid and of force.
The other looking upon this Baptism as a mere nullity, holds an absolute
necessity of Rebaptization. Now to these latter let me speak a word, and but a
word. Minding them of that old Rule, which takes place in many cases: Fieri
quod non licet, factum valet: A thing which ought not to be done, yet being
done, it may be of force and valid. For instance. David ought not to 2 Samuel 12.
9. 10.
have taken the wife of V^iah to his wife. The Lord by his Prophet charge it
upon him, as a sin, and a great sin; yet being done, the Marriage was
lawful, and ought not to be dissolved. Amongst us, Clandestine marriages (as
we call them) they are not allowable, but prohibited, yet being done, they are
valid, and may not be undone. To come nearer the point in hand. In the case of
Baptism, Parents ought not to tender their children to be baptized by any
Romish Priest in a superstitious way; yet being done, Baptism so administered
ought not to be reiterated, but to be held as true, and valid. A case stated by
many of the Ancients; in case any were baptized by Heretics, so that the true
matter and form of Baptism was observed, in this case the determination of
the Church (against the opinion of Council. Laod. can. 7. Arelat. can. 8. Leo
Ep. 7. 7. citati per Chemnitium in Exam. de Confirmat.
Cyprian) was that they were not to be rebaptized; only they were to be
catechized, and interrogated concerning the faith whereinto they were baptized,
and so by imposition of hands in confirmation, they were to be received into
communion with the Church. Even so it is here. Suppose the baptism of Infants
not to be regular, that they ought not to be baptized until they be able to
understand the meaning of this Sacrament, and make a profession of the faith in
their own persons (an opinion which some moderate spirits are somewhat
inclinable to) yet being baptized, their baptism is valid, and ought not to be
repeated. Even as it is with the baptism of a profane or ignorant person; nay
suppose a Jew, a Turk, an Infidel, a Pagan. In case such a one should out of
some by and sinister respect, whether to save his life, or procure his liberty,
or for lucre, or honor, or the like, should tender himself to Baptism: In
this case he ought not to be admitted. Divine ordinances are not to be
prostituted to any such base or sinister designs. Yet put the case that by
favor, or by some other indirect way, he do obtain it. In this case his
baptism is not to be accounted a nullity. Neither ought he (in case afterward
he shall be enlightened, and come truly and seriously to embrace the faith) to
be rebaptized; only he is then to make a right use of that baptism, which was
administered to him rightly for the substance of it, however by him obtained in
an undue way and manner. Even so here. Supposing Infants to be baptized before
they are meet to partake of that Ordinance, yet being for substance rightly
baptized, they ought not now to be rebaptized, but only labor to make a right
and holy use of that baptism, which was truly, though (...) conferred upon
them. Which if rightly considered, and duly weighed, I presume it might be of
use to some who are not fully satisfied in the point of Paedobaptisme, as
touching the expediencie or lawfulness of it, viz. to stay them from running
into that dangerous and destructive error of Anabaptisme, properly so called,
I mean of Rebaptization, the repeating of baptism; which being once for
substance rightly administered, ought not for some defect in the manner, or
mistake in circumstance be reiterated. But thus much for this point; which I
have dwelt the longer upon, if it might be, to settle wavering and unstable
minds, and to keep them from being seduced, and drawn away to the embracing
of this spreading error of the times, which has also begun to put up head
in this place: However, liberare animam, to deliver my own soul, by the
discharge of my duty toward God and you; withal, making it manifest, that if
God shall permit this error to spring and spread further amongst us, yet it
may never be said, that these Tares were sown, and grew up whilst the
Husbandmen Mat. 13. 25.
slept.

MARK. 10. verse. 13. to 16. And they brought young Children unto him, that he
should touch them, etc.


YOU know what Subject it is I have lately fallen upon, viz. the Doctrine of
Baptism; and therein of Paedobaptisme, the Baptism of Infants. This doctrine
and practice I have already in part endeavored to assert, and vindicate
against the Anabaptists of the times. In further prosecution thereof I have now
taken up this portion of Scripture, which is commonly made use of in this
cause, as an argument to evince the warrantablenesse of Childrens baptism.

A portion of Scripture well known. No one passage in the Bible more
frequently read in our public Congregations (so it has been,) but very
seldom explicated. So Chemnitius observed it in the Chemnit. Har. ad loc.
Germane Churches in his time; and the observation holds as true in ours.
Scarce a Lords day but this history has been read (I mean in great
Congregations,) but it may be scarce once in an age opened. Give me leave now
to do it, and I will do it with as much brevitie as conveniently I may;
intending rather to gloss upon every thing in it, then to insist upon any
thing. A 3. fold Act in this Hist.


The words are a history, consisting of three parts, three sensual acts. The
first of those devout persons who brought and presented these children unto
Christ: v. 13. The second of the disciples repelling these Infants, and
rebuking those which brought them; ibid. The third of our Saviors rebuking his
Disciples, inviting, embracing, and blessing these Infants; v. 14, 15, 16. we
shall look upon them severally.

1. Act. The act of those which brought these children to Christ: where 4.
particulars.
Begin with the first, the act of those devout persons which brought these
children; wherein diverse particulars offer themselves to our consideration. As
1. who brought them: 2 whom they brought: 3. to whom they brought them: 4. to
what end they brought them: A word of each.

1. Who were the bringers.
I. Who brought them; (...) (says the text.) They brought;] who they were,
none of the Evangelists expressed. Most probably, the Parents, the Mothers of
these children. They brought them, which they did out of a tender and motherly
affection which they bare unto their children; desiring their good, their
welfare, [they brought them.]

2. Whom they brought: viz. Infants.
II. And whom did they bring? Children. (...), (says our Evangelist:) pueros,
puerulos; children, young children. So our translation renders it; and such
they were. Not children grown up, as some of the Anabaptists would willingly
have it, but Infants.

Cleared by 3* arguments.

Luke 18. 15.


1. So St Luke expressly calls them; (...), Infants, sucking children.

2. So much also is employed in the first word of the text; they brought, (...),
adferebant, non adduce^ant. They brought them, not led them; not led them by
the hand, but brought them in their arms, Thus they brought them.

3. And after the same manner Christ received, and embraced them. [Hee took
them in his arms.] (...), (says our Evangelist) ulnis amplexus: even as
mothers do their children. All evidencing and clearing the condition of the
persons that were brought. They were Children, Babes, Infants.

3. To whom they were brought.
III. And to whom did they bring them? Unto him, unto Christ. Thus others
before had brought diverse aged persons unto him, who had received benefit by
him. And thereupon these tender mothers they do as much for their children;
[they bring them to Christ.]

4 To what end.
IV. And to what end did they bring them. [That he might touch them (says our
Evangelist:) that he might put his hands upon them and pray, (says St. Math.
19. 13.
Matthew:) that is, that by laying his hands upon them he might bless them.
Such benedictions Parents were anciently wont to seek for their children, and
children for themselves. Thus did Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27.
each seek a blessing at the hands of their father Isack. And thus did Joseph
seek a blessing for his two sons Genesis 28.
Ephraim and Manasses; bringing them to his father Jacob, that he might lay his
hands upon them, and bless them; i. e. pray for them, and in the name of God
pronounce a blessing upon them. Such a blessing (it seems) the people of God
were frequently wont to seek for their children at the hands of those whom they
apprehended to be endued with prophetical and extraordinary spirits. And thus
these mothers, looking upon Christ as a Prophet, a great Prophet, the great
Prophet, they bring their Infants unto him, that they might receive a
benediction from him.

The words being thus briefly opened, we may take up a double observation from
them.

1. That Infants are subjects capable of benefit by Christ.

2. That it is the best office that Parents can perform unto their Children,
to bring them unto Christ. Briefly of each.

Obser. 1 Infants capable of benefit by Christ.
Infants are subjects capable of benefit by Christ: So much certainly these
devout persons who here brought these children to him apprehended and believed.
Wherefore else should they have brought them, had they not apprehended them to
have been subjects capable of benefit by him. And surely such they are;
capable, and that not only of temporal, but of spiritual benefit: viz. of
Remission of sins, of Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification,
Glorification.

Object. Infants do not actually believe.
But how can this be (says the Anabaptist) seeing that Infants do not
actually believe? They cannot lay hold upon Christ by faith; how then shall
they receive any benefit by him?

Answ. Christ can touch them, though not touched by them.
To this I answer; Though they cannot lay hold upon Christ, yet Christ can lay
hold upon them. Though they cannot touch him, yet he can touch them. And this
is sufficient. Mark the Text: [They brought children unto Christ that he
should touch them.] Not that they should touch him, but that he should touch
them. Christ can, and often does touch them by a veriuall contract,
communicating spiritual benedictions and blessings unto them, who are not able
to touch him, I mean actually to believe on him. This is the case of Infants;
they are not sensible of the need they have of Christ, neither can they seek a
blessing for themselves, they cannot by an actual faith lay hold upon him: yet
is this no impediment unto them. For all this, Christ may, and often does
communicate himself unto them; apprehending them, thongh not apprehended by
them. In adultis, in persons come to years of discretion, and to the use of
reason, both these meet together, even a mutual apprehension, the one
resulting from the other. Believers they apprehend Christ, and they are
apprehended of Christ. This is that which Paul desires for himself, Phil. 3.
I follow after (says he) if I may Phil. 3. 12.
apprehend that for which I am also apprehended of Jesus Christ.] Paul was
apprehended of Christ; viz. by his free grace accepting of him; and his desire
is, that he might more and more apprehend Gods love and favor in Christ, viz.
by faith and experience. Thus do Christians when they are come to years of
discretion, apprehend Christ; then they touch him, as that Woman in the Gospel
did, who came and touched Mat. 9.
the hemme of his Garment, drawing virtue from him by her faith. Thus indeed
Infants cannot apprehend him; they cannot touch him. In the mean time it is
enough that they are apprehended of Christ, touched by him. So were these
Infants here in the Text. [They brought Children unto Christ that he should
touch them.]

Applica. Stand not to reason with flesh and blood about this mystery.
Appli: Stand no^ then to reason with flesh and blood about the manner of
Christ's coming and communicating himself, and his grace unto Infants. This
does the Anabaptist, and because sense* and reason cannot resolve his doubt,
viz. How Baptism should be made effectual unto Infants, seeing they do not
actually believe; therefore he will not believe lieve that it can be any ways
beneficial to them, what is this but to take up Thomas his Resolution? John 20.
Unless I shall see the print of the nails, and put my fingers into them,
etc. I will not believe. These Women (or who ever they were that brought these
Children unto Christ) they were of another mind. They knew not which way
virtue should go out from Jesus Christ unto their Infants; yet they bring them,
render them unto him, only desiring that he would touch them, which if he
would vouchsafe to do, they doubt not but their Infants should be the better
for it.

Surely what ever flesh and blood, carnal sense and reason (which are no
competent judges in divine and spiritual mysteries) may suggest. The Sacrament
of Baptism is not un useful, nor always ineffectuall unto Infants. God can,
and (no question) often does concur with his Ordinance, communicating the
inward grace with the outward sign, working that grace of Regeneration in
Infan^s, whereof Baptism is a Sign and Seal. If for our parts we cannot
conceive how, or after what manner God should work this work in them, let not
that stagger our belief, Considering that there are many other things which
are above our sense and reason, yet not above our faith. We believe that they
are, though we know not in what way they are effected. Who is there that
knows the way of his own natural birth? how the body is framed and fashioned
in the womb? how, and when the soul comes to be infused into it? Even such
is the way of God in many of his works. So says the Preacher, Eccles. 11. [As
thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how Eccles. 11. 5
the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, so thou know not
the works of God.] Such are many of his works, many of his ways, (...),
untraceable Romans 11. 33.
ways, ways past finding out. And such in particular is the way of God in the
work of Regeneration; a mysterious way, the manner of it being above sense and
reasons comprehension. So much our Savior tells Nicodemnus. Ioh. 3. [The wind
blows where it lists* etc. So is every one that is borne of the Spirit.]
The wind blows variously, sometimes in this quarter, sometimes in that, and
who can give a reason of it. Such is the work of the Spirit. A mysterious
work. If we cannot give a reason of it, and set forth the manner of its
working, let not this our ignorance prejudice our faith. What we cannot
comprehend, yet let us apprehend. What we cannot see, yet believe. So did these
devout persons here in the Text. Having seen the power of Christ exercised
upon others, they doubt not but their children also were capable of benefit by
him; so as if he would but touch them, they should fare the better for it; and
thereupon they bring them unto him.

I have done with the former observation. As briefly of the latter.

Obser. The best office Parents can do for their Children, to bring them to
Christ.

Reason ^.


It is the best office that Parents can perform unto their children, to bring
them unto Christ.] So these mothers here thought of it. They knew not how to
perform a better office unto these their Infants, then to present them unto
Christ. And therein they were not deceived.

1. In as much as (Christ,) Jesus Christ is the storehouse Christ a storehouse
of blessings.

1 Ephesians. 3.


and Treasury of all blessings. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ (faith the Apostle) who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ.] Spiritual blessings (which are the best blessings)
they are laid up in Christ, to be dispensed by him. God his Father has made
him (as I may say) his high-Almoner to distribute his bounty to the sons of
men. Whetherthen can poor necessitous creatures repair better than unto
Christ? And such are Infants naturally.

Reason 2. Infants necessitous creatures.
2. Let that be a second Reason; viz the great necessity that Infants have of
Jesus Christ. Without him they are lost creatures, for ever lost. Such they
come in to the world, in a lost condition; being all sinners by nature. Sinners
by Imputation, having the sin of their first Parents charged upon them:
Sinners by real communication, being heirs of their forefathers corruption.
Now this being their condition, they stand in need of a Savior, a susceptor,
one that may undertake for them, and stand betwixt the wrath of God and them.
And who can do this but the Savior of the world, the Lord Christ? Now put
these together, Christ's Al-sufficiencie, and their necessity; we shall see
ground and reason enough for this Assertion, that it is the best office that
Parents can do to their Children, to bring them unto Christ.

Applica.
Let it be applied briefly by way of Conviction, Instruction.

Use 1. The preposterous care of carnal Parents.
By way of Conviction. Let carnal Parents here take notice of the
preposterousnesse of their care and solicitude for their children in seeking
all other things for them, in the mean time neglecting this. Other things they
will lay out, and lay up for them, necessaries and conveniences for the
outward man. They shall not want either food or raiment* It may be they will
give them civil nurture and education, bringing them up in some honest trade
or occupation, whereby they may live like men in the world: And they will do
what they can to gather a portion for them, to leave them an Inheritance. But
in the mean time, as for bringing them to Christ, and interesting them in him,
this they never think of. And what is this but with Martha to be solicitous
about many things, but Luke 10. 41.
whereas there is but one thing necessary, to over-looke that* Surely such is
the interesting of children in Jesus Christ. Other things may be for
convenience, this for necessity.

Be convinced then of* your folly herein, you who are so indulgent toward, and
provident for your children, that you think all the care you can take for them
for their temporal welfare, to be little enough; but in the mean time take
no thought to bring them unto Christ, to have union and communion with him.
Hereby you may express a natural, but no Christian affection; that is true
Christian affection, which puts forth it self in bringing others unto
Christ.

The worst office to keep children from Christ.
2. But what shall we then think (in the second bringing their children unto
Christ, that they rather keep them off from him. Prejudicing them against the
wa^es of Christ, by their own (...) examples* Cruel, un-naturall Parents! So
we account them, who Levit. 20. ^.
offered up their children into Moloc^. What are they who (as much as in them
lies) offer them up unto S^^^^?

Use 2. Instruction.

To excite Parents to this duty.


(...) Parents here take notice of their (...) and be excited to discharge it:
endeavoring (what in them lies) to bring their children unto Christ. The best
office, the truest act of charity you can perform to them. So we look Matt.
9. 2.
(...) act of those who brought that poor Paraliticke, the man ^icke of the
Palsy unto Christ* He could not come himself, they bring him. The greatest
piece of charity they could possibly have showed (...) Suppose it, that they
had otherwise contributed largely and liberally to his necessities, giving him
meat and drink, and apparel, and money; all this had been nothing in
comparison of (...) they now did for him. What ever (...), what (...) natural
affection the most tender hearted Parents in the world can show to their
children, should they provide never so well for them in all other (...) yet
this is more than all, to bring them to Christ* The truest and highest
preferment that a Parent can prefer his child unto, to prefer him unto
Christ. Old Barzillai could not do more for his 2 Samuel 19. 37.
son (...) than to prefer him unto David, to be his follower, his attendant.
He well knew that David could do more for him than himself could. Upon the
same ground prefer we our children unto Christ* They cannot serve a better
Master, none so able to do for them as he* Little it is that we (...) Much
we have done (...) and transmitting our corrupted nature to them, thereby
laying them under guilt, and making them children of wrath. This have we done
against them to make them miserable. Now all that we can do for them, cannot
free them from that condition. O labor to bring and present them unto him that
can, even unto Jesus Christ. Quest. How shall Parents bring their children to
Christ, and what they are to do to that end.

Answ. A threefold direction.




But which way shall this be done? How shall Parents bring their children unto
Christ? or what shall they do to this end?

Take some directions briefly. I shall reduce them to three heads. Something is
to be done for them before they are borne* Something when they are borne, in
their Infancy* Something when they come to years of understanding.

Before they are borne.
1. Before they are born, whilst they are yet in the Sanctify them in the
womb by prayer.

Psalm. 127* 3.


things are to be sanctified) by prayer, and thanksgiving. Children are an
heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his reward (says the
Psalmist.) Being so, they should be blessed in the womb* First, by blessing
God for them, for the hopes of them Secondly, by commending them unto his
blessing. This doing

Then (in the second place) let Parents make sure borne Make sure they may be
borne under the Covenant.
under the promise, under the Covenant. As for the Planet it matters not: if
they be but borne under the Promise, we may look upon them as a hopeful
seed*

Q. But what shall or what can the Parent do to bring the Child under the
Promise?

A. Make sure he be under it himself; make sure his own interest in the
Covenant, that God is his God in Christ* Being so, then may he have a
comfortable hope that God will be the God of his seed also. So (...) the
Covenant. [I will be thy God, and the God of thy ^eed.] This are Parents to
do for their children whilst they are yet in the womb before they are borne.

When they are borne.
Secondly, when they are born; then first give them up unto God. Even as these
mothers here in the Text, Give them to God again
they bring their children unto Christ, putting them into his Hands, his Arms.
Thus should Parents deal with their children, having received them from God,
they should give them unto God again; putting them into his hands, casting
them upon his arms; putting them into the hands of his Fatherly providence, to
be ordered and disposed of by him, according to his good pleasure. Casting them
upon the Arms of his everlasting mercy in Jesus Christ, begging for them a
gracious acceptance. For the assurance

Bring them to Baptism.
Secondly, their next care must be to tender them to the Ordinance, the
Sacrament of Baptism, to get the Seal of the Covenant set upon them; to get
them Whether mothers are bound to present their children with their own hands.
marked out for salvation; a care which lies most properly upon the Parents.
Not that they are absolutely bound to present them with their own hands. True
it is, these mothers here they bring their children unto Christ in their own
Arms (as is most probable,) and so Christ takes them into his. But as for the
l^^ter of th^se, I know you will readily yeeldit, that it is not binding, that
because Christ took these children into his Arms to bless them; therefore
Ministers should necessarily take children into their Arms to Baptize them. No
more do I conceive, the former to be; that because these Mothers brought
their own children unto Christ, therefore all Mothers ought to bring their
children to the Sacrament of Baptism, and there present them to the Ordinance
in their own Arms. Sure I am, in Circumcision it was otherwise. But herein,
if any seem to be contentious, I will not contest with them; only I will say
with 1 Cor. 11. 16.
the Apostle in anothercase; we have no such custom, ^or (for ought I know) the
Churches of God.

The chief care lies upon the Parents, specially upon the father.

Exodus 4. 24*


But in the mean time, the chief care lies upon the Parents; and that
specially and chiefly upon the Father. So did the care of Circumcision. Thence
was it, that God was ready to slay Moses for neglecting of it, suffering his
son to be uncircumcised.

Quest. What if the mother be unwilling?
Q. But what if the other Parent, the Mother be unwilling withal, not willing
the child should be Baptized? It is a case which possibly may fall out in
these dividing times. Now in this case what should the husband do? Should he
please his wife, and neglect this Ordinance.

Answ. The case of Moses and Zippora.
A. It was the very case (as Junius, and diverse other good Expositers conceive
it) betwixt Moses and Zipporah. Zipporah not being as yet fully instructed in
the Religion of God, or not fully brought off to it* and withal an indulgent
mother, was unwilling that her child should be Circumcised. Hereupon Moses her
husband in gratiam uxoris, to please and content his wife, defers the
Circumcising of him. But what the issue was the story tells you, and your
selves may easily make the application.

Let not Parents defer this Ordinance upon carnal reasonings.
Let not Parents then either neglect, or defer this Ordinance beyond what is
meet, where it may be had according to Christ's Institution. Herein let them not
stand to reason with flesh and blood about it (as the Anabaptist does; what
good, what benefit a poor Infant shall receive) from, or by this Sacrament,
seeing it apprehends nothing, understands not what is done to it. A. No more
did the Circumcised Infant, it only felt the smart of Circumcision, (as
Infants now do the coldness of the water) but the mystery and meaning it
apprehended not, yet was not Circumcision thereupon to be deferred, till it
came to years of understanding. No more ought this Sacrament, which comes in
the room of Circumcision. What though sense and reason cannot tell us how this
ordinance should be beneficial, yet submit to it, resting upon God in the use
of it. Knowing and remembering that in sacred actions of this nature, we are to
captivate our own understandings, bringing them into obedience unto Christ,
dealing with him not by reason, but by faith. So much our Savior intimates
unto us in the 15. of this Chapter, where he tells us, that, whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God, as a little child, he shall not enter therein.]
Children, we see how they yield up themselves unto their Parents pleasures,
believing, submitting, and obeying, without disputing and reasoning. Thus
should christians yield up themselves to the pleasure of their Lord and Master
Christ, believing his words, submitting to his commandments, though to reason
never so unreasonable. Thus did Abraham when he was 99. years old submit to
Circumcision, though to Genesis 17. 24.
reason, a ridiculous uncomely ceremony. What ever reason dictates, yet neglect
not this ordinance of God, the bringing of our children, and consecrating them
unto God by the Sacrament of Baptism: which if it should not be for the
present beneficial unto the child, yet to the Parents it may be, being to
them a sign and seal for the confirmation of their faith in believing the
promise made to them, and to their seed. Object. The Promise is sufficient,
though unsealed.

Chemnit. Har. ad loc.




But what needs this? Is not the promise it self sufficient? And cannot God
as well make it good unto our children without this Sacrament? So Chem^itius
brings in some reasoning against this act of these women in the Text, as if it
savoured more of superstition, then of devoution, viz. that they could not be
contented with Christ's praying for their children, but they would needs have
him to touch them. The Centurion (say they) was of another mind. He does not
bring his servants unto Christ, or desire Christ to go unto him. Only speak
the word (says he) and Math. 8. 8.
my servaant shall be whole.] And this act of his (say they) it was far more
commendable then this of the women here, who brought their children unto Christ
that he should touch them. From whence they argue, that Parents having the
word, the word of promise, they shall not need this Sacrament for their
children.

Ans. Means afforded for the help of our infirmity and strengthening our faith
are not to be neglected.
To this we reply, it is true, God can make good the promise unto them, saving
them without this Sacrament, as our Savior could and sometimes did heal those
which were diseased without touching of them, or coming near to them. But
seeing God is pleased so far to condescend unto our weakness, as to give us
a sign for the confirmation of our faith, in this case to slight it, to
neglect it, to refuse it, what is it but to tempt God? It was Ahaz his case ye
know. The Lord bids him ask a sign for the confirmation of his faith in the
promise. He refuses Isaiah. 7. 12.
it as a thing needless. [I will not ask a sign, neither will I tempt the
Lord.] Nay Ahaz, in not asking it at Gods command, therein thou did tempt the
Lord, not to believe Gods word without his seal; not to believe the promise
without a sign, this is indeed to tempt God. But where God affords a sign
for the help of our infirmity, there to refuse it, to neglect it, is both
presumption and rebellion.

3. When children come to years of discretion.
The 3. head is yet behind, what parents are to do for their children when
they come to years of understanding, in way of bringing them to Christ. Here
again two things.

1. Instruct them in the knowledge of Christ.

2 Timothy 3. 15.


1. Instruct them in the knowledge of Christ. Instilling into them, so soon as
they are capable of them, the principles of Christian Religion* Thus was
Timothy brought up; From a child he knew the holy scriptures, etc. And thus
should Christian parents bring Ephesians. 6. 4.
up their children; bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, (as
Paul exhorts his Ephesians:) teaching them to know God and Jesus Christ;
commanding them to walk in the ways of God. This Genesis 18. 19.
will Abraham do: [I know (says the Lord) that he will command his children,
etc. and they shall keep the way of the Lord.]

Leading them to Christ by example.
In the second place, go with them, go before them, leading them unto Christ
by their own examples. It is that which takes place with children more then
all precepts and instructions whatsoever: And without this the other will do
little good. Would we then have our children brought home unto Christ, be we
our selves followers of him. Not dealing by our children as old Barzillai did
by his son Chimham, whom 2 Samuel 19. 39*
he leaves to follow David, when himself departed from him. Even thus do some
parents. They could be content their children should follow Christ, and be
religious, whilst in the mean time themselves turn their backs upon him, and
his Religion; walking loosely, making no conscience either of sins, or duties.
Now what is this but to prejudice their children against that way, wherein they
would have them to walk? Would we have our children come unto Christ, go with
them, as these mothers here did, lead them, and show them the way by our own
example. And thus I have done with the first branch of the text; the first act;
viz. of these mothers, or who ever they were that brought these children unto
Christ.

And his disciples rebuked those that brought them:] Act. 2. The act of the
disciples double.
Come we now to the second act in this History, viz. the act of the Disciples,
prohibiting these Infants, not without a check a rebuke to those that came, and
tendered them. So all the three Evangelists have it. (...), increpebant eos,
says Matthew and Luke, [they rebuked them.] Not the Infants themselves, but
the bringers of them. So our Evangelist explaines it (...); They rebuked those
which 1. Repelling the Infan^^*
brought them.] Thus these Infants were repulsed, and these devout persons
rebuked. Each will yield us something worth the observation.

Obser. Satan's peculiar-ill will to children.
1. In the former take we notice of a peculiar illwill Satan bears to
children; he has an evil eye upon them, endeavoring by all means to keep
them from coming to Christ, and so to hinder their salvation. How Satan hinders
children from coming to Christ.
This Satan does many ways. 1. Through the indulgencie of Parents suffering
them to have their own wills. 2. Through evil education, poisoning their
tender years, giving them such a ^ang then, as they shall retain all their
life after. 3. Sometimes 2 King 23. 12.
under a pretext of Religion. Thus of old he instigated not only the heathen,
but even Gods own people to offer up their children in sacrifice to Molock,
unto devils. And even thus does he instigate those of the Church of Rome at
this day, to sacrifice their children, to put them into monasteries before they
know what they do, which is little less than to offer them up unto Satan. 4.
By keeping them from the ordinances. Thus he instigated the disciples here to
repel th^se Infants from coming near to Christ. And* he it is that has of
late times instigated the Anabaptists to take up this quarrel, to prohibit
the Baptism of Infants, which is as much as in them lies to keep them from
coming unto Christ.

Reason 1.
And wherefore should Satan have such an evil eye at them? Why he looks upon
them as the seminary, the ^ur^^rie of the Church, out of which God takes
those plants wherewith he plants his (...) and therefore Satan has an
ill will to them, that so he might hinder the increase of the Church.

(...).
Let Parents take notice of it, and be so much the more careful and vigilant
in watching over their children, Parents should be the more vigilant
not neglecting any means for their spiritual good; which if they shall do,
what do they but leave them as a prey unto Satan, who will be ready enough to
prey upon them.

My purpose is only to touch things as I go. repelled, and those which
brought Rebuking those which brought them.

Obser. 2. Good undertakings subject to discouragements, cast in sometimes
Reason. 1. By God for the trial of his people, and exercise of their graces.
Matthew. 15.


them are checked, rebuked.

Thus good intentions and pious undertakings sometimes, oft-times meet with
impediments and discouragements; which sometimes God casts in the way of his
people, sometimes Satan.

1. God, for their probation and trial, the trial of their faith; as also for
the exercise of that and other graces in them, which by the exercise of them
come to be strengthened and increased. To this end it was that our blessed
Savior gave such harsh intertainment to that poor Cananitish woman that came
to him in the behalf of her daughter; First, bidding his disciples dismiss
her, [send her away.] v. 23.
Then himself shaking her off, telling her he had nothing to do with her, or
for her. [I am not sent v. 24.
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.] Then giving her tam, and course
language, calling her a dog. [It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
cast it unto v. 26.
dogs.] All this he did for her probation and trial, to try and exercise her
faith. These ends God has in it.

Reason 2. By Satan to dishearten them.
2. Satan has other ends, viz. to discourage, dishearten the people of God, to
beat them off, and make them desist, and leave off their undertakings* and
therefore he endeavors to crush them in the Nnmb. 32*
shell, and nip them in the bud.

Applica. Fore-arme against discouragements.
Take we notice of it, and make use of it, that being forewarned, we may also
be fore-armed, against what ever discouragements we shall meet with. Not
disheartened by them. Alas, these are no new or wonted things, but such as Gods
people have frequent experience of. Let them not dull or rebate the edge of our
endeavors, but rather whet, and set them. Sour sauces in the beginning of a
meal, they whet the appetite. Even such use make we of what ever impediments
and discouragements shall encounter us in the entrance upon any pious, relgious
undertaking. Let them be rather as whets, to set an edge upon our resolutions.

Let not newcommers to Christ be discouraged.
And in particular, let it be useful to new beginners, new comers to Christ,
young Christians. At first conversion, when they do but begin to look toward
God and Christ, they oftentimes meet with such entertainment, as these Infants
here did. They find course usage from the world; Course language (it may be,)
or an overly carriage from friends and acquaintance; mocks and checks from
others: And happily God himself (or Satan by his permission) may strew some
Murices, some Caltraps, some crosses in their way. But let not all discourage,
still hold on. In the end, what ever the world does, be you assured, Christ
will smile upon you, and embrace you, as here he does these Infants. To pass
on.

These Infants were repulsed, and those which brought them checked. But by
whom? By the Disciples of Christ. [His Disciples rebuked those which brought
them.] What see we here?

Observe. Holy men may stand in the way of* religious undertakings.
Even good men, holy and gracious men, may sometimes be impedements to pious
and Religious undertakings.] It was Peter that assayed to persuade his Master
not to go up to Jerusalem. [Master favor thy self.] Here was an assay to
hinder the best work that ever was done, (the work of our Redemption,) and
that by Matt. 16. 22.
an eminent Saint, an eminent Apostle. Here in the Text the Apostles, whose
office it was to win and bring all sorts o^ persons unto Christ, yet they
prohibit these children, and rebuke those which brought them. Thus good men
sometimes may be back-friends to good causes. This God permits; this Satan
incites to; this holy men yield to. See a Reason for each.

Reason 1. God permits it.
First, God permits it to the end that our faith (as the Apostle speaks)
should not stand in the wisdom of men; nor yet in the holiness of men. That we
may learn not to make either the Judgment, or Practice of man our Rule; our
Rule to believe by, our Rule to walk by.

Secondly, Satan incites to it, the rather making use Satan incites to it;
making use of such instruments because least suspected.
of these Instruments, because least suspected, and consequently most prevalent.
Thus at the first he made use of the Woman in tempting the Man. Adam could not
naturally suspect his own flesh; he could not suspect that poison should be
reached forth to him by such a hand. None so likely to persuade with him, as
his wife was. Upon a like ground it is, that Satan makes use of pious and
godly persons, in crossing and hindering some pious undertakings. Thus he made
use of Peter, to take off his Master. So much our Savior there expresses,
[Get thee behind Matt. 16. 23.
me Satan*] It was Satan that spoke in, and by Peter; making use of him as his
Instrument in suggesting and conveying that temptation. And wherefore of him?
Why, he thought if any could prevail with Christ, Peter might as soon, or
sooner than any.

Holy men yield to it. because they know but in part.

1 Cor. 13. 9.


3. As God permits, and Satan incites, so* holy men sometimes yield, and become
instruments to God, and Satan in these services (or rather dis-services) in
hindering of good: and that because they know but in part. It was so with the
Disciples here. In prohibiting these children, they act according to their
knowledge. They did not know their Masters mind concerning them; and thereupon
they did what they did. Thus is it with good and holy men, they are sometimes
Remoraes, back-stayes to a work, that tends to the glory of Christ, and good
of his Church. Whence is it? not from any ill will they bear to either; but
because they are not fully informed touching the mind of Christ* they are not
perfectly Acts 19. 25.
instructed in the way of the Lord; wherein they walk according to their light.

Applica. Make not the judgment or practice of others, a rule to believe, or
walk by.
Make use of it briefly, even that which I have already given you a hint of.
Learn we hence, not to pin our faith or obedience upon other men's sleeves, not
to make the Judgment or practice of others (whatever they be) a Rule, a
Standard for us to believe, or walk by. A very common error in these un-setled
times. How many well-meaning souls are there every where, that bottom their
faith upon the wisdom, or upon the piety and holiness of men? Take we heed
of it; Knowing that if we shall sail by this Compass, we may be on ground
before we are aware. Romans 3.
You know who spoke it. Let God be true, and every man a liar. God only is
infallible, and his Word an infallible Rule. As for men, the wisest, the
learnedest, the holiest, they are all liars, and that both actively, and
passively, subject to deceive, and be deceived. Take we heed therefore of
trying truth by this touchstone, of weighing truth in this balance, by these
weights; To the Word, to the Word. That will not, that cannot deceive. Humane
judgment, humane practice may, though in persons never so eminent.

Take heed then how we be prejudiced against truth, because such or such
assent not to it. Take heed how we let in error, because such or such embrace,
and entertain it. Surely, it is one of the prevailing Arguments of the times,
that has misled and seduced many, to the receiving and embracing of diverse
dangerous errors; even the good opinion and high esteem which they have had of
some who have gone in those ways.

Anabaptists misled with an opinion of the piety of their leaders*
I will instance but in one, that which the Text leads me to, viz. The error
of the Anabaptists in denying Baptism unto children: An error which spreads
far and nigh in the Kingdom, to the present disquietment, to the future
danger of the Church. Many in all places carried away with it. And what is it
that so prevails with them for the sucking in of this error? why, surely
nothing more than the high opinion which they have of those who stand up in
this cause; an opinion of their singular piety, zeal, knowledge. They are
knowing Christians* forward and Zealous Christians, close walking Christians,
such as desire to come to the Rule, and to follow Christ close. Such they
apprehend them to be. (And I will not deny, but some such may be found amongst
them.) And hereupon they make their judgments, and practice a standard, a
pattern to themselves. Surely (say they) it cannot be but that they should
be in the right; A knowing people, a praying people, etc.

Ans. To meet with this Error, do but look upon this instance in the Text,
and see who they were that prohibited these children from coming unto Christ,
and rebuked those which brought them. They were not Scribes and Pharisees. They
were not superstitious, or blind, ignorant, or yet wicked and profane
persons. No, they were Disciples, followers of Christ, those who by reason of
their constant attendance upon Christ, and familiar acquaintance with him, one
would have thought should have understood his mind sooner than any, yet they
fall into this very error; they would not have children brought unto Christ,
for which they are reproved of their Lord and Master.

I doubt not, but even amongst that Sect which I am now speaking against, there
may be some pious, devout, humble Christians, (though I fear not many, for in
most of them you shall see a spirit of pride and disdain, and bitterness
against all that do not walk by their light, but some such I hope there are)
some Disciples of Christ, who do follow Christ according to their light, in the
simplicity and uprightness of their hearts. Now what though they debar
children from coming unto Christ, and rebuke th^se which bring them, finding
fault with the received practice of all the Churches in Baptizing of Infants?
What then? Shall we presently hearken unto them? Nay rather hearken unto
Christ; so do these women here in the text. The disciples prohibit, rebuke
them, bid them be gone with their children. But Christ he incourageth them,
he invits them. And to him they harken not to his disciples. Suppose the
adversaries to childrens Baptism be some of them disciples of Christ, never so
pious, never so zealous, never so eminent for grace, for holiness, yet hearken
we rather to their master, then to them; to him inviting, rather then to them
prohibiting. [The disciples rebuked those which brought them.]

Object. The ground of this act of the disciples, not malice, or envy, but 1
Cor. 13. 4.
But upon what ground did the disciples this. What did they it out of malice?
Out of envy? Were they unwilling that these Infants should receive any benefit
from Christ? Surely not so. Charity envies not: Grace is communicative,
willing and desirous that others should have a share in the same Christ, and in
the same benefits by Christ; whence was it then?

Surely out of Ignorance, and out of blind-zeale. 1 Out of ignorance, ignorance
of these two things. Ignorance, of two things.

1. Of the need that these Infants had of Christ.




1. They did not apprehend what need these Infants had of Christ. Not being
troubled (as is most probably) with any bodily infirmity, they did not see
what should occasion this their address. [The whole need not the physician but
the sick.] Had they been sick Matthew. 9. 12.
and diseased, questionless the disciples would have admitted them as readily
as they had done others; but being sound and hayle, they put them back, as
apprehending them to have no need of Christ.

2. As they apprehended that they had no need of Christ, so (probably) they did
not conceive how 2. How they were capable of receiving benefit by him.
they were capable of any benefit by him* Those which came unto Christ,
ordinarily they came for one of these ends, to be benefited by him either in
their bodies, or in their souls. In their bodies by his miracles; in their
^oules by his doctrine. Now as for the former of these, these Infants had no
need of it; and for the latter they were not capable of it; and consequently
the disciples could not see what they should be the better for coming to
Christ, and thereupon Applica. The Anabaptists grounds in denying Baptism unto
Infants, the same with these of the disciples.

1. Because Infants have no need of it.


repel them, keep them back*

And are not these the very grounds, the chief grounds that the Anabaptists
go upon at this day, in debatting children from the Sacrament of Baptism? 1.
They have no need of Baptism (say they.) And 2. They are not capable of
benefit by it.

1. They have no need of Baptism. How so? In as much as they are free from
original sin, (that is the doctrine of the complete Anabaptist.) Infants
(say they) do not stand charged with Adams sin. And as for any sin of
their own, whether original, Di^^g Anab* integ Ereunen ^ Od^go^*
or actual, they are not guilty of it. Original sin in Infants (faith one of
their books) it was but a Romish invention, (...) and set a foot by those
Antichristian factors, that so they might have an occasion to extol, and
de^^^e their queen of heaven, the virgin Mary, whom alone amongst all the
posterity of Adam, they exempt from that common condition. Now being free from
sin (say they) from the guilt of sin, and from the stain of sin, what need
have they of this laver, which is ordained for the washing away of sins? Act
22. 16.
[Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,] (says Ananias to Paul.)
The poole of ^eth^sda that miraculous has, it was proper for lepers, and
cripples, and such other diseased bodies; as for others they received no
benefit by it. And so is it with this spiritual, this heavenly bath, it is
appointed for leprous, sinsick-soules, not for Infants who are not troubled
with any such maladies.

2. They are not capable of benefit by Baptism.
Again secondly, as they have no need of Baptism, so what benefit can they
receive by it, or from it, being void, and destitute of understanding, of
reason, and consequently of faith, upon which depends the efficacy of this,
and all other the ordinances of God. Heb. 4. 2.
This it is that qualifieth a person for the Sacrament Act. 8. 37.
of Baptism, his faith in Christ. If thou believe, thou maiest] (says
Phillip to the Eunuch.) And this it is that draws virtue, and benefit from
the ordinance, which without this is rendered wholly ineffectually.

These are their reasonings; and are they not (for substance) the very same
with the supposed reasonings of the disciples here in the text? They would not
have the Infants brought unto Christ, Why? They had no need of him, being in
perfect health, free from sickness; and they could receive no benefit by him,
being void of understanding. Even thus says the Anabaptist, what should
children be brought to Baptism? They have no need of it, being free from
sin* neither can they have any benefit by it, being void of faith.

Both err, not knowing the scriptures.
Now to both these we may say, as our blessed Savior once did to the Sadduces
in an other case, when they represented to him their mis-apprehensions touching
the Doctrine of the Resurrection. [Yee err (says he) not knowing the
scriptures, nor the power Matthew. 22. 29*
Matthew. 22. 29 So did the disciples.
of God.] Surely so did the disciples here in repulsing these Infants, they
erred not knowing the scriptures. Psalm. 8. 2.
The scriptures would have told them, that out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings God has ordained himself praises, Psalm. 8. The scripture would have
told them, Psalm. 22. 9,
that God makes Infants to hope whilst they hang upon their mothers breasts,
and that he is their God from their mothers (...) Psalm 22. The scripture could
have told them what their Lord and master had said; All that Ioh. 6. 7.
the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me I will
in no wife cast out, Joh. 6. As also what he had done, and that but a little
before this act Matthew. 18. 2.
of theirs. How he had expressed his affection to Infants, by taking one, and
setting it in the midst amongst them, propounding him as a pattern for their
imitation. This they either knew not, or remembered not, or considered not. Thus
they erred not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of Jesus Christ, how he
was able to communicate his virtue to Infants, as well as any others.

So do the Anabaptists Psalm. 51. Ephesians. 2.
Even so do the Anabaptists at this day. They err, not knowing the
scriptures, which will inform them, that children are conceived in sin, and
brought forth in iniquity; and are by nature children of wrath, and
consequently, have need of Christ, and of this ordinance of Christ: Nor yet
knowing the power of God, how he is able to make this ordinance effectual unto
them, though for the present destitute of actual faith. Here is the first
ground of this error in the disciples; ignorance, misapprehension.

2. Blind zeal for their masters
The second is not much unlike, viz. their blinde-Zeale; zeal for their
master; 1. For his honor; 2. For his ease, both which probably they had an eye
at.

Honor.
First, his Honor. They thought it dishonorable to their Lord and Master,
that he should be troubled with such Clients. Non vacat exiguis. -- Had they
been Kings and Princes, or persons of quality, such as those three Wisemen of
the East were, that brought Matt. 2.
Presents to him in his Cradle. Had they been persons that came to do him
homage, to put any temporal honor upon him; had they brought a Crown to put
upon his head, to make him a King. Now Calvin. Harm. ad l^c.
(says Calvin) in all likelihood they should have been welcome, none more.
For, ^his it was that had dazeled the Disciples eyes; even a mis apprehension
of a temporal kingdom, which they expected, and Matt. 20. 21. Acts 1. 6.
hoped their Master would take upon him. Whereupon, what ever made and tended
that way, they were ready to embrace it. In the mean time, not understanding
that the Kingdom of Christ was not John 18. 36.
of this world; which if they had, in likelihood they would not have repulsed
these Infants as they did, as if it would have been a disparagement to their
Lord and Master, to have any thing to do with them.

Ease.
2. They had an eye herein to his ease; they saw that their master wanted no
work, no employment already, so many of all sorts flocking unto him, as that
he had scarce leisure to take his repast for them. Now if Infants also should
be admitted, they feared he would be overcharged, over-burdened.

These were their thoughts (as Expositers most rationally, and probably
conjecture.) Certainly however, Observe. Two dangerous counselors and guides.
some carnal reasoning it was, seconded with a blind-Zeale, that made them do
what they did. [Two dangerous things to consult with, and to be led by in the
matters of Christ]

consult with carnal reason; Carnal reason.
To make sense and reason sit as Judges upon Christ, and upon the mysteries of
the Kingdom of God. Surely, this it is that has brought a world of errors
into the world. Men will not submit to the judgment of the Word, but they will
call in carnal reason to advise with. Hence are most of the errors in the
Church of Rome at this day. Their Bread-worship, wherein they think they do a
special honor unto Christ, in falling down before the consecrated Host,
being Transubstantiated, turned into the Body of Christ (as they conceive.)
Their Saint-worship, wherein again they think they do great honor unto
Christ, in not coming unto him immediately, but making use of
Court-favourites, Saints or Angels as their mediators to make their way, and
present their Petions for them. This do they by this means fancy a new
Christ unto themselves, taking from him that which properly belongs to him,
and attributing to him that which is heterogeneall, not agreeable, but
dishonorable to his nature.

From the same fountain spring many of the errors of the times. Socinian and
Arminian errors generally all of them. Anabaptisticall errors many of them.
They judge of divine mysteries, decrees, ordinances, not by faith submitting to
the Word, but by sense and reason. A dangerous Counselor in these matters, not
to be hearkened to without, much less against the Word.

2. And as reason is a dangerous Counselor, so blinde-zeale is a dangerous
guide. This was that Ignisfatuus Blind-zeale.
that led Paul's Countrymen (the Jews) wild, that led them into those bogs and
quicksands of legal Ceremonies, and ran them on ground upon the main of their
own legal righteousness. They had a Zeal of Romans 10. 20*
God, (or for God) but not according to knowledge,] (as the Apostle tells
them.) And this it is that mis-leadeth many poor devout souls in the Church
of Rome, (whose case is to be pitied,) putting them upon all their
superstitious will worship, wherein they take a great deal of pains to go to
heaven, more than the most of us do. They have a Zeal of God, of Christ, but
not according to knowledge. And surely, this is the grand-seducer amongst us at
this day, that which misleadeth a multitude of well-meaning souls in this
Kingdom, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seperatists. They stand for Christ, whom
they desire to have exalted, and (as they think) for the ordinances of Christ,
which they desire to have set up with the greatest purity and simplicity. And
herein they show themselves Zealous, I, (...) (as Paul said of himself Gal. 1*
1^*
before his conversion) more exceedingly Zealous; but alas, their zeal is not
according to knowledge. Even as the Disciples here, they have a Zeal for their
Master, as for his ease, so for his honor; and thereupon they keep back
these Infants from coming to him. But it was not according to knowledge, a
blinde-Zeale. By this means (contrary to their intentions) they came to
dishonor him whom they intended to honor. For wherein lies the honor of a
Prince more than in the multitude of Subjects? [In the Prove. 14. 28.
multitude of people, is the Kings honor.] No one thing more honorable unto
Christ, than to have multitudes of all sorts of persons, both old and young,
repayring and resorting to him, and receiving benefit by him. To keep back
any of these from coming to him, is an act not more injurious to the persons
so repulsed, than dishonorable unto him.

Like issues and fruits of blinde-Zeale are but too observable amongst some of
the Sectaries of the times, who in pretending to advance and exalt Christ, do
in truth debase and dishonor him. In pretending to set up his Ordinances, they
rather pull them down* destroying what they pretend, and intend to build.

Of such dangerous consequence is it to be led by such a guide. A fiery hot
mettalled horse wanting his eyes is but dangerous to the Rider, specially if
the reins be cast upon his neck. And such is blind-Zeale to a well-meaning,
but ignorant soul, being given way to, it will run a man upon precipices, and
downfalls, which shall neither be honorable unto God, nor safe to himself.

All of us take heed of this Guide. Be Zealous, but let it be 1. in a good
matter. And 2ly. in a right manner. To that end regulating our zeal by the
Word. Psalm. 119. 133. verse. 105.
It is David's prayer, [Lord order my steps in thy Word.] And it was his
practice, to make the Word a light unto his feet, and a lantern unto his
paths.] Herein let him be our pattern; knowing that they are not good
intentions that will bear out unwarrantable practices. The Disciples intention
here (no question) it was good, but yet their act reprovable. They rebuke
others, and Christ rebukes them. So it follows.

Verse. 14. But when Jesus saw it, he was displeased, and said unto them, suffer
little children to come unto me, etc.


Acts 3. Our Saviors Arbitration; wherein 3. particulars.
COme we now to the third and last Act in this History. In the two former, we
have the controversy betwixt the Disciples, and those which brought these
Infants. In this, we have our Saviors arbitration, and decision of that
controversy. Wherein we may take notice of three particulars; Our Saviors
Affection, Speech, Action. What he thought of this act of his Disciples; what
he said to it; what he did upon it. 1. His Affection. [He was displeased.] 2.
His Speech to his Disciples; wherein we have a Charge, and a Reason for it. His
Charge, [Suffer little children to come unto me, etc.] The Reason of that
Charge, first propounded; [for of such is the Kingdom of God;] then confirmed
and illustrated by an argument a majori, from the greater to the less;
[Veriby, I say unto you, whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God as a
little child, etc.] 3ly, His Act, which is threefold, all toward these
Infants. 1. His susception, [he took them in his arms.] 2ly, His Imposition
of hands, [he laid his hands upon them. 3ly, His Benediction, [he blessed
them.] Of these in their order. His affection, what he thought of this act of
his Disciples.


Begin with the first, wherein the History expresses our Saviors affection,
what he thought of this act of his Disciples. (...) [when he saw it, he was
displeased; (much displeased) (says our new Translation.) Indigne tulit, says
the vulgar, he took it ill at their hands. Indignatus est (says Beza) he
looked upon it with indignation. What see we here?

Obser. Good intentions will not bear out unwarrantable actions.

2 Samuel 6. 6. Mat. 16. 23.


Good intentions will not bear out un-warrant able actions.] Uzzah had no ill
thought in putting his hand to the Arc, yet you know how it was taken. Peter
had no evil meaning in advising his Master to favor himself* yet you know
what a tart rebuke he received, [Get thee behind me Satan.] The Disciples
here, in keeping back these Infants, they had an eye at their Masters both
ease, and honor; yet they have no thanks for their labor. Their Master is so
far from accepting of that their officious service, that he distastes it, he
was much displeased with it.

Applica. Let not Wilworship look for acceptance with God.
Let Will Worship never look for better acceptance at the hands of God.
Voluntary services which men perform unto God without the rule, what ever the
intentions of the performers may be; or what ever show of wisdom or holiness
in the things themselves, God will never own them, never accept them. I doubt
not, but it was a devout and Religious intention that first hatched and
bredmost of that Will Worship, which is to be found in the Church of Rome at
this day. Their Bread-worship, their Saint-worship, their Image Worship, they
intended the honor of Christ in all. All their pompious and costly Ceremonies,
they were introduced upon this ground, to put honor upon Religion. The
intention good, but the services unwarrantable, being without, or against the
rule, and consequently shall find no better entertainment at the hand of
Christ, than this act of the Disciples did.

Would we be sure our services shall find acceptance, be first sure of a
warrant (Gods warrant) for what we do. Otherwise, what ever show of love, or
wisdom there may seem to be in them, we shall but lose our labor. Instead
of pleasing God, displeasing him. So says the Text of this act of the
Disciples here; [When Jesus saw it, he was displeased.]

And wherefore displeased? what was it that he The ground of Christ's
displeasure.
took so ill at their hands? A. For answer; See a threefold ground of this
displeasure, even a threefold injury involved in this one act of the
Disciples. viz. A threefold injury offered by his Disciples.
An injury 1. to the Children; 2ly, to those which brought them. 3ly, to Christ
himself. Touch upon each.

To the Infants, in keeping them from Christ.

Observe. The greatest injury.

Use 1 This injury charged upon Anabaptists.


First, Here was an injury offered to these poor Infants, prejudiced, and (as
much as in them lay) hindered in the matter of their salvation. A greater
injury they could not have done them.

Appl. Let Anabaptists look to it, who debar children from Baptism. Herein
what do they but as much as in them lies, debar them from coming unto
Christ? debar them from union and communion with him? The greatest cruelty that
can be exercised upon these innocent Lambs. Non est hoc Christianum (says
Ferus in Mat* c. 19. v. 13.
one writing upon this History) sed plane Herodianum, vel* si mavi^ Aegyptiacum.
This is so far from Christian charity, that it is rather Herodian, or (if you
will) Egyptian cruelty. Cruelty exercised not only upon the bodies, but upon
the souls also of poor Infants. Certainly, what ever the Anabaptists thinks
of it, this is a thing which Christ cannot take well at their hands. He that
was so displeased with his Disciples for keeping back these children for
coming to him upon earth, will not be well pleased with any that shall have
any hand in hindering them from coming to him being now in Heaven. No one thing
that Christ takes worse at the hands of any, than to be hindrances to others
in coming to himself.

Use 2. Take need of hindering the salvation of any; Mat. 18. 6.
In the fear of God take we heed of it, of being any ways accessory to so
great an evil. Express and dreadful is that Commination of our Saviors,
Mat. 18 verse. 6. Who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe on
me, it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the midst of of the sea.] Off end one of these little ones,
(...), Scandalize them, lay stumbling-blockes in their way for them to stumble
at, to impede and hinder them in their salvation. No one thing that Christ
takes more heinously than this. So much may be collected from the punishment
there mentioned. Better that a millstone were tied about his neck, etc.] That,
it Hicro^^. ad loc.
seems, (as Jerome notes upon it) was the usual punishment where with the
Jews were wont in those times to punish the most Capital offenders, viz. Tie
a stone about their necks, and so plunge them into the water. No crime more
heinous in the eye of God, than this; the scandalizing, offending any that do
but begin to look toward Christ, and toward heaven; so to offend them, as
that they should be put off from Christ, as that the work of their salvation
should any ways be hindered. All of us beware John 1. 41. 42.
of it.

If we can any ways be furtherances to others in bringing them to Christ,
this do we. So did Andrew to his brother Simon, having himself found the
Messia, verse 45. 46.
he brings his brother to him. So did Philip to Nathaniel. So did the Samaritane
woman to other of John 4. 28, 29.
her friends and neighbors. Do we the like. The best office that we can
perform to any. But take heed of hindering them, whether by our evil counsel,
Which may be done three ways.
or evil example, or else by the abuse of our Christian liberty in things
indifferent. Every of these three ways men may be, and often are hindered
from coming unto Christ.

First, By evil counsel. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees By evil counsel.
the days of his flesh, from believing on him, viz. by their pernicious
counsels, and wicked suggestions, whereby they set them off what they could.

Secondly, By evil example. So did some of the scandalous Jews, who made
their boast of the Law, but By evil example.
no conscience of it; they thereby brought an evil report upon the ways of
God, making the name of God evil spoken of among the Gentiles, (as the Apostle
Romans 2. 23. 24.
charge it upon them) Romans 2. And thus do scandalous Christians at this day,
who do Gentes agere subnomine Christi, bear the name of Christians, but live
like Heathens, walking counter to their profession, they make the name of God
evil spoken of amongst those which are wicked, confirming and hardening them
in their wickedness. Even as the Spaniards in the Indies, who by their horrid
cruelties which they exercised upon the Natives there, they so prejudiced them
against Christ, and his Religion, as that they professed their willingness
rather to go to hell with their own Countrymen, then to heaven with the
Spaniards.

abuse of Christian liberty in things indifferent. By the abuse of Christian
liberty.
Hereby also Christians come to give offense unto others, laying stumbling
blocks in their way. Of this I shall speak some what more fully hereafter.
Every of us take heed of every of these. Knowing that we cannot do a greater
wrong or injury to any, then to be any ways a cause, or occasion of hindering
them from coming unto Christ. Here was the first error in this act of the
disciples; they were hereby injurious to these Infants themselves.

2. Injury to those who brought these Infants, discouraging of them.
2. They were injurious to those that brought them. By checking, and rebuking
of them, they did as much as in them lay to take off the edge of their good
affections toward Christ, to weaken them, to dishearten, and discourage them.
A thing very improper for the disciples to do. It being their office to
confirm, and strengthen those which were weak. That is the charge which our
blessed Savior gives unto Peter. Luke 22. 32.
When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. This they should have done.
No wonder then that our Savior was displeased with them; to see and hear them
disheartning, checking, those whom they should have encouraged, and
strengthened.

Applica. Take heed of discouraging or offending the weak brethren; Job 4. 3, 4.
This also take we heed of. If we can any ways promote, and further the work
of grace in any, by encouraging, strengthening; this do we. So did holy Job
in his time, (as Eliphaz gives the attestation to him.) Job 4. Behold thou
have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands; Thy words
have upholden him that was fallen, and thou have strengthened the feeble
knees.] The like do we according to ability and opportunity. But take heed of
disheartning, discouraging, weakening. It is a thing which Jesus Christ will not
do, [A bruised reed shall he not break, and the Isaiah 42. 3. Math. 12. 20.
smoking flax will he not quench.] Take heed how we do it, or be any ways
accessory to it. Take heed of being any ways offensive to our weak brother.
Whether it be 1. By word, as the disciples here; or 2ly. By evil example, as
Peter by his Judaizing, and dislembling; 2 Gal. 12. 13.
or else 3ly. By the abuse of our Christian liberty in the use of things
indifferent.

Specially by the abuse of Christian liberty.

1 Cor. 8. 9.


This oft-times proves matter of scandal unto others. And such scandals take
we heed of. It is Paul's caveat to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8. Take heed lest by
any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are
weak.] In this case Christians must restrain, and abridge themselves, not doing
what otherwise they may do: exemplary is that resolution of the Apostle in the
last v. of that Chapter. [If meat v. last.
scandilize my brother, (offend him, so as to make him to offend, which is
properly to scandalize) I will eat no flesh while the world stands, that I
may not scandalize my brother.] Christians in this should be very tender, very
careful how they offend, or grieve their weak brother by the use of their
Christian liberty; much more how they cause, or occasion him to offend. [It is
good (says the Apostle to his Romans) Romans 14. 2^.
neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak*] Three several words expressing
(as I conceive) one and the same thing, but not without an emphasis,
insinuating the great and special care that Christians should have for giving
any kind of scandal to their weak brethren, whereby either to grieve their
spirits, or distract and unsettle their judgments, or much more to cause them
to offend, by stopping them in, or turning them aside out of their way. This
take we heed of, do all that we can to further others in their way, take heed
of hindering, stopping, diverting them. Cherish and blow up the sparks of
grace in others what we can; but beware of casting a drop of water upon them,
either to dampe or quench them. This was the disciples fault here in the text.
Instead of welcoming and encouraging, and furthering these new-comers unto
Christ, they beat them off. A thing which their Lord and master takes ill at
their hands. [He was displeased with it.] Here was the second injury involved
in this act of the disciples: They were injurious to the persons which brought
3. Injury to Christ himself; hindering his Kingdom.
these children: Thirdly they were herein injurious to their Lord and master,
Christ himself; and that in going about to straiten his jurisdiction, and
lessen his Kingdom. Of this Kingdom, Infants and children are a considerable
part. Now to keep them from coming unto Christ, what a dimunition was it to his
Kingdom?

Applic. Charged upon Anabaptists.
Surely this wrong do Anabaptists unto Christ in debarring children from
Baptism, and denying them to be members of the Church, and to have any right
to the Covenant of grace. Herein how injurious are they to the Kingdom of
Christ? In cutting off so considerable a part from all communion with the head,
and body; Christ, and his Church. The story tells us of the Israelites, when
they had done the great execution upon the Benjamites. [They sat down and
wept, repenting them for Benjamin their brother, because there was a Tribe cut
off from Israel that day, Judge. last.] And what less does the Anabaptist in
cutting off Infants from communion with Christ and his Church? In so doing
there is a Tribe cut off from Israel; which though it be the Tribe of Benjamin;
the youngest Tribe, yet is it not the least, but a very great and considerable
part of this body. This act of theirs calls for repentance. To which leaving
them.

Use 2. Take heed of being back-friends to this Kingdom by withdrawing our
selves or others from visible communion with the Church. Heb. 10. 38.
Take we heed lest any of us come under the same guilt, in any other kind
least we be any ways back-friends to the Kingdom of Christ, by with- drawing
our selves, or others from visible communion with the misteriall body of
Christ. Our selves. [If any man withdraw himself, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, Heb. 10.] Others, by seducing them, drawing them from visible
communion with Christ in his Ordinances. What is this but a dismembring of the
body of Christ? A thing which he cannot but be sensible of. I wish they may so
be, who stand guilty of it. David when he had but cut off the lap from 1 Samuel
24. 5, 6.
Saul's garment (the skirt of his role) his heart smote him. What is it then to
cut off a lamb from the body of Christ? Take we heed of having any hand in
it.

Let all seek the enlargement of this Kingdom; Specially Ministers, Luke 14.
21.
Can we do any thing to enlarge, and increase the Kingdom of Christ, this
do we. And as all ought to do it, so the Ministers of Christ in special;
whom Christ has sent forth with the same commission, as that great feast-maker
in the Gospel did his servant, ordering him to go into the streets and lanes,
and high ways, and hedge rows, and to bring in all that he met with,
compelling them to come in, that his house might be filled.] This are we the
Ministers of Christ to do. Invite, persuade, command, compel, (I mean in a
spiritual way, making use of spiritual 2 Gor. 10. 4. Inviting and compelling
men to come unto Christ.
weapons, which are the weapons of our warfare, viz. the sword of the spirit put
into our mouths) compel men, all sorts of persons to come in unto Jesus
Christ, that they may have communion with him, and benefit by him.

Quest. Whether men may be forced to visible communion.

Answ. No, they must come willingly Psalm. 110. 3.


But what then, must men be forced to come unto Christ? To have communion with
him in his Ordinances, though against, or without, their wills?

Not so. Thy people shall be willing (or come willingly) in the day of thy
power.] They which come to Christ must come willingly. So did they which
brought these Infants here in the text. This is the maine work of the
ministers of Christ, to work upon the wills of men, of unwilling to make them
willing; to bring off their wills to desire and seek communion with Christ;
that they may come, and come willingly.

Object. Are all to be admitted who offer themselves to visible communion Answ.
Yes, unless there be some just obstacle.
But what if they do come, and come willingly, offering, and tendering
themselves to visible communion with Christ? are they now to be received,
admitted to the Ordinances?

Surely yes. Unless there be some just obstacle to hinder them. That was the
case of these Infants here in the text. They were brought unto Christ, and
the^e was no just obstacle to hinder them, and therefore the disciples ought
not to have kept them back. No more (for ought I know) ought the Ministers of
Christ to repel, and reject any who come willingly unto Christ, desiring
communion with him in his ordinances, I mean in the Sacraments, whether
Baptism, or the Lords Supper. There being no just obstacle, no just exception
against them, they ought not to keep them back. True it is, where there is a
just obstacle, as, viz. where the person is ignorant, or scandalous, in this
case there ought to be a suspension from these ordinances: Sacred things ought
not to be prostituted to all comers. But otherwise, I see not how the ministers
of Christ can debar any from visible communion with Christ, who offer
themselves to it, without incurring the displeasure of their Lord and master,
as here the disciples did, by putting back these Infants against whom no just
exception lay. [When he saw it, (...), he was much displeased, saying, suffer
little children to come unto me, etc.]

2. Our Saviors speech to h^s disciples: Where
And so I am fallen upon the second particular observable in this History,
which informs us what our Savior said to his disciples upon this act of
theirs. Where we may first take notice of the charge he 1. His charge to them.
gives them, viz. that they should freely permit children to come unto him.
[Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not.] A double charge,
or rather one and the same charge expressed, 1. Positively, [suffer little
children, etc.] Then Negatively, [And forbid them not.] The latter is but an
inforcement of the former. Put them together, they hold forth unto us this
maine truth. Observe. The grace of Christ reaches unto ^nfants.


That the grace of Christ extends even ^^to Infants. Infants have a right to,
and interest in Christ, and are capable of benefit by him as well as others.
Wherefore else should Christ call them unto himself? So he did (as St. Luke
notes it) But Jesus Luke 8. 16.
called them unto him.] Them, i. e. the Infants; So the Greek expresses it.
(...): viz. (...). And wherefore else should he give so strict a charge
concerning them, that they should have free access unto him? Had he no
interest in them, nor they in him. Surely the grace of Christ reaches them as
well as others.

Reason.

Otherwise no hope of salvation for them.

1 Cor. 15. 22.


It must needs be so, otherwise there were no hope of salvation for them. In
Adam (the first Adam) all dyed. The root dying, all the branches dyed in it,
and with it. So as now the whole posterity of Adam are all concluded and shut
up under death. [Death Rom 5. 12.
passed upon all, for that all have sinned, (says the Apostle.) All subject to
a temporal, lying under the power of a spiritual, bound over unto an eternal
death. Such amongst other) is the condition of Infants; which appears in that
they are subject to temporal death as well as others. [Death reigned Rom* 5.
14.
from Adam unto Moses even ^ver them which had not sinned after the similitude
of Adams transgression.] i. e. over Infants who had not sinned as Adam did,
actually in their own persons. Yet death reigned over them, they were subject
to a temporal death as well as others. A plain evidence that they were, and
are guilty of eternal death as well as others. Now there is no way, no means
of deliverance, no way to be freed and exempted from this common condition, but
by Christ. [Even as in Adam 1* ^o^* 15. 22.
all died, so in Christ shall all bemade alive,] (says the Apostle) i. e. all
that are in him. Even as all that were in the first Adam dyed in him; so all
that are in the second Adam (Christ) shall be quickened in him. Or, all that
are made alive, they are made alive in Christ, and by Christ. Freed from
eternal death Ioh. 14. 6.
by his merit; from spiritual death by his Spirit; from temporal death by his
Power. [I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.] No life, but in, by, and
through the second Adam, Christ. So as if Infants ever come to eternal life,
they must come by, and through Christ, as Act. 4. 12.
well as others. There being no name by which Salvation can be expected, but
only the name of Jesus Christ.

Object. Infants cannot come unto Christ, ^rg^ not capable of benefit by him.

Ioh. 6. 37.


But how can Infants, have any interest in Christ, or receive any benefit by
him, when as they cannot come unto him? This our blessed Savior says, all
that his Father has given him must do, and shall do. [All that the Father
gives me, shall come unto me, etc.] Now, what is it to come unto Christ? Why
to believe on him. So our Savior himself explaineth it Veers. 35.
verse. 35. [He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes
on me shall never thirst.] The latter explaines the former. To come unto
Christ, is to believe on him. Now this Infants cannot do. How then can they be
said to have any interest in Christ, or receive any benefit by him?

Sol. 1.
Answ. To this it is answered diversely. Some in the (first place) conceive that
in this case the faith of the Parents is sufficient. Hereby the children of
believers (say they) are brought unto Christ, even as these children here; they
were brought unto Christ The faith of the Parent conceived sufficient*
in the arms of their Parents* so are Infants (say they) brought home unto
Christ, in the arms of their Parents faith, laying hold upon the Covenant of
grace, both for themselves, and their children.

Infants are Infants may have a seed of Faith.
subjects capable of faith; if not of actual, yet of habi^^all faith. Germen
fidei, a seed of faith; the Spirit of God working in them promodulo, according
to their capacities. Hereof I have spoken more fully heretofore.

Being given to Christ, they shall be brought to him one way or other.
it be sufficient that some of them are given unto Christ in Gods eternal
Election. And being given unto him, they shall come unto him one way, or other.
(All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me.) If they live to years of
discretion, they shall come unto him (as I may say) upon their own feet, by an
actual faith. In the mean time they are brought unto him by a secret work of
the Spirit, working upon their natures in a hidden and mysterious way, for the
changing and ren^w^^g of them. Herein if we know not the way, yet let not us
question the thing, seeing we have so plain an expression from the mouth of
truth it self. Suffer little children to come unto me and, forbid them not.]

Applica. To Anabaptists.
Applic. A Charge, and a Prohibition, both so direct against the Anabaptists of
the times, as if they had been purposely intended against them. Whether our
blessed Savior did foresee what errors would spring up in these last times,
and so intended to make this as a Provision against them, I will not say. But
sure I am, a more direct Provision could not have been made. In denying
Baptism unto Infants, what do Anabaptists less than the Disciples here did?
even (as much as in them lies) forbid children to come unto Christ. Which act
of theirs, how distastefull it was to him, the first words of this verse
express, [Hee was displeased:] And how contrary to his mind, the like
practice is in any other, the latter words explain. [Suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not.]

For of such is the Kingdom of God.] Pass we now to our Saviors Reason*
whereby he convinces his Disciples The reason of this charge*
of their error, in repulsing these Infants, keeping them back from coming
unto him; and consequently (as much as in them lay) debarring them from entering
into that Kingdom; to which they have as good a right and title as any others.
[For of such is the Kingdom of God.]

Kingdom of God, 3. fold.
The Kingdom of God, (by way of Explication) in phrase of Scripture is
threefold, his Kingdom of Power, Grace, Glory. You have them all three put
together in that pithy doxologie; the close of the Lords Prayer; [Thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory*]

Of Power.
First, Gods Kingdom is his Kingdom of Power; powerful government which God
exercises, in, and over the world, and all the Creatures in it, all which are
subject to his Providence, even the least, and most contemptible amongst them.
The Sparrow Matt. 10. 29, 30.
upon the house top; the hair of our head, both of them numbered and ordered.
This universal Government is Gods Kingdom. [The Lord has prepared his Throne
in Psalm. 103. 19.
the Heavens, and in his Kingdom rules over all.] Psalm. Psalm. 145. 13.
103. viz. his Kingdom of Power. [Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
(says the Psalmist, Psalm. 148.) What Kingdom? why, his Kingdom of Verse. 11.
power. So he explaines himself, verse. 11. [They shall speak of the glory of
thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power.[

Of grace.
Secondly, Gods Kingdom is his Kingdom of Grace; even that special gracious
government, which he exercises over his Elect; whom having Predestined to
Grace, and Glory, he calls out of the world, to have union aad communion with
Jesus Christ the head of this Kingdom, guiding and governing them by his Word
and Spirit. Of this Kingdom, we find Mat. 6. 13.
frequent mention in the new Testament. [Seeke first the Kingdom of God (says
our blessed Savior) viz. his Kingdom of Grace. So the following words
explain it. [The K ngdome of God, and his Righteousness;] viz. Righteousness
of Justification, and Sanctification, wherein this Kingdom of Grace
consists. Romans 14. 17. Luke 17. 21.
[The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, (says the Apostle,) [The Kingdom of
God is within you, (faith our Savior.) His Kingdom of Grace.

Of glory.
Thirdly, Gods Kingdom is his Kingdom of Glory; even that glorious and blessed
estate, wherein himself reigns, and shall reign, with millions of Saints and
Angels unto all eternity, full of heavenly glory and Luke 12. 32.
felicity. Of this speaks our Savior. [Feare not little flock, it is your
Fathers will to give you a Kingdom; (...), the Kingdom, viz. the Kingdom of
Heaven, which is the Kingdom of God. [Know ye not 1 Cor. 6. 9.
(says the Apostle) that the un-righteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God.] A threefold Kingdom.

Quest. Now of which of these shall we understand our Savior here in the Text?

Answ. To this I might answer; not of one, but of all. Take it which way we
will, we shall find a Infants subjects of all these.
truth in it. [Of such is the Kingdom of God.]

First, His Kingdom of power. Infants they are subjects Of Gods Kingdom of
power.
a Providence, a special providence, and that both in the womb, and from the
womb. David acknowledges both as touching himself. [Thou have covered me
Psalm. 139. 13.
in my mothers womb: Psalm. 139. Thou art he that took me out of the womb:
Psalm. 22. verse. 9. I was cast upon Psalm. 22. 9. 10.
thee from the womb: verse. 10. etc.] It is God that preserves Infants in the
womb; It is he that brings out of the womb, in both which his Power and
and Providence are wonderfully manifested. And he it is that takes care of
them afterward, providing for them, as he does for other of his Creatures. He
Psalm. 147. 9.
that hears the young Ravens when they cry, much more hears the cries of
poor helpless Infants. [God has heard the voice of the Lad,] says the Angel
to Hagar Genesis 21. 17.
concerning her son Ishmael. Thus the cries of poor Infants come up to
heaven, prevailing oftentimes for themselves, sometimes for others. So did Ion.
4. 11.
the Infants at Nineveh, Jonas* 4 verse. last. Thus the Kingdom of Gods power
belongs, and reaches unto Infants. A consideration not un-usefull unto
Parents in respect of their children. But I will not dwell upon it. The phrase
in the Text, (though it takes in this, yet) it rises higher.

Secondly, In the second place, Infants, as they are Power, all of them; so of
Of the Kingdom of Grace.
his Kingdom of Grace, some of them. [Of such is the Kingdom of God,] viz. his
Kingdom of Grace, which consists as well of Infants, as any others. They may
Children of believing Parents, members of the Church 1 All of them of the
Church visible.

Romans 11. 16. Explained. verse. 21. Dr. Willet ad loc.


be subjects of this Kingdom, members of the Church.

First, Of the Church visible. So are all the children of believing Parents.
The Parents themselves being subjects of this Kingdom, visible members of this
mystical body, such are their children also. So the Apostle concludes it, Romans
11. If the root be holy, so are the Branches.] Where, by the Root we are to
understand, the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: By the Branches, the
people of the Jews, their lineall offspring, their natural branches, as they
are called v. 21. (...). From which expression, it is well collected by some,
that by the Root in that place, cannot be meant Christ (as Origin of old, and
our Anabaptists at this day would have it*) in as much as Christ has no such
natural Branches. His Branches are all Insititious, ingrafted, (...), Branches
not by nature, but by Grace. The Root there is Abraham, and other of the
Patriarchs, the Jews Progenitors: who are so called, not in regard of Calvin
ad loc.
their persons (as Calvin well notes upon it;) but in regard of the Promise
which was made to them, and to their seed. In respect of that Promise, that
Root was holy; holy, in respect of a federall holiness, the holiness of the
Covenant. Now the Root being such (says the Apostle) such are the Branches.
Their progenitors being in Covenant, such was their Posterity. Such were the
children of Abraham then, and such are the children of believers now. The one
being holy, so is the other. Holy, not in respect of any inherent quality of
holiness, but in respect of outward privileges, and prerogatives of grace,
grounded upon the Promise made to the faithful and their seed. The former
cannot, but the latter may, and does descend from Parent unto the child. A
wise man does not always Prove. 17. 21.
beget a wise son, communicating his wisdom Acts 22. 28.
to his child; But a freeman begets a free man. The child being borne free by
virtue of his fathers Charter. Thus, though inward holiness is not transmitted
from the Parent to the child, yet external holiness may, federall holiness
may. Thus Jews begat Jews, and Christians now beget Christians. Who yet are
such (let that be still taken notice of) not by virtue of natural generation,
but by virtue of the Covenant, the Promise which is made unto the faithful,
and their seed. Thus the Root being holy, so also are the Branches. The Parents
being in Covenant, so are their children to be accounted. They are all of them
members of the Church visible.

Some of them of the Church Invisible.
Secondly, I, and some of them of the Church Invisible, Election of grace, but
subjects of his Kingdom of grace: Such as Christ exercises a gracious
government upon, and in; Regenerating, Justifying, Sanctifying them, induing
them with his holy Spirit. That Christ does exercise such an operation in, and
upon some Infants, it must not be denied. Two instances are usually brought to
prove it, the one of Jeremy, the other of John the Baptist, both which are said
to be sanctified in the Iere. 1. 5.
womb. So was Jeremy. [Before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee.]
But this (I consesse) I dare not build upon. By [Sanctification.] I take there
to be meant only a separation unto a special use and service. So the next
words seem to expound it. [I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a Prophet unto
the Nations.] That seems to (...) the (...) spoken of. Not any infusion of
any (...) of grace into Calvin ad loc.
his soul, (that faith Mr. Calvin, is nimis argutum, the Text will not bear
it,) but only a designation* a setting of him (...) unto his prophetical
office. To wave that. The latter is clear. John the Baptist, he was sanctified
in, (or from) the womb, and that by the secret work of the Spirit upon his
soul. The Luke 1. 15.
Text is express. [He shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from his
mothers womb.] This God did to him. The like he can do for others, and no
question frequently does it; Communicating his Spirit even to Infants, though
not in so large a measure as to the Baptist, yet in such a measure as may be
sufficient for them, sufficient to make them, and prove them subjects of this
Kingdom of God, his Kingdom of Grace.

Of the kingdom of glory.
I, Thirdly, to give them a right to, and interest in his Kingdom of glory.
That also is the Kingdom of God, and of such is the Kingdom. A truth which
necessarily follows upon the former. Being subjects of Gods Kingdom of grace,
they have also right to Psalm. 84. 11. Romans 8. 23. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 14.
his Kingdom of glory. [He shall give grace and glory, Psalm. 84.] Grace as the
first fruits, Glory, as the full crop; the one a pledge, a seal and earnest of
the other. But upon this I will not insist. I presume I shall meet with none so
uncharitable as to deny or question it. Come we rather to make some
Application of this Truth.

Applica. A warrant for Baptizing nfants.
Use 1. Here is first a Warrant for what the Church of God in all Ages has
practiced, the Baptizing of Infants. This the Church has done, and this it
does. I, but quo jure? (says the Anabaptist) what warrant has it for it? why,
Christ's own warrant, who here tells us, that of such is the Kingdom of God;
the Kingdom of Grace, and Kingdom of Glory. Now being subjects of this
Kingdom, they have right to the privileges of subjects; amongst which, this
seal of the Covenant is none of the least.

Replica. The Anabaptists evasion. Not [Them] but* [Such]
Repl. I, but (says the Anabaptist) we mistake the Text. How so? Why, the Text
does not say to [them] belongs, or [theirs] is the kingdom of God, but of
[such] is the kingdom of God; (...) not (...), meaning thereby (say they) not
those, or any other Infants, but such as are like unto them in some
qualifications. So diverse Interpreters expound it. Theodor. Aquin. Stella.
Non istorum, sedtalium; Not of these, but of such. Such as are like to those
Infants. Like them, non aetate ^ed moribus, not in age, but in manners, in some
imitable qualities, as viz. Innocence, Simplicity, etc. So much (say they) may
be collected from the verse after the Text, where our Savior explaineth his
own meaning, what he means by [such] viz. such in humility, [Whosoever shall
not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein.] Such are the children (say they) to whom our Savior here averres the
Kingdom of heaven to belong. And thus they think to elude and evade the force
of this Argument, and the evidence of this Text, triumphing in this subter fuge.

Solu* Cleared.
Answ. But all in vain; as will easily appear, if we do but consider the true
intent of our Savior in this place, as also the true sense and meaning of the
word.

1. From our Saviors intent.
First, for the former, our Saviors intent. The text is clear. He was
displeased with the disciples for repelling of these Infants, and he gives
this as a reason to convince them of their error, [For of such is the kingdom
of God:] viz. those Infants, and others like unto them in age: otherwise his
Argument had been of no force. [For of such etc.]

2. From the proper sense of the word [such.]
For the word ((...),) [such*] it cannot be conceived to exclude these Infants,
but to take them in, as primarily and properly here intended. So the word is
commonly used (as in our ordinary speech, so) in phrase of Scripture, Parallel
instances are very Nehem. 6. 11
obvious. Should [such] a man as I fly, (says Nehemiah meaning himself.) Paul
writting to Philemon, Philem. v. 9
[For loves sake (says he) I rather beseech thee, being [such a one as Paul
the aged] (...), Such a Romans 1. last.
one, meaning himself. [Those which do [such] things (says the same Apostle)
are worthy of death.] (...); such things, viz. those things (...) 5. 21.
before specified in the Chapter, and things of like nature, as himself
expounds it, Gal. 5. 21. Thus the word is commonly used inclusively, still
taking in the thing, or person it self, to which any other is equalized, or
coupled. If need were, more instances might be mustered up: But I shall save
that labor. In the mean time challenging our Adversaries to show any one
place in all the Scriptures where the word is so used as they would interpret
it in this text; viz. Where the word (such) is put exclusively, excluding the
person or thing it self, to which any other is compared; but so as still it
intends either directly and peculiarly the same person and thing instanced in,
or else that, and others like unto it. So without question must it be
understood here in the text. Of [such;] i. e. these Infants, and others like
unto them, whether in age or condition. So as there can be no advantage justly
taken from the word.

The argument retorted.

Chemnit. Musculus ad loc.


2. Nay (as it is well pressed by some) it makes the more strongly against the
adversary. [Of [such] is the kingdom of God, (...), not (...). Non horum, sed
talium; Not of [these,] but of [such.] Plainly importing, that the Kingdom of
God did belong not only to those particular Infants then and there brought unto
him, but unto them, and others that should at any time be brought unto him
after the like manner. The word [such] is of larger extent, then [them.] Had
our Savior here said, to [them] belongs the kingdom of God: Then might the
Anabaptist here have found a more colorable evasion; alleging that Christ who
knew all things, might know them to be elected, and so might say that, theirs
was the kingdom of God; but that it could not from thence be inferred, that
any other of like condition could claim the like right to it. But saying
[such,] now he takes in others with them, even all that should be offered and
presented unto him after the like manner.

Conclude we it then: This Argument ordinarily taken up by Divines from this
text of scripture, for the maintenance of Infants Baptism, it is of force and
validity, carrying out the cause against all opposition. They to whom
belongs the kingdom of God, who are subjects and members of the kingdom of
Grace, and heirs of the kingdom of Glory, they have right to this seal of
the Covenant, whereby this their interest may be confirmed and sealed up unto
them. This by way of Instruction.

Use 2. Comfort and hope to believing Parents touching their Infants dying
without Baptism.
In the second place, here is a ground of comfort and hope unto believing
parents as touching their children, whom God is pleased to take ab utero ad
ut^rum, from the grave of the womb, to the womb of the grave; cropping them
in the bud, taking them hence before ever they know the right hand from the
left; it may be, before such time as they could be made partakers of the seal
of the Covenant. Yet let not such parents mourn as men without hope. Let them
not perplex themselves with a doubtful anxietie touching their eternal state,
and condition. The text in this case yields a ground of comfortable hopes. [Of
such is the kingdom of God] says our Savior here concerning these Infants,
who were as yet only intentionally tendered to him, not actually touched by
him. Is it so that we have done the like for our Infants? Presented and tendered
them unto Christ, and to this Ordinance in the unfeigned desires and intentions
of our hearts, doubt not but the kingdom of heaven is theirs, theirs as well
as any Gal. 3. 28.
others. You know who spoke it, [In Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor
Gentile, neither male, not female, (and I may add, neither young, nor old) for
they are all one in Christ Jesus.] Being given unto Christ, they shall come
unto him, be brought unto him one way or other; and coming unto him they shall
be all alike saved by him, made partakers of the same Kingdom with him. And
thus much for this Reason, as it is here simply propounded.

Verse. 15. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.


Our Saviors Reason amplified.
COme we now to look upon this our Saviors reason as it is illustrated and
amplified in the verse following; viz. by an Argument a majori Piscat. Anal. in
loc.
(so Piscator conceives of it;) an Argument from the greater to the less. As if
he had said: Wonder not at this that I have said* that the kingdom of God
belongs to Infants. I tell you more; whosoever would enter into this Kingdom
must become an Infant, an Infant by way of resemblance; imitating, and being
made like unto such a one in some imitable and observable qualities. Otherwise
he never shall, he never can enter into this Kingdom. [Whosoever, etc.]

The words make up but one entire proposition, or conclusion. In effect the
same with that which we meet with Matthew. 18. 3. Where our Savior (upon an
other occasion) taking a little child, and setting him in the midst of his
disciples, he propounds him Mat. 18. 3. Observe. All that would enter into Gods
Kingdom must be come as little children.
to them as a pattern for their imitation; telling them. [Verily I say unto
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God.]

Behold here then a pattern for every one of us. As many of us as would enter
into Gods Kingdom (his Kingdom of grace and glory,) we must become as little
children.

Explic. Ioh. 3. Resembling Children in some imitable qualities.
Q. As little children? How shall this be? What must aged persons (according to
Nicodemus his conceit of the doctrine of Regeneration) repuerascere, turn
children again?

A. Yes. This aged persons oft-times do in a natural way. Bis pueri senes.
Old men are twice children. And all Christians must do it in a supernatural
and spiritual way. They must be twice children. As once by nature* so once by
grace: and that by the imitation of children in some of their imitable
qualities.

Q. But what qualities are these? Wherein must Christians be like unto children?

A. To single out some particulars, some of the chief.

1. Without malice.
1. A first is that which the Apostle himself propounds to, and presses upon
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 14. Where he shows them both wherein they should not
be like unto children, and wherein they should. Non mentibus, sed moribus:
wherein not. Not in understanding. Herein he would have 1 Cor. 14. 20.
them not children, but men. [Brethren, be not children in understanding, etc.
But in understanding be men,] (...), Perfecti, perfect, Adul^^, of ripe age.
Wherein then? why in malice. [How ^e it in malice ^e ye children.] Children
they are free from malice, and envy; there is not so much as a spark of this
fire in those breasts. Herein a pattern for Christians, even for all that
would enter into the Kingdom of God. Let them in this become as children,
laying aside malice. 1 Pet. ^. 1.
So St. Peter presses it, [Wherefore laying aside all malice, etc. As newborn
babes desire the sincere milk of the word.] Newborn babes are void of malice.
So should all Christians be. Not seeking, not wishing evil to any; wishing,
and doing what good they can to all, but hurt to none. As children concerning
malice. 2. Without Guile.


Secondly, as children concerning guile. So the Apostle Peter there goes on.
[Laying aside malice, guile.] Such are infants, (...); there is no guile, no
fraud, no deceit, no hypocrisy in them. They do not pretend one thing, and
intend another. They do not go about to overreach, or circumvent others; but
in all their actions there is a plainehearted Matthew. 10. 16 (...)* ab (...) and
(...), Cui nihil est admixtum.

Romans 16. 19. (...). ^. In their actions.

1 These. 4. 6.


simplicity. And such should Christians be. (...), Simple as doves. So our
Savior presses it upon his Disciples. I, simple as children, [Simple
concerning evil, (as Paul explaines it) without guile, and that;

1. In their actions; not circumventing, defrauding others. So the Apostle
presses it upon his Thessalonians, 1* These. 4. That no man go beyond, or
defraud his brother in any matter.] As, viz. in buying and selling, and
bargaining, etc.

2. Without guile in their words? This is the character which Peter gives of
his Master. [Who did no 2. In words. 1 Pet. 2. 22.
sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth.] So should it be with
Christians; there should be no guiles in their mouths, in their words, in
their promises, testimonies, etc. So Paul charge it upon his Ephesians.
[Therefore putting away lying, speak the Ephesians. 4. 25.
truth every man to his neighbor.] Truth is the Christians girdle. [The girdle
of truth.] And in this sense Ephesians. 6. 14.
the Proverb holds true. Ungirt, unblest.

hearts and spirits. It In heart, Psalm. 32. 2.
is one branch of David's description of a blessed man. [Blessed is the man in
whose spirit there is no guile.] Such is the spirit of a child. There is no
guile, no hypocrisy in it. It is such a one as it seems to be. And O that it
were so with all Christians! That they were in this respect as children. As
children for sincerity; without guile. Here is the second of these properties.

Children for humility.

Mat. 18. 4.


3. A third follows. As children concerning pride. Children for humility.
This I take from our Savior himself in the place forenamed. Whosoever shall
humble himself as this little child, etc.] Children, we see how humble, how
lowly they are. Their spirits are not haughty, high minded. There are no
proud, ambitious, vain glorious, aspiring thoughts in them. They are as well
content with their rags, as with their robs; with a cottage as a palace; A
child sitting in the dust, an Emblem of humility and contentation.
often sitting in the dust. An emblem of humility. A child sitting in the
dust, and as well contented there as if it were a throne. Such should
Christians be; of humble and lowly spirits. Such a frame of spirit we find in
the man after Gods own Psalm. 131. 1. 2
heart [Lord, mine heart is not haughty, etc. Surely I have behaved my self as
a child, etc.] It is not for Christians to have haughty hearts, or lofty
eyes; so as to have high thoughts of themselves, Iere. 45. last.
or* seek high things for themselves. [And seek thou great things for thy
self? (Says the Lord to (...) seek them not.] This will not children, this
should not Christians do. Their spirits should lie low, so as they may be
willing to embrace the Dust, if God shall bring them thither. This carnal
wicked men sometimes do by constraint. So shall Babylon do. [Come down and sit
in the dust, O Virgin daughter of Isa. 47. 1.
Babylon.] Babylon a Virgin; (So called, because then not deflowred by the
enemy. Even as Cities that were never sacked nor conquered, but have enjoyed a
long continued peace, they are called Virgin, Mayden-Townes; as Venice in
Italy, Dordrecht in Holland: so Babylon there, in that respect is called a
Virgin;) She shall sit in the dust, says the Prophet (which is long since
accomplished in typical, and ere long shall be in mystical Babylon.) And this
Gods own sometimes do, [They which were brought up in Skarlet, embrace Lam. 4.
5.
dung-hills;] It is said of the precious sons of Sion, the Nobles of Israel,
Lam. 4.) and this they ought to do willingly, when God calls them to it. In
this (as I said) like children, who if their Parents set them in the dust, they
are willing withal. Is it so, that God is pleased at any time to bring any of
his children from high estates, to mean and low conditions, to set them in the
dust; I, suppose with Job upon the dunghill, yet should they herein submit to
the will of their heavenly Father: Ever having their spirits as low as their
conditions. Herein again should Christians Col. 3. 12.
be as children: Children in humility, putting 1 Pet. 5. 5.
on this as a robe, being clothed with it, as the Apostles both Peter, and Paul
press the exhortation.

Contentation.
Fourthly, to this (in the fourth place) let me join Contentation. A quality
very observable in young children. If they have but enough to suffice nature,
how contented shall we see them. If they have but clothes to keep them warm,
be they rich, or mean. If they have but food to satisfy their hunger, and
drink to allay their thirst, how quiet are they. What their Parents give them,
they receive it, and are contented with it. Oftentimes put to bed with a
little. In this again should Christians be as children, Content with their
heavenly Fathers portion, whatever it be; be it much, be it little. It is the
Apostles Phil. 4. 11.
lesson; A lesson which himself had taken out. [I have learnt in whatsoever
state I am, therewithal to be ^ Tim 6. 8.
contented.] And a lesson which he reads others. [Having food and raiment, let
us therewith be content.] A lesson which very nature can teach, and sometimes
has learnt. Natura paucis. Nature is content with a little. Mere natural men
how contented do we find them oftentimes in their mean conditions? And
shall not grace do it much more?

Innocence.
Fifthly, Again, children are Innocent, harmless creatures. So we use to call
them. [Innocents.] And it is no other language, than what the Spirit it self
is Iere. 2. 34.
pleased sometimes to make use of. [In thy skirts is found the blood of the
poor innocents.] So it is charged upon Jerusalem, Jer. 2. And who were these
poor Innocents? Calvin and some others, understand it of the Prophets of God,
whom they had slain cruelly, and causlessely. But it may seem rather to be
meant of Infants. So the same Prophet else where seems to expound himself;
chap. 19. where charging upon Iere. 19. 4. Verse. 5. Diodat. ad loc
Jerusalem the same sin, [They have filled this place (says he) with the
blood of Innocents.] And who were they? The next verse explaines it, viz.
little children whom they offered up unto Mo^ech: These were the Innocents,
with whose blood they had filled the valley of Gehinnon. Such are children, and
such should Christians be. Innocents, though not to Godward, (which yet they
must endeavor) yet to manward. Heb. 7. 27.
Harmless; So was our heavenly pattern. Holy, harmless, etc. In this should
Christians labor to resemble him; being innocent as Doves, (so our Savior
Mat. 10. 16. (...), ab (...) and (...), sine cornibus. Scap.
presses it in the place forenamed.) I, innocent as children: Having innocent
hands, and innocent tongues. Two properties of a man that shall ascend the hill
of the Lord. So David makes them. [Who shall ascend into thy Hill? Psalm. 24.
He that has clean Psalm. 24. 4.
(or innocent hands.) verse. 4.] Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall
dwell in thy holy hill? Psalm. 15.] Psalm. 15. 3.
He that back-biteth not with his tongue, etc. verse. 3.] Such hands, such
tongues have Infants, both innocent. And such should the hands and tongues of
Christians be.

Forgiving and forgetting injuries.
Sixthly, To these I might yet add many more. Children are apt to forgive and
forget injuries. If they be angry, yet they hold it not, they are easily
appeased and reconciled. And in this respect again, should Christians be as
children, viz. apt and ready to forgive, and forget wrongs and injuries. A
lesson which our blessed Savior frequently inculcates upon his disciples. [If
thy brother trespass against thee, forgive him; and if he trespass seven
times in a day, yet forgive him.] Luke 17. 3, (...)
In this should Christians Patrizare, resemble their heavenly Father. Being
ready to forgive; so is he. [Thou O Lord ar^ good, and ready to forgive, Psalm.
86.] Psalm. 86. 5*
Not retaining their anger. So does not he. [He will not always chide, neither
will he keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. 9.
Psalm. 103.] Anger rests not in Gods bosom against his children; Let it not
rest in ours against our brethren. Ephesians. 4. 26.
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, (says the Apostle) Ephe. 4.] In
this be like unto children.

Making use of cries and tears for their weapons* Exodus 2. 6.
injured by others, what are their weapons? Why, their cries, and their tears.
This was Moses his Rhetoric, wherewith he took Phara^hs daughter* when she
opened the Arc; [Loe the Babe wept.] In this should Christians be as children
in all their straights and difficulties, making use of these weapons, their
prayers, and their tears, crying to their Heavenly Father. But passing by
this, name but one more.

Obedience to their heavenly Father.
viz. their obedience; Obedience to their Parents, to whom they submit, and
subject themselves to be ordered by their commands, being afraid of their
threatenings, standing in awe of their frowns, readily believing, and firmly
building upon their promises. And herein should Christians be as children;
yielding such an absolute obedience to their heavenly Father. Submitting to his
commands, trembling at his threats, awed by his frowns, readily believing, and
confidently resting upon his promises. All this, without any Ifs and Ands;
without disputing about them, or demurring upon them. This is that which our
Savior here principally drives at in the Text. [Whosoever shall not receive
the Kingdom of God as a little child.] viz. receive the mysteries of this
Kingdom; yielding an humble and submisse obedience to the will of God revealed
in his Word. Therein making more use of Faith, than either of sense, or reason.
So do children, they believe what is told them, what is promised them,
specially if it be by their Parents; therein (as I may say) making more use of
their belief, then their reason. And this must Christians do, in apprehending
heavenly mysteries; they must captivate sense and reason, bringing them both to
the obedience of faith; yielding an absolute and universal* both credence, and
obedience unto God, in what ever he shall make known to them, to be according
to his will. In all these (besides many other qualities, for the Argument is
very fruitful, would we follow it so far as we might,) ought Christians to
imitate and resemble children.

Applica. Enquire whether we be such.
But do we thus resemble them? Let that be the first use that we make of it.
Bring we it home to our selves; enquiring whether we be all like children, in
all the forenamed particulars, viz. without malice as children; without guile
as children; hand-guile, tongue-guile, heart-guile. Without pride, as children;
innocent and harmless as children, apt and ready to forgive and forget
injuries as children; ready to pour forth cries and tears into the bosom of
our Father, as children; as ready to yield obedience to our heavenly Father; as
children to their natural Parents. Are we such? O that every of our hearts
could now Echo back again, and say, such we are. Such in our measure, such
at least in unfeigned desire, and serious endeavor. But, alas, is it not far
otherwise with some amongst us? Are there not some whose hearts are full
fraught with rancour, malice, envy? their hearts, hands, tongues full of guile,
full of deceitfulness, full of hypocrisy? Is there not a spirit of pride in
some of us, filling their hearts with ambitious, vainglorious thoughts;
making them think highly of themselves, and meanly of others; puffing them up,
and exalting them above measure? Is there not in some of us a spirit of
discontent, so as we are not contented with Gods dispensations and dealings;
but upon all occasions, if we have not what we would have, our hearts are
ready to repine and murmr? Are there not some amongst us, who care not what
wrong, what injury they do to others, so they may but benefit and advantage
themselves? Are there not others of an implacable spirit? Being once offended,
once provoked, they will never be reconciled; never forgive, much less forget
injuries? Are there not some who do not know what it is to un-load their cares,
their fears, their sorrows into the bosom of their heavenly Father, by
pouring forth their souls before him? And are there not others who walk
stubbornly against God, not regarding either precepts, or promises, or
threatenings; Isa. 48. 4.
no, they are obstinate: Their neck is an iron sinew, and their browbrasse; (as
the Lord complains against the people of the Jews.) Surely, such there are,
some of every of these sorts to be found amongst us.

And is this to be like unto Children. In this to receive the Kingdom of God
as little children? Let the All who are not such shut out of Gods Kingdom.
Conviction take place with those to whom it belongs; who may here see
themselves shut out of the Kingdom of God. Mark the Text.] Verily I say unto
you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein.] As for such then who are un-like unto children, it
may be every ways un-like, un-lesse happily therein, wherein they ought not
to resemble them, viz. in knowledge, and understanding. [Brethren, be not
children in understanding (says the Apostle.) Herein happily they are too like
unto children, having no more understanding in spiritual matters, the
mysteries of Gods kingdom, then they. But in all other imitable qualities,
they are altogether un-like them. Now let not such flatter themselves with
vain hopes, of ever entering into Gods Kingdom. No, it cannot be. He that
Ioh. 14. 6.
is Truth it self here speaks it; and he speaks it both earnestly, and
peremptorily. So much will appear from a re-view of the words.

First, earnestly. So much that Asseveration, which we meet with in the
entrance of the Text, imports. [Verily I say unto you.] Amen; which in the
beginning of a sentence has the force of a vehement Asseveration, importing a
serious and earnest affirmation, or negation.

Secondly, Peremptorily. [He shall not enter.] There is an Emphasis in the
original, which our Translation here has not expressed. (...). Two negatives
put together, which in the Greek tongue do vehementius negare, confirm the
negation or denial of a thing (like two witnesses to a Testimony) making it
more peremptory, more certain. [He shall not enter.] Nequam ingredietur. He
shall [in no wise] enter. So we find it translated elsewhere, and so it ought
to be here. (...), [In no wise] or [by no means.] Ioh. 6. 37.
Thus is the Kingdom of God both locked, and boulted against all such. Locked,
and that by him who R^^e. 3. 7.
has the key of David, who shuts and no man opens. Bolted, and that with
a double boult. (...), He shall in no wise enter. Thus has Christ put it out
of doubt. [Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child,
he shall not enter therein.]

Use 2. Be we as children.
Use 2. Let this then (in the second place) be a motive to every of us,
setting on this useful exhortation, that we would labor to be such. Would we
enter into the kingdom of God, of Grace here, of Glory hereafter; Be we as
children. It is a Copy (you see, which our blessed Savior himself has set
before us. Let us write after it; propounding this pattern to our selves,
study to imitate it. Be we as children. As children without malice, as
children without guile, as children for humility, as children for contentation,
as children for innocence, forgiving and forgetting injuries as children; upon
all occasions complaining to our heavenly Father as children; Obedient as
children Imitate we them in every of these.

Specially in the last. That the Text leads us to more particularly. Receive
we the kingdom of God as little Children.

Receive the Kingdom of God as children.
The [kingdome of God] (as I told you) is here, his Kingdom of grace, and
glory. His kingdom of grace. The government which he exercises in and over
his Elect upon earth, whom he guides and governs by his Word, and Spirit.
His Kingdom of glory: That blessed state which he has provided for his Elect
hereafter. Now receive we both these as little children, viz. humbly,
submissively.

His kingdom of Grace.
First, Thus receive we his kingdom of grace. Yielding up our selves (as little
children do themselves to their Parents, and Governors) to be instructed and
ordered by him, according to his good will and pleasure. Resigning up our
understandings, and our judgments unto him. So do little children; they yield
themselves as an abratatabula, white paper for To be taught by God.
their teachers to write any thing upon, what they please; receiving their
instructions quietly, submissively, without quarrelling or cavalling. Even thus
receive we the Kingdom of God, the mysteries of his Kingdom. Such truths as
God has been pleased to reveal unto us in his Word, let us receive them,
entertain them quietly, readily, with a holy submission of our understandings,
and judgments; not standing to quarrel with, or cavil against any truth of
God, because we cannot apprehend the reason of it. Herein look upon our
pattern. Children do not apprehend the reason of things which are taught, and
told them; yet they receive them, and believe them. The like do we in the
mysteries of Gods Kingdom. 1. Captivating our understandings and judgments,
yielding up both unto God, to receive, and believe what To be ordered by him.
ever is held forth unto us in the Word. And then 2ly. In like manner yield up
our wills and affections. Let Gods will, be our will; to which let us stoop
and submit, though contrariant, and crossing to our wills. So does the child.
Though happily it may be crossed in what it would have, and do; yet it
submits, it yields. Even so do we. Yield we up our selves (as to be
instructed, so) to be ordered by God; to be in what state and condition he
pleases; to do, and to suffer what he will have us to do.

In life.
Thus behave we our selves in life; even as a child. So did David as himself
tells us, Psalm. 131. [Surely Psalm. 131. 2.
I behaved and quieted my self as a Child that is weaned, etc.] A child in
the weaning is froward, and tangle, then nothing will please it but the breast.
But being once weaned; then usually it is quiet, and contented with any thing.
In this be we as children; not like children in the weaning, so as if we have
not what we would have, nothing shall please us. But like children weaned;
behaving our selves quietly, and contentedly; yielding up our selves to the
ordering of our heavenly Father.

In death.
And thus behave we our selves in death. Therein also as children. Children,
Infants, as they are ordered by their Mothers, or Nurses in the day, so they
are put to bed by them at night, when, and where, and after what manner they
please; for the most part falling asleep in the Nurses lap. Even thus do we
resign up our selves unto God our heavenly Father, to be disposed of him, as
in life, so in death: to be put to bed, the bed of the grave; when, and where,
and after what manner he pleases. Falling a sleep in 1 Pet. 4. last
his lap, in his arms, committing our souls unto him as to a faithful
Creator, and merciful Redeemer. Thus receive we Gods Kingdom of Grace, his
government here upon earth.

Kingdom of His Kingdom of Glory.
Glory. Still as little children. Receiving it in Gods way, and upon his
terms. Thus do little children take Parents hands, upon their Parents
Receiving it upon Gods terms. Rom 6. 23.
terms, and in what way they will have them. And thus receive we this
Kingdom of God.

Receive it, first upon Gods terms, viz. as a free gift; freely bestowed upon
us, without any merit, any desert of our own. Thus do little children receive
every thing at their Parents hands. All of gift. Never dreaming of any merit,
any desert in themselves.

Secondly, Receive it in Gods way: in what ever In God s way
heaven by. Even as the Israelites, so they might but come to Canaan, they care
not what way they go; be it through the sea, or through the wilderness. What
if God will lay out unto us the like way to bring us to our heavenly Canaan; a
troublesome and tedious way, yet baulke it not. [I press forwards toward the
Phil. 3 11. 14.
mark, (says the Apostle). (...), If by any means I might attain the
Resurrection of the dead.] Herein yield we up our selves unto God to be led by
him, as sheep. Psalm. 77. ^0.
So it is said of Israel. [The Lord led them as a flock, (as a flock of
sheep, as the word signifies*) by the hands of Moses and Aaron.] Or (to hold
to the Text) as Children. Children are led by the hand, or carried in the arms
of their Parents, whether they will have them. Even so yield we up ourselves to
the will of our heavenly Father. So he may but bring us to heaven, let him lead
us, and carry us which way he pleases. What ever the terms be, what ever the
way be; let us accept of this gift at his hands. Receiving the Kingdom of God
as little children. And thus I have done with this Speech of our Savior to his
Disciples.

Verse. 16. And taking them up in his Arms, he laid his hands on them, and
blessed them.


Christ's act toward these Infants, threefold.
COme we now to the last branch of this Story, which informs us what our
blessed Savior did to these Infants. Herein we may take notice of a threefold
act; the two former introductory to the latter. 1. His S^sception. 2ly, His
Imposition of hands. 3ly, His Benediction. [1. He took them up in his Arms.
2ly, He laid his hands upon them. 3ly, And blessed them.]

Thus do these Petitioners receive what they desired, and more. That which was
desired for these children, was only a touch of our Saviors hands. So the
13th ver. of this Chapter expresses it. [They brought children unto Christ,
(...), that he should [touch] them.] Now this he does for them, and more. [Hee
embraced them in his Arms, laid his hands upon them, and blessed them.]

Obser. God sometimes does for his people above their desires. Ephesians. 3. 20.
Thus God is pleased sometimes, oftentimes to do for his people above their
desires. This he can do. [Now unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think; (says the Apostle.) God can do
for his people exceeding abundantly above their desires, or thoughts. There
being in him abundance Malac. 2. 15.
of Spirit, as the Prophet Malachi has it. [Did not he make one? yet he had
abundance of Spirit. (So the Geneva reads it, Residuum Spiritus (says
Montanus) a residue (as our new translation has it) an overplus of spirit,
that is, of power and virtue to have done more then he did. Whereas God at the
first made but one woman for one man, it was not for want of power; he could
have made more if he had pleased. He has no measure of his power, but his
will* [If thou will, thou can,] says the leaper to our Matthew. 8. 2.
Savior. So as out of this plenitude, and abundance of power God is able to
supply all the wants of his people; ^o do for them above their desires: which
also sometimes he does. Solomon having his choice to ask what he would, he
begs wisdom from God; [Lord give me an understanding heart.] 1 King. 3. 12, 13.
God gives him that and more, viz* riches, and honor: [I have also given thee
that which thou have not asked.] The poor Paralytick in the Gospel is brought
unto Christ for a bodily cure: Christ does that for him, and more; sending him
away with a double cure; the one of his body, the other of his Soul. [Sonne,
thy sins are forgiven thee: Take up thy bed and Matthew. 9. v. ^* v. 6.
walk.] Thus Christ dealt with others; and thus ordinarily he deals by all
that come unto him: doing for them above their desires, and thoughts.

The ground whereof is, his abundant mercy. That Reason. He is abundant in
mercy* 1 Pet. 1. 3.
is the epethite St. Peter gives it: [According to his abundant mercy.*] Rich
mercy: So the Apostle St. Paul, [God who is rich in mercy.] God is rich, as
Ephesians. 2. 4.
in power, so in mercy. The one makes him able, the other willing to do for
his people above their defires. As a man having a large purse, and a large
heart, he gives to a poor beggar more then he asks: He asks a penny, he
gives him two. Thus God deals with poor suppliants that come unto him in the
sense of their wants suing for mercy. He often does for them what they desire,
and more. Being, as rich in himself, so rich unto them. [God is rich unto Romans
10. 12.
them that call upon him,] (says the Apostle.) God is rich; having an abundant
fullness of all goodness Luke 12. 21.
of himself. And he is rich not to himself, (as the covetous ^iser is,) but
unto others: Being ready and-willing to communicate, and let out his goodness
unto all that seek it, (even as the fountain that is ready to communicate of
its water to all that come for it, and bring vessels to receive James 1. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 17.
it.) And that not sparingly, (says St. James.) He gives us richly all things
to enjoy (says the Apostle.)

Applica. Come unto God and Jesus Christ.

1. By prayer.


A meditation which may serve as a forcible motive, and inducement to make us
come unto God, and to Jesus Christ. Unto God by prayer: Unto Jesus Christ by
faith. ^* Come we to the throne of Grace for a supply of our wants* what we
ask, Ioh. 16. 23.
being fit for us, we shall receive. [Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
my name, it shall be given you, Matthew. 7* 7
(says our Savior.) [Aske, and it shall be given you;] It, what you ask, and
more: God gives, and he gives not sparingly* but liberally[: Therefore come
we, and come boldly. [:If any man l^^k wisdom, let James 1. 5.
him ask it of God* (says St. James;) why? For he gives to all men
liberally.]

2. By faith.
2. Come we unto Jesus Christ by faith* ^^e shall sinde more in him, and from
him, then ever we thought of So did these mothers (or whoever) that brought
these their children unto Christ. They found more tenderness, more love, more
affection in him, then they could have expected. They come for a touch; he
embraces, blesses them. Such over*flowings of mercy there are in God* and in
Jesus Christ toward poor sinners. The prodigal coming to his father, little
did he dream of such affection, such entertainment as he met with. His
thoughts were, if he might but get a room in his fathers house, to eat bread
with his servants, that was all he could look for, and more then he was worthy
of. But see what he found: No sooner does his father see him a far off, but
he runs to meet him, Luke 15. 20* 22.
Jils upon his neck, and kisseth him, brings farth the best ^oabe* and
kills the fatted calfe for him. Such over*flowings of unexpected, undeserved
mercy and compassion there are in our God toward poor penitent sinners. Upon
there returning and coming home to God they shall find abundant mercy,
abundant compassion, more then ever they could have promised to themselves*
considering their own unworth^nesse of the least mercy. And therefore come we
unto God, and come we unto Jesus Christ. But this I take up by the way, from
the joint consideration of the words.

Come we now to look upon particulars* And viz. The act of susception; The
first act, viz. Suception.
[Hee took them up in his arms.] (...), Complexans ^os, (says the vulgar
latin) Embracing Piscator schol* ad locum.
them. But the word (by Piscators leave) in proper signification imports
more. Not any kind of embracement, but an embracement peculiar to children;
whom others use to take in their arms. Thus Simeon embraced our Savior, when
his Parents came to present him in the Temple, Simeon took Luk 2. 28.
him up in his arms; (...), Which is but a periphrasis, of the word in the
text, giving us the true sense and meaning of it. Surely even as Simeon there
embraced our Savior, so d^d our Savior here embrace these children: In ulnas
suscepit. He took them in his arms.]

These children were Infants.
From whence (by the way) it is rightly concluded against the Anapabtists, that
these children which were brought unto Christ, they were young Suidae.
children; not children capable of Instruction, but Infants, (...), Little
children, such as were brought in the arms of their parents unto him, and by
him taken into his arms. But letting that pass, Obser. Christ's singular
affection to Infants.
^n That which we shall here take notice of, is, the singular affection of Jesus
Christ toward these Infants; which he expresses by this act of his: Taking
them into his arms,] that so he might (as it were) lav them in his bosom,
nigh to his heart; Chemnit. Har. ad loc.
t^nquam charistima* (...) (as Chemnitius glosseth upon it) as a dear and
choice treasure which he made special account, and reckoning of. Thus do
(...). Zenoph. Pad. 7.
tender mothers (not knowing how better to do it*) express their affection to
their babes; taking and carrying them in their arms, as near their heart as
may be; embracing, and hugging them. And how could Christ have expressed
greater affection to these babes then he did?

Applic. Papists and Anabaptists, herein unlike unto Christ.
And did he show such affection to them? How then dare any show such
dis-affection toward them, as to shut them out of the Church, whether
triumphant, or militant? Triumphant; So does the Papist all children dying
without Baptism. Militant: So does the Anabaptist, who denies Baptism unto
Infants, because (as they would have it) they are no members of the Church. And
what rigor? What unwarrantable, uncharitable, and unchristian rigor is this?
What is this, but even (as it were) to pull Infants out of the arms of Jesus
Christ? Surely, he who took these Infants into his arms upon earth, does as
much to some of them being now in heaven, and will do the like to such as are
tendered to him as these were; viz. brought to him in the arms of their Parents
faith. He will receive them, embrace them, take them into the arms of his
mercy. And there let believing Parents leave them (I mean, their Infants
deceased) in a comfortable hope, and persuasion of finding them there another
day. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to 2 Samuel 12. 23.
me (says David of his child.) This for the dead. As for the living, take
heed how we shut them out of the Church: Seeing we here find them in Christ's
bosom, take heed how we cast them out of the Churches bosom, by denying unto
them the Churches privilege, the badge and seal of their Christianity. This
for Infants. Use 2. Be encouraged to come unto Christ.


As for our selves, be we all encouraged to come unto Jesus Christ. He that had
arms to receive these poor Infants being brought (...) him, he will have
arms to receive us coming unto him. [Him Ioh. 6. 37.
that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] He v. 40.
that [cometh] unto me, that is, [believeth] on me; coming to me as a Savior,
and a Lord* to be saved and governed by me, [I will not cast him ou^.] There is
a me^^sis in the phrase, less said, but more intended. I will not cast him
out, that is, I will receive, I will embrace him. Surely Jesus Christ has lost
none of his affection, none of his compassion* What he had, he has: he
carried his ^^wels, and his arms to heaven with him. And therefore come we
unto him.

Q How shall we come.

A. Not by any power of our own. Ioh. 6. 44.


Q. How shall w^e come* A. 1. Not by any power of our own. Thus none can come
unto Christ. [No (...) comes unto me, except my Father which has sent me draw
him.] Even as these children could not have come unto Christ, had not their
Parents brought them. Thus unless our heavenly Father bring us, lead us, draw
its, (that is, effectually persuade our hearts to believe on him, working upon
them by his word and spirit) we will never come* can never come unto Christ;
being of our selves both unwilling, and unable.

2. Not in any confidence of selfe-worthinesse.
2. Not yet (secondly) in any confidence of any worthiness in our selves, as
if we should be the rather received and embraced of Christ for any thing that
we^ bring with us. No, this also we doctrinally renounce, and that as clearly,
as firmly, as any (...) whatever; averring that he which ^ill come unto Christ,
must come emptie-handed, bringing with him nothing of his own. So say they,
and so say we* Nothing save only an eye, and a hand, (which yet are not our
own neither.) An eye to look up unto Christ, a hand to receive him, both which
are done by faith.

^. Bring faith with us* Hab. 2. 4.
3. And this (in the third place*) every of us must bring with us. Every one
his own faith* [The just shall live by his faith.] Whatever the case of Infants
be, sure we are, in persons of age thus it must be. These Infants here they are
brought unto Christ that he should (...) them. But the woman with the Matthew. 9.
20. 21. Mark 6. 56 c. 3. ^0.
bloody issue she comes unto Christ that she might touch him, (as also other
sick persons usually did.) Whether Infants may be saved by their Parents
faith, or no, it is disputable* But as for us* it is out of doubt; it is our
own faith must benefit us. Even as it is with a child in the womb* and out
of it. In the womb it is nourished by the meat which the mother eats* but
not so out of the womb; then it must live by the meat which it self eats.
Whether it be so with children in their infancy* whether they they live by the
faith of their Parents, it is a question which I will not peremptorily
dedetermine* (I know it was the opinion of the Ancient Church.) But afterward
when they come to years of discretion* then they must live by their own
faith. Then they must come unto Christ (as I may say) upon their own leas,
though still led by the hand of another. And thus let us come. So coming, doubt
not but ^e that had arms to receive these Infants being brought to him in the
arms of others, will also have arms, arms of mercy and tender compasson* to
receive, to embrace us, coming unto him, believing on him* submitting to him.

Pass we now to the second and third acts, in both which I will be very
brief hasting to a conclusion of this subject. [He laid his hands upon them,
and blessed them*] Wherein we have, first the outward ceremony or sign,
Imposition of hands: [He laid his hands upon them.] Then the thing signified,
the grace conferred, Benediction: [Hee blessed them.] Briefly of each.

Act 2. Imposition of hands.

A ceremony of ancient use in case of 1. Benedicti^en. 48. 14.


[Hee laid his hands on them*] A ceremony of very ancient use amongst the
people of God, and that in diverse cases: Specially in two.

1. In the case of benediction, and blessing. Thus the Patriarch Jacob being to
bless the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses, he laid his hands upon their
heads, praying for, and pronouncing a blessing upon them. And thus our Savior
here blessing these children, he laid his hands upon them.

2. Consecration.
2. In case of Consecration. When a person, or thing was to be set a p^rt to
some special use, and service; this was done by imposition of hands. Thus the
sacrifices under the Law were consecrated by Exodus 29. 10. Numb. 8. 11.
the Priests. [Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the
sacrifice;] which they did (amongst other ends) in a way of consecration.
Destinarunt illud Osiander ad loc.
ut ^ieret sacrifici^m, (says Osiander upon it;) destinating and setting
apart that creature to be a sacrifice. And as their sacrifices were thus
consecrated, so were (at least) some of their Church Officers also. Numb. 8. 10.
So we read that the Levites were to be consecrated by imposition of hands,
Numb. 8. Thus was it under the Old Testament.

And thus we find it under the New. Our blessed Savior (our great high Priest)
being to consecrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper* he Mat. 26. 26. 1 Cor.
11. 23. 24.
took the Bread, and he took the Cup (says the Text.) Either taking them
into his hand, or laying his hand upon them, setting them apart from a common,
to a sacred use. And in like manner were the officers of the Church, the
Ministers of Acts 6. 6. Acts 13. 3. ^ Tim. 4. 14.
the Gospel consecrated; set apart to their Ministerial Offices, by
Imposition of hands.

A useful Ceremony, though not simply necessary, yet expedient.
A useful Ceremony in both these cases. Whether necessary, or no, it is made a
question? Papists contend for it as absolutely necessary, making it the outward
sign in two of their Sacraments, (so they call them, and make them) viz.
Confirmation, and Ordination. In the latter of these (not to speak of the
former now, which I have touched upon already,) we generally allow it, approve
it as very convenient* not only warrantable but useful, warrantable by the
practice of the Apostles, and the Church of God in all Ages. Useful, both in
respect of the solemnity, and significancie of it, suting well with the
business that it is applied to, (Ordination; wherein there is a charge) laid
upon the person ordained, and the person set apart unto a special use and
service.

Warrantable and useful we allow it; yet leaving it as an indifferent
Ceremony, as not being of the essence of Ordination, (much less of
Confirmation,) which may be performed without it, viz. by Fasting, and Prayer.
And so not absolutely necessary, there being no express precept in Scripture
(...) enforce it. As for that obvious Text in 1 Timothy 5. 22. Vide Piscator: sup.
Mat. 19. verse. 15.
Timot^y, where the Apostle wills him not to (...) on hands suddenly upon any
man. It shows indeed, what the usual Rite and Ceremony then was not what of
necessity it must be. But of this enough.

The signification of this Ceremony, viz. the conferring of some gift; either
The case which the Text leads us to, is the former of these, the case of
Benediction. And with this the Ceremony suteth well. Importing a putting, or
conferring* of some gift upon another; whether by bestowing of it, or praying
for it.

By bestowing, etc.
First, By bestowing it. Thus our blessed (...) blessed these children: Not
only praying for, but Thus Christ blessed.
bestowing a blessing upon them. (D^^ ^ene dic^re (...) be^efacere;) which was
in his power, in his hands to do. And therefore he laid his hands upon them.

Blessed hands, hands full of blessing. In^^ which was, and is committed the
dispensation of all blessings, both heavenly, and earthly* This is that which
our Savior says of himself, Mat. Mat. 21. 18.
28. (All power is given unto vice, both in heaven, and in earth.) This he
spoke after his (...) Not but that he had this power (...) how ^ve^ from
thence*forth he was to exercise it more freely than formerly. Before this he
had all power in his hands; a power to confer and bestow what blessings, and
where he pleased. Not unfitly then did he lay on hands upon these Infants
here, being about to bless them; he having all blessings in his hands.

By praying for it, and pronouncing it.
Secondly, But so have not others, why then confer them, yet they may pray
for them. I, more. In the name of God pronounce them, and make promise of them:
And therefore to confirm the persons in the apprehension of obta^ning what is
so prayed for, so pronounced, so promised; therefore they lay on hands upon
them. Thus Jacob in the place forenamed, laid on hands Genesis 48.
upon the sons of Joseph, praying for, and pronouncing a blessing upon them.
Thus Moses laid hands upon Josuah, who thereupon was filled Deuteronomy. last* verse.
9.
with the spirit of wisdom, as you have it, Deuteronomy. last. Not that Moses could
put his spirit upon Joshuah, but he praying for it, God conferred it. And thus
the Apostles in their time laid their hands upon diverse, who thereupon
received the holy Ghost, as it is said of those Disciples, Acts 19. Not Act.
19. 6.
that they of themselves could confer the holy Ghost, but God did it by their
Ministry. But I promised to be brief. Act. 3. Christ blessing of these
Infants.


A word or two of the last branch of the Text, and so I will dismiss it, and
you for the present, viz. the thing signified by this Ceremony. [Hee laid his
hands upon them, and blessed them.] He blessed them. How? why, by praying for a
blessing, pronouncing a blessing, conferring a blessing upon them* All this he
could do, having authority to bless, and having all power in his hands to
confer, not only temporal, but spiritual, and heavenly blessings. Ioh. 17.
2.
[Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him.]

Quest. But the question is, what blessing it Quest. What blessing Christ
bestowed on these Infants.
was that Christ here bestowed upon these Infants. Christ has many blessings
(says the Anabaptist,) right hand, and left hand blessings. In the days of
his flesh, he healed the sick, cleansed the leapers, made the dumb to
speak, the blind to see, etc. And who knows (say they) but some such
blessing it might be that Christ here bestowed upon them, some temporal
blessing?

Answ. Not only a temporal, but a spiritual and eternal blessing.
Answ. To this we answer, that possibly it might be so. He might, possibly,
and probably prav that they might live and grow in stature, in wisdom, and
favor, and the like. But surely, this blessing of his imports more* The Text
tells us here, that Christ laid his [hands] on them. Not one hand, but both.
Christ's blessings when he was upon earth, seldom went single. Seldom did he
bestow a left hand without a right hand blessing. Seldom did he cure any in
their bodies, but he cured them also in their souls. And surely such was his
blessing here. More than a bare temporal blessing; chiefly, and principally a
spiritual* and heavenly blessing* even the blessing of Gods Kingdom. This he
had before avowed to belong unto them. [Of such is the Kingdom of God;] and
the blessing of this Kingdom he here conferred upon them.

Observe. Christ's blessing, the best blessing.
He blessed them.] And what could he have done more for them? or for any?
This was the best thing that Isaac could do to, or for his son Jacob, to
bless him. And what could Christ have done better for these Infants* He
blessing them, they were blessed. I have blessed him, and he shall Genesis 27. 33.
be blessed, says Isaac concerning his son. And those whom Christ blesses*
they shall be blessed.

Applica. Seek this blessing.
Applic. O seek we after this blessing, the root of all blessings. Seek it
for our selves, and seek it for our Children. Without this, our blessing of
them, our providing for them* will be little worth. Let it be our care and
endeavor to bring them to Christ; to know him, to believe on him, that he may
bless them. If he bless them, they shall be blessed.

And thus I have (as briefly as I could) run over this portion of Scripture,
both in a Doctrinall, and Practical way; showing you still (by the way) what
it makes for that end to which it has been ordinarily made use of amongst
us, viz. the Baptism of Infants. Such they were that were here brought to
Christ. Such they were, whom the Disciples here (out of no ill intent) attempt
to keep back from ^^ming t^ Christ. Such they were whom Christ here inviteth
to come unto him; prohibiting his Disciples, or any other to hinder them. Such
they were to whom he avoweth the Kingdom of God, both of Grace, and Glory, to
belong. Such they were whom he here embraces, luy^^h his hands on, blesses.

Object. Christ did not Baptize these Infants Answ.
Object. But (says the Anabaptist) what is all this to the point in hand? All
this while we do not read that Christ Baptized these Infants?

Answ. True. No more did he any others. [Iesus himself baptized not.] John 4.
2. But yet he expressed a singular and peculiar affection to them; Invites
them to communion with himself, avowes the Kingdom of God to be theirs; and
conferres upon them the blessing of that Kingdom. And has Christ thus
honored some of this tender age* What shall new be done to them, He^. 6. 6.
whom the King of Heaven delights to honor? Does he invite them to
communion with himself* Who shall keep them back, by debarring them of the
means of that communion? Does he avow, and confer the thing signified, who
shall then deny them the sign?

FINIS.

