A brief NARRATION or some Arbitrary Proceedings of the Committee chosen for
the County of Kent. (But acting against it.)

With the unanimous Resolution of all true hearted KENTISH-MEN in a just
Detestation. of the same

Aug: 17. London, Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Brief Narration of some Arbitrary Proceedings of the Committee chosen for
the County of Kent.
ALthough by the permission of the divine providence, we have suffered a
present transaction of our deliberate purposes, and by addition of the
mischievous endeavors of many of our degenerating Country-Committee-men, had
Characters of disaffection to the peace and quiet of our County undeservedly
stamped upon us, whereby a double disadvantage is labored on our behalf. Yet
that it may be evident how constant we dare appear to any religious and
warrantable undertaking, notwithstanding any particular miscariage, or
misfortune in the same.

And that by way of return, we may ingrave those black aspertions in legible
Letters upon the brazen brows of such as would outface the truth. We desire
the world to take notice, that we are so perfectly satisfied in the assurance
of our clear Intentions, that we willingly call heaven and earth to witness
our sincere integrity in that particular.

We are not so undetermined in Religion, as to be superstititious in successes,
and sacrifice our reason thereunto, or suffer our selves to be shaken merely by
the motions of adverse events. We deny not but that Gods present will may be
read therein, but affirm likewise that his consequent Order cannot be
discerned thereby, which may require the demolishment of many particular Gods
to build up the frame of the universal, neither does the present ruin of
single pieces of equity derogate any thing from the goodness of their nature,
so that we may safely determine that the success and prevalence of Injustice
and self Interest, against candid and unbiaced honesty, must not at all abate
our zeal to any public, virtuous undertaking.

The performance of what we intimated in the second place, will require a
survey of the proceedings of a factious number of our Committee men, whose
distempered Pallates can relish nothing which savours of tranquillity and quiet,
nor digest preparatives appropriated to that purpose, gaping after nothing but
what is composed of Arbitrary and Independent Ingredients, which they greedily
swallow, until their stomachs overchar'gd, send forth infectious, poisoned
paper pellets, destructive to the very being of a free borne Subject. Witness,
an Order of theirs, long since commanded to be read in all the parish Churches
within the County, strictly denying so much liberty, as but to make our desires
or fufferings known by way of Petition, (least possibly themselves might have
been the burden of our complaint.)

This for the present we obeyed, in hope that defect in us might by their
means be supplied, and that they would endeavor to apply some seasonable
relaxation to our havie pressures. But behold our expectation frustrated, and
themselves become the great Oppressors of us, extorting by threats of
Sequestration, and such affrighting Engines, such sums of money as they thought
fit to require by perremptory Letters dispersed to that intent.

Our patience still triumphed over their trregular exactions, neither did we
discover so much self affection as to make public complaints of these
particular grievances. But when the more general concernments of the Kingdom
called upon us, and we were invited by the examples of our neighboring
Counties, to express our sense and fellow feeling of these epedemicall
distempers, which in probability without a speedy Applycation, must prove
destructive both to the Church and State, we then resolved to hazard their
displeasure, and humbly offer our addresses higher, where encouraged by the
success of others upon the like occasion, we durst presume at least a kind
reception.

But this Appeal prevailed not to prevent the interposition of our angry
Masters, who to discover their distaste of what might tend to an accommodation,
and demonstrate, that their busy malice could aspire to reach us, what ever
distance we observed for our security, not staying to expect a warrant for
their undertaking, salute us with another Order (forged in the shop of their
distempered fancy) wherein they do asperse both us and on Petition with
scandalous and reproachful language, notwithstanding the wisdom of the two
Houses had discovered no such merit in expressions of the same import, which
they then had, (and since have) received from several places of the Kingdom.
An Argument (in our opinion) of the unparalleled presumption of our
anticipating and preiudicall Judges whose hasty and indiiested determinations
are impatient to exspect the results of more mature deliberation. Nor did they
rest here, but by raising of Armed Troops, endeavor (as at the first to
discountenance, so now) to discourage us in our honest undertaking, and by
their powerful provision terrify us from performing that duty which we really
owned to our distressed Country. To this purpose their Order was read at the
head of their several Troops at fayres, and Market towns, and to make it the
more universal Commanded to be published (as their former had been) in the
several parish Churches within the County by their respective Ministers; nor
was this thought sufficient, without disarming all that appeared forward and
active in the business, which private resolution of theirs was seasonably
discovered, by which means we had the oppertunity to take the staff into our
own hands the better to support us from their intended opproession and ruin
(how just the provocation was, we leave to all Indifferrent Arbitrators to
determine,) add hereunto the several expressions of Sir Anthony Welldon and
Mr. Beale the first declaring that he would not cross the street of Rochester
to save the soul of a subscriber, the other delivering, he thought it very
requisite that two or three of the Petitioners in every Parish were hanged up
for example. This contrary carriage compelled us to an engagement, and for
satisfaction to others to evidence the ground of it by a Remonstrance, wherein
we still continued to profess our peaceable intents though (in obedience to
the Law of nature) enforced to take up Arms for our defense in prosccution of
the same. This we desire might be Communicated to the two houses, as a
preparative to our entertainment there, and to prevent all misconstructions of
our fair intentions.

To that end we did entrust it in the hands of Captain Lee, and Captain
Nestrone both Members of the lower House, and of our high Committee, who (to
say no more) did unworthyly deceive our confidence, and abuse their trust by
presenting it unperfect, having first obliterated the most material passages,
which might either conduce to our advantage against themselves, or a right
understanding with those to whom we had intended our address. What the unhappy
consequence of this has bin we shall omit, as needless to be mentioned; and
where the reparation both for the Affron^ and subsequences of it is due to be
expected, we do conceive it evident enough, without a use of Applic^t^on.

It remains only now that we labor our own Vindication from so foul a
defection, as we must of necessity be guilty of, if we neglect that duty we owe
unto our captive country men (whose reputation shall survive the malice of their
enemies, and in despite of treachery or fortun (a Diety which we adore not) be
ever Registered for Imitation, when the Fames and Names of their contemned
Opposers shall stink and perish) in relation whereunto we do again religiously
engage our selves faithfully to discharge that obligation which is upon us, and
not to neglect any opportunity which may conduce to their advantage, being fully
assured in our Consciences, that our first resolutions were built upon a very
safe foundation, and that having so warrantable ground for our productions, it
is no less noble to act thereon (though it prove our own Tragedy) with out
swords in our hands, then it will appear Inglorious tamely to enslave our
selves by a degenerous submiting to arbitrary and insulting Results and so
become the Commicall Scoene of laughter and contempt to all usurping Tempers.

And herein as we can discern no reason to suspect the approbation, so are we
as confident to promise to our selves the useful assistance of all that do
unfeignedly incline to peace, either in this City of London, or the Adjacent
Counties (whenever opportunity shall prompt them to afford it (whose just and
serious apprehensions of the increasing distractions of this declineing
Kingdom (fomented by the factious spirits of disaffected Sectaries) has
lately prevailed with them to prepare and present the same addresses which we
unworthily were prevenred in.

FINIS.
The Colchester Spy.
Truly informing the Kingdom of the estate of that gallant Town, and the
attempts of Fairfax against it: with some other remarkable Intelligence from
the English and Scots Army; the last news from the Navy, also from Westminster
and London.
From Thursday, Aug. 10. to Thursday, Aug. 17. 1648.
Yet Colchester bears bravely up,
They eat and drink apace,
Lately they gave a deadly cup
Unto the Babes of Grace.
Though the Saints hope to starve them out,
Alas it nere will be:
For if they grapple the other bout,
O Fairfax, farewell thee.
To the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell, Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the
renowned Captains in Colchester.
Shrink not brave Hero's, be not you dismayed,
Because so long you want your hoped aid;
You know it is not easy to bring down,
Traitors who sit at Helm, and grasp a Crown:
The Scots must force their way, through Lamberts heart.
And send ten thousand for to claim their part,
Amongst the Furies, ere they can come on
with winged have, to your redemption;
The Prince of Wales, although King of the Seas,
Yet fears his cure may add to their Disease;
Should he act rashly, and a Battle try
Ere things are come unto maturitie,
Things work apace, be patient and ere long
Unto your rescue comes three Armies strong.
Printed in the Year 1648.


