YGIEIN. OR A Conservatory OF HEALTH.

Comprised in a plain and practical Discourse upon the six particulars
necessary to Man's Life, viz. 1. Air. 2. Meat and Drink. 3. Motion and Rest. 4*
Sleep and Wakefulness. 5. The Excrements. 6. The Passions of the Mind. With the
discussion of diverse Questions pertinent thereunto. Compiled and published for
the prevention of Sickness, and prolon^^^ion of Life.

By H. Brook. M. B.

Mihi vero, and qui ambitionis, aut cujusvis Cupiditatis gratia, impeditam
negotiis vitam delegerunt, quo minus corpori curando vacare queant, ii quoque
servire ultro dominis, and quidem pessimis videntur. Gal. London, Printed by R.
W. for G. Whittington, and are to be sold at the Blew-Anchor in Cornhill, near
the Exchange. 1650.

Praesidi, Electis, reliquisque Collegii Medicorum Londinensis Sociis;
Egregiis, Viris, Doctissimisque S. D.
PVlblicae sanitati consulens, ad quorum pedes libentius tractatulum hunc
deponerem, quam vestris, qui (...), Summi estis antistites: non est
gratitudinis hoc, sed observantiae pignus, quippe qui prius de vobis been
mereri studui, quam audire, and sodalitii vestri me dignum reddere quam ambire.
Hoc saltem cona^^ fas sit; nec desperare. Medicinae partem hanc secundam,
abstrusam satis, and nodosis implicatam controversiis consulto el^gi, and
vernacula promulgavi, uniuscujusque scilicet, cognitioni necessariam, and ut
vos etiam expertos magis, and intimiores Apollinis (...) provocarem, quod
perfunctorie incoepi, stylo magis exarato per ficere, rationibusque veritatem
magis irrefragabilibus confirmare.

Gladio vixdum vaginato, novum imminere videtur bellum (quod tamen avertat
Deus) publica autem calamitas, Medicorum duplicare curam industriamque debet ut
vel sic compensanda strages. Litibus quidem locupletatur jurisconsultus, morbis
Medicus, Illius autem finis debet esse Pax, hujus Sanitas: quippe utriusque
lucro, Populi preferenda est Salus: haec est summa lex tam in Schola
Hippocratis, quam in Politicis. Sanitatis praecepta necesse est and tuto
cognoscat populus, in hisce enim sui juris est; bisce etiam abunde vacat,
reliquas medicinae parts, nisi omnes, easque non superficialiter sed intime
cognoscat, melius est ut penitus ignoraret; adeo luculenter constat, nihilo
plus inesse periculi quam imperfecta scientia. Operae pretium ergo existimavi
enchiridion Diaiteticum concinnare, portatu facile, quo prompte consilium
unicuique occasioni suggeratur: Primitias has vobis dedico, exiles satis, nec
tanto dignas patrocinio; majora tempus proferet vestrumque exemplum: haec
interim candide accipite verissimum observantiae (...), and me vobis
addictissimum tota vita futurum existimate.

H. Brook.
Ex Musaeolo meo Londini, Anno Salutis, 1650.
To the Reader.
BEing solicitous of thy health, and finding thee too neglectful of thy own I
have for thy benefit at a few leisure hours compiled the ensuing. Treatise of
that part of Physic which concerns Dieting, or the Regulation and well
ordering thy Life, the Reasons prompting me thereunto being these.

1. My Duty as a Physician, for being bred up in the Study of that Faculty, and
licentiated in the practice thereof, and so taking upon me a general care and
charge of preserving Health, I judge my self thereby obliged to communicate what
Council, and advice I esteem necessary thereunto.

2. Because this part of Physic, though by most Physicians esteemed the
principal, and by some the All, or only necessary part, yet has the
publication thereof in the English Tongue been omitted, very little having been
written thereupon, which was an urgent and more then ordinary motive to me, to
supply somewhat that defect.

3. The Physician being seldom or not at all consulted with about preserving
Health: there is the more need of furnishing every man with a Manual, that may
be always ready at hand, to which recourse may be had upon any occasion; And
indeed so far every man ought to be a Physician, or else he brings into
Question that discretion, by which well employed, in a strict observance of
what is good or bad, wholesome or unwholsom, in the six non-naturals, he may
easily make his Conclusions, and reserve them as a Guide to himself, and leave
them as a Help to his Posterity.

If I had regarded applause, or preferred Fame and Opinion before thy welfare,
I should have come abroad in a more queint and Scholastical dress; whereas I
have now studied plainness, and (so far as the Subject I treat upon will
permit) evened my words to the meanest capacity: which though happily the most
Critically Learned may despise, yet will the most wise I doubt not approve:
knowing well that matter was not made for words, but words for the plain and
Intelligible conveyance of our minds one to another.

Unwilling I was, as Dr. Brown cautions us, to put thee to the trouble of
learning Latin, to understand English: my drift being herein not so much to
delight the Learned, (who may elsewhere find gardens enough to exspatiate in)
but instruct the ignorant. I have not taken much care in quoting Authors, (to
some of whom I have been beholding) intending thou should rather be persuaded
by Reason then Authority: and this I did, ex industria, on set purrose,
preferring the simplicity of Truth before the Honor of Allegation.

I desire likewise, that notice may be taken, that what I have written, is
intended for the preservation of Health; other Rules there are in Diseases to
be observed, particular, according to the Nature, and with reference to the
Beginning, Augmentation, State, and Declination of each disease, in which each
one must expect advice from his Physician.

This Part of Physic thou may simply and safely known: In the rest, unless
thou be skilful in all, and with some exactness, it is better thou remain
Ignorant which thou can not be, if thou have any other employment,
considering the abundance of time necessarily required, before it is possible to
attain those many particulars that are hard to be learnt, and yet of necessity
to be known, before thou can without extremest hazard undertake the
practice of Physic: With a Smattering and Imperfect Knowledge, thou may be
bold (as most are) but not skilful. To the first gain and Pride may prompt; but
to a true Physician, see by that which follows what is Necessary.

It is expedient thou should first know whereof man is made: his principles
of Composition, his due Temperament, as he is, entire, and of every part: Their
deviations likewise and diversities; The Nature of Spirits, Innate Heat, and
Radical Moisture. The Conformation, Situation, and use of all and every part
of the Body, both Similar and Organical, the several Vessels, Rivulets, and
Conveyances within us; and this is only attainable by frequent dissection and
Inspection. Thou art also to know the Operations of the Soul, as it is
distributed in, and makes use of several parts of the Body: whether they be
Nutritive, Generative, Vital, Animal Sensitive, Motive.

The particulars contained in the Diaetetical part, thou have in this Treatise:
Thou art likewise to have exact knowledge of all diseases of the whole Body, and
of every Part: Their Nature, Causes, Differences, Symptoms or concomitant
Accidents, and Signs, as well to know them by, as also to foreknow their
issues and events; Their usual Mutations, Duplications, sudden and many times
frightful Alterations: which will distract the Practitioner, who to save his
credit will then also venture, but with extremest danger to the Patient. But
above all, and that which is most necessary, is right knowledge of the manner
and method of Curing: which comprehends all the operations in Physic and
Surgery, which are exceeding numerous, and require a large Discourse, but to
reckon up and explain. And as one requisite hereunto, thou ought to be
furnished with the Knowledge of all Plants and Trees, (at least that are in use
in Physic) Their Roots, Stems, Barks, Leaves, Flowers, Berries, Fruits, Seeds,
excresences; to know all Foreign Drugs, Gums, Rozens, juyces liquid and
inspissated, all medicinal Animals, their parts and Excrements; Whatsoever the
Sea affords for Medecin: or the bowels of the Earth, as Metals and Minerals.
All these ought well to be known, both how to choose them, to prepare, mix and
compound them. To make of them distilled Waters, Simple and Compound:
Conserves, Syrups, Loches, Powders, Electuaries, Pills, Trochisks, Diet Drinks,
Apozems, Potions of all sorts, proper to each body, part, disease: Vomits,
Iuleps, Ptisans, Opiats, Epithems, Lotions, Fomentations, Baths, Liniments,
Ointments, Cataplasmes, Cerats, Plasters, Vesicatories, Colliries for the
Eyes, Caps for the Head, Gargarismes for the Mouth and Throat, Dentifrices for
the Teeth, Errhina for the Nose: Sneezing-powders, Suffiments, Pessaries,
Suppositories, Clysters and Injections. These of diverse kinds, with many more,
which for brevity sake I omit, a Physician ought to be well seen in, and
acquainted with; but principally to know the proper time, and season of using
them; which is not to be done, but with much study, education therein, great
helps and experience; and yet without that, all Medicines, though in
themselves, they be (...), as the hand of God to cure diseases, prove like a
sword in a mad man's hand, by which instead of doing the Physicians work, Work
is made for the Physician.

I intend not by this to affright any from the acquisition of the Medicinal
Art: but rather to let the World see, what is requisite thereunto, that it may
understand how far short of being Physicians such men are, who upon the bare
stock of a few Receipts, and knowing how churlishly to Purge and Vomit, with
three or four more common Operations in Physic, presently and with confidence
fall to the practice therefore: As if a man should boast himself a good
Painter, because he knows how to mix Colors, but knows not what belongs to
Symmetry and Proportion.

-- Sed quo non mortalia pectora cogit,
Auri Sacra Fames --
It were better their need or Avarice did prompt them to venture upon some other
subject then the body of man. Thus much I thought good to insert in this place,
to show the difference between what is requisite to the preserving preserving
thy Health, and restoring it; The first is properly thy own work, the last is
the Physicians, unless thou give thy time to make thy self such.

But to return from whence I doubt I have too long digressed; They who resolve
to continue their course of life without care or consideration of their Health
guided by their appetite, and not their understandings, will receive little or
no benefit by this Treatise: however Liberavi animam meam, I have done my duty,
and therein receive satisfaction. Others who are more careful of themselves
will, I question not, hence gain some light and benefit, to whom I offer this,
but not impose it; prefer it in my own understanding as best, but submit it to
theirs; and wish them to be persuaded, as the reason thereof proves
efficacious: all that I desire is, that they would not be prejudiced by Custom,
and long received opinion which in some places it thwarts: but preseinding from
that, give their understandings leave clearly to examine, and so judge and
Practice. It is like my attempt herein may set others at work; I shall be glad
of that also, and of whatsoever else may tend to the Helath and Commodity of
Mankind.

Studious whereof is, Thy Friend and Servant, H. Brook.
From my Study in More-Feilds, this 16. of April. 1650.
To my Friend the Author, a Truly Learned and Expert Physician.
WHat mean you Sir?
This will undo Physicians, and Surgeons too.
They live by Sickness, not by Health,
Disorder brings them all their Wealth.
If this take place, you never will ride
On foot cloth, with a Groom by your side.
This is as if a Draper should,
Invent a neat spun cloth, that would
Seven Ages last, and after be Fresh, and fit for Livery.
Pray timely think on it, and Recall
This Book, that will undo us all.
You rather should excess invite,
And raise decayed Appetite.
Cry down all Rules, and Freedom praise,
The Rich to Apicius Diet raise;
Teach Curious Sauces, and advance
The Mysteries of Intemperance.
Make Rabelaies in our English shine,
Erect a School for Aretine:
That to increase Physicians gain,
The Rich man's Gout and P -- may reign.
Catarrhes and Palsies, and the new
Disease that lately escaped so few.
Or think you that egregious Race
Of Leeches that yet spring apace
From every Trade, will find you more
Work, then diseases did before.
Or then those Books which teach new skill*
How with good Medicines men to kill.
But your diffusive Soul, that still
Studies the World with truth to fill
And useful Knowledge, shows a way
(Would mankind but your Rules obey)
To escape those Quick sands, and live free
From need of Drug, or Surgery.
Reader.
THis little Manuel will prove
A House Physician, that in Love
To each man's Health, will ready stay
Without his Fee, and every day,
Council sound and plain impart,
Drawn from surest Rules of Art.
Where by an undisturbed Health
Thou may enjoy the Crown of Wealth.
But I detain you from a Feast,
At which you long to be a Guest.
Read and Practice, so you will find
In a Sound Body, a Sound Mind.
Sam. Blaicklock, Chirurgus.

The Table.
OF Air. 55 Which the best Air. ibid. Helps against bad Air. 58 Sharp Aires.
60 Corruption of Air. 62 Change of Air by Winds. 63 Of Native Aires. 71
Sudden alteration of Air bad. 72 Caution about Air. 74 Of Anger. 237 Its
Discommodities. ibid. Remedies against Anger. 228
B.
No Breakfast. 123
C.
Benefits of Continency. 185 Costiveness to be prevented. 52 Of Custom 34
Customs how to be altered. 35
D.
Rules for Drink. 133 Effects of Drunkenness. 136 Of Dotage. 240.
E.
Of the Excrements. 182 Excrements of the Belly. 189 Their proportion to the
Aliment. 191 Excrements of the Brain. 217 Of the Ears and Nostrils. 218
Commodity of Exercise. 143 Exercise when to be forborne. 159 What best for the
Fat and Lean. 160 When best. ibid. Places bad for Exercise. 161 Violent
Exercise bad. 162 Drinking cold beer after Exercise bad. 165 Also drinking Sack
and strong waters. 166 Kinds of Exercise. 167
F.
Errors in Feeding. 104 Cautions about Feeding. Respect in Feeding to the
nature of meats. 114 To the Constitution of the Person. 115 To the season of
the Year. 116 Best times of Feeding. 118 Order of Feeding. 139 Of Feasting. 110
Of Frications. 171
H.
Health what it is. 15 By the orderly use of what things Health is preserved.
21 Of Hunger.
I.
Intemperance. 85 It hinders nourishment and growth. 90 Of Joy. 251 Effects of
Joy. 252 Incommodities of Incontinency. 187
L.
Of Love. 236 Three kinds of Love. 236 Godlike. ibid. Humane. 237 Conjugall. 238
Of Looseness. 192 Of Lust. 238
M.
Of Motion and Rest. 143 Of Meat and Drink. 77 Due quantity of Meat. 84 Drink
against Melancholy. 249
P.
Whether Physic be necessary for the preserving of Health. 44 Cautions in
using Physical Helps. 47 Whether customary Physic be to be continued. 49
Physic worse for the Healthful. 51 Of the Passions. 220
R.
Commodities of Rest. 176
S.
Discommodities of a sitting Life. 144 Of Sleep and Wakefulness. 174 Cause of
Sleep. ibid. Evils of immoderate Sleep. 176 Long Sleeps for whom best. 178
Sleep after Dinner. 180 Form of lying in Sleep. 181 Of Sweat. 210 When Sweating
to be avoided. 211 When to be provoked. 212 Helps to Sweat. 214 Why Sleep
causes Sweat. 215 Long and Violent Sweating bad. 216 What Smells best. 70 Of
Spitting. 217 Of Sadness. 243 Remedies against Sadness. 244 Larger Supper. 127
T.
The Bounds of Temperance. 100 Gaeatest pleasure in Temperance. 95 1. Rule of
of Temperance. 102 2. Rule of Temperance. 103 Of Thirst. 80
V.
Of the Vrin. 193 Divination by Vrin a deceit. 194
A Conservatory of HEALTH.
IT is as much the Duty of a Physician to endeavor the Preserving of Health,
as the restoring it: and so much the more careful he ought to be, by how much
the more neglectfull People are of themselves: This is indeed a charge that we
are not so much obliged to by Gain, as by Conscience; For there are few or none
that come to the Physician to keep themselves well, but only when they are
forced thither by the importunity of Sickness: It becomes us therefore who have
the Charge of Bodies, to send our Council abroad, and though that may be a
means to lessen our Practice, yet will it much quiet our Minds in the discharge
of a necessary part of our duty; It is much easier to prevent Diseases, then
expel them, It may be done with small care, and less expense; our Diseases
cost us dear, not only in the Cure, but in the purchase, being for the most
part the offsprings of Intemperance, Incontinency, Disorder, and other very
costly Vices. Temperance therefore brings a double Commodity with it: the
preserving of Health, and the Saving of Expense, all which notwithstanding, so
indulgent is the generality of Mankind, to their appetites, and the present
enjoyment of their loose and inordinate desires, that they utterly cast off the
consideration of events and consequences, never duly prizing Health till they
have lost it: preferring a sickly, wearish, and momentany Delight before a
full, perfectly contentfull, and durable. A customary saying they have, That he
lives miserably, who lives Physically; and that they who observe Rules, look
palest, are most frequently sick, and in Physic, of Lean and consumed Bodies:
whereas the good Fellow, that regards not what he eats, or how much he drinks,
is usually plump and Ruddy, seldom sick, and though happily they live not so
long, yet are their lives more pleasurable, which makes good amends for the
shortness. For better is a short life and Happy, then a long and Dolorous: And
therefore let us, say they, give the Reins to our Appetites, let us loose no
time: Let us eat and drink, and if we die to morrow, let us have our penny
worths out to day; For to what end are all delicious things given us, if not to
enjoy? Thus pleads the Intemperate: As if he were born for his Belly, and all
the noble Faculties of his Soul, the exquisite operations of his Senses, and
other Habiliments of his Body ought to be subservient thereunto, As if he lived
to Eat, and did not eat to Live: making that the main end of his Creation,
which is but an unavoidable Consequent, occasioned by Necessity for
Preservation: Eating and drinking, and other sensual pleasures, are indeed
below the Dignity of the Soul; In which Beasts are our Equals, and for the
doing whereof it was necessary to furnish us with parts of exactest Sense, for
the incitation of Desire and Appetite, least otherwise we should neglect those
operations needful for preserving the Individual and Kind, out of a contempt
to the Homeliness of the Works themsleves, or out of a more earnest intention,
upon more excellent and worthy Actions. But besides all this, They consider not
those frequent Headaches, Catarrhes, Qualms, Gripings, Swimmings in the Head,
Dimness in the Eyes, flushing Heats, Dropsies, Gouts, Palsies, and other more
irksome and ignominious Diseases, they that indulge their Appetites and Desires
are overtaken withal: besides the decay of Memory, slackness of Understanding,
loss of Time, and Reputation: All which God Almighty, both to deterr and punish
us, has made the inseparable Concomitants of Intemperance and Incontinency;
that whom the foreknowledge thereof will not affright, the sting and punishment
may justly Recompense, and happily Reclaim.

Others there are, who avoiding the extremities of those Vices, Pride themselves
therein, and think they are careful enough, and do in that as much as is
needful for the preservation of Health. These are affrighted with the variety
and multiplicity of Rules and Cautions, which they say Physicians have
purposely invented, to make their very Healths Tributary unto them; that
scrupulosity in Diet and Order keeps the Mind too intent thereupon, and hinders
the enjoyment of Health, by the fears of Sickness, unto which the very
imagination enclines us upon every Default, and omission of what is prescribed.
To these I shall say, that I intend the reducing them, not so much to what Art
directs, as Nature: from whose ordinary and safe prescripts the generality of
Mankind are swerved, and thereupon fallen into many strange and complicate
Diseases, which except in Countries of equal Luxury and Intemperance with our
own, are not to this day so much as heard of. Mine shall not be Rules of
Niceness, but Necessity, such as every Man's Reason shall approve, and
Experience confirm: I intend no burdens or Fetters, no Farrago of Recipes, with
which the Understanding is rather distracted, then directed: but to revive
those unhappily exploded Rules of Temperance, and due Order in our Lives, by
observation whereof Life may be prolonged, and Diseases avoided: The Benefits
of this Temperance I shall not need to reckon, they being so largely and
plainly recited in two excellent Treatises: The one of Learned Lessius,
Entitled The right course of preserving Health: The other of Cornaro, Of
Temperance and Sobriety: both which are almost at every Booksellers to be had
in English.

That therefore I may the more methodically, and so the more beneficially
proceed, I shall observe this Order.

1. I shall declare wherein Health consists.

2. By the due and regular Observation of what things it is preserved.

3. The right Order and Course to be observed in the use of those Things, and
by the way I shall handle those practical and familiar Questions which
occasionally shall offer themselves, whereby either popular errors may be
Rectified, or wilful neglects amended, by a recital of the prejudices thence
arising.

Of Health.
Health, what it is?
HEalth consists in a good and well tempered Constitution of the Blood and
Spirits, and of all the Similary Parts: as also in a legitimate and
proportionable Structure of All the parts Organicall, comprehended in their
just Magnitude, Number, Situation, Passage and Confirmation; their Union
likewise and Continuity: Health is then known to be, when all the Actions of
the Body, viz. Natural, Vital, and Animal, are in their Integrity; But when
there is a defect in any one, it is no longer Health, for as in Morals that
action only is truly good, which is so both in its Nature, Bonum constat ex
Integris.
End, and all its Circumstances; in which there is not the least Mixture of
Evil: So in Naturals, that Man cannot be truly said to be in Health, who is
not entirely so, in all and every particular requisite thereunto: Hence may we
conclude, that though Sickness admits a Latitude, Health does not: and that the
Neutrall Constitution, maintained by Fernelius and others, and the common
Saying of People, that they are neither Well nor Ill, is not in Reason
allowable, but must be comprehended within the Sickly Constitution. In the
beginnings whereof, though Sickness does not so eminently and visibly appear,
yet there she is in her degrees, and gives Testimony of her Self, by the
depravation of some Action, as want of Digestion, of Nutrition, Immoderation,
or Irregularity of Pulse, imbecility of the Senses, Motion, or Respiration,
etc. in the Perfection and Integrity of which, and all others that flow from
Man, is Health comprised. In this sense a Heathfull man is hardly found, every
one having his Constitution more or less depraved, by a desertion of Natures
Rules, and prescripts in the Regulation and Order of Lives. The difficulty
therefore is to find out the exactness of those Rules, that so we may
gradually return from the perverseness of Custom, which by continuance of time
is seated in Natures Chair, and usurps her Offices (though we smart for the
change) to those Safe, Wholesome, and Preservative Rules, which begets us long
Life, and happy Days. Certainly we are Recoverable, and God has placed it
within the Comprehension of Reason to find out our Defects, and amend them:
Our Infirmities lie not upon us from any Necessity, but our neglect: Neither
did the Almighty Create our Diseases with us, they are like Insects, the
offspring of Corruption, of our Disorder and Luxury; and consequently may by
due care and circumspection be very much avoided. Yea, those diseases which are
Epidemicall, as Pestilentiall Fevers, Catarrhes, small Pox, the present Flux,
etc. do much easier seize upon such as by contracting an evil Habit of Body,
have rendered themselves more obnoxious, and disposed thereunto, in whom
likewise they are more difficultly curable: but to proceed.

By the orderly use of what things Health is preserved.
In the next place we are to consider the Subject Matter of our Health, and what
those particulars are, which are essentially necessary to its preservation; and
they are six. 1. Air. 2. Meat and Drink. 3. Motion and Rest. 4. Sleep and
Wakefulness. 5. The due Excretion of those things which are to be Excreted, and
the Retention of those things which are to be Retained. 6. The Passions of the
Mind. The abuse of these six Things destroy Health; The right use and ordering
them preserves it: They are therefore usually by Physicians termed
Indifferentia, Things in themselves indifferent; the care where of God has
referred to us, and has endowed us with understanding requisite to make the
best use thereof; Our selves therefore we are most to blame for our Maladies,
whose unhappy disorders they inseparably follow, as the Shadow does the Body.

Of these six things we will severally Treat, with all circumstances relating
thereunto, as the Measure, Manner, Season; not only abstractively, as in
themselves, but with all the concomitants of Age, Sex, Temperament, their
Diversities and Changes: and withal the Method and Order of using the foresaid
six things, so as that Life may be with least Sickness extended to its utmost
possibility. But before I come to particulars, I shall touch upon two Questions:

The 1. Whether Health is always to be preserved by Meats and Drinks of like
Quality and Temperament, with the body Taking them.
This, though a Fundamental in Physic; which says that Diseases are expelled
by Contraries, Health preserved by Similaries; Yet is it oppugned by many
Arguments, As 1. Children and Youths, of Nature Hot, are forbidden Wine; and
with old men that are cold of Temperament do hot things best agree; Hence say
we, Vinum est Lac Senum, Wine is the old Man's Milk; agreeable to which is that
of Hippocrates, Epidemion 6to. They that are Choleric must use bathing, and
much rest: they must drink Water for Wine; Mustard, Garlic, Leekes, Onions,
and spiced Meats are to such very hurtful: This is confirmed by every days
experience; Therefore ought that Traditionall Foundation in Physic to be no
longer trusted to, being so detrimentall to our Healths.

For the Decision of the Question, we must Note, 1. That the Instances to be
given, ought to be in cases of Health and Sound Constitution, and not of
Distemper and Sickness, for then the other part of the Maxim takes place, That
they are to be helped by Contraries.

2. Note. That the Assimilation is not to be understood in a large Sense, but
strictly, with reference, not to the Quality in general, but to the proper and
individual degree thereof: As for Instance, The true Temperament of Man is,
when all the Qualities pertinent to his* Composition are well mixed and
moderated, only his Heat and Moisture are somewhat predominant, it is now
therefore to be preserved by such things as are of like Temper and
Qualification; Hence must we not infer, that whatsoever is Hot, though in never
so intense a degree, is proper and nutritive, but that which is so in the same
degree and constitution with himself.

3. Those things are truly said to be alike in Temperament, which are of equal
distance from the Mean: For instance, those things which are hot in the second
degree, are preserved by Aliments of the same degree: but those which have much
departed from the due Temperament, ought not to be preserved in the State they
are in, but by due Alteratives and Correctives to be amended and restored.

These things thus premised, I agree with the Affirmative, That the Body is
best preserved by Similaries; for how is Nutrition performed, but by
agglutination and Assimilation, by making the food one and the same with the
body: Those things therefore that have greatest Likeness and Resemblance in
Temperament, must needs be most easily and with least disturbance to Nature
assimilated, and made one with her Self.

To the objections I answer, 1. That Wine is therefore forbidden children,
because its Heat is in no proportion analogous to theirs, as being
over-intensively hot, and so too violently consumptive of that radical
Moisture, and destructive to that innate Heat; which by meats and drinks of
like Temperament is long and kindly preserved.

To the 2. I will not here dispute how good Wine is for Old men; I believe they
are generally too bold with it: and my observation tells me that they live most
Healthfully, who both in their youth and old Age are least accustomed to it: It
may be good Physic, but bad Diet: Help to repair and recompense the Defects of
Heat, and to dry up those superfluous Moystures with which old men abound, but
they who use it as their Milk, must expect (in stead of Soft and Firm Flesh,
such as Milk indeed produces in Children:) a dryness and withering in theirs, a
depraedation of their spirits and strength, Catarrhes from their brain, one
while upon their Lungs, and then they become Physical: Another while upon their
Kidneys, and then they prove Nephritical: Now the Humors remain and thicken in
the Brain, and then they prove Lethargicall, and Apoplectical: in others they
loosen the Nerves, and fall upon the Limbs and Joints, and then the Palsy and
Gout seizes them. Thus much as to the Instance.

To the objection I say, that the good which Wine, taken in good quantity and
season, does to Old Men, it performs as a Corrector of the defects, and amender
of the decays which age is accompanied withal, and so makes nothing at all
against our Position.

3. The case is much the same in the 3d objection, of the Choleric: whose
dyscracy must by contraries be amended, and those things strictly forborne which
augment his Distemper: He is therefore prohibited the use of Wine, of Hot meats
and Spices, as increasing his Evil habit of* Body, and advised to such
Correctives of contrary Nature and Quality to his distemper, whereby the same
may in time be allayed, and he reduced to a more equal and orderly constitution.

Of Custom.
In the 2d place, as a particular very necessary to be known in it self, and
very pertinent to a right understanding of what shall hereafter follow, I think
it good to make some enquiry, briefly as I may, into that great Imitatrix of
Nature, Custom, who is said to be as a second Nature, and into which Nature
(though improperly) is said to be convertible: However this Usurper has
exceedingly extended her Dominions, whose power and efficacy is seen almost in
every action of every man's Life. She may be thus Defined.

Custom is an Adventitious Quality, gradually acquired, by frequent Exercise
and Multiplication of Actions: arriving in time to a power somewhat resembling
Nature, but never acquiring such an Identity, as to become Nature her self.

Customs how to be altered?
She gains footing upon us by degrees, and must therefore gradually be removed:
they therefore err, who advise the sudden abolition thereof, acting herein
contrary to the approved Maxim of Nature, That all Sudden Mutations are to be
avoided as dangerous; Whence says Hippocrates Aph. 51. l. 2. Much at one time,
and suddenly either to evacuate, to fill, to heat, to cool, or any other ways
to change or move the body, is very dangerous: and advises thereupon that all
Mutations be made insensibly, and (...), by little and little, yea even the
refection and Restoration of emaciated and consumed bodies. Nature makes no
leaps, but passes from one extreme to another by intervenient Gradations. This
Rule must carefully be observed by such as having long accustomed themselves to
that which is hurtful and prejudicial to their Healths, have acquired thereby
an Evil Habit and Constitution of Body: whether it be by too much use of Wine,
Tobacco, Carnal Coition, Exercise, Meats of bad juice and Hard Digestion,
Sleeping after Dinner, or whatsoever else either in its immoderate use, or in
its own nature proves detrimental to Health, must not however either in
Sickness or Health, be suddenly, and all at once left off, but by degrees, and
small portions, and the contraries thereunto (if need require) insensibly
introduct, and inoffensively to Nature. Many Instances might be here reckoned
up to show the evils that have ensued upon such Violent changes, but in a case
so clear* and in which almost every man's observation will afford him examples,
it will be needless: The inconveniences are most familiarly seen in leaving
totally off long accustomed exercises, whereby those Humors which Motion wasted
by Transpiration, being closed in, and heapt up in the body, become the Food
and Matter of Diseases. So that here the Gradation is to be observed, and the
Diet lessened, that so what by stirring before was used to be evaporated, may
now not be generated.

Another Error there is, of suddenly altering an inveterate Custom in Sickness
and Weaknesses, although that Custom has no Contrariety with the Disease. By
which means Nature is very much discomfited and dejected, her delight being
taken away, and in that dejection she yields very much to the disease; she must
for a time be indulged, Custom having got a great similitude and sympathy with
her self; the omitting whereof must be left to a time when Nature is strong,
and at good leisure, and not under the hands of some violent or obstinate
disease. This case is most perspicuous in those that drink much Wine, and take
much Tobacco, which though in themselves in some respects prejudicial to the
parties using them, yet by time and long use made familiar with their Natures,
as Hemlock was to Galens Athenian Woman, or Poison to Mithridates: they must
not when Violent Diseases come upon them, be rashly and totally left off; and
the Customary longings of Nature utterly rejected, considering I say the
similitude they have got with her self, but rather their quantities fitly
lessened, and the total omission thereof left to a Time of greater Strength
and Ability.

The Reason hereof is, because whatsoever any man is accustomed to, though
worse in its own Nature, yet is it less hurtful to him then its contrary,
forasmuch as it makes less Resistance, and so works less disturbance to the
Stomach and other parts, because of its Agreement in quality with what is
before in the Body: A Countryman though weak and Aged better bears Garlic,
then the strongest man who never before eat of it: That which hinders digestion
is the Resistance that is made in the Stomach; and that is most done by
Dissimilaries; For, Inter Symbola facilis est transitus: Those things that are
of nearest similitude, do easiest pass one into another.

I plead not here for bad Customs, but for the best way of Removing them;
desiring this Inference rather may be made therefrom, that since Evil things
becoming Customary are so difficulty removable, we be very careful to enure our
selves only to those things that are good, wholesome, of easy charge and
preparation.

Whether Physic be Necessary for the preservation of Health?
If the due Course and Order of Nature were observed, there would be very
little or no need at all of Medicinal Helps, for we see those that live nearest
thereunto, continue longest and most free from sickness, as Countrymen, and
those who observe a Strict Diet: the last by an extraordinary temperance,
prevent the generation of those Crudities and Corrupt Humors, which are the
matter and Fuel of Diseases: The other, though they feed heartily and
plentifully, yet is their Diet but simple, and at all times much alike, their
Appetites fresh and urgent, their Concoction strong and constant, and the
accumulation of evil Humors prevented by their hard and Customary Labor. These
want little or no Physical helps: But those that are subject to many Disorders,
as the most part of Mankind is, stand in much need of Preservatives and
Preventives; Hence has come in the Custom of bleeding and purging at Spring
and Fall, and with some Monthly; the now frequent Regurgitations after every
feeding, the use of Fontanels, the frequenting of the Wells, the entering into
Diets, and Courses of Physic: Nor do we usually after Restoration become
Wiser or more wary and orderly in the Regulation of our lives, but recover
strength only for the new and more able exercise of our Intemperance: and so
continue the* Necessity of customary preventives; In these cases therefore they
are to be allowed for the avoiding of greater Evils, only with these Cautions.

Cautions in using Physical Helps.
That strong and violent means be not used, when gentle and more familiar helps
will serve, nor many Remedies when few are sufficient; that we prefer
Alteratives and Correctives, before Purgatives; and likewise Minoratives and
benign Medicines before Churlish, and Scammoniate: bleeding or purging before
an Issue, for that is Medicamentum Continuatum, a being as it were in Continual
Physic, which is also frequently liable to pain and irksome prickings, upon
the change of weather and other accidents. But then though gentle means be to
be preferred, it must be with a great probability of effecting the ends
intended.

2. Whether Customary Physicking is to be continued?
Though Imminency-of Diseas do beget a Necessity of observing the Seasons for
Physic, yet that Custom need not be continued, but when there is a likelihood
of the same Imminency; as suppose a Turgency of Humors, heaviness and
wearisomness of the Limbs, want of appetite, etc. has for these six years
every Spring, signified a Necessity of Dieting and Purgation, and that they
have to good purpose been used accordingly, yet if the same man do by observing
a better order in Diet, and a greater Temperance, so behave himself for the
following year, as not to have the same Symptoms and Indications, neither is
it necessary that he continue by Custom of Physic; but may the next Spring
without danger leave it off, or at least wise lessen it, as occasion requires.
For in these cases the Indication is not to be taken from Custom, but the
Imminency of Sickness.

3. Physic worst for the Healthful.
Though Customary means be needful for prevention of Imminent Sicknesses, yet
they are not therefore to be used Out of Wantonness, and when there is no
appearance or likelihood of an ensuing Malady, for by that means, as Celsus
well says, We consume in our Healths the Remedies of our Sickness; and dispose
our selves many times by so weakening our Bodies, to those sicknesses we had
before no propension unto: for that they worst of all endure Medicines that are
of sound Constitution, who have nothing for Physic to work upon, but the good
Humors, and Habit of the Body it self.

4. They who either naturally, or by the excessive feeding upon hot and dry
meats, have slow bellies, and are constantly costive, must prevent the
inconveniences which will thence ensue: as extreme putrefaction of Excrements,
hot Vapors in the Brain, heaviness and pain in the Head, Inappetency,
palpitation of the Heart, windiness in the Stomach, the Cholick, etc. they must
prevent I say these Inconveniences by the use of some gentle Lenitive, and such
order as is requisite for keeping the body loose and laxative, as eating roast
Apples, or stewed Prunes half an hour before Dinner, drinking a good Draught
in the Mornings, forbearing dry Meats, using Cassia, Manna, Pulp of Tamarinds,
Syrup of Roses, Pilulae ante Cibum, loosening Clisters, Whey with Fumitery,
Senna, or Epithymum, etc. Milk, or the Waters in the Summer, and the like,
proper to facilitate the Belly, prevent those obstructions which are the
Fountain and Nurse of most Diseases: and all this may be done familiarly,
without much ado, and beget no disturbance to the Body.

Of Air.
Air we attract by Inspiration and Perspiration, by the Windpipe, and by the
Pores, and that to repair our continual loss of Spirits, and contemperate the
heat of the Heart and Blood.

Which the best Air in general?
The goodness of Air is considered either, as it is in it self, or with
Relation to this or that Body:

In it self, that is best which is pure and serene, not mingled with any noisome
smell, as of Carrion, Iaxes, places where they repose their Dung, standing and
corrupted Waters, thick Foggs and Vapors, etc, but is naturally pure and void
of all inquination.

Which to each Particular.
Considered with Relation to this or that Body, that is best, which by its
similitude is most proper to preserve Health, or by its contrariety most
efficacious to expel diseases: as over moist bodies, live most Healthfully in
Dry Aires, and over dry in Moist: so that it is a mistake to think the clearest
and sharpest Air is best for every body; since Distempered and depraved
Constitutions do as necessarily require a contrariety in Air, (and
consequently sometimes moist and thick Aires) as in Meats and Drinks.

I have lately known two sickly bodies who heretofore were hardly ever out of
Physic, and yet for that time since they lived in Lambeth-Marsh (a place that
no one would choose for the pureness and Clarity of the Air) have enjoyed a
sound, and uninterrupted Health: and one of them has lived there for these 3.
or 4. years: Sound Bodies and healthful endure well almost any Air, but Crazy
Persons must (if they have the Convenience) make choice of such Aires as are
opposite to their Distempers.

Helps against Bad Air.
But when want of Means and Convenience necessitates any to those Aires that are
most repugnant to their Healths, all the help that remains, is by proper meats
and drinks, and other means to repair what may be that defect: as if the Air
be hot, and the Body inclined to hot Distempers, to use cooling aliments, to
drink Water in stead of Wine, to frequent Bathing where it may be had, to
Rest much, and forbear Violent Motions, To have little Cisterns of Water,
always running, (such as are commonly made of Peuter,) to hang up Wet clothes,
to strew the pavement with Roses, Rushes, Vine-leaves, Water Lillies, and other
Cooling Herbs, which may likewise be sprinkled with Rose Water and Vinegar: On
the contrary, cold and moist Aires may be much helped by Large Fires,
Bath-stoves, Warming-stones, and agreeably provisions may be made in other
cases.

I purpose not to insist upon every consideration that relates to Air, but
passing by those that are speculative, I shall touch only upon such as are
useful and practical, and from which most men may derive some Commodity to
themselves.

Of sharp Aires.
Mountanous Aires are esteemed wholsomer then in the Valley, because more
perflated and cleansed by the Winds: whereas the others are stagnant like
standing Waters: But I doubt the truth hereof, for that I see not how one part
of the Air can be moved without the other, its motion and impulsion being so
easy, that we see the very voice moves and makes it give way at a very great
Distance, and then again if to some bodies more gross and stagnant Aires are
not so wholesome, for instance, to the slaggy and corpulent, to others they are
most agreeable, and the thin, sharp, and Penetrative most inconvenient, namely
to thin, spare and emaciated Bodies.

What the inconveniences of Metalline Vapors are, I shall not need to recite,
neither yet what helps there are against them: because living not where they
are, we are not subject thereunto.

Corruption of Air.
The Causes whereby Air is Corrupted, that are within our Ken, and which may by
us be Remedied, are especially three.

1. Great Standing Waters never Refreshed. 2. Carrion lying long above ground.
3. Much People in small Room living uncleanly and sluttishly.
Change of Aires by winds.
The Air Changes its qualities from the Diversity of Winds: By those from the
North it is cold and dry, they do confirm and strengthen such bodies, which are
able to bear them. From the South they are hot and moist, and so loosen and
dissolve; the West is more Temperate: but the East apt to blastings.

The South Wind without rains continuing long,disposes to Feavors and the
Pestilence: and generally so do stagnant Airs without Winds, Rain and Thunder.

It is observed that from the North there arises with the Doggstar certain
Winds called Ethesiae, which do not only contemperate the Heat of the Air, but
Purg it from putrefaction, and pestilential Infections, and have thence got the
name of Scoparij: because they do as it were Brush and Cleanse the Air.

In Consumptions, and for Restoration after long Sicknesses; the best Aires
are in dry Champaignes, where there is much Timber-Shade, and Forest, Beach
Trees, and Groves of Bays,; where likewise grow odoriferous Plants, as Wild
Time, Wild Marjerom, Pennyroyal, Camomil, Calamint, Juniper and the like, and
where the Brier-Rose smells like Musk-Roses, Helpful whereunto is likewise the
Steam of new ploughed grounds; and for such as have not strength to walk, a
Fresh Turf of Earth every Morning, with a little Vinegar poured upon it.

However it is best for them that are any thing Healthful not to be
over-solicitous in the choice of Air, or to judge that they cannot have their
healths except in some few Places of best and excellent Air, for they do
thereby very much deject Nature, and opinionate themselves into Sickness. Such
Imaginations the mind in continual doubts and perplexities, and make us
sickly, out of a fear of being sick: We see that many men, and those not of the
strongest and most healthful constitutions, live long, and without sickness,
amidst noysom and unpleasant Smells, as Oyl-men, Sope-boylers,
Tallow-Chandlers, and diverse others besides, those that are conversant about
Dung, cleanfing of Commonshores and Jaxes, and though Custom in these cases may
be urged, because of the familiarity that by long use is begotten between such
Smells and their Natures; yet is it thence clearly evincible, that health and
noysom smells are not inconsistible, which is a clear argument that we need not
be over nice and solicitous in the election of Aires, as if in this City of
London amidst thick fumes and Sulphurious Vapors from the Sea-coal, we could
not enjoy our Health: In these cases Opinion is more our Mistress then Reason:
which whilst we are pleading for, we can content our selves with the Smoke of
Narcotick Tobacco, and not only surround our selves therewith in a close Room,
and in hot weather too, but suck it in, and let it sometimes descend-into our
Stomachs, and sometimes ascend into our Nostrils and so into the very Brain it
self: In some cases therefore we are scrupulously exact, in others supinely
negligent, a middle between both were best, as not to think but that health is
preservable in Aires not exquisitely serene and penetrative: and on the other
side to avoid choking, hot and too exiccative Fumes, which in time parch the
Lungs, and dry up the Brain.

What Smells best.
For Odors, those are best which neither by their super-abundance of Heat,
Strength and Crassitude of Spirits do overcome us, but which by their rarity
and quickness do refresh us: But they also are good only sometimes, and the
bodies infirmity requiring it, for otherwise, no Smell is best: but that which
is almost insensible in the Air it self.

Of Native Aires.
It is observed, that the Air we are born in, tends much to the Restoration of
Health. Something may be allowed to it because of its Sympathy with the innate*
Spirits of the Body: which remain in some measure from our generation to our
Dissolution: Although I conceive when we go into our Native Countries, to
repair our Health, after long Sickness, the principal means thereof, is vacancy
from care and business, the wholsomness and simplicity of Country Feeding, the
enjoyment of friends, merriment and pleasant pastime, which is usual, and
which ought indeed to be especially intended in such Journies.

Sudden alterations.
But above all, sudden alterations in Air from extreme to extreme, is very
dangerous: Such as usually falls out in March, April, and sometimes in May, as
also in September, October: the change is usual too in several parts of the
same day; the Mornings and Evenings extreme cold, the mid day excessive Hot: In
these cases the surest way is for them that are crazy to go warm clothed, till
the uncertainty of the weather is over: the Proverb speaks well, though homely,
Till May be out,
Leave not off a Clout.


We must not, like the unexperienced Mariner, believe the Stormy Season to be
past, because of a fit of Sunshine. If we err, it is better do it on the safe
hand, and not run the hazard of a sickness for fear of an unhansome Nickname.
This Caution concerns those only that are any thing infirm and sickly, (as
indeed most are) the youthful and robust, can bear all Weathers, and in the
thinnest apparel; though there is a Proverb concerns them also, That they
should be old when they are young, that they may be young when they are
expected to be old.

Cautions about Air.
Some other inobservancies there are prejudicial to Health, that somewhat
concern this point, which I shall only touch upon: as being naked in the cold
Air, and going into the Water when we are hot and Sweaty, by doing whereof
many healthful Persons dispose themselves to Agues and Consumptions.

2. The ventring too suddenly before the Pores are closed into the cold Air
after Bathing, and Sweating in Hot-Houses, Cradles, or Sweating-Chairs, by
which not only the benefit hoped for is lost, but our Infirmities are doubled
upon us, by begetting an inequality of Heat and Cold in the Inward and Outward
Parts, whence arise those Shuddrings, and Aguish Rigors, that usually follow
thereupon. And so I have done with Air, the first of the non-Naturals, as we
call them: (that is) of which the body is not compounded, though by them it be
preserved.

Of Meat and Drink.
OUr Bodies being in a continual, though insensible Consumption, would in a
short time decay, were it not that Reparation is made by the use of Meats and
Drinks; By the first the Solid Parts are refected, by the last the Humid: For
the better performance whereof, God has endowed every Creature with an
Appetetive Faculty, distinguished according to the Objects forementioned into
Hunger and Thirst.

Of Hunger.
Hunger is caused by a sharp and Fermenting juice remaining in the Stomach,
especially in the upper Orifice, the most sensitive part thereof, by the
penetrative Quality whereof the Meat ingested is also digested, fermented, and
concocted, and so made fit for separation and Distribution. When this juice, (a
visible Specimen whereof is the Runnet in a Calves Stomach) is either wasted, as
after very long Fastings, or is dulled by Repletion, or intermixture with other
Humors, so that the force thereof cannot be felt, or when the Mind is
over-intent and distracted, so that it can give no ear to its Impulsions: Then
does the Appetite flagg and decay; as on the contrary, when this juice is
over-abundant, and extremely acide, there follows a continual Importunity from
the Stomach, an unsatisfiable Appetite, which being most eminent in Dogs, is
therefore called Appetitus Caninus, the Doglike Appetite; but appears sometimes
in Men, as every one can Instance.

Of Thirst*
Thirst is a Desire of that which is Cold and Moist, for though many Stomachs
are satisfied with Hot Drink, yet is it through a Customary aberration from
Nature, inasmuch as we see that all Creatures except Man are desirous of, and
use that Drink only which is cold; and in man the use of Hot Drinks is not so
much attributable to his Natural Appetite, as to his having been indulged
therein by his Physician, or himself, in respect of some other Weakness and
Infirmity of his Body. This Thirst does vanish when the Mouth of the Stomach is
bedewed with Humors that are Phlegmatic, Watery, or Insipide: As it is
increased when those Humors are consumed, and the Stomach dry and parcht,
either through its own or any of its Neighbors Indisposition, or yet when the
Coats thereof are lined with a Salt, Hot, or sharp Humor. These Things
premised, of which I shall make use hereafter; I return to the Considerations
of those things that are Aliment ( viz.) which being eaten or drunk are altered
by our Natural Heat, and so prepared by the several Parts destined thereunto,
as at length to be Converted into the Habit of the Body it Self.

In Meats and Drinks there are six particulars to be considered, viz. 1.
Substance. 2. Quality. 3. Quantity. 4. Custom. 5. Time. 6. Order.


For the two first, I purpose not to insist upon them, viz. their Substance and
Quality, what yield Good, what Bad juice and apt to putrefaction, which are
easy, and which hard to be digested; what are Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Causing or
Freeing from obstructions: neither intend I to treat of every Meat and Drink
particularly, both of these having been already performed in English by Dr.
Venner in his Via Recta ad Vitam longam, from whence those that are inquisitive
that way, may receive satisfaction: Unwilling I am now to exspaciate in so
large a Field, which I shall rather reserve to a time-of more Leisure: My
Intention being at present to consider only these Particulars relating to Meats
and Drinks, viz. The Quantity, Time, Order and Custom. The greatest and most
dangerous Errors being committed with Reference hereunto.

Of Quantity in Meats.
First then for Quantity, or how much ought to be eaten: Here there is not so
much need to prescribe the Bounds, and show what are the Limits of Temperance:
as effectually to persuade to the observance of those Limits: Arguments against
Intemperance.
A word therefore first as to that, and what Argument can be more efficatious
then an Enumeration of the Benefits that arises from Sobriety and Temperance:
and of the discommodities that are the Natural Effects of the contrary. I shall
reckon them up in two ranks, and then let every man make his choice.

The Benefits of Temperance.
1. Freedom from almost all Sicknesses. 2. Length of Life, and Death without
pain. 3. It armeth us against outward Accidents. 4. It mitigateth incurable
Diseases. 5. Maintains the Senses in their Integrity and Vigeur. 6. It
moderates our Passions and Affections, and renders them easily commendable. 7.
It preserves the Memory, sharpens the Wit and Understanding. 8. It Allays the
Heat of Lust.


The Inconveniences of Intemperance.
1. It brings upon us almost all Diseases. 2. It shortens our Days, and makes
us die in Agonies. 3. It exposes us to innumerable accidents of extreme
prejudice. 4. It takes part with Diseases, and makes them incurable. 5. It
dulls, stupifies, and decays the Senses. 6. It subjects us to our Passions, and
makes them irresistible. 7. It drowns the Memory, dulls the Wit and
Understanding. 8. It furiously provokes us to Lust.


These experimental Events who can deny? since almost every man carries about
him, and within him a convinceing argument thereof. Whence is the Multitude of
Physicians, but from the frequency and Multitude of Diseases? and whence that
frequency and Multitude, but from Excess? This is generally confessed, but the
practice still continued; the understanding assents, but the Affections
overruled; the present delight we take in those delicious Cates, Condiments and
enticing Sawces that are before us, over-sways our judgments; In this case,
Venture non habet Aures, the Belly has no Ears, All our Senses are at a stand,
save that of our Taste, so earnest are we in digging our Graves with our Teeth;
so greedy after Diseases, which by excess insensibly steal upon us, and then in
the midst of our Aches and Intemperance we repent, and call to mind the unhappy
cause thereof.

Much feeding hinders nourishment and growth.
I shall desire therefore that before hand, besides the former, these 2
Arguments be coned: 1. That Nourishment and Growth consists not in the
Abundance we eat, but in the due competency: A man may hinder his Nourishment
and prevent his Growth, as well by eating too much, as by eating too little:
for Nutrition and Augmentation consists principally in good Digestion, and
perfect Distribution: Abundance of Meat and Drinks hinders first Digestion.

1. 1. Digestion.
In that it suffers not the Stomach to close, but leaves the upper Orifice
open; by which its heat exhales and so languishes, and the inconveniences
thence arising are almost innumerable: for then Vapors ascend, and fill the
Brain, there they thicken and cause Defluxions into the Eyes, the Gums, and
Teeth, the Stomach, the Lungs, the Spine of the Back, the Kidneys, the Joints,
the Veins, Nerves, and Arteries, according as they can insinuate themselves,
and the openness of Passages affords them way.

2. When the Stomach is overcharged, it is extended, its Pleits and
Duplications unfolded, and consequently both its own heat is diminished, and
the Parts surrounding, which are very great Assistants, if not principalls in
concoction, cannot afford their due Heat and efficacy, in that they are not
able to compass the Stomach as it is then extended: Thence arises Crudities,
Putrifactions, Worms, Putrid, Malignant and Pestilentiall Fevers, with many
other Diseases.

2. 2. Growth or Augmentation.
For Distribution, how can that be performed when the Passages are choakt up
through the abundance of Meats? how can each part have its proportionable share
by Wise and Equal Nature allotted, when we raise Banks and Dambs to hinder that
Distribution: On the contrary when a due competency is taken into the Stomach,
it presently closes and aptly surrounds it, and is fitly embraced by its
assistant parts; So is Digestion perfected, the Meat made passable, the
Excrement orderly descends, the Nourishing juice takes its Course to the Liver,
and after Sanguification is distributed, and assimilated into the Habit of the
Body it self. So that since we eat to be Nourished, and since by a due
competency that is best performed, and excess is a manifest Impediment
thereunto, how vain are we if we alter not our Course, and take that way that
is effectual for producing of our Ends?

Greatest Pleasure in Temperance.
The 2d Argument is taken from the greater Pleasure that Temperance brings with
it then Excess: And this Argument sure will do, for why is it that we indulg
our Bellies so much, but because of the supposed pleasure we reap therefrom?
Now if it can be made appear, that Temperance brings more, we cannot then
choose sure but follow her tract and Prescript.

1. Then, that pleasure is greatest, which is most Natural and unforc't, such
is the Temperate man's: His Appetite only is his Sauce, which by spare feeding,
and due Abstinence is kept always fresh, vivid, and Importunate, so that he
tastes to the last, and to the very end of his Temperate Meal his Appetite
continues, and consequently his Delight; Whereas the excessive man eats not
from desire, but Custom, and generally finds no Appetite naturally, but is fain
to force it by artificial Helps, whilst to the other, ordinary Fare does Equal
in Sweetness the greatest Dainties.

2. That Delight is best, which is most lasting, such is the Temperate man's,
His all the year long continues; Whilst the other, for his Deliciousness to
day, is fain to lie by it to morrow: nay, is distracted amidst his Pleasure, by
the foreknowledge of what will follow: And how can that be termed delight,
which is intermixed with an expectation of Sorrow. There will be Qualms and
Surfets, a necessity of frequent Purgations, Vomitings, Bleeding, making
Issues; And then the former Surfets are called to mind, and repented of; then
we condemn our selves for preferring a sickly and momentany Pleasure before a
sound and lasting: The Athenians by one of their Senators were told, that they
never Treated of Peace but in their black Robes, after the loss of their
dearest Friends and Kinsfolks: Plutar. Praecep. Sanit.
So are we, regardless of a sober Diet, till we are cauterised, and have
Cataplasmes and Plasters about us. Till then we blame, one while the Air,
another while the place we live in, as unwholesome, attribute the fault to our
being out of our Native Country, or some such trifle, but never think of the
true cause, our Intemperance. But I shall not need further to pursue this
Point, for to such as have the Command of themselves, their longings and
desires, here is sufficient; Such as have not, will run their course, till
Sickness, and an inability of being Intemperate restrain them. I come now to
the Thing it self, The Determination of the Bounds and Limits of Temperance; In
doing whereof I cannot approve of that Arithmeticall Proportion, The Bounds of
Temperance.
or Dieta Statica, the allotment of a certain Weight and Measure of Meat and
Drink, not upon any terms to be exceeded.

I cannot I say approve it, as to general practice, for how should the same
shoo fit every foot; how can it be, but that where there is difference in
Constitution, Age, Sex, etc. and so diversities of Heat, and ability to Concoct
and Digest, a different proportion should be also requisite: That Quantity
surely which is but sufficient for a young man in his Heat and Growth, is by
much too much for an aged man, whose Nutritive Faculties are languide, whose
Transpiration being little, stands in need also of but little Repair; Leaving
therefore the strictness of Lessius and Cornaro to Speculative and Monastic
men, as somewhat above us, and besides us: My purpose is only to prescribe two
general Rules of Temperance, which may easily be made practicable by all sorts
of Men and Women; and likewise to suggest some Helps to such as finding the
inconveniences of Customary large feeding, are desirous to reclaim themselves,
and observe such a Diet as is most advantageous to their Healths.

1 Rule of Temperance.
The first Rule is that of Hippocratis, (...). They that study their Health,
must not be satisfied with meat, but as Avicen otherwise expresses it, must
rise from the Table cum Famis reliquiis, with the remainder of their Hunger: by
this means the Stomach will well overcome and digest what it has received, and
the remainder of thy Appetite will be better employed in perfecting thy
Digestion.

2. 2. Rule of Temperance.
That thou so feed, as after it to be neither unfit for the labor of the Body,
nor the employments of thy Mind: For he that finds an oppressive Dullness, and
slothful Weariness after his Meal, may know for certain that he has exceeded
the Bounds of Temperance, and perverted the end of Feeding, which is not to
oppress, but to recreate the Spirits, and renew the strength and powers of the
body, to make them more cheerful and vigorous, that by abstinence or labor
were impaired: If therefore thou transgressest in this point, let thy
Abstinence be the greater, and thy care and circumspection doubled at thy
following Meals.

Error in Feeding.
Many, as Lessius well observes, run into an extreme mistake in this point, for
finding themselves more faint and unweldy after Meals then before, they
presently attribute the cause thereof to their not having eaten enough, or
conceive that their Meats were not sufficiently Nutritive, and thereupon are
very solicitous to find out Meats of better nourishment; which when they have
done, and fed largely thereupon, do yet alas find the same Lassitude and
indisposition of Body remaining: the true cause whereof is the ill Juice and
Moisture, the Relics of their former Surcharge, as their much spitting, their
frequent Catarrhs, and the swelling of their Bellies do eminently demonstrate:
This Moisture likewise remains in the Joints, the Brain, and Nerves, and so
renders both the Limbs unable to perform their several offices, and hinders
likewise the Conveyance of a due and competent proportion of Spirit thereunto:
And hence comes that Dullness, and Lumpishness of the Limbs and Senses, so
generally complained of amongst men.

2. Error.
Another general mistake in this particular is, That Men and Women finding this
Heaviness and Indisposition in the Mornings, judge it to proceed from Fasting,
and therefore, as for prevention thereof, carefully provide good Breakfasts;
from which they may happily for the present find some alteration, by the
present Warmth and Spirit of their new Feeding; which being in present motion
in their Bodies, takes away not the Cause, but the sensibility of their former
Lassitude: but that being gone, which continues but for a very short time,
their Wearisomness returns again, with the addition of new Crudities, till at
last an accumulation is made, to that degree and quantity, as does both very
much dispose them to the Gout, and also begets other Diseases. The preventive
Remedy whereof, is to spend those ill Juyces and Superfluities by Abstinence,
with the assistance of an Exiccative Medicine, or as the Crudities and excess
may have been, of Vomit or Purgation. And this is the way to restore the
Lightsomeness and Agility of the Body.

1. Caution.
My first Caution is, that we Enure our selves what may be to a simple Diet, as
most healthful, as the best Remedy against Intemperance; so prescribes Nature,
and we see those Creatures in whom Nature is least perverted, and who are not
distracted from their Course by the Lust and Tyranny of Man, do strictly and
with excellent success observe this Rule; In this Simplicity there is not that
entisement to the Appetite, whereas Diversity of Meats and Drinks do extend it,
ultra famen and sitim, as Socrates was wont to say, Of Feasting
beyond hunger and thirst. In this our English Feastings are exceedingly
blamable, in which no Art or Charge is wanting, to furnish us with Diseases;
There are all the Curiosities that can be invented to provoke us to
Intemperance, Diversities of Courses and Services, each of which is much more
then sufficient; and all to renew decayed Appetite, and entise it to subvert it
self, and its yielding Master: the next days Nauceousness tells us as much:
The Pleasure of Feasting consists not in the daintiness, True end of Feasting.
and curiosity of Fare, and Multitude of Dishes, but in the Society of Feeding,
not in our Eating much, but in our Eating together; it is poverty of Spirit,
and below a man to place felicity in Meats and Drinks, it is an argument, that
in us the sensual exceeds the Rational, that our Desires are our Masters and
our Bellies Sovereign to our Brains. A great Feast is indeed a handsome
opportunity to exercise our Temperance, for they are most truly such who can
resist the Entisement, and abstain when delicate cates are before them; but
since few there are of us (though some I know) that are arrived to such a
degree of Virtue, it is best to decline the Field, not being able to endure the
Combat; Next to Resisting a Temptation, is the avoiding it; nay in some sense
it is to be prefered, in that it avoids the hazard of being overcome thereby:
Though the first shows most Fortitude, this shows greater Prudence.

2. 2. Caution.
Provoke not Hunger, (if the Body want not Nourishment) by Sawces or Vomit; but
Rather by Exercise and Abstinence. These are the Natural ways of least
disturbance to the Body, and are most efficacious to the begetting of Appetite.

2. In the Quantity of Meats, respect is to be had to three particulars.

1. To the Nature of the Meat. 2. The Constition of the Person, and his manner
of life. 3. To the Season of the year.

Respect had to the Nature of Meats.
Meats that are tough, Viscid, Dry, of hard Digestion, must be eaten in lesser
quantity: Such also as are most ingrate to the palate, for that the Stomach
upon their Ingestion, does not firmly close, but with some kind of Reluctation:
Meats also that are uncustomary, unless they be very pleasant and of easy
digestion, must very sparely be fed upon.

These following do require a larger proportion of Meat: To the Constitution of
the Person.


1. They that have Hot Stomachs, and so both wast much, and have greatest Heat
and ability to Digest; with whom likewise solid Meats, and somewhat of hard
Digestion do best agree.

2. They that are in their growth.

3. They that Labor or Exercise much.

On the other side, a lesser proportion is sufficient, for,

1. Those that have Cold Stomachs.

2. That are in their full age, or declining.

3. For those that lead a sedantary Life, and use no Labor or Exercise.

4. For those that are indisposed in their Bodies, newly recovering their
Healths, or falling into Sickness. But as well these later as the former must
observe the two Rules of Health formerly prescribed.

To the Season.
In Winter and Spring our Stomachs are hotest, and our Sleeps longest, and
therefore a larger proportion may be allowed in those Seasons, of Meat, but not
of Drink, for that the Body is then moist, both because the Seasons are such,
and also because the Cold hinders the egression of Vapors, which being closed
in, turn into Humors.

In Summer, what is wanting in Meat, may be taken in Drink, for then the Body
is dry, and the inward heat and Vapors are extracted by the external.

Autumn is more Variable, and so not capable of Rule: in it self much like
Spring; and must be respected as it partakes of the precedent and Subsequent
Season.

Times of Feeding.
The next Circumstance to be considered in Meats and Drinks, is the Time of
Feeding; Best Time when Hungry.
And therein, the best Guide is Hunger: that before the next Meal, the former
Meat be well digested, and perfectly distributed; then will Hunger follow, the
Richest Sauce, without which we may conclude (the body being in Health) that
the Stomach has a part of its former work to do; and therefore ought not yet
to be charged with new employment. This rule truly observed, would exceedingly
conduce to the Conservation of Health: for it would keep the Stomach and Bowels
clean, much better then purgations, and all artificial Helps, it would keep its
strength Fresh and Vigorous, prevent Crudities, Nauceousness, filthy and
unsavory Eructations, and that Catholic Source of most Diseases, Obstructions.
This, as to the general, to be observed by all.

The particular Considerations for often feeding, are much the same, as for
much feeding: Children must eat little and often. Little, because their
Stomachs are as yet straight, and not enlarged. Often, because little, because
their Stomachs are hot and able to concoct. And lastly, because they are in
their Growth. Young men proportionably may, to the Frequency, be allowed Larger
Quantities. Very Old men are to be fed like Children, because they are not able
to digest much: But being not in the extremity of Age, they can best of all
endure Hunger. The Hot and Choleric endure not Hunger: The Cold and Moist can
bear with long Abstinence. The Lean and Hot, whose Transpiration and vvasting
is much, must have Large Reparations. To the Fat, who have narrow Pores,
Abstincnce is good and easily endured. Much Labor and Exercise, as they spend
much, so do they require Large and Frequent Supplies, otherwise the body is
soon enfeebled; But they who Lead a Sedentary life, which is the unhappiness of
most Women, must seldom and sparingly feed: yea very seldom and sparingly,
otherwise they will have need of continual Physic and Evacuation, to spend and
drive those Humors, that in other are consumed by Labor or Exercise. Custom is
here of very great Moment also; which if not very bad, must be indulged; but if
so, it must be altered by degrees, and insensible Gradations.

The usual Custom in England is to eat thrice a day; No Break-fasts.
a Breakfast, Dinner, and Supper: the young and very healthful may be allowed
it, eating not to fullness; But forasmuch as the generality of People are
infirm, and since most diseases proceed from Crudities, and Indigestion, I judge
it better to omit the Breakfast, that so by Abstinence the Stomach may be
cleansed, and its superfluous Moistures consumed: I mean those that labor not,
and who have crude Stomachs, their mouths being constantly bedewed with
Phlegmatic moisture, and who seldom eat from the instigation of Hunger, but
Custom.

Much benefit they will likewise find from the using of some desiccative, to
dry up these moistures, such as are Condite-Ginger, Ginger-Bread, the
Condite-Roots, or Stalks of Angelica, Rinds of Oranges, Lemmons, or Citrons
condited: Cakes or conserve of the Flowers of Rosemary: Conserve of Roman
Wormwood, with a little Cream of Tartar, the Roots of Horseradish sliced and
steeped in Sack: of any of which a small quantity, as half a Dram, a Dram, or
two Drams to more Robust Bodies, will dry up Reumatick Superfluities, dispel
Wind, and prevent those Scorbutic Maladies, to which most People are
Inclinable.

From this Rule I except those that Labor, Nurses, Growing Persons: who must
daily eat thrice at least. And also in Recompense of the others Abstinence,
it is requisite that they Dine betimes, as about Eleven, and Sup about six: so
will there be a sufficient Space intervening for the perfecting of Each
Digestion.

Whether may be allowed, the larger Dinner or Supper?
Custom pleads for the former, for then our appetite being strong, and we
coming with empty bellies, and importunate Hunger to our Dinners, feed largely,
having respect only to our present Satiety, by which means (the space to
Supper time being but short, and consequently our Stomachs not yet empty) our
appetite is then weak, so that (at least if we have any regard to Health) we
then feed sparingly, otherwise we must expect a a very turbulent and restless
Night. Large Supper best.
But setting Custom aside, which is alike inclined to that which is bad as
good: I conceive the healthfullest way is, to propose the Largest Meal for
Supper: the largest I say, not to a Surcharge, or Surfeit, for that is at no
time good, but to a competent Satiety: always provided that it be somewhat
early, as about six, that so a due space may intervene between that and Bed
time: That our Dinner be only ad mulcendam famem, to assuage Hunger, not
satisfy it, but take off its Edg and Urgency till Supper. And that Supper be
Quasi Laboris and Cogitationum Terminus, and the time after it, till Bed time,
be only destined to Mirth and Pastime, pleasant both to the body and the mind.

My Reasons for larger Supper are, 1. Because the time after Supper is fittest
for Concoction, as destined to Rest and Sleep, in which the heat and Spirits
are not distracted, or otherwise employed, in the Brain or limbs, as in the day
time by Business or Labor but are totally retired, and employed about
Digestion. 2. The Intervening Space between Supper and Dinner, is much larger
then between Dinner and Supper; and the Heat and Spirits have thereby the
greater Help and opportunity to perform their office of Digestion.

The strongest Objection against this that I can find is, in the case of those
that are troubled with the Headache, Vertigo, Catarrhs, or any other
infirmities of a weak and moist Brain.

To which I answer, first, that my enquiry was only of what is best for them
that are in good state and condition of Health, and that particular Infirmities
require particular Rules.

2. I say, as to the present case, that the early Supping avoids the
inconvenience; for that a sufficient space is allotted before sleeping time,
for the closure of the Stomach: nor can I but conceive that Motion and Labor,
which is usual after Dinner, does by Agitation and subversion of the Stomach,
hinder its Closure, and so more inclines to the Elevation of Vapors, which is
the cause of the infirmities in the objection mentioned.

To the Common Argument, of the assistance the Stomach finds by the additional
Heat of the Sun, for its Help to Digestion. I answer, that all external Heats
are rather a Hinderance thereunto, then a Furtherance, for that they dissipate,
and draw forth the Natural Heat, and leave the Inner parts more Cold and
Helpless: This they shall soon experiment that sit by a great Fire, or in the
Hot Sun after Meals; and the case is clear by our Stomachs, greater inability
in the Summer then Winter: So that my assertion to me remains firm, which
therefore I commend to public consideration.

Rules for drinking.
The same Rules as are for Eating, serve also for the times of Drinking, the
only motive whereunto ought to be Thirst: the only ends of Drinking being to
Moisten and make passable the Victuals; and therefore Moist Meats require
little Drink, and solid require only so much, as well to temper them and
prevent obstructions: They therefore who drink much at Meals, incur a double
inconvenience. 1. By making the Victuals Float in the Stomach, which ought to
reside in the Bottom thereof, they hinder Digestion, and by overmuch moistning
the upper Orifice thereof, they keep it open, and so make the Vapors rise. And
2. It makes the Victuals pass too soon out of the Stomach, raw and indigested,
whence come Fluxes in the Bowels, and putrid Crudities in the Veins and
Arteries.

The best time of Drinking is about the middle of the Meal: for that best
moistens and contemperates the Meat, and so helps Digestion: To Drink before
too much, dissolves the Stomach, unless in those that have a very Current
passage, and then an hour must be allowed between. To drink after is very bad
for those that are apt to Rheums and Headaches. Avoid drinking also at
sleeping time, for that also disposes to Vapors and Rheums. Drink also small
draughts, for that best prevents fluctuation, when the Drink insensibly, and by
little and little mixes with the Victuals.

For those that Drink much, and frequently, ad Ebrietatem usque, it is in vain
to prescribe Rules, it is better save that labor, that I know before hand will
be lost: Only I shall present them with a short scheam, at their leisure (if
they can spare any from their Potations) to Contemplate upon.

The Effects of Drunkenness are,
Resolution of the Nerves, Cramps and Palsies. Inflation of the Belly and
Dropsies. Redness and Rheums in the Eyes. Tremblings in the Hands and Joints.
Inclination to Fevers and the Scurvy. Sicknesses at Stomach and sour
Belchings. A furious and unmanageable Disposition to Lust. A Subjection to all
the Passions. Decay of Memory, and Understanding. Loss of Credit and
Reputation. An unfitness for Business, and Dispatch of Affairs.
An easy Discovery of all Secrets:
These and many more are the bitter Fruits that grow upon that unhappy Tree:
God having wisely annexed to every Evil its inseparable Inconvenience: Every
Vice has its Sting, and every Virtue its Recompense; two Paths he has made,
the straight and crooked, and given commands that we should walk in the one,
and eschew the other; the first leads to Felicity, the last to Misery, and Man
has Understanding and Freedom, to know and choose the best, and consequently
himself only too blame, if he prefer the worst.

Order of Feeding.
The last Particular to be observed in Meats and Drinks is the Order of Feeding:
What is to be eaten first, and what last: wherein two Things are principally,
and in most People to be intended. 1. The Avoiding Obstructions. 2. The
prevention of the Vapors ascending into the Brain. Obstructions are best
avoided, by beginning our Meals with those things that are loosning, (contrary
to our Custom) whereby the Passages are made slippery, and the Victuals easily
passable through the Bowels: Such are Figs, Straw berries, Cherries,
Roasted-Apples, Prunes, etc. On the contrary astringent things are at first to
be avoided; as Quinces, Medlers, Services, Baked Pears that are gretty,
Peaches, Chees, Olives, all which do close up the Bowels, and are therefore to be
eaten in small quantities after Meals, as necessary to press down that which
was first eaten, to shut the Stomach and keep the Vapors from fuming into the
Head. If Laxatives be eaten last, the Stomach will be apt to Qualms, Belchings,
and Regurgitations, and (other Meats hindering their descention) they will
easily corrupt, and will then impart their putrefaction. And this is all I
shall say about Order, in which, as it is not convenient we be over-nice, for
that the Victuals does in some sort mix and blend in the Stomach, yet since it
cannot be supposed to be so perfectly done, but that the Order in egestion or
casting out, is much the same with that of Ingestion or taking in; so much care
is necessary, as to prevent the manifest inconveniences I have mentioned. And
so I have done with the second of the Non-Naturals, Meat and Drink. I come to
the third, which is;

Of Motion and Rest.
THe Commodities of Moderate Motion or Exercise are many, principally three.

1. The Commodities of Exercise.
The Increase of Natural Heat and Spirit.

2. The Agility and Firmness of the Body.

3. An easy bearing of external accidents. To which may be added, That it
assists the Distribution of our Nourishment, and so augments our Growth: That
it discusses Vapors and fuliginous excrements by the Pores or Spiracles of the
skin, Facilitates the Birth, adds Color and Vivacity to the whole Body.

Discommodities of a Sitting Life.
The Discommodities of too much Rest and Sitting, are, 1. That it makes our
Bodies loose and slabby, easily yielding to all external accidents: it begets
Multiplication of Humors and excrements, and consequently that they are seldom
well at ease, and void of Infirmities: This is especially the unhappiness of
Women, who mostly leading a Sedentary Life, lose their Colors, and the vivacity
of their Countenances, and are thereby forced to use paintings, whence (being
unskilfully administered) they contract Headaches, pains and blackness in the
Teeth, and derive many other Maladies both to themselves and their Posterities:
Hence it is that they are unavoidably in continual Physic, have need of
Issues, and other artificial Helps, for the evacuation and exiccation of those
Superfluous Moistures, that might more safely, Naturally, and with infinite
less trouble to them, be consumed by easy and constant Labor or Exercise: So
that the Indigent People have this recompense to their Poverty, that their
necessitated Labors keeps them much in Health, and without the need, trouble
and charge of Physic.

Caution to Women and Maids.
Let me therefore without offense to good Women and Virtuous Maidens, give this
advice, that as they respect their Healths, and Beauties ( and who I pray do
not respect them?) they accustom themselves from their Childhoods to convenient
Labor or Exercise, so shall they by Custom and Education, take a good liking
thereunto, and without any reluctance of mind or irksomness of body undergo the
same: To Labor I say, for under favor they are much mistaken (be their
condition what it will be) to judge it dishonorable, or a Derogation to their
esteem in the World, it is rather an Ornament, and addition thereunto,
especially since employments may be found out very suitable (and becoming
Maidens of greatest Birth and Parentage, such as are Confectioning, Simpling,
or an acquisition of the Knowledge of Herbs and Drugs, their Natures and
Virtues, how to use them likewise in Physic and Surgery: which is a very
commendable and profitable employment both for the Body and the Mind, and
whereby they may be helpful and assistant to their poor Neighbors.

History.
The Gentlewomen of France, of very Honorable Discents, esteem it an Honor to
themselves, and an Obligation upon them from their Religion, to be attendant
for some time in the Nosocomium or Hospital, upon the sick, and disdain not to
dress their Provisions, make their Beds, and perform for them the meanest
offices, which they do with greatest care and attendance, and with much more
affection and tenderness of Heart then is usual in Chare-Women and Hired
Nurses. And indeed wealth is not given by God to Nourish Idleness, but to
enable us to do more good, and extend our selves in offices of Love and Charity
toward others.

Many other Decent Employments there are wherein young Gentlewomen may busy
themselves, keeping thereby their Bodies Fresh, and Healthful, and their Minds
in motion (whereby wanton and vain Thoughts, and Qualities are avoided) wherein
some regard may be had to the mutability of humane Affairs (a notable instance
whereof these late years has afforded us, where so many that have been richly
and delicately brought up, are reduced to penury) whereby provision may be made
for adversity, by the acquisition of some neat and Curious Manufacture, which may
be in Prosperity a Delight and Recreation, in Poverty a Refuge: For alas, those
that are bred up only to the expense, how sad is their Condition when the Means
and Storehouse thereof is by any casuality wasted, to an infinite Number
whereof God has subjected us. How much better is it to copy the Picture of a
Virtuous Woman, which Solomon in his last Chapter has so lively delineated; and
for every good Woman to endeavor the being like Her, Pro. 31.
In whom the heart of Her Husband may Trust, and by whose Industry he shall
have no need of Spoil. But I digress too far, and happily may incur a censure
for my boldness, in this point; However with the Virtuous I hope to find
excuse, since my fault (if it be any) has proceeded only from my Love and fair
Respects to that Sex.

Be pleased that I may add some few Arguments to press the Necessity of Labor
and Exercise.

I have urged before how much the want thereof enclines you to diseases, and
puts you to a continual need of Physic: that it decays your Colors and
Complexions; that particularly it disposes you to Obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Womb and Breast: One more, and that a grievous Inconvenience it
produces, viz. Long Travel, difficulty and danger in Childing: The
Hebrew-Women, says the Egyptian Midwives, are lively, and are delivered ere
the Midwife comes to them: The Irish Women because of their stirring and active
Lives are Straight, Tall, full grown, quick in Delivery: The German-Women are
also* observed to be such, and here in England also the poor and laboring Women
in City and Country, are very quick at their Labors, and allow themselves
hardly a Weeks Retirement: So that in this particular also, which is of no
small concernment, the active and stirring Life is of greatest advantage.

2. They that Lead Sedentary Lives, usually bear Weak and Sickly Children, and
so beget themselves much sorrow, and double care and charge in their Education:
besides the Injury they thereby do the Commonwealth.

3. The mind, for want of convenient business to employ it, becomes either
dulled, and unacquainted with humane accidents, and so not fitted, and prepared
to bear them, or otherwise misguided and depraved.

4. It is necessary that Parents, and they that have the Charge in Education,
timely take care in this particular, for that their Children being at first
bred up restively, acquire a habit thereby, and cannot afterward, when they or
their Parents see the inconveniences thereof, change their course, their Joints
and Limbs are so stiff and unweildly, and their obstructions so great. Insomuch
that by endeavoring an alteration, they incur many times grevious diseases; So
that Parents ought to lay this particular very much to heart in time, and to
order the Education of their Children accordingly, for which they will
afterward be more beholding to them then for their Portions, as of more real
benefit and behoof unto them; For what is Wealth without Health; yea how much
better is a mean fortune with a Sound and Healthful Constitution, then Large
possessions, when the Body is Crazy and unapt to enjoy them.

But if through neglect or inanimadvertency, this at first be over-slipt, the
old Custom must not all at once be left, nor the Body suddenly be innur'd to
Labor, but by degrees, using at the same time convenient Helps, and such drinks
as do powerfully clear obstructions, and remove shortness and difficulty of
Breathing. And so I have done with that Particular. I shall add one or two
Considerations more concerning Motion and Rest, and so Leave it.

When Exercise is to be forborne.
When the Body is very foul and replete with ill humors, exercise must be
forborne till it be conveniently cleansed, for that otherwise it will work and
disperse them into the Habit of the Body it Self: and occasion thereby some
long and hardly curable Disease. In this case it is best to avoid
fool-hardiness, and venienti occurrere Morbo, remember, that to prevent, is far
easier then to Cure.

Exercise for the Fat and Lean.
They that are Lean should exercise only ad Ruborem, till the Body and Spirits
are gently heated, for that will help to satin them. They that are fat may
Exercise ad Sudorem, till they Sweat, and that will extenuate them.

Exercise when Best.
Exercise is best before Meals, for it clears the Stomach, and prepares the
Appetite: but a little time must be allowed again to settle the body before we
eat.

When Bad.
Too soon after meals it is very bad; for it subverts the Stomach, and forces the
Victuals thence raw and indigested, and so disperses it into the Veins and
Habit of the Body, whereby putrid Feavours, Headaches, Weakness of the Eyes,
and a general Cacochymy or depraved Constitution is engendered.

Place bad for exercise.
Avoid exercising in damp and noysom places, for that the Lungs being opened,
and Respiration increased, much air is drawn in, and the brain thereby filled,
and the Lungs corrupted: This Caution is to be observed by all, but especially
by those that are Pthisical and Rheumatick.

Violent Exercise bad.
Lastly, too Violent Exercise is very bad, for it too much dries the Body, it
engenders the Stone, and Gout, especially toward old age, when it is
discontinued. Let not therefore Pleasure, and a too earnest Intention at our
sports make us so much our own Enemies, as to convert that which ought to be
used only to refresh the Mind, to Strengthen and keep healthful the Body, into
the means of its Infirmity, Sickness and decay: especially knowing that
exercise is then only pleasant when the Body is fresh, Vigorous and very well
able, and without toil and pain to undergo the same.

Besides that too constant a use and intention upon Sports, corrupts the Mind,
and distracts it in the midst of all affairs and business, and begets a Dotage
thereupon, wherein there is not true Pleasure* and contentment, but a w^arish
and impotent giving up of the Spirits and Faculties thereunto: a convenient
mixture of Labor and Exercise is best, so as that the first do far exceed the
last, and that the last be indeed but as a Refreshment and quickening of the
Spirit and Body, for the better and more Pleasant undergoing of the first.

Lastly, If it be too much or too violent, it is no friend to Prolongation of
Life; for it over-heats the Spirits, and renders them easily evaporable. 2. It
consumes too much the Moisture of the Body. 3. It wastes the inward Parts, which
delight most in, and are conserved best by Rest. We see by this the
inconveniences of Excess and Defect: Via Media, via Tuta; the middle way is
best and wholsomest.

Drinking cold Drink after Exercise bad.
A usual error is, the drinking cold beer after Violent Exercise, and in our
Sweat, to which Heat and Thirst intises us; but the effects are,

1. Damping and almost exstinguishing the small remainder of heat that is left
in the inward parts.

2. Surfeiting the Body by Mixing cold Drink with the fat, which is at that
time melted, and floating in the Body: Let that inconvenient custom be
therefore carefully left. Another is, to Drinking Sack and hot Spirits bad.
Drink Sack or Strong-Water, when we have spent and wearied our selves with
hard Labor or Exercise, which is done as for avoiding the former inconvenience,
not seeing that thereby we incur another: which is the over-heating and drying
our bodies, which were too much heated and dried before: To avoid both, and to
refresh the body withal, the best way is, first to rest a while warm, if
conveniently we may, but however to drink a good draught of Cawdle, Mace-Ale,
Hot Beer and Sugar, or of some other Supping, whose Warmth is not Scorching,
but analogous to that of our Bodies, so will the Spirits soon settle, and be
refreshed, and the Limbs after rest be enabled with ease to undergo new Labor.

Kinds of Labor
For the kinds of Labor, some stir the whole Body, the best whereof are,
Dancing, Running, Leaping, Bowling, Walking; Tennis is too Violent, and to be
used only upon extraordinary occasions, with convenient Rubbings, Sweating in
Bed, and other accommodations after it: Fencing has too many inconveniences
attending it, and is best to be learned as necessary for safeguard and Defense,
and not used as a customary exercise. There are also Exercises appropriated to
certain parts, as lifting great Weights, and the Pike, to the Back and Loins.
Riding is availful for the Stomach, the Kidneys and Hips, Navigation for those
that are Pthisical: Ball and Bowls for the Reins; The Breast and Lungs are
opened and cleared by Shooting, Hollowing, Singing, Sawing, Blowing the Horn,
or Wind Instruments, Drawing a Rope too and again about a Post or Table,
Swinging, Lifting the Poyse or Plummets on high, and letting them down again.
And last of all, the use of Frications or Rubbings, which has been much in
use, but is now grown obsolete, is very convenient for whatsoever part we
please; Gentle Rubbings, with warm soft Cloths, softens the Parts, attenuates
the Humors, and opens the Pores; But Strong Rubbings, with hot and course
Cloths, used long, do Dry and Harden. The Ancients had two kinds of Frications,
the one which they called Praeparatorium, which they used before Exercise, to
render the Limbs agile and apt to Motion, the other Recreatorium, which was
used after Exercise, and was performed with sweet and Mollifying Oils, to
Moysten and refresh the Body dried and wasted with toil.

Natures great Explorator, in his Centuries, much commends the use of
Frictions, as a Furtherance of Nourishment, and Augmentation; he instances in
Horses, whom for that end we constantly Rub: His reasons are, for that it draws
a great quantity of Spirits and blood to the Parts ( it ought not therefore to
be used upon a full Stomach) and again because it relaxes the Pores, and so
makes passage for the Aliment, and dissipates the excrementitious Moistures; He
prefers it before Exercise, for Impinguation or Fatning the Body; because in
Frictions the outward parts only are moved, and the inward at Rest. Hence,
says he, Gally slaves are Fat and Fleshy, because they stir the Limbs more,
and the Inward parts less.

I shall not say more hereof, but only commend its use to good Women, that they
gently, and by a warm fire, either themselves, their Maids or Nurses, every
night rub the Sides, Back, Shoulders and Hips of their Children, as very
necessary to prevent obstructions and the Rickets,and to further their growth
and agility, and also to keep straight and strong the Limbs of their Children.

Of Sleeping and Wakefulness.
THe Subject of Sleep is not the Heart, as Aristotle has asserted; but the
Brain, as Galen: for to that we make our applications in cases of too much
Sleep, Cause of Sleep.
as in the Lethargy, or of too little, as in Phrensies. The cause thereof is,
the ascension of pleasant and benign Vapors into the Head from the blood, and
Aliment: benign ones I say, for those that are sharp, hot, and furious in
their Motions (as in Burning or putrid Feavors) occasion Wakefulness, and want
of Rest. In Sleep, Heat, Blood, and Spirits retire toward the Center and
inward parts, which is one reason why it is a furtherance to digestion.

When we are awake the Understanding is employed, the Senses, the Limbs, and
parts destined to Motion, whereby the Spirits are wasted; it is necessary
therefore, that they be replenished by Sleep; In which all the Faculties are at
rest, Commodities of Rest.
except sometimes the Phansy, and always the Motions of the Pulse, and
Respiration. By that cares are taken away, Anger is appeased, the Storms,
Agonies, and Agitations of the Body are calmed, the Mind is rendered Tranquil
and Serene. It Stops all immoderate Fluxes, except Sweating. Hence is it that
Sleeping.
Soporiferous Potions are good in Lienteries, and all other Laskes.

The Evils of Immoderate Sleep.
These are the Commodities of Moderate Sleep; of Immoderate the Inconveniences
are:

1. In that the Heat being thereby called into the Body, it consumes the
superfluous Moistures, and then the Necessary; and lastly, the Solid parts
themselves, and so extenuates, dries, and emaciates the Body.

And secondly it fixes the Spirits, and makes them sluggish and stupid; it duls
the understanding, it hardens the Excrements, and makes the Body Costive, from
whence follows many inconveniences.

Old men may Sleep long; and it is necessary they should, Large Sleep best for
whom.
for nothing refreshes them more: for that end Condite Lettice is very good,
eaten to Bed-ward: So is the washing of their Feet or Hands, or both, in warm
water, with flowers of Water Lillies, Chamomil, Dill, Heads of Poppy,
Vine-leaves, Roses, etc. boiled in it; It is necessary likewise that they go to
bed Merry, and keep their Minds devoid of Perturbations. That they avoid
Costiveness, by taking loosening Meats at the beginning of their Meals, and by
using now and then, as need requires, some Laxative: as Electuarium Lenitivum,
Catholicum, or Benidicta Laxativa, of any of them 2. drams in the Mornings,
with a little powder of Anniseeds: or yet Cassia, Tamarinds, or Prunes Pulp'd,
Manna, etc. either of themselves, or dissolved in Broth or Posset Drink; But
these, though gentle, I advise they use not too often, for better is it to be
moved naturally; besides that by the frequency, the Party using them will loose
the benefit thereof.

Children may likewise sleep Largely; So may the Choleric, and the Lean: The
Phlegmatic and Fat should Watch much.

Sleep after Dinner.
Sleep after Dinner may be allowed Old men, Children, and they who are
accustomed to it; And then it is best not to lie, or hang down the Head, but to
sit upright in a Chair, to have no binding before upon the breast, and not to
be suddenly awaked; but better it is, that they only drowze for the better
closure of the Stomach, for long sleeping in the day, indisposes the Body very
much, and makes the Nights restless, but they are especially Hurtful for those
that are apt to Rheums, Sore Eyes and Coughes.

Form of Lying.
The best form of Lying is with the Arms and Thighs somewhat contract, the Head
a little elevated, on either of the Sides, for lying on the back is bad for the
Stone, assists much the Ascension of Vapors, and wastes the Marrow in the Spine.

Overmuch Watching consumes the Spirits, dries the body, hurts the
Eyesight, and very much shortens our Lives.

Of the Excrements.
THey are distinguished into two kinds, the Benign, or Profitable, destined by
Nature for special Uses, as the Seed and Flowers. 2. The unprofitable, of which
the Body has no use, but which are as soon as may be to be expelled. Such are
the Excrements of the Belly, the Urine, and Sweat; and particularly that Muck
and Phlegm that is excerned by the Mouth and Nostrils, and the more thick
Transudation by the Ears. Sure it is, that the orderly and seasonable
evacuation of These, in due quantities, as Natures needs are, does very much
tend to the conservation of Health. I will speak of them all severally, except
of the second, which I shall purposely omit, and first of Seed.

This if considered in its own nature, is far above the appellation of
Excrement, being the most spiritful part of the blood, whose excellency
likewise is exceedingly improved, by its elaboration in the Testicles* it is
called so only ab exclusionis modo, because it is excreted out of the Body. Men
should not provoke it till 20. for till then it is for the most part
unprofitable to the individual, and to Generation: Children till then are
generally born weak and infirm, and the Parents themselves become of Mean
growth, by so preventing it, and of short lives. The case is the same in
Plants, Trees, and other Animals.

Moderation in Coition is most necessary to the preservation as well of
Pleasure, The benefits of Continency.
as of Health: Recte perpendentibus constat, in Immoderation we consult not
with delight, but lust, and lose the pleasure, by being too intent upon it: and
it is a certain Truth, that those Parents have most, and most healthful
Children, that are most continent, who meet their Pleasure by Necessity; To
these it rejoices the Heart, it makes free the Breathing, it appeases
Melancholy and Sadness, it mitigates anger, it disposes to Rest: But then the
Moderation receives its difference much from the Temperature: for less is
sufficient for the Melancholy and Choleric* the old and emaciated; but more
is requisite for the Sanguine and Phlegmatic, and those of middle and
flouirshing Age; the Feavorish in any kind must avoid it, and they who are
inclined to Gowts, and diseases of the joints: There are some diseases Cured by
it; But I am bid Silence.

Its Immoderation has these damages attending it, The incommodities of
Incontinency.
a dissolution of Strength and Spirits, dullness of Memory and Understanding,
decay of Sight, Tainture of the Breath, Diseases of the Nerves and Joints, as
Palsies and all kinds of Gowts, weakness of the Back, involuntary Flux of Seed,
Bloody Urine:But then, if to Immoderation be added, the base and sordid
accompanying of Harlotsand Impure Women:what follows? but a Consumption of
Lungs, Liver and Brain, a putrefaction and discolouration of the Blood: loss of
Color and Complexion: a purulent and violent Gonorrhea, an ulceration and
Rottenness of the Genitals: noysom and Malignant Knobs, Swellings, Ulcers, and
Fistulaes in the Head, Face, Feet, Groin, and other Glandulous and extreme
parts of the Body; these, with the loss of Credit, and the sense of Sin, should
me thinks be sufficient to deter all sorts of People from that noysom Vice which
Almighty God has cursed with so many attendant Evils, viz. The decay of Body
and mind here, and utter ruin hereafter; who will not be deterred, must
deservedly suffer the Evils thus foreseen: and for a moments pleasure (if it
may be called pleasure) must content themselves to lead the greatest part of
the remainder of their Lives, in shame and Torment.

2. Of the Excrements of the Belly.
Of the Excrements of the Guts, or 1st Concoction. The Excrements of the Belly
are duly to be Evacuated, for which end we must obey Nature, whenever she
solicites thereunto; and accustom our selves to some certain times, as first in
the mornings, and last at nights, for that will very much dispose the body
thereunto: Strai^^ng overmuch is to be avoided, and some other help to be used
instead thereof: for otherwise Ruptures may follow, the falling of the
Fundament and Straight Gut, by a Resolution of the Sphincter Muscle. The best
proportion of the Excrement to the Aliment, is about the third part, they who
much exceed it, Its proportion to the Aliment
have the mesaraick Veins stopped, and so cannot be nourished; If it exceeds it,
it is sure that the body wastes, unless the matter of some disease be thereby
evacuated: if the Excrement be very little, either Nature is unable to expel,
and so must be assisted, or great Heat evaporates the moisture, and so dries
the Belly, or there has been long hunger, and then the greatest part is turned
to Aliment.

Of Looseness.
Looseness of the Belly, so long as it is not Violent, and the Appetite remains
good, is not to be suddenly and rashly stopped, for Nature thereby frequently
prevents, and many times rids it self of many a disease; which upon an
unadvised astriction, would be riveted into the Body: the rule is, first
Cleanse, and then Close; But if it be too Violent and Frequent, and the Somack
thereby decayed, it must be carefully and speedily remedied, but in this case
advise is very requisite; for to err is easy, and very dangerous.

The Incommodities of a Dry and fast belly, I have occasionally spoke of
before, to which I refer you.

Of the Vrin.
THe Serons and Waterish part of the blood is streined through the Kidneys, and
is kept in the bladder, till either by its abundance or sharpness, it provokes
to Excretion: This retained beyond its due and convenient time, inflames the
Bladder, and so over-fils it, that many times it cannot without much pain be
contracted: in those cases you must gently compress the Bladder, which lies in
the bottom of the belly, somewhat above the Genitall: Long Meals, Festivals,
Counsels and Assemblies are very inconvenient for this, especially where there
is more modesty then is requisite: Some Helps there are also in such Cases.

Divination by Urin a deceit.
The Diagnostick and Prognostic of Diseases by Vrin, is from my intention here,
that relating to another and peculiar part of Physic; only I shall for the
redemption of such as are deceived by it ( and most are, and deserve to be)
spend some little time in showing how far it may be used, and how far it is
abused: Urin of it self does truly and properly declare the immediate
indispositions only of the Blood, the Liver, the Kidneys, Bladder, and Vrinary
passages, and of these not distinctly, but confusedly, and not without the
help, and interrogating of the Patient; erroneously therefore do People
imagine, that in the Urin is contained the ample understanding of all things
necessary to inform a Physician: which is therefore a vain and sottish, though
Customary way to Judge of a Physician; the best whereof do leave devining
thereby as false, and out of measure uncertain; the most Ignorant and deceitful
only do practice it, to delude the Credulous: Many other things are equally, if
not more necessary for the right information of a Physician, as the Pulse, the
Knowledge of pain, and the place affected, of all concurrent and precedent
Causes, which by due inquiry he is to find out, and then from them all compared
together, he is to make his judgment of the nature of the Disease, and so may
fitly, and with best probability of Success apply his Remedies: The other by
seeking his own Glory hazards thy Health, regarding more the being thought
skilful by thee, then rightly to inform himself, that so he may knowingly
proceed to the Cure.

The diseases of the Breast are best known by the pulse; insomuch that in those
greifs many times the Urin speaks fair and Healthful, even to the last moment
of Decaying Life. The Brain and Animal parts have their proper Excrements, and
are best known by them. Neither is she any other then deceitful, even in the
indicatin of the diseases of the parts abovementioned, from which the Urin more
immediately proceeds: It is changed and appears different according to the
diversity of Meats, Drinks and Medicines: its Color and Substance is wholly
altered, upon the Critical Determination of diseases, which many times evacuate
themselves by Urin, and which cannot but Confound the Judgment of our
Pisse-Prophets, proceeding only upon Inspection thereof; The Sex can with no
certainty be known by it, for though the Urin of a Man and Woman are usually
different in Color and consistency; yet since both the one and the other is
upon easy changes alterable, no certain judgment can be made thereupon.
Besides that a Cbolerick Woman after exercise, and after the use of Hot and
spiced meats, will make a deeper colored water then a Phlegmatic man; She
likewise has different Urin, according to the diversity of the disease that
then possesses her: The Comparison therefore is only to be made between the
Urins of a Healthful Man, and a Healthful Woman, which have received no
alteration by any thing eat, drank, or external accident: and so is the
difference given by Physicians to be understood, when they say, That Man yields
thinner Vrins, higher colored with small Contents or Sediment: but Women pale,
with Copious Sediment.

In Virgins, and also other Obstructions of Natural courses, there will be much
the same alterations in Urin, as in Conception: because the Blood, and
consequently the Urin, is also thereby Tainted. Pregnant Women do also render
different Urins, both one from another, and also the same Women at several
Seasons: neither is there any one sign of certainty to determine the same.

Let me subjoyn a History for confirmation hereof; and it is Dr. Cottas, a
Northamtonshire Physician, whose fortune it was to take the profession of a
Dying Physician in this point. He was (says he) but simple in manners, and
meanly Learned, but in his Auguration of Conception by Urin, held most
excelling, and preferred before the best learned of the Country: Some small
time before his death, he was for the behoof of posterity importuned to leave
behind him that skill in Urins, that had made him so famous; he Replied, that it
was unworthy Posterity, unworthy the name of Art; That he had long indeed, with
the felicity of good opinion, exercised it, but with tried certainty known it
to be uncertain and deceit. Simplicity, he said, was easily ready to betray it
self, and the ignorant People; especially to one used to the observation, will
easily discover their hearts in their Eyes, Gesture and Countenances, of
themselves unobserved, and unconsidered: Sometimes I have predicted right upon
Conceptions, and that has spread it self, but I have proved more often to my
own knowledge false, but that has soon dyed, or found excuse. I somewhat
satisfied my self in my deceitful custom, in that I deceived none but such as
either desired, or deserved it; who by their insidiation of the proof of my
skill, either provoked it, or by unreasonable earnestness extorted it. Thus,
some days before his death did this famous Deviner unbowel himself, and
thereby indeed made someamends for his former inpostures.

Lastly, it is most easy to deceive the Physician by other Liquors, especially,
if he smells them not: and though some notes of difference are given by Avicen
and others, yet are they very doubtful, and not to be trusted to: I judge it no
dishonor to be deceived in this kind, unless to such as arrogate a certainty of
Divination.

It should be considered also, that thou art ignorantly, and doltishly
employing thy self about posing the Physician, mispending thy time that way,
running from Doctor to Doctor, till thou art struck in the right Vain, and
inveighled by the Artifice of some more crafty then the rest, who sets himself
to deceive thee in this kind, when in the mean time, the disease by delay gets
strength, and becomes more obstinate, Malignant, and peradventure incurable.

I advise therefore all good People, that you regard not other men's fame
fraudulently gotten; but your own health: and in order to that, that you
punctually and expressly inform the Physician of all you know concerning your
disease, particularly of your pain, if any be, and of all external accidents
that may have any ways caused it; of the place and part affected, of the
Impediments you have in the performance of any action in the Body; and let the
Physician then feel your Pulse, see your Urin, consider your Temperature of
Body, know your use and Custom of Living, so is he most likely truly to
understand your State and Condition, and you to receive benefit and Curation: I
shall not need to insist longer hereupon, the Vanities and Deceits of Vroscopy,
or Devination by Vrin having been fully and demonstratively discovered by many
able Physicians: and by some in English, as Mr. Brian in his Piss-Prophet: and
by Dr. Cotta in his Discovery of the Errors, and dangers of Ignorant
Practitioners: To which I refer the Reader, who if notwithstanding all that can
be said, has yet a mind to be deceived, doubtless he may, and there be enough
that are provided for it.

Of Sweat.
SWeat and Vrin have the same material cause, but have different ways of
Excretion: The skin is therefore made pervious, that so there might be free
Egress for the Sweat, which retained in the Body, corrupts it, and begets a
languishing wearisomness in every part thereof; as in Burning Feavours, when
the Party cannot Sweat: whereas the kindly and free Evaporations thereof, make
the Body lightsome, removes colds, chilness and lassitude of the Limbs: It is
most to be avoided in Cold weather, When to be avoided.
either in Bed, or at Exercise; for though it frees the body from internal
causes of Diseases, yet it more disposes it to receive wrong from external
sharpness, and penetration of the air or wind, by opening the spiracles, and
so giving admission thereunto. As to preserve the Body, which is my intent,
When to be used.
it is necessary that every one upon a Cold taken, which together with the
usual signs preceding, is manifested by a sudden heaviness and lumpishness of
the Limbs, do with the first convenience he may, with an empty Stomach, dispose
himself to a gentle and leasurely breathing, which in most Bodies may be
procured, with a draught of Saffron and Milk: of Posset drink, with a few
Camomill Flowers boiled in it: either of them drank hot, and close covering
thereupon; or if need require it, with a scruple of Gascoignes Powder in either
of them: which Sweat being gently continued for about an Hour, care is to be
taken that thou be rubbed well with warm clothes, and shifted with fresh and
well aired Linning, and that about half an Hour after thou drink a draught of
hot and comfortable Broth, Cawdle, or other Supping, and so by degrees enure
thy self to the air and Customary way of Life: This timely and carefully
performed, may save thee many a sharp and irksome sickness.

Caution
Provided always, that thou then be not costive: for so, sweating will
harden the Excrements, and evaporate the moisture thereof into the Body: Before
thou sweat therefore, if thy belly have been fast, open it either by some
gentle Lenitive, or loosening Clyster.

Helps to Sweat.
They that have dry and hard skins, and therefore difficultly sweat, should be
bathed, or at least fomented with a Decoction of Warm Water, with Hot and
mollifying Herbs boiled therein, that through the skin so relaxed, the Sweat
may have the easier passage. The Help of Bottles, with a Decoction of
Sudorifick Herbs, as Camomil, Pennyroyal, Rosemary, Mother of Time, Hyssop,
etc. is very assistant in this case; increasing the heat by degrees, as by
putting in less Heated Bottles first, and half an Hour after the more Heated.

Why Sleep causes Sweat.
Sleep that stops other Fluxes, causes Sweat, because the Heat and Spirits first
moving inward, do there gather force, which so increased, works upon the
moisture, and evaporates it by Sweat.

Too long and violent, Bad.
Sweat is not to be overlong, or over-violent, for it impairs the Body too
much; better it is to Sweat twice or thrice, for that is Natures way, who never
expels the whole Morbifick matter at one Sweating. Thus much as to the
Preservative by Sweating.

Of other Excrements.
Of Spitting.
THey that spit much, want exercise, for that is the best way to spend the
matter thereof; for to stop it, begets pains in the Head, and endangers many
diseases of the Brain: besides that, it may afterward take another course, as
upon the Lungs, in the Spine, or on the Reins, whereas exercise safely breaths
it out through the Body.

Excrements of the Brain.
If the Humors and Viscosities remain in the Brain and Head, and descend not,
they are to be provoked down by the Nose, or Mouth, either by Sneezing, or the
Chewing.
Mastication of those things which are of Subtle Parts, and so open and clear
the passages: as Tobacco, Rosemary, Bettony, Seeds of Thlapsi, Crosses, etc.
are very good: so are their fumes, but then they must not be brought into a
Custom, but used only as the necessity requires.

In the Ears and Nostrils
The Foulnesses in the Ears, and thick wax that by Time grows there, ought to be
prevented; by often cleansing them, taking first into them the fume of Camomil,
and Pennyroyal, boiled in Ale: and afterward of hot Viniger; which done,
cleanse them with thy Earpicker carefully, for fear of hurting the Tympanum, and
Provoking Coughs.

After Meats, and in the Mornings, Wash and Rub the Teeth, thy Eyes, Ears and
Nostrils, thy Hands likewise, and Face with Cold water, even in Winter. Comb
thy Head well, that thou may make way for the Egression of Vapors, which
will otherwise fill thy brain. In the observation of these small Matters how
much does Health consist? I am in these things but thy Remembrancer.

Of the Affections, or Passions of the Mind.
OF these I purpose briefly to treat, not as a Natural Philosopher, but
Physician, and so to consider, not their Essences or Causes, but Effects, and
how their Regulation conduces to the Conservation of Health. Their power is
doubtless very great upon us, as being of force, not only to hurry us into
diseases, but to bring upon us sudden death. Their Steersman is Reason, which
assisted with the Devine Spirit, manifested in the Holy Scriptures, is able to
keep down the Surges of our Passions, and is by Almighty God given us, to be as
a Check or Bridle to prevent, or restrain all their Extravagances: so that
although there be great force in our Passions; yet are we not involuntarily,
and without the power of Resistance overcome by them; but yield unto them
cowardly, and unworthily, for want of making use of that Reason, by which we
might Restrain them. Our Affections indeed are (...) unreasonable, but yet they
also are (...) under our own power and command, and one principal work, that
man has to do in the world, is to moderate them. And though some Passions, as
also Vices, have through Custom, and an habitual commitment, become Usurpers
upon reason, and over-rulers thereof, insomuch that it becomes a most difficult
thing for Reason to reassume its Empire, and keep them in due subjection; This
however is attributable, not to their Nature, but our own default, and is
decreed as a punishment of our first yielding thereunto: It Is just in God to
harden his Heart, who first hardens his own; the penalty is appropriated to the
offense: From whence we may collect, that Vice is a Punishment.

2. It Is observable, that there is a mutual influence from the Body upon the
Mind, and from the Mind upon the Body: not necessitating, but inclining. It Is
clear in the several effects the Passions produce in the Body, which I shall
presently speak of: and it is as clear, that Anger, Sadness, Joy, etc. in their
Immoderation I mean, are more easily produced in those that are under the
Violence of a Feavour, or other Sickness, or pain, or yet of depraved and
unequal Constitutions, then in them that are in Health, and of Sound
Complexion: That therefore thou may be Virtuous, keep thy self in good
Health; that thou may be in good Health, keep thy self Virtuous, and Regulate
thy Passions.

Passions are not bad of themselves, but in their excesses or defects: for by
their assistance, we more easily attain good and Laudable Ends: there are some
things against which they are well, and by injunction employed: Be Angry and
sin not, says the Apostle: and our Savior drove the Money Changers out of the
Temple: our Love and Hatred, our Fear, Sadness and Rejoicing, have all of them
proper objects about which they may, and ought to be employed. It Is to be more
then man, to be (...) wholly indolent and void of Passion: we are required only
to be (...), well to manage and moderate them.

Of Anger.
Its incommodities.
IN its excess the incommodities are many, and evil: as Feavours, Phrensies, and
Madness, Trembling Palsies, Apoplexies, Decay of Appetite, and want of rest,
paleness, as when fear is conjoined, and the Spirits called in; sometimes
Redness of the Face and Eyes, when the Spirits are sent out, as in desire of
Revenge: which is also accompanied with an Ebullition of the blood, stamping,
bending the fist, etc. With many more evils anger is accompanied, Remedies
against Anger.
all of which, though they fall not out to every one that is angry, yet some
do, and more or less, as it is, it inclines us to all: observe them that be
angry; for in others we can better judge of the unseemliness of it, then in our
selves, to whom we cannot but be partial, neither are we capable Judges in our
Fits, when we are wholly possessed by it: But observing it in others, we may thus
reason: Shows this so unhansome in my Friend? sure it does so in me also: Does
it impair his Health? so will it mine also: Does it un-man him? doubtless it
also transforms me into a Beast.

habit we get, and the apter we shall always be upon every slight occasion to
fall into it.

loose its effect, and become wholly neglected by them upon whom we spend it.
It ought to be ultimately not against Persons, but Things; not against Men, but
Vices: so that we ought even in our Angers, to give some manifest of a desire
of good to the Person we are angry withal, as of Reclaimer, of his amendment,
and altering his Course: so will it both make the deeper Impression, and do our
selves less Hurt. Sixthly, Let us call to mind the Patience, Long-sufferance,
and Humility (for Anger is frequently an effect of Pride) enjoined us in
Scripture: Let us remember, how unspeakable it is in God toward us. And
lastly, How Christ the Son of God, and God, who might have had Legions of
Angels to have defended him, and who indeed wanted nothing, had he pleased to
have defended himself; yet did he patiently submit himself to Rebukes, Scorns,
and false Accusations, to be hurryed from place to place, to be bound with
Cords, whipped, spit on, buffeted, Crowned with sharp Thorns, to carry his own
Cross he was to suffer on, to be extended forth, and nailed thereon, to have
his Sides pierced, his Sinews stretched, and at last suffer death, and all this
not for his own, but even his Enemies offenses: for whom he prayed whilst he
was Tormented. O let us all lay this to heart! and let it sink into us: so
shall it doubtless be a means to restrain those light, and customary Heats, and
animosities that take fire at the least motion, and upon the slightest
occasion: and last of all, as we respect our own Happiness even here in this
World in Body, in Mind, let us wisely pass by Mistakes, Affronts, Injuries: at
least wise, let us assay all gentle means first, of amity and Love, of winning
upon our Adversaries by all Christian ways that can be thought on, and when no
other means will serve, then to show our Anger for our own defense only, and
preservation.

The Beginning thereof (says Solomon) is as one that opens the Waters,
therefore ere the contention be meddled with, leave off.

Diversion: Octavian was advised to say over the A. B. C. before he expressed his
Anger in word or deed, for giving some pause thereunto, it many times vanishes;
Reason then (as I conceive) having some space to work and rowse it self, which
at other times is surprised. If I were not Angry, said Architus Tarentinus to
his Bailiff, I would now beat thee.

Of Love.
THis in its extreme, is a Passion seldom heard of in our times, the two
Catholic Vices, Pride and Covetousness, having almost swallowed up this
Affection: the sincerity whereof, as it relates either to Freindship or
Marriage, is now converted into Convenience, and terminated not in another, as
it ought to be, but in our selves: I distinguish it into 3. kinds; Three kinds
of Love Godlike.
The 1. Godlike, which is a knitting of the Soul to God, and manifesting by his
blessed example, without any indirect ends, Sine sera, sine fuco, without
deceit, or without dissimulation, a Sympathetical Spirit and Affection toward
one another. This is incapable of extremity, in its utmost extent being but our
Duty. The 2. is Humane, 2. Humane.
toward particular Persons, as Parents, Wife, Children, Friend, or Things;
toward the first, it ought also to be Hearty, Constant, begotten and continued
for their sakes, not our own but yet bounded with a due submission to the Will
of God: That to Things, is not to be fixed, but apt to change and alteration,
because the Things themselves are so: which we are to love, The Apostle says,
As if we loved them not. 3. Conjugall.
The 3. is that which is shown between one Sex to another, and ends in the
Conjugal; This is naturally impressed upon us, Caution concerning the third.
and is to be carefully preserved from Dotage, and Lust: Of Lust
when it takes fire from the last, it is never permanent, but soon cloyes it
self, and Vanishes upon satiety: Reason is here excluded, and that has made so
many happily seeming Marriages soon vanish into those which are full of
Bitterness, and p^ssionate Distemper; Love therefore is to Begin, as it ought
to Continue, or rather to increase by continuance, and so it ever does, when
Virtue, and sweetness of Disposition is its Foundation, and not Wealth or
Beauty, which are good Concomitants, but bad Principles. A Virtuous Mind, an
unblemished Life and Conversation, a Healthful Body, these are, me thinks,
essentially necessary in man and Woman, to make a Marriage Happy: the other two
are Ornamentals, that add to its perfection, but not to its essence. For
Dotage which is an Impotent and unreasonable placing of the Affection upon
another, Of Dotage.
which many times brings all the Faculties of Soul and Body into a Languishment
or Consumption, and sometime by Summoning and uniting all its spirits in the
Brain causes Phrensies, Madness, and diverse other Maladies; For this I say,
neither Reason nor Physic, has yet found any Remedy: it being neither capable
of Council, nor within the reach or power of any Medicine: Diversion is by the
Wisest esteemed the best Remedy; Change of Objects devides it, and so lessens
it: Indeed Stratagem and Invention has most share in this Cure, which must be
assisted by Season and Opportunity. I shall end this with one only Caution,
That Parents hazard not the destruction of their Children, by not giving their
consents to those Marriages where the Hearts are United, and Virtue is the
Bond, and the defect or cause of obstacle is only inequality of Birth, or
Estate.

Of Grief, and Sadness.
Evils of Sadness.
IN Sadness the Heat and Spirits retire, and by their sudden surrounding, and
possession of the Heart all at once, do many times cause suffocation: They
being likewise by uniting increased, do violently consume the moisture of the
Body, and so beget drowth and leanness. Hence says Solomon, Pro. 17. 22.
A joyful heart causes good Health, but a sorrowful mind dries the Bones:
like the moth in a Garment, or a worm in the Tree, so is sadness to the Heart:
It likewise takes away Appetite, overheats the Heart, and Lungs, decays the
complexion, unfits us for our Business and employments, and shortens our days.
The Remedies are diverse, Remedies against Sadness.
as the cause is: only in general, consider, that what is without thy power to
help, ought not to afflict thee, for it is utterly vain; if it be within thy
power, then greive not, but help thy self. they come, by frequent reading, and
rightly understanding the Scriptures, and other Religious and Cha^on of Humane
Wisdom. Seneca. Plutarchs Morals and Lives.
Moral Writings, that are full fraught with good Instructions, to arm thy mind
against the day of need; that so when affliction comes, thou may be provided
for it; for our Sadness is generally falsely grounded upon mistake, and
mis-apprehension, which may by this means be prevented: Without this Help thou
shall be hardly able in the day of thy straight, to take good advice, though it
given thee. In the Scriptures and other good Books, thou shall find sound
advice, that will enable thee to bear the Ingratitude of a Friend: the loss of
nearest Friends, of goods, or office, a Repulse in thy desire of preferment,
and all other casual accidents, with which the World is replete, and which do
frequently befall us.

vent, for so it spends it self, and the sooner forsakes us, whereas cooped up
and stifled, it takes deeper hold upon us; For that purpose, discover the
causes, and take the advice of a Bosom Friend; restrain not thy tears, but
give them way, and it will ease thee; If Pain begets thy grief, take thy
Liberty, to Cry and Roar, neither should thy Friends restrain thee; for that if
it do not totally remedy, yet will it revell and somewhat divert thy pain.

and thy very Temperature, dispose thee thereunto; Then avoid all things that
be noyous in sight, smelling, hearing, and embrace all things that are Honest
and Delectable. Fly Darkness, much Watching, and business of mind, over much
Venery: the use of things in excess, Hot and Dry, often or violent Purgations,
immoderate Exercise, Thirst and Abstinence, dry Winds, and very Cold: Meats of
Hard Digestion, such as are very Dry and Salt, that are Old, Tough, or Clammy:
Cheese, Hares flesh, Venison, Salt-Fish, Wine, and Spice, except very seldom,
and in small quantities. Prepare now and then when Sadness most oppresses thee,
one of these following drinks, which upon long experience I have found very
recreative, and quickening the Spirits.

1. Drink againsh Melancholy.
Rec.
Waters of Carduus, and Wood Sorrel, of each 4. Ounces. Syrup of Violets 2.
Ounces and a half. The best Canary 3. Ounces.

Spirit of Vitrioll 12. drops; Mix them, and drink it at thrice, at ten in the
fore-noone, and four in the afternoon.

2. Drink against Melancholy.
Take a large sound Pippin, and cut out the Core, and in its place put a little
Saffron, viz. Three grains dried, and beaten very fine, cover it with the Top,
and roast it to Pap, then put to it half a pint of Claret Wine damasked: sweeten
it well with fine Sugar, and make Lambswooll: and so drink it.

Take the first of these when thou artCostive, the last when thou art loose, or
go orderly to stool. But in this case it is expedient that thou take further
advice of thy Physician.

Of Joy.
THere is no great Fear of the Immoderation of this Passion; the present
condition of the World hardly affords cause for it, and man has generally lost
his Cheerfulness, with his Innocence: It Is now in Fits and Flushes, not solid
and constant: Effects of Joy.
The effects of it are very good, for by Dilating and sending forth the Spirits
to the outward parts, it enlivens them, and keeps them fresh and active; it
Beautifies the Complexion, it fattens the Body, by assisting the Distribution
of Nourishment to every part: It Is that doubtless which God intended should be
the Portion of every man, he therefore made the World so full of delightful
objects for every sense, and plentifully furnished it in every place, with all
things necessary for the solace, and contentation of Mankind; But we unhappily
have distracted our own Lives, and multiplied the occasions of Hatred,
Oppression, Jealousy, difficulty of gaining a very competency, doubts of
loosing, endeavors of supplanting one another, Envying, Lawsuits, Wars, and a
thousand other Engines we have contrived to destroy our Contentment, and
multiply our sorrows and afflictions: Insomuch that very Wise and good men,
have much ado to preserve that chearfulnes, which is the reward and Recompense
of their Virtue. I wish I could here propose Remedies: Some I have, but the
World is not able to bear; and must yet longer by its Miseries and sufferings
be chastised into Repentance and Amendment.

These Passions are the Principal that have Influence upon the body, others
have not, or very little; I shall therefore pass them over, with this general
Caution relating to them all, that as we expect to keep them in due subjection,
and not to become Slaves to our Affections, let us lead a Temperate and
Continent Life; for all Disorder and Excess, especially in Meat, Drink, Venery,
makes us their Slaves, and gives them heat, and spirit to Lord it over us, and
renders us impotent to withstand their Temptations and Assaults. And so I have
done, desiring that what I have said, may be fairly accepted, and Interpreted
by all, as intended for every man's good, and is but a preparatory to much more
that I have in my Thoughts: Beseeching Almighty God to give his blessing to it,
that it may prove effectual, at least in some measure, to preserve every man,
and woman in Health and Virtue.

FINIS.

