TWO SPEECHES Spoken at the Councell-Table at OXFORD.

The one, by the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bristoll, in favor of the
continuation of the present WAR.

The other, by the Right Honorable EDWARD Earl of Dorset, for a speedy
Accommodation betwixt His MAJESTY, and his High Court of PARLIAMENT.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield, And now reprinted at LONDON for John
Hanson. 1642.

A SPEECH spoken by the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bristoll, in favor of
the Continuation of the present WAR.
MY LORDS,
I Know you do expect I should deliver my Opinion in the present Affairs,
which how much more weighty it is, so much more timorous am I to discover mine
Opinion in it, lest some should imagine my Vote to arrogate to it self a
Definitive power, and look to pass without any contradiction. But I disclaim
all such haughty intentions, and shall plainly, and according to my
conscience, give in my true verdict of the affair in agitation, namely,
whether it were better for the honor and safety of his Majesty, and the good
of his Kingdoms to continue the present war or to aquire and endeavor a
sudden peace betwixt his Majesty and his Court of Parliament.

(...)

W^ (...) my Lords the Physicians that ^ough^^ to discourse of the (...)
wholesomest remedies our art can invent, labor her sudden cure; But yet we
ought to take heed that the cure be not worse then the disease; that while we
strive to compose the differences which are but contingent to us, we pull upon
our selves and our families certain and not to be avoided ruins. Charity
begins at home, says the Proverb, and in Wisdom we are engaged to provide,
that by the purchase of the public peace we do not intail upon our
Posterities the cruellest of all wars; The wars which our children and their
descendents must have with want and penury, the greatest and most depressing
enemy that can manage arms against noble and generous minds: And to that
exigent must we betray them for the future, our selves for the present, if we
yield to, or determine of a peace. The Parliament has declared diverse of the
greatest and most eminent in nobility amongst us, Delinquents, in the highest
nature to the Commonwealth, have proscribed our persons, and adjudged our
estates no longer ours, but forfeits to the Commonwealth, and so have taken
order for the receiving and securing our revenues into such hands as shall
dispose them according to their intentions; and without this condition be
ratified, it is most probably imagined they will hardly be drawn to an
Accommodation for peace. In what state then will our fortunes stand? In what
deplorable condition shall we leave our children? heirs only to their
parents loyalties, not to their lands.

Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim. We shall justly verify that
sentence: escaping a quickesand, we shall fall upon a rock that will split us,
out of one evil into a worse; that condition of peace being incompatible with
our existences. But grant that this Article were removed out of the
Propositions, as the case stands, my Lords, I cannot (though I love peace, and
pray for it with all my heart) see which way his Majesty can condescend to it
with his honor. Is it fit for a King to beg peace of his Subjects? for the
regal authority, the immediate figure of heaven and the Deity on earth, to
descend from its supreme height, and, as it were, to derive its power from a
subordinate power derived from its bounty? That were to invert and vitiate the
course of nature, to enforce the cause to give place to its effect, the Sun
to acknowledge his all-quickning heat and light, emergent from the terrestrial
fires, created (as it were) and issuing from his influence. In Spain (where
the long time I resided there as Ambassador, afforded me privilege to be well
acquainted with the state of that Kingdom) in no age or record can scarcely be
found mention of intestine or civil war, till these very years wherein all
the world labors with dissentions; the reason is, because they are truly
Subjects, and their Sovereign truly a Sovereign. And since the state here
will neither be so to the King, nor suffer the King to be so to them; my reason
tells me, they should be compelled to it. It is no dishonor for Subjects to
condescend to any Propositions to their King, but it is an excessive declension
and diminution to his Majesty's royality, to submit himself to his Subjects:
Fuisse faelicem miserrimum est. My Opinion therefore is (with all humility to
his Majesty) that He neither propound to the Parliament, or receive from them
any Conditions for peace, but such as shall absolutely comply with the Regal
dignity and Prerogative, (which God and succession has allowed him) and such
as may be no way prejudicial to us or our estates, his Majesty's most
faithful servants and Counselors. We have an Army on foot, a braver the
Sun never shone on, an Army, that by force can compel that which fair words
cannot effect; and since Emori per virtutem praestat quam per dedecus vivere,
let us resolve, always submitting to his Majesty's judgment, to go on
cheerfully in these wars, which, though they be rough and churlish parents,
will at the last bring forth that mild and gentle offspring peace, and we shall
enjoy that with honor and safety, which otherwise with disgrace and detriment
we shall be enforced to abandon.

The Earl of DORSETS Speech for a speedy Accommodation with the PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
THe Earl of Bristoll has delivered his opinion, and my turn being next to
speak, I shall with the like integrity give your Lordships an account of my
intentions in this great and important business; I shall not as young Students
do in the Schools, argumentandi gratia, repugne my Lord of Bristols Tenants,
but because my conscience tells me they are not Orthodox nor consonant to the
disposition of the Commonwealth, which languishing with a tedious sickness
must be recovered by gentle and easy medicines, in consideration of it is
weakness, rather then by violent vomits or any other corroding or compelling
physic. Not that I will absolutely labor to refute my Lords opinions, but
justly deliver my own, which being contrary to his, may appear an express
contradiction of it, which indeed it is not; Peace, and that a sudden one being
so necessary betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament, as light is requisite for
the production of the day, or heat to cherish from above all inferior bodies.
This division betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament, being (as i^ by miracle)
the Sun should be separated (...) be divided from his proper Essence, I would
(...) Lords be ready to embrace a peace that should be (...) ^antagious to Us
then the present war, which as the Earl of Bri^^^^ says, should destroy our
Estates and (...) The ^^^^onely declares that against Delinqu^^^ (...)
conjecture have miscounselled His Maj^^ty, and be the authors of these tumults
in the Commonwealth; but this Declaration of theirs, except such crimes can be
proved against them is of ho validity; the Parliament will do nothing
unjustly, nor condemn the innocent, and certainly innocent men need not fear
to appear before any Judges whatsoever. And he who shall for any cause
prefer his private good before the public utility, is but an ill son of
the Commonwealth: For my particular, in these wars I have suffered as much as
any, my Houses have been searched, my Arms taken thence, and my son and heir
committed to prison; yet I shall wave these discourtesies, because I know there
^as a necessity they should be so; and as the darling business of the
kingdom, the honor and prosperity of the King, study to reconcile all these
differences between His Majesty and His Parliament; and so to reconcile them,
that they shall no way prejudice His Royal Prerogative, of which, I believe
the Parliament being a Loyal Defendor (knowing the Subjects property dependent
on it; for where Sovereigns cannot enjoy their Rights, their Subjects cannot)
will never endeavor to be an infringer; so that if doubts and jealousies were
taken away by a fair treaty between His Majesty and the Parliament, no doubt a
means might be devised to rectify these differences. The honor of the King,
the estates of us his followers and Counselors, the Privileges of Parliament,
and property of the Subject, being inviolably preserved in safety: And neither
the King stoop in this to his Subjects, nor the Subjects be deprived of their
just Liberty by the King. And whereas my Lord of Bristoll affirms, that in
Spain very few Civil dissentions arise, because the Subjects are truly
Subjects, and their Sovereign truly a Sovereign, that is, as I understand it,
the Subjects are scarcely removed a degree from slaves, nor the Sovereign from
a Tyrant. Here in England the Subjects have by a long and received Liberty
granted to their Ancestors from our Kings, made their freedom result into a
second nature; and neither is it safe for our Kings to strive to introduce the
Spanish Government upon this freeborn Nation, nor just for the people to
suffer that Government to be enforced upon them; which I am certain His
Majesty's goodness never intended. And whereas my Lord of Bristoll intimates
the strength and bravery of our Army, as an inducement to the continuation of
these wars, which he promises himself will produce a fair and happy peace;
in this I am utterly repugnant to his opinion; for grant that we have an Army
of gallant and able men, which indeed cannot be denied, yet have we infinite
disadvantages on our side, the Parliament having double our number, and surely
(though our enemies) persons of as much bravery, nay, and sure to be daily
supplied when any of their number fails, a benefit which we cannot boast; they
having the most popular part of the kingdom at their devotion; all, or most of
the Cities, considerable Towns and Ports, together with the mainest pillar of
the kingdoms safety, the Sea, at their command, and the Navy; and which is
most material of all, an unexhausted Indies of money to pay their soldiers,
out of the liberal contributions of Coin and Plate sent in by people of all
conditions, who account the Parliaments Cause their Cause, and so think
themselves engaged to part with the uttermost penny of their estates in their
defense, whom they esteem the Patriots of their Liberty. These strengths of
theirs, and our defects considered, I conclude it necessary for all our
safeties, and the good of the afflicted Commonwealth, humbly to beseech His
Majesty to take some present order for a treaty of peace betwixt Himself and
His High Court of Parliament, who, I believe, are so loyal and obedient to His
sacred Majesty, that they will propound nothing that shall be prejudicial to
His Royal Prerogative, or repugnant to their fidelity or duty.

FINIS.

