Britania Triumphalis; A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE WARS AND OTHER STATE AFFAIRS OF
Great Britain.

From the Death of the late KING, to the Dissolution of the last Parliament.

Vide quam repent tempus res mutat humanas,
Tempora mutantur, nos and mutamur in illis.
LONDON, Printed for Samuel Howes, and are to be sold at at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
I Here present unto thy view a rude and imperfect draught of those notable
Occurrences, strange Revolutions, various Contingencies, and wonderful
Transmigrations that have happened in this little corner of the Earth for these
five years last past; which although peradventure they may be imbased by the
course and mean allay of this impolisht dress; yet in this as in all other
Histories, you may find some things which may aut prodesse, aut delectare,
either profit or delight thee: One wisely and truly calls History the faithful
preserver of things past, and the certain prophet of things to come. First here
is related the Fall of one of the Mightiest Monarchs in Europe, and in Him of
Monarchy it self, with the several designs and transactions that were set on
foot for the instating of his Son in the Throne, and the fruitless events
thereof. The Conquest of Scotland. The Reducing of Ireland. The Revolt of the
Carybe Islands, and the Reducing thereof; and of the Islands of Scilly, Jersey
and Man. The Breach between England and the United Provinces, and all the
memorable Sea Fights that ensued thereupon. The Dissolution of the (commonly
called) everlasting Parliament. The Calling another Assembly or Parliament,
with the manner and cause of the dissolution thereof. The Lord General made
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. the Solemnities used
therein, his Reception and Entertainment in the City of London; Other things of
less moment are interwoven and promiscuously mingled up and down the Book, as
the nature thereof requires; all which as to matter and form, I leave to thy
impartial judgment, there to be arraigned and condemned according to the
nature of the offense; and withal I request thee, that with patience thou will
pass by such faults as have escaped the Press, whether verbal, syllabicall
or literal, and so farewell.

A Compendious NARRATIVE of the most Important Affairs of Great Britain, from
the Death of the late KING to the Dissolution of the last PARLIAMENT.
AS to the external Causes of the many evils and miseries wherewith this
Nation has been afflicted for these few years past, much might be said, but the
chief I have reduced to the following Heads.

The first and general Cause was the Sins of the People, magneticall
attraction of the Plebeian rout) and as discontented with their present
condition, sought felicity in things they wanted, and were still unsatisfied
even in the accomplishment thereof: Malv. Romans
whence is occasioned the hatred of tranquillity, the desire of motion, the
loathing of present things, and seeking after future.

Another principal Cause was the lamentable corruptions of the Court,
prodigality, daily invented some new and indirect courses and ways to torment
the people; whose jealousies and fears increasing with their grievances,
brought forth a most bloody intestine war, which ended not but in the
subversion of Church and State, as then established, viz. Episcopacy and
Monarchy, the Head of both being cut off and the Bodies discomfited. And though
the King was judged to be the Patron of those many innovations and miscarriages
that befell the Church and Commonwealth, yet I am fully persuaded they
proceeded not from the depravednesse of his will, but the flexibility of his
nature, overwhelmed by his pernicious Council, by which he seemed of a lesser
magnitude then otherwise he would have done; yet was he not the worst although
the most unfortunate of Princes: and in him ended Monarchy, but not the
miseries of these Nations: for after some years civil (and yet unnatural)
war betwixt King and Parliament, they at length terminated in the vanquishing
of his Armies, the surprisall, captivity and death of his Person, upon a
scaffold before his Palace of White Hall, Jan. ^0th 1648.

The third and last Cause which I shall mention (though not the least, then all
their Crimes put together; nor were they cried down with more heat, then
afterward cried up, verifying that of the Poet, Quid populi tibi voce places?
Mori Epigr.
saepe optima caecus,
Dat vitio, and temere deteriora probat.


Having now hinted out unto you the Causes of our Wars and the distractions
that followed (the beginning, progress and conclusion thereof, to the
beheading of the King, being accurately and briefly described by another hand)
I shall proceed to that which remains. May's Brev.


No sooner was this mighty Prince bereaved of his life and dignity in such sort
as is before related, but Monarchy (the darling of the multitude) was voted
chargeable, unnecessary and useless, and the Government was resolved into that
of a Commonwealth.

Yet this mutation happened not for want of such as by a lineall descent, and
according to the usage of this Nation, might pretend a Title to the Crown: for
there was a plentiful Issue of the late King (both Male and Female) then
surviving, but from some other political reasons best known to the then
swaying Powers, the which added and mi^istred hopes equal to the discontents
of the people.

Now Charles (though eldest Son of the late King) inherited little save the
misfortunes of his Father, and what else he could chaulk out with his Sword;
yet his g^^atest hopes and expectations were from Ireland where the several
factions (...), proclaimed him King, and bent their whole strength against the
Interest of the Commonwealth of England; and in short space become so
formidable, and prevailed so much, that they possessed all the strong holds of
that Country ( Dublin and Londonderry excepted) both which were straightly
besieged, the former by an Army of 22000. men under the Marq. of Ormond, the
latter by a party of the Irish Rebels: he had likewise adjoining to the
territories of England, the Islands of Scilly, Jersey and Man, which yet
advantaged him no more then by nourishing a few small Picaroons to infest the
narrow seas.

But his affairs in Ireland were no sooner at this height, but they begun as
suddenly to decline; for there being about 3000. Horse and Foot safely landed
at Dublin (as the forlorn of a greater body) they were joined with what other
Forces they could then make, all which made not above 9000. at the utmost, and
commanded by the valiant and never to be forgotten Coll. Mich. Jones, sallied
forth, and not only raised the siege, but routed the whole Army of the Marq. of
Ormond, himself hardly escaping, about 2000. were slain in the place and in the
pursuit, some thousands were taken Prisoners, as likewise all their Ordinance,
Ammunition, Carriages, Provision, with great store of rich Booty. To add to
their declining state, and help forward the destruction of these grand
confaederates, who were thus defeated in the midst of their mighty Attempts and
huge imaginations, Oliver Cromwell Lord Deputy of Ireland landed at Dublin with
a powerful Army (about the midst of Aug. 1649.) well accommodated for the
accomplishment of that enterprise so happily began. General Cromwall landed in
Ireland Aug. 1649
And first he laid siege to Drogheda, and in small time (though with some
difficulty and loss) took it by storm; and that he might chastise their
obstinacy, and strike terror into other Garrisons, put to the sword all that
were found in Arms, which were about 3000. presently after which there fell
into his hands many other Garrisons, some by force, others by sur^^nder, viz,
Trim, Dundalke, the Nur^ (...) ^x^ord, Rosse, Bandonbridge, Kingsale,
P^ssagefort, with many more ^^o^edious to relate. In other parts of Ireland,
several Garrisons of the Enemy were taken, and many considerable Parties were
routed by others of the Parliament^ ^hi^ ^tains, viz. the Lord Broghill, Sr
Charles Coot, Coll. Vena^les, Coll. Jones and others; and though this People
have been still on the losing hand, yet have they held out in Boggs and
f^stnesses even to this day; whereby we see, that the vanquishing this Nation,
was not so feasible as in the days of Henry the second, who made it but a
winters work to reduce and subject the people thereof: A thing scarce credible
(says our Author) that a Country so populous, Dan. Chro.
a Nation of that disposition, should not lift up a hand to defend it self! But
it seems (says he) they were wholly unacquainted with such strange kind of
fights, or such weapons; insomuch that the terror thereof laid them prostrate
to the overrunner; but though the winning of that Nation was accomplished with
so much ease, yet in the keeping thereof was more difficulty and cost. In
short, The Affairs of the Catholic and other their confederate party moulder'd
and declined more and more, to the great grief and disheartning of the Royal
Party.

Much about this time happened a general defection of the English Plantations
from their obedience to the Parliament, Virginia and the Carybe Islands revolt.
viz. Virginia and the Carybe Islands: Where, in the ardency of Popular fury,
Liturgy and Monarchy were cried up, and the Nonconformists were some
stigmatized, some fined, and some banished; which courses procured them no
small trouble and loss, in the decay of their Trade and loss of their Ships,
all Nations being prohibited from trading or traffiquing with them upon pain of
forfeiture: All which were in a few months reduced by a Fleet of Ships from
England, Are reduced.
under Sr George Ayscue, not being able to subsist for any considerable space
of time without Trade.

The English coasts were likewise miserably infested with Pirates from Scilly,
Jersey, Ireland and France; but the very Prince of Pirates and Plunderers, was
one commonly known by the Name of Prince Rupert, who with the remnant of that
Fleet, that (not long before) had revolted from the Commonwealth of England,
being about nine tall and warlike Ships, committed many spoils and
depraedations, not only upon the English coasts, but in other places likewise,
whereby the Merchants incurred no small loss.

Now for encouraging of Trade and reducing of Pirates, a stout and lusty Fleet
of Ships well rig'd and manned were set forth, which (with Gods blessing)
scoured the channel and blockt up Prince Rupert in the Harbor of Kingsale,
which with the Town being taken by the Lord Genesis Cromwell, they were forced
thence to make all the sail they could away (leaving about 3 Ships behind) and
at length arrived at Lizbon, the Imperial City of the King of Portugal, and
craved his protection, which was not denied them, the which caused much
trouble, loss and detriment to that King; and was the only cause of that
unhappy difference that fell out between him and this Commonwealth as hereafter
will appear.

Other Designs were set on foot by the Royal party, for the obtaining their
ends.

The first was the Commissionating of James Graham Earl of Montrose, for the
raising what Forces he could in Holland and other parts to invade Scotland.

The second was the procuring a Treaty between the Scots and their King,
whereby they might by force or fraud work him into an absolute Sovereignty over
that Nation, making good that known distich,

If the Lions skin will not prevail,
They Will piece it with the Foxes tail.
To give more life to these undertakings, Ambassadors were dispatched to Spain,
Italy, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Turkey, etc. in the Name of Charles the Second,
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, which Title
(with much confidence) he assumed to himself, yet obtained neither Men nor
Moneys worth noting from any of them, but excuses, pleas and complements in
abundance; for alas they had rather he should not be at all, then be too great:
they, that have equal dignity of birth, had rather have no equal then any
superior.

Montrose (according to his Masters Instructions, Montrose enters Scotland,
having got together some inconsiderable supplies of Men and Moneys) at length
lands in the North of Scotland, where he had not long been, ere he was assailed
and routed by a party from the Kirk, is routed, taken prisoner and executed.
and his Person brought prisoner in most disgraceful manner to the Castle of
Edinburgh, where to fill up the measure of their malice, they hanged him ten
yards from the ground, an act so barbarous and inhumane, as admits of no
comparison: thus lived and thus died the Mirror of Manhood and Map of Misery,
who for many years together had been a thorn in the side of the Kirk; witness
the several defeats he gave them, and who from small beginnings accomplished
vast enterprises, whose hard fate it was at last to fall into their bloody
hands, Sic transit gloria mundi. One would have thought this one act of theirs
had been of force enough to prevent all future overtures between the Scots and
their declared King: Yet as if he had thoroughly learnt that lesson, Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit regnare, he took little notice thereof.

Next Montrose was executed Sir John Urrey, Coll. Spotswood, and others that
were the chief actors in that undertaking, by which means they were rid of a
dangerous enemy.

On all this the English (like cautelous statists) had a watchful eye, and on
every of those actings, whether open or secret, that might have any reflection
upon them or their affairs: and to the end they might the better sound the
contriva^ces of their adversaries, they endeavor to strengthen themselves by
foreign Alliance; and accordingly they sent Dr Dorislaus a wise and knowing
man as public Agent, Dr Dorislaus murder at the Hague.
into the United Provinces, whereby to keep a right understanding and fair
correspondency between the two Republikes: where he had not long been ere he
was slain by six assassinates that broke into his lodgings at the Hague in a
disguised habit, by which means they escaped unpunished, notwithstanding the
many endeavors (at least pretendedly used) for their apprehension. The authors
of this Tragedy were afterward known to be English Cavaliers, discontented at
their declining state, and loss of their old Master: one whereof was Col.
Spotswood aforementioned, who at his death confessed he was an actor therein.
Thus stood the English affairs in reference to their enemies abroad, while they
were in somewhat worse plight at home: for amidst the several factions that
sprung up during these late wars, none was more desperate then that commonly
known by the name of Levellers, The Levellers mutiny.
who at once so wrought with the Soldiery, that a considerable party of Horse
withdrew themselves from the Army, and gathered together such others of their
party as they could conveniently, thinking thereby to force their Lords and
Masters to such things as their immature and unbridled apprehensions had
dictated to them: are suppressed,
But by the care and industry of Genesis Fairfax, they were defeated at a place
called Burford in Oxfordshire, and of those that were taken, some were made
exemplary, others were cashiered the Army, and the rest upon their submission
were taken into favor.

Not long after was brought to trial at the Guildhall London, Lilburne tried
at Guild Hall
the grand Champion, the chiefest and only Patriot of the faction aforesaid,
viz. John Lilburne, a man of a restless and yet invincible spirit, that could
never be detered with threats or won with favors, by a special Commission of
Oyer and Terminer; where was present most of the Judges and Justices of the
several Courts at Westminster, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and several Aldermen
of London, with others of eminent quality. The Indictment with many crimes of a
treasonable nature, as being the Author of such and such Books mentioned
therein; which Books were fraught with the most shameful revilings, scurrilous
invectives, and malicious outcries against the Governors and Government of the
Nation, that the heart of man could invent, calling them Tyrants, Traitors,
Conquering Usurpers, and what not. Now though nothing was more generally
believed, then that the Books aforesaid were of his own penning and publishing,
yet at his trial he made such an excellent, is cleared and released.
subtle and singular defense, that the Jury brought him in Not guilty,
whereupon he had his release.

By this time the several transactions that were between the Scots and their
King, had brought forth a Treaty at Breda in the Netherlands, The treaty
between the Scots and their King concluded
a Town of special note belonging to the Prince of Orange, at whose cost and
charges it was both continued and concluded: Now that part of the Agreement
that had the most especial influence on us, was, that they should endeavor to
the utmost of their power, to reinstate him in his Fathers Throne, invest him
in his Power and Greatness, and establish him in his just Rights and
Dignities: where we shall at present leave him, to see how the Affairs of his
Adversaries the English succeeded.

The differences that lately broke out between the King of Portugal and this
Nation, were now widened by acts of open hostility; for when the English
perceived, that neither entreaties nor threats would make him force Prince
Rupert out of his Harbor, and that the often applications and negotiations of
the English Agent M. Charles Vane, in order thereunto, could avail nothing,
but on the contrary prepared what Ships of war he had to join with Rupert,
and so to chase the English from his Coasts, they seized many of his Ships
richly laden both inward and outward bound: but the King doubting his strength,
desisted from falling upon the English Fleet, and fell to seize the estates,
and secure the persons of the Merchants and Factors residing in Lisbon and
other places under his Jurisdiction.

About this time likewise the English sent an Agent to the King of Spain, viz.
M. Anth. Ashcam, M. Ashcam the English Agent murdered at Madrid.
a most learned and excellently well accomplished Gentleman, who on the 5th of
June 1650. landed at Santa Maria, where (hearing of many threats against his
person) he procured a Guard that conducted him to Madrid, where is kept the
Court of the King of Spain: The first night it was his hard fortune to lie at
an Inn; the next day while with his Interpreter Signior Riba he sat at
dinner, six devils in the shapes of men, knocked at the door, had easy access,
and being entered M. Ashcam rose to salute them, whereupon the foremost stabbed
him in the head, and his Interpreter endeavoring to escape was stabbed in the
belly, both falling down dead in the place. Whence the murderers fled to the
Venetian Ambassadors house, but were denied entrance: whence they fled to the
Sanctuary, were pursued and carried to prison from thence by the Kings special
command, one of them only escaping. Hereupon arose a great difference between
the King and the Church, about the violation of the holy Sanctuary, and thereby
infringing the Sacred Rights and Privileges of the Church, and demanded that
the Assasinates should be delivered again into the Sanctuary. On the other
hand, the Parliament of England by sundry Messages, earnestly pressed that
Justice might be severely inflicted upon those execrable offenders, that had
perpetrated so horrid and vile an act upon their public Minister. And indeed
it was a crime of so transcendent a nature, that me thinks it should not enter
into the heart of any considerate man to imagine of any expiation for them here,
however it may please God to deal with them hereafter. The Church
notwithstanding prevailed so far, as to interrupt the course of Justice, for
as much as their punishment has been hitherto suspended, though for any thing
we hear they are yet in durance.

Near this time arrived in England the Lord Gerard Scarph, as Commissioner from
the States Provincial of Holland and West Friesland, and upon the 11th of June
1650. he delivered his Message in Parliament; which though it produced no more
then a mutual desire of an amicable compliance, yet was it very well resented
by the Parliament, that they showed themselves the leading cards to the rest of
the Provinces at such a time as that.

Now whenas the Treaty at Breda was fully ended, and that all their Jealousies
and animosities (notwithstanding the vast disproportion and notable antipathy
that was erewhile between the Royallists and Presbyterians) was by this means
fully allayed, at least in show. The Scots seemed to want nothing save the
presence of their King, whereby to crown their desires, and confront the
English, in order whereunto He hasts from Breda to the Hague, from thence to
Scheveling, where he took shipping, and at last in despite of foul weather,
and the English Kingfishers that lay there to intercept him, he landed at the
Spey in the North of Scotland, where he found the greatest difficulty in
ascending the Throne, and least enjoyed it of any Prince that was ever heard or
read of. For upon all occasions he was compeld to trace the steps and follow
the dictates of that haughty Clergy, in all their fanatic humors and
imperious decrees: who bereaved him first of all his old friends, Counselors
and confederates, whether of the Clergy or Layety, who (to say the truth) had
always accompanied his Father and Him in all their disasters and dangers; and
had shipwrackt their own fortunes, to carine and repair his, though it may be
by this desertion he intended their restoration. But now the Scots had a King,
yet (as though they had none) they did what seemed right in their own eyes.

The first and most pernicious potion they made him to take, and of hardest
digestion, was the Solemn League and Covenant, that ignis fatuus, and only
seminary of blood and mischief in these three Nations.

The next was a Declaration of the Kirks own framing and fashioning; wherein he
is taught to renounce the sins of his Fathers house, and of his own, the
Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the Cause of God, according
to the Covenant, in the firm establisment of Church Government, as it is laid
down in the Directory for public Worship, Confession of Faith and Catechism:
This with diverse others of the like nature (although with much reluctance) he
also signed; which its like burdened his spirit, yet bettered not his
condition, which was like that of a Child under Tutors and Governors; for there
was not an Officer in that Church or Commonwealth, how vile and abject soever
in place or person, but enjoyed more freedom in body and mind then he. Guarded
indeed he was, but little regarded; so that move he must not but in the sphaere
of the Kirk; they were the primum mobile, whereby its apparent that the
Government of that Nation was not truly Monarchical (though they had a King)
but Hierarchicall, the confusion whereof I shall now set before you.

The Parliament of England weighing right well the condition into which their
affairs were now reduced (by reason of the Agreement that was peec'd up between
the Scots and their King) after a serious and solemn debate, voted that Thomas
Lord Fairfax with the Army under his command should march Northwards: who
(after some conference had with the Parliament) and being prompted by an
indisposition of body or mind, laid down his Commission: which was forthwith
conferred upon Oliver Cromwell Lord Deputy of Ireland, Genesis Fairfax lays down
his Commission which was presently conferred upon General Cromwell Lord Deputy of
Ireland.
who (in order to this Northern expedition) arrived a while after from his
victorious achievements in that country, leaving his Son in Law Henry as Lord
Deputy in his room.

Accordingly Orders were issued forth for the speedy advance of the Army into
Scotland, who had no sooner begun their March, but the Scots took the Alarm,
and sent two or three Papers to Sr Arthur Haslerig then Governor of Newcastle;
wherein they expostulated the Case about the sudden approach of the English
Army, endeavoring thereby to impede their march, till such time as their
designs were ripe: alleging (as scar-Crowes to fright fools) the Covenant,
the large Treaty and Union between the two Nations, with other circumstances of
the like nature, as frivolous as they were fruitless.

The Parliament of England then published likewise a Declaration, showing the
grounds and reasons of their Armies advance toward Scotland, accompanied with
another from the General and Officers of the Army, showing that that which
moov'd them to that great undertaking, was not any reliance upon the arm of
flesh, The Declaration of the English Army in their march to Scotland.
or being lifted up with the remembrance of former successes, or the desire of
accomplishing any designs of their own that they had forelaid, but the full
assurance they had that their Cause was just in the sight of God: looking at
the precedent changes, and the successes that produced them, not as the work of
the policy or strength of man, but as the eminent actings of the Providence and
Power of God, to bring forth his good will and pleasure, concerning the things
which he has determined in the world; adding, That nothing was predominant
with them (next to their duty to their duty to God, not to betray a cause, to
which he had so much witnessed) as the love they had to those that feared God
there, who might possibly suffer through their own mistakes, or their
disability to distinguish in a common calamity: of which Christian love they
hoped that they gave some proof when they were before in Scotland with that
Army, and were by God made isntrumental to break the power of those that
oppressed the godly Party there; for which (say they) their late Engagement to
their new King against England was no good requital, nor their heaping on them
the reproach of a Sectarian Army, a Christian dealing: all which (by the grace
of God) they could forget and forgive, and did (as they say) desire of God that
the precious might be separated from the vile, beginning and concluding with a
most solemn and dreadful imprecation and appeal; That to the truth of these
things the God of Heaven in his great mercy, pardoning their weaknesses, would
judge of them when they came to meet the Enemy in the Field.

This Declaration was sent by the General of the English Forces from their
Headquarters at Barwick to Edinburgh by a Trumpeter, whom they blinded coming
and going, what effect this wrought the sequel of the Story will relate.

From Barwick the Army marched to the Lord Mordingtons House July 22. 1650.
where they lay three days: on the 25. they marched to Copperspeth, the 26. to
Dunbar, where they received some provisions from the Ships sent on purpose to
attend the motions of the Army; forasmuch as the people of the Country had
forsook their habitations, and had left nothing behind that might accommodate
them. The Army thus refresht at Dunbar, marched thence to Haddington: Next day
hearing the Scots would meet them at Gladsmore, they labored to possess the
Moor before them, but no considerable part appeared, whereupon Major General
Lambert and Colonel Whalley men of approved courage with 1400. Horse were sent
as a Vauntguard to Mussleborough to attempt something upon the Enemy if
possible; The General with the residue of the Army marching in the rear, the
English and Scotch Horse had some encounters, but the Scots would not endure
the Shock: that Night the English lay encamped close at Mussleborough; The
Enemy was within four miles of them, entrenched with a Line, flanked from
Edinburgh to Leith; the Guns from Leith scouring most parts of the Line, so
that they lay very strong: The English finding their Enemies were not easily to
be attempted, lay still all that day being the 20. which proved a sore day of
rain, and greatly disadvantagious to them, having nothing to cover them, all
which, expecting a speedy engagement, they did cheerfully undergo it; next day
being the 30. the ground very wet, and provisions being scarce, the English
resolved to draw to their Quarters at Mussleborough, to refresh and
re-victuall; which while they were doing the Scots fell upon their rear, and
put them to some disorder. But some bodies of the English Horse came forthwith
to close with them, which produced a hot and gallant skirmish, insomuch that at
length the English charged them so home, that they beat them to their very
Trenches. Major General Lambert in this dispute was run through the arm with a
Lance, and wounded in another part of the body, taken prisoner, but rescued by
Lieutenant Empson of the Generals Regiment; several of the Scots were killed
and taken Prisoners with small loss to the English: among the rest there was
taken one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, and some Captains, some persons of
note were likewise slain.

By this means the English had opportunity to march quietly off to
Mussleborugh, which they did that night; but so wearied for want of sleep, and
tired with the dirtinesse of the ways, that they expected the Enemy would make
a sudden infall upon them, which accordingly they did: Between three and four
of the Clock next morning, being the 30. of July, with 15 select Troops of
Horse under the Command of Major General Montgomery, and Col. Straughan, who
came on with great resolution, beat in the English Guards, and put a Regiment
of Horse into some disorder; but the English presently taking the Alarm
charged, routed, pursued, and did execution upon them, within a quarter of a
mile of Edinburgh, taking and killing many, as well Officers as Soldiers: the
Scotch affairs succeeding in this sort, made them forbear such frequent
sallies, and keep within their intrenchments.

This was the posture of the Military affairs of Scotland, when to add to the
miseries of that people, all traffic and commerce was prohibited between the
two Nations; And such of the Scots as had their residence in England, were
commanded to depart the Land within ten days or thereabouts; their Ships (not
able to resist, having no Convoy) were often surpised by the English; Insomuch
that they were in the road way to ruin: But seeing this Month of August
produced little of Action from the Armies there, it will not be amiss to give a
brief account of such remarkable passages, as about that time happened in England
and the Neighboring Nations.

At London was apprehended, condemned, Col. Andrews beheaded at Tower Hill.
and executed Colonel Eus^bius Andrews, who being taken with a Commission from
Charles Stuart, and for entering into a conspiracy to undermine the Government
of England, suffered death as aforesaid.

From the United Provinces came account of some notable transactions, which
takes as follows.

The Prince of Orange (Brother in Law to the Scots King, by marrying his
Sister, Daughter to the late King of England) aspiring to a higher degree of
Sovereignty over those Provinces then he or his Predecessors ever enjoyed, and
being thwarted in some of his projects when he was at Amsterdam, he thereupon
was so distasted, that he resolved to right himself, by securing and putting
out the leading men in that Province of Holland, for which purpose he caused
all the Deputies thereof (being then at the Hagne) to assembled, which they
refusing, he seized most of them, those of Amsterdam, (whom he chiefly desired)
escaped only. His next design was to have surpised the City of Amsterdam by a
stratagem, commanding the Horse to such a place, under pretense of conducting
his Mother, and shipped his Infantry at Utrech in the ordinary Passage-Boats,
to come all night, that they might be there early next morning, and the horse
to have their Rendezvous upon the Heath between Naerden and Amesford about
midnight, and to be at the Ports of the Town at the moment appointed; By which
time the foot should have seized on the Regulars, and the S. Tuni^s Ports, and
have opened a passage for the Horse to enter; which design (if by a wonderful
providence of God in sending a fierce storm of rain that night, the intended
march of the Horse had not been hindered from coming to the place and time
appointed) had in all probability taken effect. Nor had the Town known any
thing thereof t^ll too late. But the Hamburgh Post, as he was coming to the
Town met with several parties of Horse, riding to and fro about Amesford and
the Heath, yet who they were he knew not.

Hereof the Lords being informed, straitway caused the Ports to be shut, the
Bridges drawn, the Guards set, the Ordinance planted, and all warlike
preparations to be made; and all this while not knowing their enemies. But they
were not long in suspense, for notice was soon given, that it was Count William
with his Forces whose designments being thus defeated, the Prince of Orange
accosts the Town with this following Letter.

Worshipful, Prudent, Discreet Sirs, and my very good Friends.
WHen I was last in the City for the service of the Country, I was so
strangely entertained, that not to be subject to the like hereafter, I found it
expedient to send Count William with the Troops following him into your City;
and ordered him to keep all things in peace and quiet there, that I might not
be hindered by any ill-affected, in such things as yet I have to propound unto
you, touching the service of the Country, wherein I require your good
assistance; And in confidence thereof, commending you to the protection of the
most High, I remain,

Hague, July 29. 1650. Your Good Friend, W. Prince of Orange.


This stratagem (projected with so much secrecy and subtlety) failing, Count
William drew off his Forces to several Posts, with intent to block up the
Town, which being in a posture of defense, opened their sluices, and set the
Land under water round about, and having so done, they sent a Trumpeter to
Count William to know the reason of that so sudden approach, and to desire him
to retreat with his Army, who returned answer, that he could do nothing till he
heard from the Prince of Orange, yet a little after he thought fit to quit his
station and retire; yet the Deputies of Holland being fast in the Castle of
Lovenstaine, the Prince of Orange had the advantage of making his own
conditions which were these.

1. That the Town of Amsterdam shall agree with the other six Provinces for
continuing the Militia, as it is now settled for four or five years.

2. That the Prince shall repair to their City at pleasure, and be received
upon his entry with all respect and reverence, as was used in times past to his
predecessors, Lieutenants of Holland, and have access into their Assemblies.

3. That the Lords of Amsterdam shall at the next Assembly of the States, use
their utmost endeavors to allay all jealousies and to reconcile differences in
reference to the late action, and bury all in oblivion.

4. That the Lords Andrew and Cornelius Bicher, shall forthwith be removed from
Government, with respect had to their good Names, Integrity and future
Security; and if after they have had conference with his Highness the Prince
of Orange he shall persist in his opinion touching them, that then they shall
be rendered incapable of any Government hereafter.

Now though by this means he brought the States under his Lure, and subjugated
them to his humor; yet this was not the prize he run for, his greatest hopes
and highest thoughts being fixed on that inexhaustible treasure then in the
bank at Amsterdam, with which he might not only have raised his declining
state, but also mount to an absolute degree of Sovereignty and Supremacy over
that people, and likewise might have contributed much toward the repairing the
despicable and needy fortunes of his Brother in Law the Scots King, to the
troubling and disquieting the peace and tranquillity of these three Nations; to
all which it pleased God of his goodness to give a check.

The State of France had likewise a plentiful share in those encumbrances and
common calamities that are incident to Nations and people by reason of foreign
and domestique broyls; The present Cardinal Mazarine was looked upon as the
very efficient cause of all their civil discords, and the only eye-soar of
that miserable people; not much unlike the late blazing Star of Canterbury in
England, both Church men and yet both Statesmen, of like Interest with their
King, and of like power over the people, both alike emulated by the Nobility
for their Greatness, and of the Commonalty for their grievances; But like Fate
has not befell them; For this Cardinal is neither out of favor with his
Prince, nor is he fallen into the hands of the people, for though they have
often showed their teeth, it has never been in their power to bite.

For during the minority of the present King of France Lewis the 14. the sole
management of State Affairs has been in the hands of the Queen Regent, and her
beloved Favorite Cardinal Mazarine; at which (after some years forbearance)
the chief of the Nobility uttered their discontents both privately and
publicly: whereupon three of them were arrested and sent to prison, viz. Lewis
de Bourbon Prince of Conde, Armant de Bourbon Prince of Conti, and the Duke of
Longueville; this administered fresh occasion to the people to breathe out their
discontents, those of Bordeaux against the Duke of Espernon more especially,
but all against the Cardinal; So that on a sudden the whole Kingdom was
inflamed with civil wars, and the appurtenances thereunto belonging. The
principal promoters of and actors in those tumults were two famous Amazones,
the Princess of Conde, and the Duchess of Longueville in behalf of their
imprisoned husbands; Many others of quality appeared also in their behalf, and
to make themselves the more formidable, contracted an underhand bargain with
the Spaniard, who (greedy to fish in such troubled waters) supplied them with
considerable sums of money: The Parliaments of Bordeaux, Paris, Dijon,
Toulouse, etc. countenanced these designs in opposition to the Cardinal and
his creatures; So that in short space Armies were raised on both sides, Towns
garrisoned, taken and re-taken, many men's lives lost, and the Country preyed
upon by all parties; The Spaniard being not only a fomenter of, but an actor in
these portentous divisions, for by this means he had the opportunity to march
to and fro in that Nation, without any considerable opposition, taking
Garrisons, and wasting the Country at his pleasure.

These Insurrections (after many ebbing and flowings, strange Revolutions and
transmigrations, too tedious here to insert,) at length produced the liberty of
the Princes, the withdrawing the Duke of Espernon from Bourdeaux, the banishing
the Cardinal with all his kindred and friends from the Court and Kingdom: yet
was he longer banishing then banished; for it was not many months ere he
returned in great pomp and glory, to the extreme grief of his old malcontents
and competitors, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Orleance and others; as
appears by the present troubles wherewith that servile people is yet afflicted:
where (praying for their deliverance) I shall leave them, and return to the
more proper subject of this discourse, viz. the English affairs in Scotland.

The month of August was near done, and little action performed save the
taking of Collington house and Readhall by storm, and in it the Lord Hamilton,
Major Hamilton and 60 Soldiers, 60 Barrels of Powder, 100 Arms, great store of
Meal, Malt, Beer, Wine and other rich plunder: This was done on the 24th of
Aug. 1650.

The body of the English Army removed forthwith from Pencland Hills, to
Collington, Readhall and other parts within a mile of the whole Army of the
Scots; on the 27th both Armies marched side by side, a great bog only betwixt
them, which hindered an engagement, yet the great Guns played on both sides: Aug.
28th the Canon from the English Camp played hard upon the Enemy and greatly
annoyed them, all which provoked them not to fight, but still they kept within
the protection of the Bog: The English (being in some want of Provisions) drew
off to their old Quarters at Pencland Hills, then with much difficulty to
Mussleburrough to recruit, which done, they drew off their Forces, quitted
their Garrisons, and marched to Haddington; the Scots attending on their right
wing, fell into their Quarters with a resolute Party, and were as valiantly
repulsed by a Regiment of Foot commanded by Coll. Fairfax.

September. 1. The Scots being so advantagiously drawn up at the west end of the
Town, the English drew Eastward into fair and champion ground, fit for both
Armies to engage in: but finding (after several hours expectation of the
enemies approach) that they would not move after them, but to dog them to
advantages, they marched toward Dunbar, whether the Scots moved apace after
them, and at a Pass endeavored to fall upon the rear, which the English
perceiving faced about to fight them: whereupon the Scots drew off to the
Hills, perceiving their advantage lay there, to impede the English at the Pass
at Copperspeth; which being effected, they bragged they had the English in Essex
his pound, meaning they had them upon the same lock the King had the Earl of
Essex at in Cornwall: so ready are men to promise wonders to themselves, while
they confer but with their own desires.

The English were indeed environed with all manner of apparent dangers; their
Forces were lessned, their bodies weakened with Fluxes, their strength wasted
with watchings, in want of drink; wet and cold weather they were always
accompanied with, and much impaired in point of courage, 2000 at least being
disabled for present service, were sent at several times to Barwick.

The General and his Council of Officers finding the Army unfit for further
delays, The Scots defeated at Dunbar.
resolved next morning to break through that their ^sraelitish condition, by
falling on the right wing of the Scots, and either force a passage that way, or
perish in the attempt; and being imbattail'd by break of day accordingly, they
fell upon the enemy with Horse and Foot very unanimously; who to hinder the
English at a Pass, drew up all their Horse upon their right wing, and
valiantly received the onset: The Word of the English was The Lord of Hosts;
and that of the Scots was The Covenant: The English as men endued with new
strength from on high, vigorously pressed forward, as resolved to become absolute
vanquishers or to die Martyrs. After one hours sharp dispute, the Scots were
wholly routed, their Cavilry fled, and the Infantry were all or most of them
slain and taken to the number of about 15000. There were taken 200 Colors, 10
Colonels, 12 Lieutenant Colonels, 9 Majors, 47 Captains, 72 Lieutenants, 80
Ensigns besides Cornets and Quartermasters: 22 Pieces of Ordnance, with
several smaller Pieces, about 15000 Arms; those of Quality taken, were the
Lord Libberton and his Son, the Lord Cranston, Sr James Lumsdale Liutenant
Genesis of the Foot, Adjutant Genesis Bickerton, Scoutmaster General Cambill, etc.
At this engagement all the Forces of the English would not amount to 1200, and
the Scots were in number more then 20000. And as there was a general Fast
throughout England, to implore a blessing from Heaven upon the proceedings of
their Army in Scotland, so likewise there was appointed a solemn day of
Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for this mighty Victory obtained over the Scots
in the fields of Dunbar, Sept. 3. 1650. in the observation whereof many of the
Clergy showed themselves very froward and obstinate, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter.

Scot. 7th. 4 Regiments of Foot marched into Lies, where they found 37 Guns
mounted on Platforms, some Shot and Ammunition with store of wealth.

The same day the Lord Genesis Cromwell drew the rest of his Army both Horse and
Foot into Edenburrough, without any loss save the Arm of a Soldier taken off
by a Canon bullet from the Castle: Sept. 6th being Sabbath day, General
Cromwell sent a Trumpeter into the Castle, to invite the Ministers to come to
their several Charges, which they refused, so that the English supplied their
places.

For some certain time the Army was busied in completing the Fortifications at
Lies, the most commodious Harbor for their accommodation in all Scotland.

Genesis Cromwell (after he had caused a Protection for Markets, and Liberty of
Trade in Edenburrough and Lies to be proclaimed by beat of Drum and sound of
Trumpet) marched forward Sep. 14th with his Army to Netherish, 6 miles from
Edenburrough, leaving Maj. Genesis Overton with his Brigade behind. Sep. 15th the
Army marched beyond Linlithgow, but (by reason of the extremity of the weather)
they were forced to quarter there that night. Sep. 16th they marched toward
Falkirke; and from thence Sep. 17th within a mile of Sterling. Sep. 18th a
Council of War was called, and a Letter drawn up to be sent into the Town,
expressing their constant affection to, and tenderness of the People of
Scotland, which though they had not taken the desired effect, yet being so far
advanced into the Country with their Army, they now desired them to take into
consideraiton their former Papers, and deliver up that place for the service of
the Commonwealth of England. A Trumpeter being sent with the Letter, a
Gentleman on foot, with a Pike in his hand met him, and told him They would not
let him come in, nor receive his Letter.

In the afternoon came a Trumpeter from the Scots, desiring a release of
Prisoners upon ran^ome: To which General Cromwell answered, That they came not
thither to make merchandise of Men, or to get gain to themselves, but for the
service and security of the Commonwealth of England.

The same day Orders were issued forth for the Horse and Foot to march toward
Sterling, in order to a storm, Ladders and all other necessaries being provided
for that purpose; but the strength of the enemy, and of the place, with other
disadvantages being considered, it was resolved that the Army should draw off;
which accordingly they did Sep. 19. and marched to Linlithgow, which when the
General and his Officers had viewed, order was given for making several Works
for the security of the place, conceiving it might make a very considerable
frontier Garrison, lying in the heart of the Country, between Edinburrough and
Sterling: whence (leaving there 5 Troops of Horse, and 6 Companies of Foot)
Genesis Cromwell with the rest of the Army marched back to Edenburrough. Sept. 23.
The Genesis and Officers kept a day of Humiliation.

About the same time the Kirk party also appointed a solemn Fast,

1. To humble themselves for their too much confidence in the arm of flesh. 2.
For the malignity and profaneness of their Army. 3. For the Plunderings and
wickedness of their Army when they were in England. 4. For their not
sufficient purging their Army. 5. For their Commissioners unlawful and
surreptitious manner of prosecuting the Treaty with their King, and their
crooked ways in bringing him home. 6. For their not sufficient purging the
Kings house. 7. For the just grounds they have, that his Majesty's Repentance
was not found, nor from the heart.
From which time to the months end, little was done, save that Genesis Cromwell
took order for the effectual reducing of the Castle of Edinburrough: for which
purpose many miners both Scotch and English were procured to expedite the
business. Sep. ^0. The English went so near the works of the Castle, as they
carried away one of the Scots Colors, 300 Muskets with other Arms, without any
loss.

October. 1. The Scots Galleries went on in order to springing the Mines, they
sent many great and small shot among them, yet nothing retarded the work.
October. 2. the English made a search in the high Church at Edinburgh, and found
there one great Iron Gun, 200 new Muskets, 16 barrels of Powder, 6^ bundles of
Bandileers, 200 Swords, 200 new Halberts, 300 new Pikes, and two load of Match.
That which was done the remaining part of this month, was chiefly to beget a
right understanding and compliance with those that dissented from the King and
Kirk, viz. Col. Kerre and Straughan and their adherents: for which purpose Gen
Cromwell sent Commis. Genesis Whaley with his own and another Regiment toward
them: in the mean while the Fortifications at Lies, and the mining at
Edinburgh went on prosperously: Then Genesis Cromwell with the residue of the Army
marched toward Glasco, but finding there little encouragement for longer stay,
they quickly returned, and in their way Garrisonned two strong Houses, both to
enlarge their Quarters, and to prevent the Mosse-Troopers from securing
themselves there.

Let the Reader now judge what a disasterous condition this People was in, that
when an enemy was in the very heart of the Country, there should be so many
distractions and civil discords among themselves, even to the killing and
slaying one another: One Party in the North was for the King without the Kirk;
another Party in the West was for the Kirk without the King; a third was for
King and Kirk; and these were they then at Sterling that bore the greatest
sway; viz. The Committee of Estates and General Assembly; all these had their
Swords drawn one against the other. When things were at this pass, Genesis
Cromwell sent a Letter to the Committee of Estates, and another of the same to
Col. Kerre and Straughan, much like the former, and produced like effect.
Commis. Genesis Whaley that was sent with a party toward Kerre and Straughan,
accosted them first with a Letter, declaring, That it was not unknown what
Amicable ways they had used, to avoid the effusion of Christian blood, before
and since they came into Scotland, which though hitherto had been ineffectual,
yet they should endeavor the same; Showing further, that their Arms were still
stretched out ready to embrace them, whenever God should incline them to come
in, and that they sought not domination over them, to enslave them, nor to
depresse their Kirk-Government, neither that they sought their Goods or
Estates, but to carry on the Lords work: And that if they would still be
blinded, and persist in gainsaying and opposing, then what further misery
befell their Nation by Famine or Sword, would lie heavy on them.

This Letter (though savouring so much of integrity and ingenuity) met with
nothing of like nature from their Adversaries, notwithstanding their pretended
desire of harkening to an accommodation.

For within short space after Col. Kerre sent a Letter to Commissary Genesis
Whaley then at Carlisle, which being contracted speaks after this sort; That
though they were not in a capacity against the unjust invasion of the English,
yet were they in a capacity to suffer, and should submit to Gods will, either
by doing or suffering, until the time of their deliverance come; and that if it
were their happiness to perish in their duty, it would be a sufficient mercy
to them: and when the persecution had arrived to its height, their captivity
should be returned, adding that he thought it strange the English should talk
of a cessation, even while they were captivating their poor people, assaulting
their Garrisons, apprehending their godly Ministers, tearing them from their
holy callings, and from their holy sighing flocks: concluding, that the
departure of the English out of that Kingdom, and then desiring a Christian
Treaty or conference with them, would be a favor and mercy equally as great to
the one as the other. These were the effects of that (I will not say misguided)
zeal, by which these men were acted.

About the latter end of this Month, Prince of Orange dies.
the Prince of Orange departed this life, who so lately had put a hook into the
Nostrils, and a Bridle into the mouths of the high and mighty States, and in
him the Scots King lost the great interest he had in those parts; whom, though
the States for his late Actions when he was living hated, yet when dead they
lamented: About ten days after this, The Princess is delivered of a Son.
the Princess of Orange was delivered of a Son, which did in part mitigate the
grief that was conceived for the death of the Prince.

Now seeing the Scots still slighted all the ways and means of a loving and
friendly compliance, as appeared by another Letter from Coll. Kerre to Commiss.
Genesis Whaley, wherein he advises them to stand upon his Guard, and expect no
further Overtures; the English set upon new undertakings, and by a party of
Horse under Maj. Brown took in a strong place called Dalhouse, and in it 50
Muskets, 50 Pikes, 4 Barrels of Powder, some store of Provisions and Provender:
this was a supposed Harbor for those villainous people the Mosse-Troopers, who
murdered diverse Englishmen straggling or going for Provisions; they likewise
surprised a party of Mosse-Troopers in Darlington Castle, some of which were
shot presently upon the place. Then advanced Coll. Monk with a party of Horse
and Foot to reduce Roselane Castle 7 miles from Edinburrough, which (when he
had sent in some Grenades among them) was yielded upon mercy: Maj. Genesis
Lambert presently after with a party of 2000 Horse marched toward Dumfreez,
Coll. Kerre being then about Peebles; Commis. Gen Whaley in his march toward
the enemy, took in Dalketh Castle with a threatening Summons, where was store of
Arms, Ordnance, Powder, Match and Bullet; the wall of it was 13 foot broad at
the top: Now Coll. Lambert having (not without some difficulty) got over
Hambleton River, quartered there that night; Coll. Kerre having notice thereof
early next morning, resolved to beat up their Quarters and fall in upon them,
Col. Kers patty defeated, and himself taken prisoner.
and so to surprise the Maj. General, all which he at tempted with courage;
but the English having a timely Alarm, on a sudden encompassed most of the
enemies Horse, of whom they killed 100 and took 100, they took likewise 400
Horse and Furniture, forsook of the Riders, and pursued the rest as far as
Air; in which pursuit Col. Kerre himself was wounded and taken, Colonel
Straughan came in to Major General Lambert.
with his Capt. Lieut. Lieutenant Colonel, and Straughans Major, etc. Colonel
Straughan, Capt. Giffin with some others of the dissenters in the West, came
then in to the Major General, who brought them all forthwith to the
Headquarters at Edinburgh.

December; The English having raised a battery, planted their morter-peece and
great Canon against Edinburgh Castle, and begun to play; the Enemy hung out a
Flag of defiance in contempt thereof: but they had not played long ere they took
it in, whereby it was conceived some notable execution was done by four or five
shells that fell among them, and forthwith put out a white Flag on the top of
the Castle, and sent forth a Drummer offering to surrender if they might have
leave to send to the Committee of Estates: which being denied they accepted of
a Treaty, and sent Major Abernethy and Capt. Hinderson to treat on their part:
Col. Monk and Lieut. Col White were appointed to treat in behalf of the
English, the result whereof was to this effect.

That the Castle of Edinburgh should be surrendered up to his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell on the 24. of December. 1650. with all the Ordinance, The
strong and impregnable Castle of Edinburgh surrendered to the English.
Arms, Magazine, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging.

That the Governor with all the Officers and Soldiers, should then march
forth with their Arms, Colors flying, Drums beating; matches lighted and
Bullet in mouth to such place, as they shall choose.

That such Inhabitants adjacent as have any goods in the Castle, shall have
them restored unto them; and to that purpose they had liberty from the 19. to
the 24. of December. to fetch them away. There was taken in this strong-hold 5
French Canon, 5 Dutch half Canon, 2 Culverings, 2 Demi-culverings, 2 Minion, 2
Faulcon, 28 Braste Drakes, 2 Petards, about 7000 Arms, 80 Barrels of Powder,
store of Canon Shot, with other provisions proportionable.

It may seem strange and almost incredible, that such a strong and impregnable
hold as was that, should be so easily won, the like whereof is not in that
Nation; wherefore it was the common vogue of that time, and by many credibly
believed, That it was assaulted with silver engines; But whether it was
covetousness, cowardice, Treachery or want that caused this sudden rendition,
I know not: But this I know and am sure, it made as much for, and was of as
great importance to the English, as can be imagined: for while that business
was yet in suspense, the Army was hindered from many attempts of great
consequence.

Nor was the Parliament of England less fortunate in their maritime affairs:
for the English Fleet under the command of Genesis Blake lying before Lizbon,
after they had destroyed several French Pirates, taken many Sugar Prizes
belonging to the King of Portugal, of great value, and scowr'd the Seas in some
sort of such others as had been so extremely prejudicial to the English
Merchants, especially those trading into the Levant Seas; They were constrained
partly by distress of weather, and partly to revictuall and water, to make for
some other port: in which time Prince Rupert with his Fleet (making a virtue of
necessity) hoisted sail, and steerd their course for Malaga, where they burnt
and spoiled several Merchants Ships: Genesis Blake hereupon reduced his Fleet to
7 stout and nimble Frigots, and sent the rest home with the Prizes, and with
them he made all the Sail he could after the Enemy, and coming to Malaga heard
they were gone toward Alicant, Genesis Blake sailing thence betwixt Cape degat
and Cape de Paulo took a French Ship of 20 Guns, and presently after that the
Roe-buck one of the revolted Ships fell into their hands, after which they met
with the Black Prince another of Ruperts Fleet, which to avoid being taken, ran
ashore and blew her self up: next day 4 more of Ruperts Fleet ran ashore in the
Bay of Cartagena, Prince Ruperts Fleet destroyed.
where they were cast away and bulged: Some few days after General Blake set
sail to seek out the rest of Ruperts Fleet, which were two, steering his course
toward Minorca, Majorca, Humaterra; but missing of them he gave over the
Chase, and returned for England, having done as much as could be expected from
men valiant and faithful, to the great encouragement of the Merchants,
contentment of the people, and joy of all well-affected people.

Notwithstanding all this, several designs were set on foot by unquiet and
wayward spirits in behalf of Charles Stuart, some by open insurrection, others
by secret combination, in which the Clergy had no small share, as shall be
declared hereafter.

There was executed at Tiburne one Benson for acting by virtue of a Commission
from the Scots King, Benson an Agent from the Scots King executed at Tiburn.
being in the same conspiracy with Col. Andrews who was beheaded as aforesaid.

Upon the same account rose a mutinous rabble in the County of Norfolk, An
Insurrection in Norfolk.
who for a while went roving to and again, pretending the ends of that
undertaking, was for the abolishing of Popery, restoring the young King to his
Crown, revenge of his Fathers death, for suppression of heresy and schism; But
as it was begun without order, so was it managed without resolution: For the
Parliament were no time-givers to growing dangers, but immediately gave order
for the suppressing them; So that 200 Horse from Lyn and 3 Troops of Horse from
the Army, with some of the Militia Forces of that County, is appeased and the
ringleaders executed.
marched toward them, upon which they were presently dispersed, and some
taken, whereof about 20 were executed, who because they were persons of no
great eminency, I shall forbear troubling the Reader with their Names.

About this time also Sir Henry Hide being commissionated as Ambassador from
the Scots King to the Grand Signior at Constantinople, Sir Henry Hide executed
at the Old Exchange
stood in competition with Sir Thomas Bendish (then Ambassador for the
English) for his place: whereupon they had a hearing before the Vizier Bassa,
the result whereof was, that Sir Thomas Bendish should dispose of the said Sir
Henry Hide, as he thought good, who was straightway sent to Smyrna, thence into
England, and there condemned and executed for a traitor before the Royal
Exchange in London.

The war in Scotland was now almost at a stand, for the sharpness of the
Winter was such in that Northern Climate, that much could not be expected, yet
were all probable designs for the reducing that obstinate and hardy people put
in execution. The Scots King crowned at Scone. Jan. 30. 1651.
The Scots were chiefly busied about the Coronation of their King, which was
performed at Scone, Jan. 1. 1651. with as much solemnity and gallantry as their
necessity and poverty would permit; then they proceeded to the Excommunication
of Straughan, Swinton, and others that came in to the English, made a shift to
unite the other Dissenting parties, and then put out an Act for new Levies to
be made throughout the Nation.

Soon after this Lieut. Genesis David Lesley with a party of 800 Horse made an
attempt upon Lithgow where was a Regiment of Horse under Col. Sanderson, who
being presently in a readiness to receive them, the Scots retreated without
entering the Town.

Next attempt of the English was for reducing of Hume Castle with two Regiments
of Horse and Foot commanded by Col. Fenwick, Hume Castle besieged,
who coming before it, sent in this Summons, which with the answer for the
unusual strain thereof, I here insert.

Sir,
HIs Excellency the Lord General Cromwell has commanded me to reduce this
Castle you now possess, under his obedience, which if you now deliver into my
hands, for his service, you shall have fit terms for your self and those with
you, and ease the adjacent parts of a great charge; If you refuse, I doubt not
but in a short time, by the Lords assistance to obtain what now I demand. I
expect your answer by 7. of the Clock tomorrow morning, and rest,

To the Governor of Hume Castle.
Your Servant, George Fenwick.


Right Honorable,
I Have received a Trumpeter of yours, as he tells me, without the Pass, to
render Hume Castle to the Lord General Cromwell: Please you, I never saw your
General, nor knew your General, as for Hume Castle it stands upon a rock:
Given at Hume Castle this day before 7 a clock, so rests without prejudice to
my Native Country.

For the Governor of Barwick,
Your most humble Servant, assaulted and taken.
Th. Cockburne.


Notwithstanding this resolute and conceited answer, when the English with
their Culverin and morter-piece had opened a small breach, the Enemy beat a
parley, and because they might not have such conditions as they would, they
were forced to take such as they could get, viz. to surender upon mercy, which
was done accordingly.

Then Col. Monk with about 3 Regiments of Horse and Foot, laid Siege to
Tymptallon Castle, against which they played with their mortar-pieces for the
space of 48 hours, but did them no hurt; then they played at the Castle with 6
battering Guns, Timptallon Castle taken.
which did such notable execution, that the Enemy beat a parley, and desired
terms to march away, but none would be granted, save that they should yield
themselves to mercy, which was at last accepted, and the Castle yielded, with
all the Guns, Arms, Ammunition, and provision therein: The taking of this
Castle was of great concernment to the English, who were ever and anon taken
and rifled by the Garrison; So that now the passage from Edinburgh to Barwick,
was in a manner clear. Notwithstanding which and all the care that had been
used, the English were daily surpised and murdered in small straggling parties;
insomuch that Genesis Cromwell was forced (for the safeguard of his men) to
publish and strictly to put in execution the following Proclamation.

FInding that diverse under my command are not only daily spoiled and robbed,
but also sometimes barbarously and inhumanely slain by a sort of outlaws and
robbers, not under the discipline of any Army, and finding that all our
tenderness to the Country, produces no better effect, then their compliance
with and protection of such persons, and considering that it is in the power of
the Country to detect and discover them, many of them being inhabitants of
those places where commonly the outrage is committed, and perceiving that
their motion is ordinarily by the invitation, and according to intelligence
given them by Countrymen; I do therefore declare, that wheresoever any under
my command, shall be hereafter robbed or spoiled by such parties, I will
require life for life, and a plenary satisfaction for their Goods, of those
Parishes and places where the fact shall be committed, unless they shall
discover and produce the offender; and this I wish all persons to take notice
of, that none may plead ignorance. Given under my hand at Edinburgh, November.
5. 1650.

O. Cromwell.


Hereupon several Sums of Money were levied upon such Parishes and places
where any Robberies or Murders were committed; and likewise such persons as
were found to abett, act, or assist in the perpetrating any murders were
forthwith condemned and executed, according to the tenor of the aforesaid
Proclamation.

The English in the next place designed the reducing of Brunt Island, and in
order thereto they shipped some of their Infantry; but either through the
ignorance, mistake, or neglect of the chief Commander, the design for that time
was frustrated.

Genesis Cromwell with his Army marched from Edinburgh, and assayed several times
to pass over into Fife; but the violent season and difficult passage, forced
them to betake themselves to their former Quarters, which were the more
comfortable by reason of the Fleet of Ships that arrived at Lies with plenty
of provisions for Horse and Man; one whereof bound from Hamburgh with cheese,
by distress of weather was driven into the North of Scotland where it was
seized: but the Master pretended he was bound for Haver de Grace in France, and
producing old Cockets, importing as much, he was dismissed and a Scotch-man put
himself and goods aboard for France; whereupon they set sail, and about the
Frith were boarded by an Irish Man of War, who would have carried the Vessel
to Ireland, alleging they were bound for Lies, the Master stood to his former
relation, and desired they would take the report of a Scotchman who was aboard;
so that forthwith they left her, and she came safe into Leith, whence the
Scotchman was sent home to carry the News. These with many other the supplies
that were sent from England were a great heartning to the Soldiers in the
midst of those many hardships they were exposed to by diseases, and otherwise;
of which the General himself had as great a share as any, for he had so many
violent fits of the contagious disease of that Country that brought him even
to the brink of death; yet the weakness and want of the General did neither
abate the Soldiers courage, nor retard the enterprises they designed for
completing their work; although other difficulties presented themselves as so
many mountains of opposition, viz. the number of their enemies dispersed all
along the other side of the river to prevent their Landing, the danger of the
passage it self, and the unseasonablenesse of the weather; these impediments
with the weak condition of the English, hindered any further proceedings for
some space of time.

During which Intervall there happened as remarkable an accident in England as
any Story can parallel, which for the strangeness and rarity thereof may well
merit my pains to recite, and the Readers patience to peruse: At Oxford (the
famous and renowned Nursery of humane Literature) was tried, condemned, and
executed, Anne Green, a Servant to Sir Thomas Read at Ounstu in that shire, who
being with child by a Gentleman in that House (as she affirmed to the last)
about the fourth month of her time; over-working her self fell in travel, and
(not knowing what it might be) went to the House of Office, where with some
straining the Child fell from her unaware (as she said) being not above a span
long; and something appearing in her Linen that caused suspicion, search was
made, and an abortive Infant found on the top of the House of Office, so that 3
days after (being in that time before some Justices of the Peace) she was
carried Prisoner to Oxford, where she was condemned and hanged in the
Castle-yard: After she had hung about half an hour (during which time she was
pulled by the Legs, Anne Green hanged at Oxford, afterward she revived and is yet
alive.
and struck on the Breast by diverse of her friends, and others, that she might
be out of her pain) she was cut down, put into a Coffin, and brought to a House
to be dissected before some Physicians: When they opened the Coffin, they
perceived a rattling in her throat, a Fellow standing by stamped upon her breast
and belly; yet Doctor Petty and two or three more then present fell speedily to
use some means to bring her to life, and opened a vein, laid her in a warm bed,
procured a woman to go into bed to her, and continued the use of diverse other
remedies, having respect to her sencelesnesse, head, throat, and breast, so
that in a few hours she spoke, the next day talked and coughed very heartily,
and in short space perfectly recovered: Upon which first her reprieve, and then
her pardon was procured: After this, she (as upon the Gallows) still insisted
upon her innocence and integrity, in relation to the fact for which she was
condemned. And indeed this was looked upon as a special providence of God thus
to deliver her, who in the judgments of those that understood the business
was deemed guiltless. Herein did the hand of God wonderfully appear, in
detecting the unadvised actings of men, and in showing us the danger we are in,
when we are swayed either by passion or prejudice against the meanest of his
Creatures.

The Parliament weighing how prone the people were to adore the shadow of the
late King, though the substance was destroyed, caused his Statue that was set
up at the West end of the Cathedral of St Paul to be pulled down, and that
also in the Royal Exchange, over which they caused to be wrote this Motto.

Exit Tyrannus Regum Ultimus Anno Libertatis Angliae restitutae Primo, Anno
Domini 1648. January 30.

They likewise caused that badge of Monarchy the Kings Arms, to be defaced and
expunged out of all Churches, Chapels, and places of public worship and
Courts of Judicature throughout their Dominions, and this indeed was a means to
make the giddy people forget the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt they much hankerd
after.

And to add a more splendid luster to their strength and greatness; they were
highly courted by Ambassadors from the Neighboring Nations, viz. Holland,
Spain, and Portugal, yet the crafty Hollander held at a distance, as rather
willing the prosperity of the Royal party, then heartily desiring, or
effectually endeavoring a peace with them. The Spaniard as he had better ends,
so had he better success; though in all his addresses he was still reminded of
his suspending and delaying the execution of justice upon the Assassinates of
the English Resident at Madrid, since which time till now the controversy
between the King and Church about that business has been in debate.

The Portugal Ambassador (after audience had before a Committee of
Parliament, The Portugal Ambassador dismissed home.
and several applications unto them) not being fully impowerd, to give a
plenary satisfaction to the state for their vast expenses, and to the Merchants
for their great losses, all occasioned by them, was at length dismissed.

Ambassadors extraordinary were sent from the Parliament of England to the
States of the United Provinces; their Names were Oliver St John, and Walter
Strickland, English Ambassadors are sent into Holland.
men of singular parts and of approved integrity, who in gallant equipage, with
a magnificent train of followers, set sail from the Downs, March 11. 1651. On
the 12th toward Evening, they came to anchor before Hellevoit slugs, but not
without some danger: On the 13 they went in Boats to Roterdam, being met with
vessels from the States, then by the English Merchants were conducted to the
English house, and nobly entertained: During their stay there, the Spanish
Ambassador sent a Gentleman to congratulate their sase Arrival, and to desire
there might be a fair correspondency and right understanding between their
Lordships and him. About two or three days after they set forward for the
Hague, where by the way the Master of the Ceremonies, with about 30 Coaches,
met them, and entertained them with some Complements, and conducted them to a
House at the Hague, prepared for their reception, where they were feasted three
days by the States, and then had audience: where the Lord St John made a
Learned and Eloquent Speech in the English tongue and then delivered a Copy
thereof in Dutch and English, they have audience.
the heads whereof were in effect as follows.

That they were sent over to the High and Mighty States of the Netherlands,
from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to make a firm League and
Confederacy between the two Republiques, if they think fit to accept thereof,
notwithstanding the many injuries the English have sustained from the Dutch
Nation.

Secondly, To renew and confirm those former Treaties and Agreements of Trade
and commerce made between the two Nations.

Thirdly, He showed them the notable advantages of England, in respect of the
pleasant and commodious situation thereof, for the advancement of trade and
all other accommodations.

Lastly, He told them he was commanded by the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England to let their Lordships know how highly they resented the execrable
murder of Dr Dorislaus their Agent, and that he doubted not but that their
Lordships would use their utmost care and industry in causing a strict and
diligent search to be made after the Authors thereof.

After which the States (being acquainted with the many affronts the
Ambassadors Gentlemen and others their attendants, had received from English
Cavaliers and other ruffians) drew up a Proclamation and sent it to the
Ambassadors by the Lord Catz, to know whether they judged it full enough; the
contents whereof was, To forbid all manner of persons whatsoever, from giving
any affront, either in word or deed, to any of the Ambassadors retinue, upon
pain of corporal punishment.

Three months was now spent in this tedious and costly Embassy, and nothing
obtained save affronts and abuses of all kinds, and the Sword of Justice not
drawn in their behalf, against any one of that riotous rabble, that so
frequently swarmed at the Ambassadors gates, assaulting their servants, and
reviling their persons: of which injuries the Parliament being deeply sensible,
and wearied with expectation of what fruits this Treaty would produce, Resolved
(That seeing all their Proposals and endeavors for a lasting and well grounded
Peace, were answered with dilatory shifts and evasions, on purpose to gain time
upon the English, till they saw on which side the chance of war in Scotland
would fall) to call home their Ambassadors; which sudden and unexpected news
did so surprise the Hoghen Mogens, that they courted them with frequent and
unusual visits; and with a multitude of feigned expressions, they return into
England.
labored to beget a good opinion in the English of the reality of their
intentions toward an amicable compliance with this Nation: notwithstanding all
which the Ambassadors soon after return into England infecta pace.

That which gave further cause of jealousy to the English, that the Dutch
played an underhand game with them was, because Admiral Van-Trumpe with a Fleet
of Ships lay hovering upon the Coasts of Scilly, as though he would make an
hostile attempt upon that place; but it being demanded of the States of
Holland, what was the design of their Fleet in riding so near that Island? it
was answered, That they had no other design therein, but to demand restitution
of such Ships and Goods as the Pirates thereof had taken from their People:
with which answer the Parliament were somewhat satisfied; but not to trust them
too far, speedy order was taken for reducing the same into their own hands.

Accordingly on the 18th of April 1651. Genesis Blake (with the addition of a
squadron of Ships commanded by Sr George Aiscue, The Islands of Scilly reduced.
that were designed for reducing of the Carybe Islands,) set sail and landed
300 Seamen besides Landmen upon the Isle: The Seamen with much resolution,
courage and gallantry, led the van, and easily made way for the rest; so that
they soon became masters of the Islands of Tresco and Briers, took therein 150
Prisoners, and slew abut 20; they took also two considerable Frigots, the one
of 18, the other of 32 Guns; they likewise became Masters of the best Harbor
belonging to those Islands: hence the enemy fled to St Mary's, their chief
place of strength, which in short time was surrendered. As to the exceeding
great strength and commodious situation of these Islands, I need not say much,
for who so knows those parts, or has observed the Card, will see what a
necessity there was of reducing the same, and what a seasonable mercy God was
pleased to Crown their endeavors withal, that they should gain so
considerable a place as that, being fortified both by Nature and Art, without
the loss of ten men from first to last.

Upon misinformation of the State of Cornet Castle in the Isle of Guernsey,
Cornet Castle in Guernsey assaulted, but in vain.
that then held out for the Royal party, a considerable number of Foot, with
Ladders and all things necessary, gave an onset; but whereas it was reported
and believed that there was but 40 men in the Castle, and 18 of them unable for
service, it appeared aftewards that there was 60 able men therein, enough to
keep it against a far greater number, then was before it, so that their Ladders
were beaten down and broken with stones, timber, and case-shot from the
flankers, and many of the Soldiers both slain and wounded, insomuch that it
proved a work too hot for the assailants: nor was there more safety in getting
off one or two Boats full of men being sunk by shot from the Castle; but how
badly soever the business succeeded, the Soldiers were not in the least
wanting in their duties.

There was executed at Towerhill one that had been a notorious stickler for the
Royal party by Sea and Land; Brown-Bushell beheaded at Towerhill.
for several crimes of blood and treachery acted by him, while he was in the
service of the Parliament, and after his revolt known by the Name of Brown
Bushel.

And now once more let us advance Northward, and observe the motions of the two
Armies: Blackness taken by the English.
The English (desirous to gain upon their adversaries as much as consisted with
policy and their own safety) with a commanded party under Col. Monk, set down
before Blackness, that had much annoyd their Quarters by sheltring loose
rogues and otherwise; After the batteries were made, and some shot spent at it,
they desired Quarter, which (considering the strength of the place) was
granted, and the place forthwith yielded. On the other side the Scots begun to
be both powerful and numerous to the eye: For notwithstanding the many parties
and Factions, Strifes, Aemulations, Contentions, Divisions, Subdivisions,
Excommunications, etc. they peec't up an agreement (such as it was) to the
seeming satisfaction of all the dissenters: And now they join against the
common Enemy, having their greatest hopes wrapped up in a most notable design and
confederacy, hatched by the Royal Covenanters of England and Scotland, whereby
a general rising in the County of Lancaster and parts adjacent was contrived,
who by joining with a considerable force from Scotland, should have been able
to confront the greatest power the Parliament then had, and this plot had its
rise and progress from the Clergy, those foeudatories of Rebellion and
treason; but by Gods Providence was seasonably discovered; the Grand Agent
hereof was Thomas Cook of Graies Inn Esquire, who was apprehended and carried
before the Council of State at White Hall, whence he made his escape, but in
few days after was retaken at a House in the Strand; Next discovery was by
means of a Ship bound from the North of Scotland to the Isle of Man, which by
contrary winds was driven into Air, and there secured and searched, wherein
were found many notable Papers, giving further light into the business.

Not long after this a Party of Horse and Dragoons marched to Grenock, near
Dunbarton, where they seized Mr Birkenhead another Agent for the Royal
designs, about whom they found such Letters, Commissions and Instructions, that
therein their whole plot was discovered; Upon which the Parliament ordered,
that a considerable body of Horse and Foot should march Northward, under the
command of Major General Harrison both to prevent insurrections and likewise
to oppose the Enemy, if they should make an inrode by the way of Carlisle.

At London was under question the most eminent actors in and contributors to
the plot aforesaid, viz. Mr Christopher Love, Major Alford, Maj. Adams, Col.
Barton, Mr Blackmore, Mr Case, Mr Cauton, Dr Drake, Mr Drake, Capt. Far, Mr
Gibbons, Mr Haviland, Major Huntington, Mr Jenkins, Mr Jaquel, Mr Jackson,
Lieut. Col. Jackson, Capt. Mussey, Mr Nalton, Capt. Potter, Mr Robinson, Mr
Sterks, Col. Sowton, Col. Vaughan, and others; of all which there suffered
only two, viz. Mr Love, and Mr Gibbons; Mr Love and Mr. Gibbons executed.
Now Mr Love although by many circumlocutions, sleights, and evasions, he
strived to clear himself; yet besides the witnesses of his own party, that
testified against him, he was everted out of his own Narrative, as also out of
the several Petitions presented by him to the Parliament in his own behalf,
after he was condemned; which did but procure him a short respit from death:
for on the 22. of August, 1651, he with Mr Gibbons aforesaid were beheaded on
Towerhill; the rest upon their humble Petitions and acknowledgements of their
crimes were releast and pardoned. And high time it was that such an exemplary
piece of justice, should be inflicted upon the proud and obdurate Clergy, who
till then thought themselves out of the reach of Magistraticall power, and that
their Function might cloak their actions; but let them know, that Magistracy is
an Ordinance of God as well as Ministry; for there is no power but of God, and
the powers that are are ordained of God.

Therefore it would not be amiss, if our Governors in some particulars would
imitate the Republique of Venice: First, By not admitting Ecclesiastical
persons into secular Councels, because they have relation to another
Government, viz. Pontificiall. 2. By having a special care to the Pulpit and
the Press, that no Churchman from the meanest Priest to the Patriarch, dare
tamper with the affairs, designs or transactions of the State: It being too
well known (says my Author) that Churchmen are the most perilous and
pernicious instruments in a State, Howels Survey of the Signiory of Venice.
if they misapply their Talents, to poison the hearts of the people, to
intoxicate their brains, suscitate them to sedition and a mislike of the
Government; and they have more power to do this, in regard they have the sway
over the noblest part of the creature, the soul and intellectualls: therefore
if any meedle with State-matters in the Pulpit, they are punished in an
extraordinary severe manner, and this (says he) is alleged for one main
reason why the Venetian Republique has kept their Liberties inviolable; and if
it shall please God to put it into the hearts of our Governors to take the
like course, no doubt but we shall have the like blessing.

There happened much about this time a petty Insurrection in Wales, A rising in
Wales.
two or three hundred being got together in behalf of the Scots King, whom
telltale Fame (that has continual credence with the fickle multitude) had
possessed with pleasing (and yet untrue) news of the defeating Genesis Cromwels
Army, and the advance of the Scots into England, which prosperous attempt had
an event suitable to the undertaking, viv. confusion and destruction.

The English being now desirous to put a period to the war in Scotland, by
gaining a passage over the river into Fife, for the facilitating their work,
and more easy transportation, caused several boats to be made, with which
they gave many great Alarms to the Enemy on the other side, as also to those in
Brunt Island, in order to what they futher intended.

The Scots also made many infals upon the out-quarters and Garrisons of the
English, wherein they had frequently good success, killing some and slaying
others, having the advantage of the English by their knowledge of the Country,
for prevention whereof, orders were given out for drawing off their remotest
Garrisons, and contracting their Quarters, which was done accordingly, and the
Army put into a marching posture for Fife, for which purpose Blackness was
made their Magazine; but the Ground not yet affording either Grass or Oats,
the enterprise was further suspended.

The Scots having completed their Levies to the Number of 15000 Foot and 6000
Horse, marched on this side Sterling to a place called Torwood, where they were
faced by the English, but would not be drawn to an Engagement, yet still lay
encamped behind bogs, and inaccessible fastnesses, on purpose to delay the
War: Upon which the English resolved to land some Forces on Fife side, The
English gain a passage over into Fife.
and for that end there was drawn out 1600 Foot, and 4 Troops of Horse,
commanded by Col. Overton, who attempted to land at Queens Ferry, which on the
17th of July 1651. with the loss of about six men was effected, and presently
they fell to entrench themselves: while this was doing the Lord Genesis Cromwell
with his Army marched close up to the Enemy, that in case they had marched
toward Fife, he might have engaged their rear before they could have reached
Sterling: The Scots receiving the Alarm the same day, forthwith sent a
considerable party of Horse and Foot to the number of 4000 under Sir John Brown
to drive the English out of Fife: upon which Genesis Cromwell sent Maj. Genesis
Lambert with two Regiments of Horse and two of Foot to re-enforce the other
party, who in 24 hours were ferryed over and joined, upon which Col. Okey with
his Regiment fell in among the Enemy, whereby they were forced to draw into a
Battalia, as did the English also, who were more in number then the Enemy,
though to equalize that they had greater advantages of ground. In this posture
they continued facing each other about an hour and half; whereupon the English
resolved to attempt the Enemy by ascending the Hill, which being done (after a
short dispute) the Scots were utterly routed, 4000 of the Scots routed, slain
and taken.
2000 or thereabouts were slain, and 1400 taken Prisoners, whereof Sir John
Brown the Commander in chief was one, with Col. Buchanan and many others of
quality: Of the English there was few slain, but many wounded: A further
additional strength of horse and foot were sent into Fife, so to strengthen the
English that they might be able to encounter the whole body of the Scots Army,
if occasion required.

Immediately upon this, Inchigarvey Castle surrendered to the English.
was surrendered to the English the strong Castle of Inchigarvey, situate on a
rock in the midst of the Fryth, between Queens-Ferry and North-Ferry, wherein
were 16 pieces of Ordnance.

July 27. The whole English Army appeared before Brunt-Island, and sent in a
Summons for rendition thereof, unto which the Governor returned a modest
answer, and the next day accepted a Parley: Commissioners on both sides were
chosen, and after some debate it was agreed, that the said Island,
Brunt-Island surrendered to the English.
with all the Provisions, Guns and Shipping of War, should be delivered into
the hands of the English, etc. and that all the Officers and Soldiers in the
said Island, should march away with Colors flying, Matches lighted, and Bullet
in mouth: This place was of much concernment to the English, and served for a
storehouse of all necessary supplies for the support of their Army.

Thence the Army marched without stay to St. Johns-Town, a place of great
strength and importance, St Johns-Town yielded to the English.
into which the enemy had newly boated a Regiment of Foot: yet when the
English broke down their sluices, and let the water out of the Graff, the
enemies courage failed them, so that it was in short space delivered.

This was no sooner done, but the main body of the English Army, were
constrained to attend more eminent service, viz. the pursuit of the Scots King,
who with an Army of about 16000 Horse and Foot, had slipped into England by the
way of Carlisle: The Scots enter England by the way of Carlisle.
accordingly most of the Infantry were boated over to Lies, with as much
expedition as could be, and presently after the Horse: Orders were immediately
given to Maj. Genesis Lambert, to march with 3000 Horse and Dragoons, and (if he
could) to get into the rear of the enemy. Maj. Genesis Harrison was ordered
likewise to get into their van, to stop them and do what further he thought
fit: besides these there was about 16 Regiments of Horse and Foot with Genesis
Cromwell upon their march after the enemy: And to prosecute the affairs of
Scotland, Liev. Genesis Monk was left with a party of 7000 Horse and Foot, who
straitway took in the strong Town and Castle of Sterling, Aberdeen, Abernethy,
Dundee, Dunotter Castle, Dunbarton Castle, with several others, so that the
whole Realm of Scotland, was (after a passage gained into Fife) with little or
no difficulty subdued and made tributary to the Republique of England.

The Scots Army, The Scots enter the City of Worcester,
after many halts and skirmishes, long and taedious marches, weakened in their
bodies and distracted in their minds, decreasing rather then increasing, at
length put into Worcester; whence the King sent out his Letters mandatory to Sr
Thomas Middleton to raise forces for him, and to Col. Mackworth Governor of
Shrewsbury to the like purpose, as he did to others also, but without success:
He was likewise proclaimed King of Great Britain, France and Irelrnd, in most
places where he came: which blast of Honor (like Jonah's Gourd) quickly
vanished: for alas by this project of theirs, of coming into England, they run
themselves into inevitable danger, as the Poet says, Decidit in Syllam, qui
vult vitare Charybdim. being environed on all sides with the Militia Forces of
the several Counties of the Nation, besides Genesis Cromwels Army they so much
dreaded; there was likewise a considerable body of Horse and Foot under Maj.
Genesis Lambert and Harrison that attended their motions: Col. Robert Lilburne was
left in Lancashire to hinder the Earl of Derby from raising Forces in those
parts, other parties were disposed into several other places, to hinder the
enemy of Provision, or stop their flight as occasion should be.

The Earl of Derby being landed (as was expected) at Wyewater in Lancashire,
with about 300 Gentlemen and others, endeavored to raise the Country, while
the English were busied at Worcester, and in short space by the accession of
Papist, Royallists and discontented Presbyterians, they increased to the number
of 1500: Genesis Cromwels Regiment of Foot being then at Manchester, was appointed
to meet Col. Lilburn at Preston: To prevent this conjunction, The Earl of Derby
routed in Lancashire.
the enemy bent their course toward Manchester to surprise the said Regiment;
whereupon Col. Lilburn assayed to flank the enemy in their march, and by that
means to join with those Foot; which the enemy perceived and pressed to engage.
Now though Col. Lilburn was overmatcht with Foot in point of number, whereby
the dispute proved taedious and difficult, yet in the space of an hour, the
enemy was totally routed, many persons of quality were taken, as Col. Leg, Col.
John Robinson, Col. Bayns, Col. Gerard, 4 Lieut. Col. 1 Major, 4 Captains, 2
Lieutenants, 20 Gentlemen and Reformadoes, 500 Common Soldiers, with all their
baggage, Sumpters, Arms and Ammunition, the Earl of Derby's George, Garter and
other robes with badges of the Order, but he himself escaped and recovered
Worcester: There were slain the Lord Widrington, Sr Thomas Tildesly, Col.
Matthew. Boynton, Sr William Throgmorton, Sr Francis Gamuel with some other
inferior Officers and about 60 private Soldiers. Of the Parliaments Party but
10 were slain, but many wounded: For this piece of service Col. Lilburn was
bountifully rewarded, as he indeed deserved.

Genesis Cromwell (who by delays, never contributed to approaching dangers) with
his Army came to Worcester, before he was either expected or desired by his
Adversaries; whenas the whole Army was presently disposed about the City, in
order to a close begirting thereof.

The first remarkable attempt, was the possessing a Pass upon the Severne, at
a place called Upton, which was done by a party led on by Maj. Genesis Lambert,
and was presently made good by Lieut. Genesis Fleetwoods Brigade, who marched
toward the River Teame, over which was made a Bridge of Boats, and another
over Severne on the Generals side; upon which the enemy took the Alarm, and
drew out Horse and Foot to oppose the Lieut. Generals passage; to whose relief
there was commanded over Colonel Inglesbyes and Col. Fairfax Regiments of
Foot, the Generals Lifeguard, and Col. Hackers Regiment of Horse; all which
were led on by Genesis Cromwell in person: then was commanded over likewise Col.
Goffs, and Maj. Genesis Deans Regiments, who sell to scouring the hedges, which
the enemy had lined, and beat them from hedge to hedge, and being seconded by a
fresh supply (after about an hours sharp dispute) the enemy was forced to give
ground and fly to Powick bridge, where with about three Regiments more they
maintained another hot dispute, but at length quitted their ground also, and
ran into Worcester, except some that were taken.

After which (renewing their courage) they drew out what Horse and Foot they
could on the Generals side, thinking most of his Army had been on the other
side, making a bold and resolute sally, whereby the Generals men were forced a
little to retire; but the scales presently turned, and in such sort that the
enemy was totally routed both Horse and Foot, their Works and Fort-Royall were
taken, and their Canon turned upon themselves, the Town also was straitway
entered and sacked; The Scots routed at Worcester, Sept. 3. 5651.
most of the Scots Infantry were slain and taken, but of their Horse above 3000
escaped, of which Col. Barton lying about Bewdly with some Horse and Dragoons,
took near upon a thousand; Col. Lilburn with the Gener. Regiment of Foot, met
with the Earl of Derby, that lately so narrowly mist his hands, with the Earl
of Lauderdaile and above an hundred persons of quality more. In this engagement
and the gleanings thereof, there were taken Prisoners near 10000, and about
3000 slain: Those of Quality taken, were Duke Hamilton, Earl Lauderdaile, Earl
of Rothes, Earl of Carnwarth, Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John Packington, Sir
Charles Cunningham, Sir Ralph Clare, Lo. Spine, Lord Sinclare, Earl of
Cleveland, Earl of Derby, Earl of Kelly, Col. Graves, Mr Richard Fanshaw
Secretary to the Scots King: 6 Col. of Horse, 13 of Foot, 9 Lieu. Col. of
Horse, 8. of Foot, 6 Majors of Horse, 13 Maj. of Foot, 37 Capt. of Horse, 72
Capt. of Foot, 55 Quartermasters of Horse, 89 Lieutenants of Foot; Maj. Genesis
Pitscotty, Maj. Genesis Montgomery, the Lieutenant Genesis of the Ordnance, Adjut.
General of the Foot, the Marshall, Quartermaster General, and Waggonmaster
General: 76 Cornets of Horse, 99 Ensigns of Foot, 30 of the Kings servants, 9
Ministers, 9 Chirurgions, 158 Colors, the Kings Standard, Coach and Horses,
with other rich goods and his collar of SS. Many Parties were taken besides in
several other places, as Warwickshire, Shropshire, Lancashire, Cheshire,
Yorkshire, etc. insomuch that few of that great Body escaped, but were either
killed or taken. Maj. Genesis Massey being sorely wounded, surrendered himself to
the Countess of Stamford, and by the Lord Gray of Groby her Son, was secured
and sent to London, whence in short space he made an escape: In another place
was taken Maj. Genesis Middleton, and Lieut. Genesis David Lesley; so that I may say,
the gleanings of this Victory, were not much inferior to the harvest thereof.

Near this time, most of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, were taken at a
place called Ellet in that Nation, where they were assembled to propagate the
Royal designs: viz. Old Genesis Lesley, Earl Marshall, Lord of Keith, Earl of
Craford, Lord Ogilby, Lord Burgoiny, Lord Huntly, Lord Lee, with many Knights,
Gentlemen and Ministers: all which were soon after shipped and sent for England.

Such was the fate that attended the Scots and their King, that He who a few
days before was proclaimed King of Great Britain, had now neither Camp nor
Garrison, nor lodging to fly unto or safely to repose himself in for shelter,
500lb sterling being offered to any that should detect him; which not
withstanding he escaped, making a disguised peregrination through City and
Country, till he met with a fit opportunity for his transportation into France,
where he now is. Yet of the great number of his friends, adherents and
followers that were taken, none of quality suffered but the Earl of Derby, Earl
of Derby beheaded.
who was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, and Sir Tim. Fetherston: others of
less not were executed at Chester, Shrewsbury and other places.

Nor did the Royallists themselves expect any other or better fortune would
attend them in this invasion then that you have heard; as appears by Duke
Hamiltons Letter to Mr. Will. Crofts, taken among other Papers a few days
before the fight, the sum whereof follows;

WE are all laughing at the ridiculousnesse of our condition, Duke Hamiltons
Letter.
who having quit Scotland, being scarce able to maintain it; yet we graspe at
all, and nothing but all will satisfy us, or to lose all: I confess I cannot
tell whether our hopes or fears are greatest; but we have one stout Argument,
and that is despair, for we must now either shortly fight or die. All the
Rognes have left us, I will not say whether for fear or disloyalty; but allnow
with his Majesty are such as will not dispute his Commands. So that you see,
this undertaking was not the product of a mature and deliberate council, but
of necessity and desperation.

Soon after this the Parliament took order for reducing the two Islands of
Jersey and Man; that had been and would still be notable receptacles, for the
entertaining all manner of fugitives and disaffected persons.

In order to which business, Col. Hayne with about 2 Regiments of Foot and 2
Troops of Horse, on the 14th of October. 1651. were shipped at Weymouth for Jersey;
they were in all eighty Vessels, and set sail October. 17. but a storm forced
them in again. On the 19th they set sail again, and about 12 that night came to
an Anchor under Sarke Island, next morning they bent their course toward
Jersey, and came to an anchor in St Owens Bay; next day they sailed and
anchored before St Brelades Bay, when the seas proved so rough that the Fleet
was scattered; notwithstanding on the 21th it was resolved, that an attempt
should be made upon the Island that night at St Owens Bay, being necessitated
thereunto for want of Horsemeat; in few hours after they embarked their men
aboard the small Boats, Genesis Blake and all his Officers were very active in
this business, who about two hours after the flood weighed Anchor, cut some of
their Cables, hoisted sails and stood in for the shore, and were soon aground
on the shore side, some at 3 foot, some at 4, 5, 6, 7 foot water; their men
presently leapt out, some up to the middle, some to the neck, and run ashore;
the enemy playing hard upon them with great and small shot, and with their
Horse gave a hot charge; yet after half an hours dispute, they fled and left
behind them 12 Guns and some Colors at that place; after which and that their
Horse were landed, they marched further into the Island, and on the 23th October.
possessed themselves of three Forts more with two Guns in each; they marched on
further till they came within sight of Elizabeth-Castle, under which was a Fort
called St Albans Tower, where was 14 Guns, the speedy reducement whereof was
resolved upon and a Summons sent in, The Island of Jersey reduced.
and in two hours time it was delivered up. The next business they had to do,
was to take in Mount Orgueil Castle, which upon easy terms was also
surrendered: but Elizabeth Castle being a place of far greater strength, was
not reduced till the middle of December. following; the Governor thereof Sr
George Carteret, had large terms granted both to himself and all with him, by
reason of the mavelous strength and situation thereof, which was such as
might have cost much blood, treasure and time in the gaining of it.

October. 16th 1651. Under Colonel Duckenfield were shipped 3 Regiments of Foot,
viz. Genesis Cromwels Regiment commanded by Lieut. Col. Worsly, Maj. Genesis Deans
Regiment, commanded by Lieut. Col. Mitchell, and Colonel Duckenfields
Regiment, with two Troops of Horse, these were all shipped at Chester and
Liverpool for the reducing the Isle of Man: and on October. 18th. they hoisted
sail, but by contrary winds were driven into the Harbor of Beumorris, on the
25th. about two in the morning, the wind coming about somewhat southerly, with
a pretty fresh gale, they set sail again, and about two or three aclock in the
afternoon they had a clear view of the Calfe of Man, Castle Rushen, Derby-Fort,
Douglas-Fort, and most part of the Island, as also of the Islanders, both Horse
and Foot in their several motions, mustering up what strength they could: when
by a sudden storm the Fleet was hindered from coming up any thing near the
shore; upon which they steered their course toward the North end of the
Island, and with no small difficulty fetched Ramseybay that night, where they
cast Anchor, and with a small Party faced the Islanders, yet was there no shot
exchanged. October. 16. came on board an Islander, employed by the chief of that
Island, to assure the English they should have no opposition in landing, but
might securely come under their Forts, which they had taken possession of for
them, and that only two Castles held out. viz. Castle- Rushen and Castle Peele,
which were kept by the Forces of the Count. of Derby: now because he had
nothing in writing to confirm what he had said, he was distrusted; wherefore
Maj. Fox was boated into the Island, to enquire the truth of what the Islander
had reported, and forthwith returned with the full confirmation thereof; and
presently after some came from the Island as Commissioners, entreating that
their poor Island might be preserved from spoil, and the Inhabitants from
undoing; by landing only some part of a Regiment, or at the most but a
Regiment; upon which, they would bring Provisions at a marketable rate to the
shore, The Isle of Man reduced.
to supply the wants of such as should continue on shipboard, and would assist
those that were to land, in reducing the Castles: which Proposals were in part
assented unto by the Commander in Chief Col. Duckenfield, being somewhat
obliged thereto by the civilities of the people. But on the 27th. most of the
men on shipboard were endangered by a long and continued storm, many of the
Vessels not being able to ride in the Bay: one ran ashore and was bulged, but
the men saved, many others were driven severally up and down; which dangers by
sea and delays by land, the Castles still holding out, being sensible of. On
the 28th. Horse and Foot were ordered to come on shore, and being possessed of
all the Forts in the Island, they besieged both the Castles of Peele and
Rushen, Castle Peele and Rushen taken.
in which the Countess of Derby then was, both which were presently summoned
and brought to very low terms without any bloodshed; and delivered up to Col.
Duckenfield for the use of the Parliament of England, October. 26. 1651. Where
was found store of Ammunition and Provision of all-sorts, and in the Harbor
some Vessels also were taken: These Castles were of such strength, that if it
had pleased God the defendants had not been possessed with a spirit of fear,
much blood might have been spent in the reducing of them.

In short space after there was surrendered to the Parliaments Forces,
Cornet-Castle in Guernsey surrendered
that strong and impregnable hold of Cornet-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey.

The next remarkable passages of the Affairs of this Nation, was the decease of
two of the Parliaments Chieftains, one was General Popham one of the Admirals
of the English-Fleet, a man of singular worth and gallantry; yet his short
continuance in that employment, did not so much show us what he was, as what he
would have been, had it pleased the great Disposer of all things to have
prolonged his days.

The other was the never to be forgotten Henry Ireton Lord Deputy of Ireland,
under his Father in Law his Excellency the Lord. General Cromwell, who ended
his days shortly after the siege and taking of Limrick in Ireland: a man who
for piety, prudence and policy in Civil and Martial affairs, equaled, if not
excelled the most of men: yet was there left behind such worthy Patriots and
Champions of their Country, as upon all occasions have stood in the gap of the
greatest difficulties.

The Parliament (being now thoroughly sensible of the many delays, mischiefs
and wrongs, for a long time and even now practiced by the Hollanders, both in
their Treaties and traffic) set forth an Act for increase of Shipping and
encouragement of Navigation, which was the most pleasing and advantageous Act
to the Merchants and Seamen that could be, and by which the hearts of those
rough spirited men were more endeared to the Parliaments Interest, then by any
thing they ever did or could do; the heads whereof were these;

That no commodity whatsoever of the growth or Manufacture of Asia, The Act for
Navigation.
Africa or America, or any part thereof, as well of the English Plantations as
others, shall be imported into England, Ireland, or any the territories
thereof, in any Ships or Vessels, but in such only as do truly belong to this
Commonwealth or the Plantations thereof, under penalty of the forfeiture of
Goods and Vessels, and of Europe the like.

That no Commodities whatsoever of forregn growth or manufacture, which are to
be brought into this Commonwealth in Ships belonging to the People thereof,
shall be by them shipped from any places, but only from those of the said
growth, production or manufacture; or from those Ports where the said
Commodities can only be, or usually have been shipped for transportation, and
from none other places.

That no sorts of Fish, usually caught by the people of this Nation, nor any
Oil made of Fish, nor any whale Finne or Whalebones, shall be imported, as
abovesaid, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels belonging to the people
of this Nation, under the former penalty.

That no kinds of salted Fish, from the first of Feb. 1653. shall be exported
out of this Land, in any other save English Vessels.

Several other Exceptions and Provisoes there was in reference to the
Commodities of East India, from the Levant Seas, from the Ports of Spain and
Portugal: This is the substance of that Act which did so exceedingly perplex
the avaritious, greedy and encroaching Hollander. Who notwithstanding set on
foot another Treaty with the English, by sending Ambassadors extraordinary, and
seeing they could not obtain their desires thereby, they assayed to do it by
force and treachery: which machinations, God (in mercy to this poor Nation) by
weak instruments, detected and turned upon their own heads: yet could they have
procured the calling in of that Act, they would hardly have stuck at any other
the demands of the English; but failing therein, they began to dispute that
ancient and unquestionable Right of the English Sovereignty in the narrow Seas,
by refusing to strike therein, for which they had the fortune to be always
beaten, not thriving in any such contempt or bravado; upon which occasion began
that sad breach between the two Republiques, the effects whereof we yet feel
and groan under; from which God in his good time will deliver us.

For in May 1652. The first Sea Fight between the Dutch and the English.
Van Trump Admiral of the Dutch-Fleet, with about 42 sail of Ships, was
discovered on the backside of the Goodwinsands by Major Bourn, who commanded a
squadron of the English Ships, the Dutch bearing toward Dover-Road: upon which
the Greyhound Frigot was commanded to make sail and speak with them, which she
did, and then they struck their top-sayl, demeaned themselves civilly and said,
they came from Admiral Trump, with a Message to the Commander in Chief of the
English Fleet: And coming aboard, they saluted our Ships, and in order to the
satisfaction of our Nation, brought this account; That the Northerly winds
having blown hard several days, they were forced further Southward then they
intended, and having rode for some days off Dunkirk, where they had lost
diverse Anchors and Cables, professing they intended no injury to the English
Nation: Genesis Blake with the rest of the English Fleet, was at that time to the
Westward; but receiving speedy advice of all these passages from Major Bourne,
made what haste possibly he could to ply toward them; and on the 19th of May
in the morning he saw them at Anchor about Dover-Roade, and being within three
Leagues of them, they weighed and stood to the Eastward, where they met with an
Express from the States: whereupon he hastened with all the sail he could make
toward ours, and bore directly up with our Fleet, Van-Trumpe being the
headmost.

Upon which Genesis Blake shot three Guns at Van-trumps Flag, but without Balls,
and Van-Trumpe answered with a Gun on the averse side of his Ship, signifying a
disdain, and in stead of striking his top-sayl, hung out a red Flag, which was
the signal for his whole Fleet, and gave Genesis Blake a broadside; this was the
manner of the beginning of that Fight which has caused so much trouble to the
two Commonwealths; the continuance was for about 4 hours, until night parted
them, in which fight one of the Dutch Ships was sunk, and another of 30 Guns
taken, with the Captains of both and about 150 Prisoners; of the English there
was about 10 slain and 40 wounded: the English Admiral received much hurt in
her Masts, Sails and Riggin, many shot were likewise placed in her Hull, and
the hurt that was done to the rest of the Fleet was not considerable.

This attempt of the Duth while they were upon a Treaty, did so incense the
Parliament, that notwithstanding all the addresses and overtures of their
Ambassadors, and the coming over of two more, they could not appease them
without satisfaction for that injury.

Although in several Papers put in to the Council of State they labored to
excuse the same, alleging, That the unhappy Fight between the Ships of both
Commonwealths, The Apology of the Dutch Ambassadors for the late affront
offered to the English in the Downs.
did happen without the Knowledge, and against the Wills of the Lords States
General of the Netherlands, taking God the searcher of men's hearts to witness
the same: and that by Letters and Messages, they were daily assured of the
sincerity of their said Lords, and that with grief and astonishment they
received the fatal News of that unhappy rash action; and thereupon fell into
consultation about a remedy to mitigate that raw and bloody wound: and to that
end had appointed a solemn meeting of all the Provinces, whereby they doubted
not (but by Gods favor) such present cure for these troubles may be wrought,
whereby not only the outward cause of all further evils, may be taken away, but
also by an interne comfort, the minds may be redressed and reduced again, to a
better hope of the Treaty in hand; and that this thing was most earnestly
agitated by their Lords for the common good of both Nations, to shun the
detestable shedding of Christian blood, so much desired by the enemies of both
Nations: They therefore crave and beseech this Honorable Council, by the
pledges of common Religion and Liberty, to suffer nothing to be done out of too
much heat, that afterward may prove neither revocable nor repairable, by too
late idle vows and wishes; but that they might without delay receive a kind
Answer; which they desire so much the more, because the Ships of their Lords
and Shippers, as well in the broad Sea, as in the Ports of this Commonwealth,
some by force, and some by fighting are kept.

Unto which the Parliament replied.

That calling to mind with what continued demonstrations of friendship, The
Parliaments Answer to and resolution thereupon.
they have demeaned themselves toward their Neighbors of the United
Provinces, from the beginning of their intestine troubles, omitting nothing
that might tend to a good correspondency with them, do find themselves much
surpised with the unsuitable returns that have been made thereunto, and
especially at the Acts of Hostility lately committed in the very roads of
England, upon the Ships of this Commonwealth: Upon consideration of all which,
and of the several Papers delivered by the Ambassadors into the Council of
State, they farther answered: That as they would be willing to make a
charitable construction of the expressions in the said Papers, endeavoring to
represent the late Engagement of the Fleets, to have happened without the
Knowledge and against the Mind of their Superiors; So when they consider how
disagreeable to that Profession, the Revolutions and Actions of your State and
their Ministers at Sea have been in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves
and managed here by their Ambassadors; the extraordinary preparations of an
hundred and fifty sail of Ships, without any visible occasion, and the
Instructions themselves given by the States to their Commanders at Sea; too
much cause is found to believe, that the Lords the States General of the
United Provinces, have an Intention by force to usurp the known Right of
England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets that are (under God their Walls and
Bulwarks,) and thereby to expose this Commonwealth to Invasion at their
pleasure, as by their late Action they have attempted to do: Whereupon they
Parliament conceive themselves obliged to endeavor, with Gods assistance, as
they shall have opportunity, to seek Reparation of the wrongs already suffered,
and Security that the like be not attempted for the future. Nevertheless with
this mind and desire, that all differences betwixt the Nations may (if
possibly) be friendly and peaceably composed, as God shall open a way by his
providence thereunto, and circumstances shall be conducing, to render such
endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual then those of this kind
heretofore usually have been.

This short and smart answer contained yet something in it that tended to a
possibility of an accommondation; The Dutch Ambassadors have audience and
depart
yet all the several conferences and debates about this business came to
nothing, but broke quite off, and in short space after the Ambassadors had
audience in parliament, took their leaves and departed.

And now these two mighty States prepare to offend each other, and accordingly
Genesis Blake the English Admiral, with a gallant and resolute Fleet of Ships,
advances Northward toward the Isles of Orkney, to seize upon and hinder all
such as they should find fishing on those coasts; where he took 12 Dutch men
of War guarding their Busses, but most of the Busses were let go.

Sr George Ayscue with his Squadron of Ships being left to guard the narrow
Seas, The Fight between the Dutch and English Fleets near Plymouth.
discovered a Fleet of Flemings between Dover and Calice, being about 30; of
which 10 were taken and burnt, the rest ran ashore on the Coasts of France:
Many other prizes were daily brought in (both of the Dutch and French) by the
Ships and Frigots of this Commonwealth. Thence Sir George Ayscue with his Fleet
sailed to the Westward, to seek out the Dutch Fleet, to guard the Seas, and to
conduct the Merchantmen that lay at Plymouth through the Channel: and being
about seven or eight Leagues off Plymouth, he received intelligence of the
Dutch Fleet, and presently a Council of War was called, upon which they
resolved to stand over for the Coast of France, as the most probable way to
meet with them; and the same day being the 16 of Aug. between one and two in
the afternoon, they had sight of the Dutch Fleet, and presently made what sail
they could toward them, to discover their number, being about 60 sail of Men
of War, and 30 Merchantmen: the English were but 38 sail, 4 Fireships, and 4
Scouts; yet they came up with the enemy about four in the afternoon, and began
the fight with much resolution and gallantry; Sir George and about 6 other
Ships, charging through the whole body of the enemies Fleet, received much hurt
in their Hulls, Masts, Sails and Rigging: yet did they tack-about, weather
them, and charge them all again, and continued thus engaged in the body of the
enemies Fleet till it was dark night; and had not the rest of the English
Captains failed to do their duties, this Dutch Fleet (in all likelihood) had
been wholly defeated. In this engagement the English had some slain and some
wounded, but of note they lost only Capt. Pack, whose Leg being shot off, he
died soon after of it, who was an honest and valiant Seaman: there was wounded
Capt. Lisle and Capt. Witheridge: a Fireship of theirs was sunk, also two other
Ships of the enemies were supposed to be sunk, but what other loss they
received an account could not be had: Both Fleets retire.
the darkness of the night put a period to the dispute, so that the Dutch
stood away for the Coasts of France, and the English for the Port of Plymouth,
to repair their Masts and Rigging, without which they could no further
prosecure the enemy.

During this engagement, Genesis Blake came from the Northward into the Downs,
where there fell into his hands about six more considerable Dutch Prizes, and
sent some Frigots to the Westward to reinforce Sir George Ayscues Fleet:
Presently after this Capt. Penn with a squadron of Ships hovering about the
Coasts of France, surprizd 6 Ships more belonging to the Dutch, which had been
in the Duke of Venice service, and were now returned richly laden, all stout
Ships of War and of great burden.

Sep. 5. The English Fleet under Genesis Blake riding in the Downs, receiving
intelligence of a French Fleet, weighd Anchor and stood over for the French
Coasts; about 5 of the clock they descried them weighting Anchor in Calice
road, thinking by that means to escape: the night approaching, the English
chased them as far as they durst for the Sands of Dunkirk, took most of them,
and about midnight gave over: The Names of those taken were as follows.

The Triton, commanded by Chevalier de Verdiel, a Ship of 31 Guns, in which was
Monsieur Bimulet Commander in Chief of all the Fleet.

The Shepherd, commanded by Chevalier Boymerant of 29 Guns.

The gift of God, commanded by Chevalier de la Charta of 30 Guns.

The Duchess, commanded by Monsieur de la Roch of 22 Guns.

The Crescent, commanded by Monsieur de la Viel Dean of 26 Guns.

The Hunter, commanded by Monsieur de la Gicleck of 22 Guns.

The St Lewis, commanded by Monsieur de la Gory of 28 Guns.

A small Frigot of 8 Guns.

Six Fireships.

This French Fleet was bound to touch at Calice, there to take in Provisions
and Men for the Relief of Dunkirk: but the English thus intercepting them, the
Dunkirkers despaired of any relief, and yielded it up to the Spaniards; the
like also did Graveling: this did in part retaliate for those great losses and
injuries the English had sustained from the French.

Sep. 27. Genesis Blake with his Fleet, The Fight between the Dutch and the
English Fleets, called The Kentishh knock.
discovered on the backside of the Goodwin Sands, about 60 sail of Dutch men
of War, under the command of Admiral De Wit: on the 28, Genesis Blake with his
Fleet got under-saile and bore in among the enemy, but being upon a Sand called
the Kentish Knock (under which the Dutch placed themselves, that the English
might be mischiev'd if they should endeavor the weather-gage,) they found they
had not three fathom water, insomuch that the Generals Ship, the Sovereign, the
Resolution, the Andrew and others were on ground, but without any harm; they
all got presently off, fell to the business again, and staid by the enemy till
night parted: After this dispute the Dutch abode all night at some distance to
Leeward of the English, as if they had an intention to engage again. Next
morning Sep. 29. at day break, the Dutch Fleet was seen about two Leagues
Northeast of the English; who (though there was but little wind and various)
bore after them all the forenoon, but the wind coming to North and B. West,
they could not get up to them: yet some of the best Frigots were commanded to
bear up as near the Dutch as they could, and to keep them in play till the rest
of the Fleet could get up; and with much ado about three a clock got within
shot of the enemy, who fearing that by degrees the English Fleet would get
within them, The Dutch are shamefully worsted.
set up their main sails and ran for it, after whom about 10 Frigots had the
chase till six a clock that night. Next morning Sept. 30. the English bore
after them again with a fresh gale at S. W. and pursued them until they had
sight of West-Gabell in Zealand, and saw them run into Goree. Hereupon the
English concluded at a Council of War, not to run further upon the Coasts of
Holland, as well to avoid the shallowes, as because of the want of Provision in
the Fleet.

The loss that the Dutch apparently sustained was, that three of their Ships
were disabled in the first encounter, all their Masts being cut down, others of
them lost their heads, and others their Bolt-sprit-masts and Yards, the Dutch
rear-Admirall being towed by a Fly-boat of 32 Guns, was boarded by the
Nonesuch Frigot with 30 men, and the Fly-boat with 30 more, but there being
water in the hold, and wanting Masts and Sails, he took the Rear-Admirall, the
Captain and about 80 men out of them, and left the Vessels with the dead men
floating in the Sea: Of the English the loss was not great, about 40 being
slain, and about 40 wounded; in such shameful sort were the Dutch defeated,
who were so mighty at Sea, that they were a terror to the whole Universe.

The fame of this unhappy breach between two such Potent States, quickly spread
it self into all places, that were any whit eminent for trade or commerce, and
the effects thereof were both seen and heard in the Mediterranean Sea, as well
as in the English Channel, whether the English had sent several Ships of
War, to secure their Merchants from the French Pirates of Toulon, Marsiellis,
etc. A squadron whereof of 4 sail, viz. the Paragon, Phoenix, Constant Warwick
and Elizabeth (having under convoy three Merchants Ships, two from Scandarone,
Four Enlish men of War are worsted by eleven Dutch men of War in the
Straights.
and one from Smyrna) met with 11 sail of Dutch men of War, who presently
came up with the English and began the engagement, but night came on and parted
them: next morning the Dutch began again, and sound as hot work as can be
imagined from so small a number, two of their main top-masts being shot down,
and one of their Ships fired, but afterward quenched: the Phoenix a stout
English Frigot of 45 Guns, the Phoenix Frigot is taken by the Dutch.
was clapped on board by a heavy Dutch Ship, the men overpowr'd and the Ship
taken. Of this petty success the Dutch exceedingly boasted: yet they bought it
dearly, and that by their number, not their valor; the English not giving out
so long as they had Men or munition; for the Paragon lost 27 Men, and had about
60 wounded; the Elizabeth had but two barrels of Powder left, so hard they
plied it, and to such stresse were they put: Yet in despite of their
Adversaries, they got safe with their Merchants into Portolongone; this fight
was near the Island of Corsica.

Upon the nick of this breach came into England an Ambassador from the Queen
of Sweden, where he ended his life before he effected any thing: another also
from the King of Denmark, who being a contemporary and confederate with the
States of Holland, durst not but dance after their Pipe, and as soon as the
ghastly wound between the two States began to fester, he departed the Land.

About which time the Parliament (considering the condition of the English
Merchants trading into the East Country, whose Ships (to avoid the danger of
the Dutch men of War, then in the Sound) had put themselves into the
protection of the King of Denmark, but durst not venture home without a
Convoy) sent a Fleet of 18 men of War of good force to fetch them home, being
in number 22, and laden with such Commodities as the English had special
occasion for, and without which they could not prosecute the war with the
Dutch. Accordingly, Sept. 1^th. they set sail out of Yarmouth road, and on
the 20th. they came to an Anchor within two Leagues of Elsenore-Castle; whence
the Commander in chief sent a Letter to the Governor of Elsenore, by the
Greyhound Frigot, and another to the Danish Admiral, to desire them to
acquaint the King with their coming, and for what; with a Letter to the
Merchants and Masters of the English Ships at at Copenhagen, to address
themselves to the King, for the speedy release of their Ships, then shut up
within the Boomes and Copenhagen: but a mile short of the Castle the Ship was
stopped. Next morning the Captain went up with his Boat, and delivered his
Message and Letters, which availed nothing: so that another was sent to the
Merchants, and a Messenger to the King, but without success; for he could not
be admitted to speech with or sight of him: At length two Lord were sent to
Elsenore, unto whom two English Captains repaired, and urged the restoring the
Ships; and instead of answering to the business, they asked, The several
transactions between the English and King of Denmark.
Why their Ambassador had not audience? Whether they had a Letter from the
State of England to their King? Why they came so boldly upon his Majesty's
Streams, and so near his House and Castle with such a mighty Fleet, without
three weeks notice beforehand? All these being impertinent to the business, a
positive answer was urged by the English: and on the 26th. of Sept. they
received a Letter from the King, That he would secure them for the Merchants as
carefully as he had done, but would not deliver them to them: Whereupon the
Merchants and Seamen being destitute of all hopes of the releasement of their
Ships, lest them and came home with this Fleet: who on the 27th of Sept. left
the Sound, and steered their course for Enggland, and on the last of Sept. the
Admiral of the Fleet commanded by Capt. Ball, ran on shore on the Coast of
Shutland, and was there lost, but her men saved: this Ship carrying the light,
it was miraculous that the rest of the Fleet were not all lost: this Ship was
called the Antelope, an excellent Frigot, and carried above 50 brass Guns: a
little after that they took about 20 Busses, a Dutch man of War, and a
Freebooter of 20 Guns; and on the 15th of October. arrived safe in Burlington Bay.

Not long after this an Agent, by Name Bradshaw, was sent to the King of
Denmark, so see if yet by fair means, they could obtain their desires; but in
vain: for he did not only detain the Ships, but at length unladed them and sold
the Goods. Which incivilities towerds those that never injured him in the
least, but defir'd by all fair means, to enter into Amity with him; may one day
(by the good providence of God) be requited and avenged.

The Hollanders (drunk with rage, and greedy of revenge for those rubs the
English had lately given them, and for the continual loss of their Ships
daily surprised and in great numbers brought into our Channel) used their
utmost care and industry in rigging and setting forth their Fleet: which
(notwithstanding the season of the year.) they effected; and December. 20th. they
appeared on the backside of Goodwin Sands, being 90 men of War, and ^o
Fireships; the English under Genesis Blake were but 42, and not half of them
manned, most of the best Ships being laid up when there was most need of them:
which default (without doubt) was caused through the improvident, treacherous,
sinister and slothful actings of such as then steered the helm of this State,
whom God (in his due time) will bring to a reckoning for their miscarriages:
The English notwithstanding the paucity of their number, The Dutch and English
engage, and the English are worsted.
resolved to go out and fight them: and Nov. 30th. being fair weather, both
Fleets plied to the Westward, and about eleven of the clock that day were both
engaged, the English having got the Weathergage: in this fight half of the
English Fleet (as small as it was) came not up, pretending want of Men,
insomuch that a few Ships of the English bore the brunt of that fight with the
whole Fleet of the Dutch; the Vanguard and the Victory engaging with 20 of the
Dutch from first to last, and yet got clear of them all. In the evening the
Garland, The Garland and Bonadventure are taken.
an English Ship of above 40 Guns, was boarded by two Dutch Flag-Ships, and
after she had blown up her decks, for want of men was taken. The Bonadventure
(a Merchants Ship) attempting to relieve the Garland, was boarded, yet cleared
her decks several times, the Captain whereof being slain, the Ship was at
length taken: Genesis Blake going in the Triumph to relieve the Garland, had his
foretopmast shot by the board, was twice boarded, and yet got off safe, as did
all the rest except the two aforementioned, which though they fetched not far
yet dearly bought: two other Ships likewise fell into the hands of the Dutch
presently after the Fight, but both Merchants Ships. Genesis Blake upon this with
his Fleet withdrew into Lee-road, to be reinforc't with Ships and Men. This
Victory, such as you have heard, made the Dutch greatly rejoice and insult;
such is the vanity and levity of those which gaze on the mere outside of
things, as they present themselves at first view: Nay by their Ambassadors they
made the news thereof to echo in most of the Princes Courts in Christendom:
Mirum autem quantum fama popularis addidit fabulae.

But the English like a Bear robbed of her whelps, and awakned at this sudden
eclipse of their glory, splendor and wonted valor, betook themselves to new
resolutions for the quickening out a considerable Fleet, whereby to allay the
soaring pride of their adversaries, and to stifle those unruly clamours and
general discontents of the people every where murmuring and inveighing against
their Governors, as if they had (by secret and clandestine designs) contrived
the ruin of the Nation by a destruction of the Fleet.

And first they took into consideration, what due encouragement was fit to be
given to Mariners and Seamen: and ordered,

That the Wages of every able Seaman, fit for the helm and head, top and yard,
should be advanced from 18s the month, to 23s the month, and all the rest
proportionable.

That for every Prize they shall take, and shall be so adjudged in the Court of
Admiralty, they shall have Ten Shillings for every Tun the said Ship shall
measure; and six Pounds ten Shillings four Pence for every piece of Ordnance,
whether Iron or brass, to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to their places and Offices in the Ship: and that they shall have all
Pillage they shall find upon or above the Gundeck of any such Prize.

That they shall have ten Pounds a Gun, for every man of War they shall sink
or destroy, by Fire or otherwise, to be divided as aforesaid, with a months
gratis money to all that shall voluntarily come into their Service within 40
days.

That for supplying of necessary Provisions unto sick and wounded men aboard,
there be allowed five Pounds for six months service for every hundred men.
That care be taken upon their discharge for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct money.

That a convenient house be provided in or near Dover, Deal or Sandwich, as an
Hospital for the accommodation of such wounded men, as shall be there set on
shore. These with several other branches of the like nature, were printed and
published, to the great satisfaction of the Seamen: insomuch that toward the
latter end of Febr. 1653, the English had a brave and resolute Fleet out at
Sea; notwithstanding all the care and industry of the Hollanders, to hinder all
Nations from bringing any Pitch, Tar or Masts into this Commonweath.

Febr. 18th. The English and Dutch Fleets engage near the Isle of Wight and
Portland.
The Dutch Fleet in number about 80, with about 150 Merchantmen from Roan,
Nants and Bourdeaux, were discovered between the Isle of Wight and Portland:
and about 8 in the morning, the headmost of the English Fleet came up and
engaged them, viz. the Triumph, where was Genesis Blake Genesis Dean, with three or
four more; the rest were not able to get up, being to the Leeward: so that them
few were constrained to bear the first brunt, holding play with no less then
30 of the Dutch men of War, and thus it continued till two a clock in the
afternoon; after which about half the English Fleet came up and engaged the
Dutch till the night parted: In this fight the English lost none save the
Sampson; a Dutch Prize, which being made unserviceable, was sunk by themselves,
the men being all taken out and saved, which Ship first sunk the enemy that
maimed her.

Febr. 19. The English made toward the Dutch, and followed them upon the chase
a good while, in which days service some of the enemies Ships were brought by
the Lee and destroyed.

Febr. 20. They engaged the Dutch again, and the dispute grew hot, insomuch
that the enemy began to fire out of their stern-most ports and make away, so
that diverse of their Merchants Ships fell into the hands of the English: at
evening the English Fleet being against Boloigne in France, and not far from
the shore, the wind at N. N. west, which was bad for them to get to their own
shore; they endeavored by haling upon a tack, to get Dover-Road; but many of
their Ships, having their Sails and rigging much tattered and torn, they came
to an Anchor.

The English in this fight took about 50 Merchants, and 9 men of War,
several of their men of War were likewise sunk by the English, beside what
the enemy themselves sunk that were made unserviceable, and by Letters out of
France, it was certified also that above 2000 dead bodies of the Dutch were
seen upon the French shores. Presently after this hot and terrible fight, there
was 1500 taken Prisoners and brought to London. Genesis Blake was wounded in this
engagement, several other Commanders of the English, of eminent worth and
gallantry, were slain and wounded also. Now though a particular account of the
Dutch loss could never yet be fully known, yet without all question it was as
sad and dreadful a loss to that State as they ever yet knew, for which let
Gods Name alone be magnified: and though I am none of those, Qui malis gaudeo
alienis, yet seeing (that by a kind of fatal necessity) the strokes of
adverse fortune must fall heavy somewhere, we ought with hands lifted up to
bless God for our deliverance.

The Dutch being deeply sensible of this loss, sent a Letter to the Parliament
of England, yet signed only by the States of Holland and West-Friesland: in
answer to which the Parliament a Letter, signifying their desire of a friendly
compliance, for the avoiding the further shedding of Christian blood, but
nothing came thereon.

But lest the English should surfeit with excess of joy for their late
Victories over their enemies; God was pleased to give them a check, by an
unexpected defeat of their Ships in the Levant-Seas, which was as follows.

The English (having by a stratagem regained the Phoenix Frigot from the Dutch
as she lay in Levorn Mole) fitted themselves for another encounter with the
Dutch: Capt. Badiley with 9 men of War weighed out of Portolongone, toward the
relief of those other Ships under Capt. Apleton that lay in Levorne Mole) and
for several months had been cooped up by 22 men of War; hereupon the
English Ships under Capt. Apleton weighed out of the Mole, The English Fleet in
the Levant Seas, are again worsted by the Dutch.
a little sooner then they should have done, and were presently engaged by the
whole Fleet of the Dutch, who having the advantage of the wind, with their
Admiral and two other Ships, clapped the Leopard aboard, a stout English Ship of
above 50 Guns, who bravely maintained the fight at least 5 hours against them
all, till at length being overborne by the number of the enemy she was taken.

The Bonadventure, by a shot in her Powder room, took fire and was blown up.

The Peregrine was engaged with four or five of the Dutch at a time, and having
her mainmast and misen-mast shot away, and being overpowr'd with number was
taken.

The Levant-Merchant was first boarded by one of the enemies Ships of 36 Guns,
and (after two hours fight) by another as big, the first of which sunk
presently after; yet was she also possessed by the Dutch.

The Sampson was boarded by young Trump Rear Admiral of the Dutch on one side,
and by a fireship on the other, so that she was quickly fired.

This was the greatest loss the English have sustained from the Dutch since the
breach, and was done in the sight of 9 English men of War under Capt.
Badiley, who (I cannot say) would not, but I am sure did not vouchsafe those
stout hearts that there perished the least assistance, for which he has been
since branded with the infamous terms of Cowardice, Covetousness and Treachery;
from which imputations it is wished he could clear himself, in the sight of God
and men.

The relation wherein this Commonwealth stood with the Neighboring Nations was
in this sort,

The King of Portugal not able to resist so powerful a state as this (having
more then enough to do, The King of Portugal and the State of England conclude
a peace.
to grapple with the wealthy Spaniard) sent over an Ambassador extraordinary
with a sumptuous train of followers to conclude a peace with the English: who
(after many conferences, frequent addresses, and large offers made) obtained
the same; yet to this day he has not fully finished his Negotiations, so as to
satisfy the Merchants for their great losses.

From France the English were courted by two Parties: A French Agent arives at
London.
by an Agent from the King of France, desiring a release of his ships taken (as
aforesaid) going to the relief of Dunkirke, as also that there might be a right
understanding between the 2 Nations. 4 Deputies from Bourdeaux arive at London
also.
And by 4 Deputies from the Prince of Conde, craving aid against the Cardinal
and his creatures, who had straightly besieged the City of Bourdeaux: all which
Negotiations were ineffectuall, for alas the breach was too high between the a
Nations to be easily cemented.

Other Nations by Letters and otherwise endeavored to be mediators and
composers of those mortal jarres that were between England and Holland; as the
Queen of Sweden, the Cantous of Switzerland, the Imperial Cities of Lubeck and
Hamburgh, etc.

This was the posture of the Civil and Military affairs of this Nation, when
his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell (a man as it were by Divine
appointment set apart for great enterprises) perceiving the notorious
corruptions, dilatory proceedings, pernicious and arbitrary actings of the
Parliament, to perpetuate their session, and to inthrall the people (by
defrauding and disfranchising them of their ancient and undoubted Liberties of
equal and successive Representatives) entered the Parliament house, attended
with some of his principal Officers, and there delivered certain reasons why a
period ought to be put to that Parliament; which was presently done, The
Parliament is dissolved.
the Speaker with the rest of the Members (some by force, some through fear,
and some murmuring) departed the House. For which disaster no man moved either
tongue or hand in their behalf, it being generally believed, that though the
Nation possibly might not be bettered by this changed, yet a worse could not
befall it. And thus was this mighty Council dissolved, their Powers
transferred into the hands of the Soldiery, and their Names reproacht and
vilified with the scorns and dirigies of the common people, who being well
pleased with the doing thereof, enquired not into the reasons or causes why it
was done. But to satisfy the wiser sort, and those that were more curious
enquirers into the true and genuine causes of things, General Cromwell and his
Council of Officers published a Declaration, the substance whereof was as
follows.

THat after God was pleased marvellously to appear for his people, The
Declaration of Genesis Cromwell and his Council of Officers
in reducing Ireland and Scotland to so great a degree of peace, and England to
perfect quiet; whereby the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the
harvest of all their labor, blood and treasure; and to settle a due Liberty in
reference to Civil and Spiritual things: whereunto they were obliged by their
duty, engagements, and those great and wonderful things God has wrought for
them. But they made so little progress therein that it was matter of much grief
to the good people of the Land; who thereupon applied themselves to the Army,
expecting redress by their means, who (though unwilling to meddle with the
Civil Authority) agreed that such Officers as were Members of Parliament should
move them to proceed vigorously, in reforming what was amiss in the
Commonwealth, and in settling it upon a foundation of Justice and Righteousness,
which being done, it was hoped the Parliament would have answered their
expectations.

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires by an humble Petition in
Aug. 1652. which produced no considerable effect, nor was any such progress
made therein, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but rather an aversness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the people of God and his Spirit acting in them:
in so much that the godly Party in Parliament were rendered of no further use,
then to countenance the ends of a corrupt Party, for effecting their desires of
perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government.

For obviating these evils the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what remedy might be applied to
prevent the same; but such endeavors proving ineffectuall, it became evident,
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others,
the non-attendance of many, would never answer those ends which God, his People
and the whole Nation expected from them; But that this cause which God had so
greatly blessed, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees be lost;
and the Lives, Liberties and Comforts of his people be delivered into their
enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of the
Nation as well as by the Army, it seemed a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen
so much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual means
whereby to establish righteousness and peace in these Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, that the supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons fearing God and of
approved integrity for a time, as the most hopeful way to countenance all Gods
people, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially: hoping thereby the
people might forget Monarchy, and understand their true interest in the
election of successive Parliaments; that so the Government might be settled upon
a right Basis, without hazard to this glorious cause, or necessitating to keep
up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevalied with about 20 Members of Parliament, to give us a
conference, with whom we plainly debated the necessity and justness of our
Proposals: The which found no acceptance, but in stead thereof it was offered
that the way was to continue still this Parliament, as being that from which we
might probably expect all good things. This being vehemently insisted on did
much confirm us in our apprehensions; That not any love to a Representative,
but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate themselves, was
their aim, in the Act they had then under consideration.

For preventing the consummating whereof, and all the sad and evil
consequences, which upon the grounds aforesaid must have ensued, and whereby at
one blow the interest of all honest men and of this glorious cause had been
endangered to be laid in the dust, and these Nations imbroyled in new troubles,
at a time when our enemies abroad are watching all advantages against, and some
of them actually engaged in War with us; we have been necessitated (though
with much reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament.


This Declaration and proceedings of Genesis Cromwell and his Council of
Officers, was attended with the consent of the Generals and all the Captains of
the Fleet, as also of the Generals and Officers of all the land Forces in
Ireland and Scotland.

But least the Magistrates, and other public Ministers of the Nation, should
be startled at this sudden change, so as to swerve from their duties; or others
should take occasion thereby to make disturbances in the Commonwealth, this
following Delaration was published.

WHereas the Parliament being dissolved, Persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, are (according to the late Declaration of the 22th of April last) to
be called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme
Authority; and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for
perfecting those resolutions; yet some convenient time being required for the
assembling of those persons, it has been found necessary for preventing the
mischiefs and inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public
affairs, that a Council of State be constituted, to take care of and intend,
the peace, safety and present management of the affairs of his Commonwealth:
which being settled accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to
the end all persons may take notice thereof, and in their several places and
stations demean themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the
Nation as heretofore: in the exercise and administation whereof, as endeavors
shall be used, that no oppression or wrong be done to the people, so a strict
account will be required, of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the
public peace and quiet upon any pretense whatsoever.

April 30th 1653. O. CROMWELL.


These Domestic revolutions did in some measure heighten the spirits of the
Dutch, who thought that some eminent distractions and commotions (both by sea
and land) would thereupon ensue: but they were much deceived; for the Maritime
affairs of these Nations (wherein the woe or weal thereof consisted) were
carried on with as much dexterity, policy and speed, as the necessity and
urgency of the occasion did require.

Now the Dutch having a great Fleet of Merchants Ships outward bound, durst not
adventure through the Channel; but with a Fleet of about 90 Men of War,
conducted them by the North of Scotland toward the Sound, and there met with
another Fleet of their Merchant men homewards bound, some from Russia, some
from the East Indies, and some from France: all which they conveyed home in
safety, not having met with the English Fleet either goig or coming: which
having done, and hearing that the English Fleet was to the Northwards, they set
sail with their Fleet and came into the Downs, where they took two or three
small vessels, and made several shot into the Town of Dover, with which
bravados they greatly delighted themselves, and boasted that the English Fleet
was lost, that Hue and Cry must be sent after them, and such like speeches they
vented and vaunted with: when on a sudden the English Fleet arrived from the
Northwards, and on the 28th. of May came into Yarmouth Road. June 1. Being at
Anchor in Sole Bay, they discovered two Dutch galliot Hoyes, to which chase was
given till the whole Dutch Fleet was discovered, but the weather proving dark
they lost sight of them. June 3. The Fight between the Dutch and English Fleets
off the Northforeland.
The English Fleet (being at Anchor without the Southhead of the Gober)
discovered the enemy about two leagues to Leeward, being about 100 sail:
whereupon the English weighed and made sail toward them; between 11 and 12 at
noon both Fleets were engaged, and for some hours the dispute was sharp,
insomuch that about 6 a clock in the evening the enemy bore right away before
the wind, The Dutch are worsted, and many of their Ships sunk and taken.
little more being done that night. Next morning early, the English were fair
by the Dutch again; but there being little wind, it was noon ere they could
engage them, and after four hours dispute, the Dutch endeavored as fast as
they could to get away; but the wind freshing westwardly, the English bore in
so hard among them, that they took 11 Men of War, and 2 water-Hoyes, 6
Captains, 1500 Prisoners, and sunk 6 Men of War more; the rest of the Dutch
Fleet (if night had not prevented) would probably have been cut off; but
darkness coming on, and being near the Flats, and necessitated to stay and
mend their sails and rigging, which were much shattered and torn, they came to
an Anchor about 10 a clock that night. The loss which the English sustained in
this fight, was of Genesis Dean one of their Admirals, who with a great shot was
taken off the first days engagement, one Capt. they lost beside, they had
slain at the uttermost not above 150 men, and about 240 wounded, but they lost
not one Ship. That which greatly animated the English, and discouraged the
Dutch, was the opportune and seasonable coming in of Genesis Blake with about 16
sail of stout Men of War. The Dutch having (by the advantage of the night)
got into the Wielings, the Ulye and the Texel; the English called a Council of
all the Captains of the Fleet, to advise what was the most convenient course
for improvement of the victory to the best advantage: where it was resolved to
make what sail they could with the whole Fleet toward the Wielings, so far as
with safety they might, and so range the Dutch Coast till they came to the
Texel, where they lay for a pretty space of time, taking Prizes continually
more or less, to the woeful prejudice of the Dutch, whose Ships could in that
while neither go out nor come in, nor get together in any one Port, whereby to
unite and get to a head: in which condition I shall for the present leave them.

Genesis Cromwell and his Council of Officers having finished their consultations
and resolutions about those Persons to whom the Ligislative Power of the Nation
was to be committed; Warrants were issued out to each person so chosen in the
three Nations, to appear at the Councel-Chamber at Whitehall July 4th 1653. a
Copy whereof follows:

FOrasmuch as upon the dissolution of the late Parliament it became necessary,
that the peace, safety and good government of this Commonwealth should be
provided for; and in order thereunto, diverse persons fearing God, and of
approved fidelity and honesty, are by my self, with the advice of my Council of
Officers, nominated; to whom the great charge and trust of so weighty affairs
is to be committed. And having good assuance of your love to, and courage for
God, and the Interest of his Cause, and the good people of this Commonwealth.

I Oliver Cromwell, Capt. General and Commander in chief of all the Armies and
Forces raised and to be raised within this Commonwealth, do hereby summon and
require you (being of the Persons nominated) personally to be and appear at the
Councel-Chamber, commonly known or called by the name of the Councel-Chamber at
Whitehall, within the City of Westminster, upon the 4th day of July next
ensuing the date hereof, and then and there to take upon you the said trust,
unto which you are hereby called and appointed, to serve as a Member for the
County of (...) And hereof you are not to fail.

Given under my hand and Seal the (...) day of June 1653. O. CROMWELL.


July 4th the several Members met accordingly in the Councel-Chamber, where
was the Lord Genesis Cromwell and many of his Officers about him, who standing up,
made an excellent, useful and seasonable Speech unto them; recounting the many
wonderful mercies of God toward this Nation, and the continued series of
providence by which he had appeared, in carrying on this Cause, and bringing
affairs into the present condition.

He set forth likewise the progress of affairs since the famous victory at
Worcester, as also the actings of the Army thereupon, after diverse applications
to the Parliament, and much waiting upon them, with the grounds and necessity
of their dissolving the late Parliament, which he declared to be for the
preservation of this Cause, and the interest of all honest men who have been
engaged therein.

He in like manner held forth the cleernesse of the Call given to the Members
then present, to take upon them the supreme Authority: and from the Scriptures
exhorted them to their duties, and encouraged them therein: He further desired
them that a tenderness might be used toward all conscientious persons of what
judgment soever.

Which having ended, his Excellency produced an Instrument under his own hand
and Seal, whereby he did with the advice of his Officers, devolve and entrust
the Supreme Authority and Government of this Commonwealth, into the hands of
the Persons there met, Who, or any forty of them, are to be held and
acknowledged the Supreme Authority of the Nation; unto whom all persons within
the same, and the territories thereunto belonging, are to yield obedience and
subjection. And that they sit no longer then the 3d of November. 1654. And three
months before their dissolution, they were to make choice of other Persons to
succeed them, who were not to sit above a twelvemoneth, and then to take care
for a succession in Government. Which Instrument being delivered to the
Members, his Lordship commended them to God, and with his Officers withdrew.
From thence the Members adjourned forthwith to the old Parliament house, and
there sat de die in diem.

About this time John Lilburne (of whom I have already made mention) being a
few months before banished the Land, by an Act of the foregoing Parliament,
for certain crimes laid to his charge; took occasion upon this change of
Government to come into England, and cast himself upon his Excellency the Lord
Genesis Cromwell, craving his protection in several public addresses; who
unwilling to interpose or meddle with affairs of that nature, left him to the
Law: insomuch that he was committed to Newgate, John Lilburn tried at the
Sessions in the Old Bailey.
and the next Sessions or Jail-delivery, he was brought to trial in the
Old Bailey, July 13. but nothing was done that day, save that Council was
assigned him according to his demand. July 14. he was again brought to the
Bar, but refused to put in his Plea, unless he might have a copy of his
Indictment, which was at length granted him. July 15. he appeared at the Bar
again, but little was done that day. July 16. he appeared and delivered in
diverse Exceptions to the Bill of Indictment, which were signed by his Council
and received by the Court; which day the Sessions ended, so that the business
was put off to the next Sessions. Aug. 13. he appeared before the Bench again,
and put in an Exception, demanding an Oyer of the Judgment given against him
in Parliament, as well as of the Act grounded thereupon. Aug. 16. he appeared
again, the Point argued on both sides, but nothing more was done that day. Aug.
20. he was again brought before the Court, where he joined issue, and pleaded
Not guilty; whereupon a Jury was impannel'd, and Witnesses examined to make
good the Charge; as also Witnesses on the behalf of the Prisoner, who in making
his defense, held the Court several hours; and in answer thereunto the Council
for the Commonwealth were also heard: The Jury having the Charge, after hearing
the whole business withdrew, and about 12 of the clock that night delivered up
their verdict, That they found him Not guilty: Is quitte ^^ by the Jury.
whereupon he was sent back to Newgate, and soon after was from thence sent to
the Tower, where he yet remains.

Thus you see what endeavors were used to rid the Nation of this
inconsiderable fellow, by Tyals, Banishment, and what not, but hitherto in
vain! whenas many a gallant Heart, far transcending him in birth and parts,
have fallen by the sword of Justice in the twinkling of an eye! But it may be
God has reserved him to be a greater plague to this Nation, whose heart I fear
is the seed-plot of sedition and division: True it is, he is a man of a
penetrating judgment, quick wit and voluble tongue, bold and confident in all
his undertakings: he is likewise peevish and passionate out of measure; affects
popularity, and is of an implacable spirit, not to be appeased but with the
blood of his adversaries: Nor can I deny but some of those things he aimed at
were honest and useful for the people, but he steered not the right course to
attain those ends.

The condition of the English affairs in Scotland was now much after this sort;
although the English had got into their possession, most or all of the strong
Towns, Forts and Castles in the Lowlands, yet many incursions were made
thereinto by the Highlanders and such like loose and barbarous people,
committing many outrages, spoils and cruel murders upon the people and
soldiers in straggling parties; The state of Scotland.
and forthwith would betake themselves to such inaccessible fastnesses, that
they could not be pursued: The like they do yet daily in great numbers, and are
headed by Glencarne, Atholl, Seafort and others; the last of which was so bold
as to send a Summons to a Ship that lay at Anchor at Lewis Island (having
before surprised 7 or 8 men that went ashore for Provisions) which Summons is
as follows.

A Copy of the Summons.
BEing incited, not only by Conscience and Honor, to stand firm to the
Principles of Loyalty; but also disdaining even in rational interest, to stoop
to such a wavering and servile Power as now Rules; I have laid hold on those
men come ashore, as promoving the same: Wherefore I summon you to deliver your
Vessel for his Majesty's service; and being certainly persuaded, that all or
most part of you are with grief of heart employed in such service; I do assure
all that will voluntarily shun the unnecessary effusion of blood by that
surrender, shall have such fair quarter as is fitting for me to grant, and as
your several conditions do require, and according to your demeanours herein,
you may expect to find me your Friend accordingly.

For the Captain, Soldiers, Master and Mariners of the Fortune, These
SEAFORT.


The affairs of Ireland were much after the same pass: The state of Ireland.
for the English having reduced all the strong holds of that Country, and shipped
away most of those Irish Rebels that (according to Proclamation) came in by
such a time, for Spain and other parts; except such as were found guilty of
massacre of the Protestants at the first rebellion, who were in several places
of that Nation tried, condemned and executed, in great numbers) drove the rest
of the Irish into the Province of Conaught, and fell to approportion out the
Land of the other three Provinces, for the satisfaction of the Adventurers, and
of the arrears of the Soldiery; but are in some measure still molested by the
outlaws of that Nation the Tories, Cosen-germans to the ancient Picts and
Redshanks of Scotland, and the Banditi in Italy.

The Hollanders (perceiving that nothing was to be got of the English but
blows, and sensible of their great losses) sent four Commissioners into
England, to set on foot the Treaty again, viz. Monsieur Bevering, Newport,
Young stall, and Vanderparre, who soon after his arrival departed this life:
the rest pursued their negotiations so close, that we are not left altogether
without hopes of an accommodation. Yet did not this Treaty produce either a
cessation, or any intermission of Arms; but all manner of hostility was
exercised on both sides, as appeared by another remarkable fight between the
two Fleets during the Treaty, which it is like much quickened the same, the
manner whereof was thus:

July 29. The English Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from the Wielings of
about 95 sail of Men of War, upon which the English Fleet made what sail
they could after them, which the enemy discerning stood away; yet by five a
clock that evening, some of the English Frigots engaged them, and soon after 30
Ships or thereabouts got up and engaged, the rest of the Fleet being astern;
those few bearing the whole brunt of the days fight, till night came and
forced both Fleets to retire: the Dutch were so plied in this first days
engagement, that they were discovered to send away some of their maimed Ships
in the night, and with their whole Fleet got by, striving to make a conjunction
with 25 sail of stout Ships they expected out of the Texil; which by plying up
toward them (undiscerned by the English) they obtained: which conjunction the
English (by reason of thick and foul weather) could not hinder by engagement
nor otherwise. The Dutch and English Fleets engage.
Next morning the Dutch with their new recruits, fell upon the English Fleet in
a gallant posture, and fought courageously from 5 a clock in the morning till
one in the afternoon, both Fleets passing through each other with much
violence, endeavoring to burn, sink and destroy one another, as if the whole
business should have been decided by the event of this battle: yet the Dutch
never went off, but with the loss of some of their Ships which were either
sunk or burnt; The Garland a stout Man of War (which the Dutch had formerly
taken from the English) was laid aboard by the Worcester Frigot and burnt: The
Triumph and the Andrew were clapped aboard by two or three Dutch fireships, and
received some hurt in their sails, but were quickly cleared of them, by the
valor and industry of some paticular men: The Dutch are put to flight, and
many of their ships sunk.
The Dutch seeing themselves in a declining posture, many of their Ships being
sunk and burnt, and unwilling to abide a further hazard (their spirits being
daunted) began to bear away with all the sail they could make, and made
directly for the Texel; so that it was not thought convenient by the English,
to be too bold with the shore, not knowing how the wind might take them, many
of their Ships being disabled; but one or two small English vessels kept sight
of them till morning, and saw them steer into the Texel Harbor, Having Boats
with lights to show them the way in. Whereupon the English at a Council of
War, resolved that the whole Fleet should set sail for Sole-Bay, to dispose
of such Ships as were disabled, as also of their wounded men and Prisoners. The
loss which the English received at this fight, was as follows; 300 Men were
slain outright, whereof 7 Captains, Graves, Chapman, Tailor, Newman, Crisp,
Owen Cox and Capt. Peacock: they had also 700 wounded, of which 5 Captains,
Stokes, Seaman, Rous, Holland and Cubit. The particular loss which the Dutch
received, as to the number and quality of those that were slain or wounded,
came not to our knowledge: but the visible loss they had, was of about 30 Men
of War sunk and fired; their Renowned Lord Admiral Van-Trumpe was slain in
the midst of the engagement: and out of the Dutch Ships that lay sinking in the
Sea, the English took out 6 Captains, and about a thousand other Prisoners.
This was the saddest conflict that has happened between the two Republics, but a
most seasonable victory to the English, who I hope will not fail to make a good
improvement thereof. For this piece of Service, the Parliament ordered, that
God-Chains should be given to Admiral. Blake and Monk, as a mark of their
favor, as also to Vice Admiral Pen, and Rear-Admirall Lawson; other Chains
were ordered to be given to the other Flag-Captains, and Medals of Silver to
the Officers of the Fleet. It was afterward known by Letters out of Holland,
that the Dutch lost about 6000 Men in this engagement.

And now Reader (having brought thee well nigh to the period of my discourse,
and hitherto entertained thee with the relation of things merely Civil and
Military:) I shall (according to my skill) give thee some account of the state
of Religion, for these few years last past, which was such and in so many
shapes, that no one form can be assigned thereto: for instead of an absolute
conformity in matters of Relgion, there was a general nonconformity; Heresies
being daily broached in every corner of the Land, which continually sprung up
like Hydra's heads, one upon the neck of another, by which means the minds of
the people became unsettled and shaken in the Principles of Faith and Doctrine;
each particular faction tracing a different track to find the truth, whenas
indeed there is but one way and one truth; the numbers and names whereof of if
I should undertake to give you, I might reckon ad infinitum: viz. Independents,
Anabaptists, and those of several kinds; some for Imposition of hands,
anointing with Oil and washing of feet; and some against them. Brownists,
Millenaries, Arminians, Socinians, Adamites, Diggers, Seekers, Shakers,
Ranters, Enthusiasts, Arians, Pelagians, cum multis aliis: of all which I shall
say only thus much, Let them grow together till the harvest, least in plucking
up the tares, you pull up the wheat also.

This Parliament having sat about as many weeks as the other had done years,
though in that time (to give them their due) they had made several laudable
Acts, and of great utility and advantage to the people, viz. An Act for taking
off the Engagement; for taking off Fines from Original Writs and Declarations:
for clearing of Public Debts, and discovery of frauds and concealements due to
the Commonwealth: as also an Act for Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners,
which of all others, was of greater concernment to the Nation then any thing
they could do: Other Acts of less moment they made also, which I shall forbear
to mention. Yet in other things of no small consequence, there appeared such
confusion in their councels, such contrariety in their opinions, such a
dissonancy in their actings, and disparity in their aims, that they seemed to
be a mere monster with many heads; insomuch that it was not expected their
power (as then it stood) would continue unto the time prefixed.

For on the 10th of December. 1653. the Parliament (having heard the Report of
the Committee,

That they thought it fitting that Commissioners be sent into all the Counties,
and enabled to eject scandalous and unable Ministers; and also be empowered to
settle able Ministers in all void places.

That such as are or shall be approved for public Preachers of the Gospel,
shall have and enjoy such maintenance as is already settled by Law.

That upon hearing and considering what has been offered to the Committee
touching propriety in Tithes, of Incumbents, Rectors, Possessors of Donatives
or appropriate Tithes; It is the opinion of this Committee, That the said
persons have a Legal propriety in Tithes.) The Parliament, I say, having spent
several days in debate of this Report, December. 10. put the first of these
Reports to the Question, viz. Whether the House does agree with the first
Clause of this Report? which was carried in the Negative.

Monday December. 12th somewhat early, the House being sat, a Gentleman stood up
and moved; That the sitting of this Parliament, as then constituted, would not
be for the good of the Commonwealth; and that therefore it was requisite to
deliver up unto the Lord General Cromwell the Powers which they received from
him: This motion being seconded by several other Members, the House rose, and
the Speaker with many Members of the House, departed and went to Whitehall;
where they (being the greater number of the Members sitting in Parliament) did
by a Writing under their hands, The Parliament dissolved, Dec. 12th 1653.
resign unto his Excellency their said Powers; and Mr Speaker, attended with
the Members, did present the same to his Excellency accordingly.

This was no sooner done, but (after serious consultation and debate about the
emergent occasions of the Land,) the Lord General Cromwell was (in the
presence of all the Judges and Justices of the several Courts at Westminster,
the Barons of the Exchequer, the Keepers of the Liberties of England, the Lord
Major and Aldermen of the City of London, with most of the chief Officers of
the Army) sworn Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and of all the Islands and Territories thereunto belonging: Several
Articles by which he is to govern the People being then read to him, to the
performance whereof, he took a solmn Oath in the presence of them all; the
sum whereof was,

That he should call a Parliament every three years. That the first should be
Sept. 3d 1654. That he should not dissolve it until they had sat five
months. That whatsoever Bill they should pass, if he should not sign it in
20 days, that then it should pass without him. That he should have a Council
of select Persons to assist him, nor under 13, nor above 21. That immediately
after his Death, the Council shall choose another Protector before they rise.
That no Protector for the future shall be General of the Army. That the
Protector shall have power to to make Peace or War. That, with the consent of
his Council, he may make Laws which shall be binding till the next Session of
Parliament. These with many more particulars you may read at large in the Form
of Government.

Soon after this he was proclaimed Lord Protector in the Palace yard at
Westminster, and by the Lord Major and Aldermen in their Scarlet gowns at the
Royall-Exchange.

Not long after his Highness the Lord Protector was by the City invited to a
Feast at Grocers-Hall, the manner of whose reception was as follows.

He came from Westminster in a Chariot drawn with 6 Horses in gallant equipage;
before him rode his Lifeguard with most of his chief Officers, and some of his
Council; after them rode 2 Pages bareheaded in sumptuous apparel; after them
about 12 Lackeys with velvet Caps in gray Liveries with silk and silver fringe;
then came his Highness, as aforesaid, in a Chariot, clad in a dark colored
suit and cloak, attended by many of the Nobility in their Coaches with 6
Horses: At Templebarre his Highness was met by the Lord Major and Aldermen,
where the Recorder of London saluted him with a pithy an excellent Speech. His
Highness then came out of his Chariot, put on a riding coat imbroidered with
gold-lace, and mounted on horseback, two or three of his horses of State being
there led by: which done, the Lord Major took the City-Sword, and carried it
bareheaded from thence to Grocers-Hall, all the way whereof the several
Companies in their Liveries sat on both sides the way, in railes set up on
purpose, with Streamers sticking up to distinguish each Company. After his
Highness had dined and banquet was ended, he conferred upon the Lord Major the
Honor of Knighthood.

And now Reader have I brought my Story from the end of one Monarchy to the
beginning of another: under which (if it please the wise disposer of all
things, as well as persons, to grant us Peace, both at home and abroad) both
thou and I may live to see happy days: and if it shall please God to spin out
the thread of my life to some considerable length, I shall afford the world some
other things of the like nature, but if not I am content to acquiesce in the
good will of Him that dwelt in the Bush, and so farewell.

FINIS.

