THE HEALING OF ISREAL'S BREACHES. Wherein is set forth ISREAL'S Disease. Cure.
Physician. Danger.
All paralleld with, and applied to the Present Times. As they were delivered
in six Sermons at the weekly Lecture in the Church of Great Yarmouth. By JOHN
BRINSLY Minister of the Word, and Pastor of Somerleiton an adjacent village.
Published by order of a Committee of the House of Commons.

TEXT. PSALM. 60. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof, for it shakes. LONDON, Printed
for JOHN BARTLET, at the sign of the golden Cup, near S. Austins gate, in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

To all the Lovers of Truth, and Peace, specially those in the Town of Great
Yarmouth.
TO some of you were these Meditations lately preached; For all of you they are
now Published. My Design in both is, (that which should be the Desire of
every true Israelite) The Healing of the Breaches in this our Israel. And my
Hopes are that there is not a line within the Circumference of this Tract,
which is not drawn directly to this Center. If any shall think otherwise, let
them mistrust their own eyes, which, being dazeled, will make the Sunbeams
(though most direct in themselves) seem distort, and crooked. Sure I am, what
ever my lines may seem to be, my Intentions have been right. These I can
approve to God who knows them, and the other (I trust) shall approve
themselves to those who (being not prejudiced) are able to judge of them. If
herein I fall short of my Mark, let it be enough I have aimed, and shot at it.

In magnis voluisse -- Yours, devoted to the service of Gods Truth, and the
Churches Peace, IOH. BRINSLY.

ISREAL'S DISEASE. The first Sermon. Anno 1641. Feb. 23.
PSALM. 60.2. Heal the Breaches thereof, for it is shaken.
IN these words which I have now singled out upon this solemn aoccasion; a
Puplike fast.
we have the sum and substance of an earnest request made by David in the
behalf of that Kingdom, whereof God had made him the head; the Kingdom of
Israel. This Kingdom it had been, and Occasion
as yet for the present was, in a distressed, distracted state and condition.
So it had been, not only under the Judges, during whose government it felt of
ten or twelve several commotions or Persecutions, (as Iacobus de Valentia
writing upon this Psalm, computes them, paralelling, and comparing them with
the ten Primitive Persecutions of the Church under the Gospel) but also under
King Saul, and sometime after his death; during which time it had been
afflicted and distressed, partly by foraigne Invasion, partly by intestine and
homebred sedition. By foraigne invasion, especially of the Philistines, who in
that fatal Battle slew King Saul himself, with his three Sons, routing his
whole Army, cutting off the flower and strength of Israel, taking possession of
some of the chief holds and Cities in that Kingdom, having expulsed the
Inhabitants; the said story whereof you may read, 1 Samuel the last, 2 Samuel 1. By
homebred seditions; those raised partly by Saul himself, during his life;
partly by his Son after his death. By Saul himself, who in an hostile manner
causlesly prosecuted and persecuted David as a public enemy to the State,
whom God had designed to be next heir to the Crown, so making a great and a
dangerous Commotion in that Kingdom: withal, falling upon the Priests of God
with great cruelty and rage, butchering no less then fourscore and five
persons of them at once; all that were found, upon suspicion of their siding
with David, or favoring his cause, of both which you may read, 1 Samuel 22.
this did Saul in his life. After his death Ishbosheth his son, by Abners
instigation laying claim to the Crown, makes a strong party, takes up
Arms, purteth the Kingdom into blood, distracting and wasting it with a long
and a dangerous Civill-warre, of which you may read, 2 Samuel 2, 3. Cap. Thus
that Kingdom had been afflicted. And hereunto Interpreters generally
Coherence. Calvin. Mollerus Sohnius. Scultotus.
conceive the verses before the sixth to have reference, wherein the Psalmist
complains unto God, O God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, ver.
1. This he had done in that fatal overthrow given to Saul and his Army Royal
by the Philistines, at which time the Israelites forsaking their Habitations
fled into the Mountains, hiding themselves amongst the Rocks, leaving their
Cities to be possessed by their enemies, themselves being made a dispertion, as
you may see, 1 Samuel c. last, v. 7. this God had done to them, thereby
manifesting his displeasure against them, seeing as it were to have cast them
off. O God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been
displeased, etc. Thou have made the Earth to tremble, thou have broken it: So
the Psalm goes on, v. 2. with reference as Interpreters conceive it to those
homebred divisions, those Civill-warres betwixt the two Houses of Saul and
David, after the death of Saul, then did the Earth, the Land, that Land of
Israel (as the Chaldee explaines it) quake and tremble, being broken, riven,
(as the word in the Original signifies:) even as the Earth sometimes by
Earthquakes it is riven, and torn a sunder with prodigious Chasmaes,
openings, or gapings; so was that Kingdom divided in those Civil Commotions;
the Nobles and Commens taking parts and siding, some with David, some with
Ishbosheth. So miserably had that Kingdom been distressed, distracted, so it
had been I, and as yet for the present in part still was. However those
storms were well over, and the Heav^^ had begun to clear, the Kingdom was
somewhat quieted, yet still was it in an unsettled, tottering condition; and
that as by reason of those late distemperatures which were not yet thoroughly
healed, so also by reason of some present distractions wherewith it was still
afflicted. Still there were Ruptures, Breaches in the Kingdom, and those more
then a few, and such as did both unsettle and endanger it, shaking the very
foundations of it: And in regard hereof it is, that the Psalmist here prefers
this his Petition unto God, the sum and substance whereof you have in this
short clause which I have now singled out, wherein we may take notice of two
particulars.

Division.
David's Request. Reason.


His Request, that God would heal the Breaches of his Kingdom: Heal the
Breaches thereof.

His Reason or Argument to back and second his Request, taken from the eminent
danger wherein that his Kingdom then was, in case God should not step in into
it by mature and timous Prevension, it was shaken. Heal the Breaches thereof,
for it shakes, or it is shaken. You see the parts of the Text, to prosecute
them in their Order, beginning with the former.

David's Request, which he presents and puts up as you see in a Metaphorical
strain, the Metaphor taken from a Physician or Chyrurgion, who by ministering
and applying sanative Modicines, and healing Salves, Cures and heals the
Diseases or Ruptures of his patient: And therein (following the sense of the
Metaphor) we shall take notice of three particulars,

1. Isreal's Disease. 2. Isreal's Cure. 3. Isreal's Physician.
Isreal's Disease; Ruptures, Breaches; the Breaches thereof. Isreal's Cure; the
making up or healing of those Breaches: Heal the Breaches thereof. Isreal's
Physician, from whom it is that David here seeks for this Cure, viz. God
himself: To him it is that he makes this his Request, as the first word in
the Psalm informs us; O God, heal thou the Breaches thereof. Insist we upon
these three particulars severally, beginning first with Isreal's Disease; the
Isreal's Disease, Breaches. The word and thing explained.
Breaches thereof.

What David hereby means I have in part explained already, viz. Those
Distractions, Divisions, Political Breaches, and Ruptures in the body of his
Kingdom. Shevariah says the Hebrew, Contrit jones, (...)
Rupturas, Fragmenta; the Ruptures, Breaches, Shivers; a word which answers the
Original both in sound and sense; possibly fetched from this Hebrew root
Shibber, to break or sbiver a Breach: this Confringere (...) Contritio (...)
was Isreal's Disease. A Disease in what body soever we meet with it: Be it
first in the Nature all body; whether Inwardly, a Rupture, or Outwardly salutio
continui, a cut or Wound; whereby the flesh is broken and divided. Every such a
Breach or Fraction, in what part soever it be, it is a Malady, a Disease,
calling for the help of the Physician or Surgeon. These are Corporal
Breaches. Or be it,

Secondly, In the Oeconemical Body, or Family, Breaches, whether in the Head,
betwixt the Governors, those unhappy jars betwixt man and wife, dividing those
whom God has made One: or betwixt the Members, Dissensions of Brethren, too
frequent, or the disagreements of Servants; all hurtful and prejudicial to
the family: Domestical Breaches. Or be it.

Thirdly, in the Political body, the Commonwealth; Breaches made upon it, by
open hostility from foraigne enemies, or else in it, by homebred divisions and
dissentions, whether betwixt the Prince and Subjects, or betwixt Subjects
themselves, all endangering the state of a Kingdom. Political Breaches, Or be
it,

Fourthly, In the Ecclesiastical Body, the Church; Breaches in or about
matters of Religion. Sects, Schisms, Heresies, rending and rearing the
Seamelesse Coat of Christ, the Church. Ecclesiastical Breaches.

Of all, and every of these I may truly say, that they are Diseases, and that
dangerous ones; How dangerous, I shall forbear to show you for the present,
reserving that for the latter part of the Text, to which properly it belongs.

This is the disease which David here speaks of, and complains of; And this
was Isreal's disease; That is the mark which my eve is upon at the present.
Heal the Breaches (thereof) viz. Of the Land, the Land of Israel.

Even Israel is subject to Breaches, that is the conclusion which from hence I
take up: Even Israel is Israel is subject to Breaches*
subject to Breaches. So it was with the Literal typical Israel, David's
Kingdom, so it may be with spiritual, Mystical Israel, the Kingdom of
Christ, the church of God upon Earth: Hereof was Israel Israel a Type of the
Church in three particulars.
a type. David's Kingdom a type of Christ's Kingdom, the Church upon Earth;
resembling it both in the King of it, and Subjects of it, and State of it.

1. For the King and Head of it; David a type 1. The King and Head.
of Christ, and a lively type, thence is it that Christ is sometimes called by
the name of David. They shall seek the Lord their God (says the Prophet 3
Hos. v. last.
Hosea, speaking of the Israelites, the Jews) and David their King. i. e.
Christ, who as he was of the seed of David, the son of David, so he was most
clearly and lively represented, and resembled by David. To touch upon the
particular Resemblances betwixt them, (as it is besides the Text so) it would
swallow up more time then for the present I have to spare.

Secondly, For the subjects of it; they were Israelites, a people that were in
covenant with God, carrying 2. Subjects.
the seal of that covenant, (the sign of circumcision) in their flesh; an
holy people, professing sanctity and holiness. And such are the subjects of
Christ's Kingdom, the true members of the Church visible; they are Israelites;
Behold an Israelite: such by profession; a people in covenant with God,
partaking 1 Ioh. 47.
of the feals of the covenant, a holy people, called to holiness, Saints by
calling, professing sanctity and holiness.

3. State.
Thirdly, for the state of it; David's Kingdom was still in a militant
condition for the most part* and so is the Kingdom of Christ, his Church upon
Earth, a militant Church; where Christ Psalm. 110.
rules and reigns in the midst of his Enemies.

Thus was Israel a Type of the Church, the one literal, the other Mystical
Israel. And both these shall we find subject unto Breaches. Typical Israel
was; Mystical Israel, the Church may be; the Text makes good the former, let
me show you the latter, and for the demonstrating of it, clear unto you these
two things.

1. What Breaches they are which Israel, the church, is so subject to.
Secondly, Now it comes to pass that it should be so subject to these
Breaches.
For the former, What Breaches they are that the qu. 1. What Breaches the
church is subject to.
church of God upon earth is so subject to?

For answer hereunto, give me leave to reflect upon the type, and enquire what
were Isreal's Breaches which David here complains of. In making Ans. Cleared
from the Type.
this inquiry, I will not go out of this Psalm whereof the Text is part, in
the latter part whereof David does tacitly insinuate unto us what were those
Breaches whereof he complayneth in the former. They were of two sorts:

Homebred. Isreal's Breaches of two sorts.
Foraigne.
Homebred, intestine and civil Breaches, made and caused by some of the
Israelites themselves. Foraigne, made by those who were open, and professed
enemies to their Kingdom, and Religion.

1. For the former. There was as yet a strong party in Israel, which after the
death of Ishbosheth Hombred made by Israelites.
cleaved to the house of Saul, not acknowledging David for their King, but were
ready upon all occasions to raise new tumults, and commotions, thereby seeking
to shake off the yoke of David's government. The chief and principal places,
where this seditious party had their residence, and abode, were those which the
Psalmist mentions in the sixth and seventh verses of the Psalm. viz.
Shechem, Succoth, Gilead, Manasseh. Shechem, a City in the Josh. 20. 7. Ioshu.
13. 27.
tribe of Ephraim. Succoth, a City in the tribe of Gad. Gilead and Manasseh,
the utmost borders of the Land of Canaan, beyond Jorden. These were some of the
chief places which sided with Ishbosheth whilst he lived, as you may see, 2.
Sam. 2. a Sam. 2. 8
and (as it seems) they still cleaved to the house of Saul after he was dead,
not acknowledging David for their King. So much David himself here insinuates,
I shall divide Shechem etc. i. e. have a full possession of it and the rest,
which as yet he had not. These were intestine and Homebred Breaches made by
some of the Israelites themselves.

Secondly, Besides these (in the second place) David and his Kingdom had many
foraigne enemies; open and professed enemies, not only to David and Foraigne
made by Enemies.
his House; but to the whole Kingdom of Israel. Such were the Moabites,
Edomites, Philistines, of whom you have mention, ver. 8. Moab shall be my
Wash-pott, etc. Moab, the land, or people of the Moahites, borderers upon the
land of Israel, that incestuous progeny, begotten by Lot in his drunkenness
Geni 19. 3 3. etc.
upon one of his own daughters, who having forsaken the true God, they were
also enemies to his Number. 25. 1. 3. Judge. 3. 12
people Israel. Edom, or Idumea, the Edomites, the posteririe of Esau, who for
that profane act of his in bartring away his birthright for a mess of red
potage Ge. 25. 30
was called Edom, i. e. redd. These also were enemies, imbittered and
inveterate enemies against Israel; so David setterh them forth Psalm. 137. Psa.
137. 7 Genesis 1^. 6. 14.
Philistia, or Palestina, the Philistines, Chams cursed posterity, open and
professed enemies to Israel (Shems progeny) as appears in diverse places. All
these Nations they were afterward subdued and conquered by David, and in
assured confidence of this conquest, David here triumphs aforehand; Moab shall
be my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shcoe,

But as yet they stood out, upon all occasions ready to make incursions and
invasions upon Israel, which also frequently they did, to the great disturbing
and indangering of that Kingdom. Put these together, and you see the Breaches
to which the typical Israel, David's Kingdom, was subjected. And in these may
you see what are the Breaches which The Church subject to like Breaches.
the spiritual Israel, the Church of God upon earth is subject.

Breaches from without, and breaches from within. I will invert the order. From
without, by open 1. Foraigne, by Persecution.
persecution; from within, by intestine and homebred Divisions. Of both these
the Church of God in all ages has had sufficient experience: look we upon the
primitive times, during the infancy of the Church, however the soundest and
entivest Church that ever was, yet how was it broken? broken, as by foraigne
persecutions, so by homebred divisions. Both these ways was the Church during
the Apostles times broken, distressed by Enemies from without, who persecuted
it. So was the Church at Jerusalem broken, in that great persecution, wherein
Paul was an actor, Stephen a Martyr, many of the Saints sufferers, who
thereupon were dispersed and scattered, as you may see Acts 8. there might the
Acts 8. 1.
Church have taken up the words of the Psalmist, in the first verse of this
Psalm; O God thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us. Thus was the
Church at Antioch broken in that persecution raised by the Jews, irritating
and stirring up devout and honorable Act. 13. 50
women with the chief men of the city, against the Christians, wherein Paul
himself was to suffer: to let pass diverse other.

The Churches being thus broken by persecution from enemies without; they were
also broken by 2.
divisions and distractions from within: their own Hombred by divisions.
members being divided, and severed in their judgments, in their affections.
This fire it began to smoke betimes, as you may see in that first Church, the
Church at Jerusalem, kindled by a little spark, a small neglect, through the
want of convenient Church Officers. There arose a murmuring of the Grecians
against the Hebrews, because their widows Acts 6. 1.
were neglected in the daily ministration. Afterward it broke forth into more
open flames, hot and eager contests, and that about diverse points; as namely
The Church rent during the Apostles time.
about circumcision, whether necessary or no: no small dissension about it
betwixt Paub and Barnabas, and certain believers of Iudeah, who made a journey
to Antioch (as it seems) to vent their tenants, and to undertake a dispute
about it. After Acts 15. 1, 2.
this (to let pass personal differences which fell in betwixt their Teachers
themselves, as viz. that betwixt Paul and Barnabas are sharp contentions, Act.
15. 39. Gal. 2. 14.
and Paul and Peter:) how were the people in some of the Churches divided?
divided in particular about their Teachers. Instance in that Church of Corinth,
where the members thereof were divided into Sects, some were Paulites, others
Apolloites, a 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4.
third Cephites, a fourth Christians; so divided and broken into sects, and
that about their Teachers, after whose names they affected to be called. In the
same Church we shall find other Breaches; the members thereof being divided
again (as probably about their Gestures in the public worship and service of
God, so) about the doctrine and manner of administering the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as it may be collected from that 1 Cor. 11. where the Apostle
both censures those differences amongst them, and for the rectifying of them
reduces them 1 Cor. 11. 22, 23.
to the first institution. Such Breaches were there made in and upon the Church
during the time of the Apostles themselves.

After their departure these Breaches were more After their departure torn.
and greater. In the three first Centuries how was the Church of Christ rent
and torn, partly by Lions, partly by Wolves? By Lions, such as Nero, By Lions
a Tim. 4. 17.
Saint Paul's Lion was; cruel and bloody persecutours, putting the Church into
blood; pouring so much blood at the root of this Vine, as has made it the more
fruitful ever since. Of these breaches Histories usually mention ten as most
remarkable. The ten primitive persecutions under those Romish Heathenish
Emperors. Thus was it torn by Lions.

As by Lions so by Wolves. So Saint Paul foretold that it should be; I know
that after my departure By wolves Act. 20. 29
shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst you, not sparing the flock. He spoke
it of false Prophets and heretical Teachers, which with their pernicious
errors, schisms and heresies should even rend and tear the flock of Christ,
the Church. And accordingly it came to pass, as the Histories of those times
sufficiently testify. Never was the Church more rent and torn by Heresies and
Schisms, then in those next ages after the Apostles: within the compass of
the first 400. years, there being little less then an hundred of them of
note, as they are Danae. do Haeres.
collected and computed out of those two ancient Doctors Epiphanius and
Augustine. So fruitful was the Church then in breaches. Broken by heathenish
persecutions, broken by various divisions and distractions: and such has bin
the condition of it ever since; even in the purest and quietest times never
free from breaches: in some parts persecuted, in others distracted. That it
has bin so, is out of doubt, which makes good the Assertion that it may be
so. Israel is subject to breaches. Q. 2. How the Church comes to be so subject
to these Breaches. Answ.


Q. But how comes it so to be? to be subject, so subject as it is?

A. I answer briefly. This is diversely considered: Gods doing. Satan's doing.


Gods doing; who does it with an eye parts to (...) is Gods doing, who permits
and orders them, with respect,
Himself. His Church.


1. With an eye to himself: his own glory; the glory of his power, wisdom,
goodness; all which are gloriously manifested; as,

First in the preserving and upholding his Church in the midst of all these
Breaches: even as the care 1. To his own glory which is manifested, In
Preserving.
and skill of a Pilot is shown in stearing a ship in a stresse, keeping her
above-water in the midst of those raging billows: or as the wisdom and valor
of a good Commander is shown in defending the City, the walls whereof are full
of breaches: so,

Secondly, in healing and making up of these Breaches; which God sometimes does
in such a In Healing.
way, as he not only leaves no sear behind, but makes the Church a gainer by
them. In both these is God glorified: and to these ends does he permit these
breaches, which if he would he could hinder: even as our Savior suffered
Lazarus to be sick, to Ioh. 11. 21
dye (both which he could have hindered) that the Son of man might be
glorified in his Resurrection: This sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God. Ve. 4.
So may we say of these diseases in the Church; her Breaches are not mortal,
not unto death (the Church being a Body like unto the Head of it, immertall)
but for the glory of God, that the son of man, the Head of the Church may be
glorified in preserving in Healing it.

2. God does it in the second place, with an eye 2. To his Church, viz. for
to his Church, giving way to these Breaches, and that For, 1. Exercising 2.
Trying 3. Purging
of it.

1. For the exercising of the Church. Therefore does he expose it sometimes to
open persecution, Exercise.
suffering Enemies to break in upon it, and to break it; even as the
Husbandman opens and breaks the clods of his ground, rending and tearing it
with ploughes and harrowes, as the Prophet Jsai alludeth. Is. 28 24.
This he does for the exercise of his Church, which if it lay fallow, would be
ready to run wild and prove unfruitful.

2. For probation and trial of it. To make trial of the Faith and Obedience
of his people. To this Trial.
end the Lord left the Cananites and some other nations, to be as thorns and
pricks in the eyes and sides of the Israelites, not driving them out before
Joshuah Ios. 23. 13
as he had done the rest, that through them he might prove Israel, whether they
would keep the way 2 Judge. 22. 23.
of the Lord, to walk therein, as you have it 2 Judge. And to this end (amongst
other) he suffers his Church to be pierced, rent and torn, as by persecutions,
so by schisms and heresies, viz. for the trying and manifesting of those which
are approved: There must be heresies or sects, says Paul to his Corinthians;
(...) oportet. There must be; Why? 1 Cor. 11. 19.
That they which are approved, may be made manifest. Of such use were those
civil dissentions in the Kingdom of Israel betwixt David and Ishbosheth,
thereby it was manifested who they were which cleared to the house of Saul, and
who to the House of David. And such use God makes of the Breaches and
Divisions in his Church; hereby he discovers who they are which will cleave
unto him and to his Truth, and who they are which for by and sinister respects
will be drawn aside to follow after error. Hereby God makes a Discovery;
discovering men to others; I, and sometimes discovering them to themselves,
making them hereby to know the rottenness or sincerity of their own hearts,
whether they have followed Christ for Loaves, or no.

Thirdly, for the purging of the Church. Even as by Purging.
those Commotions in the upper region of the Air, thunderings and lightnings,
rending and tearing the clouds; with those in the lower Region, storms and
tempests, the air it self is purged, and cleansed from many noxious vapors,
which otherwise would anoy the inhabitants: Even so by these commotions, and
combustions in the Church, God purges a great deal of corruption out of it.
This is one of the fans in the hand of Christ, whereby he Mat. 3. 12.
dresseth his corn, and purges his floor, (his Church,) freeing his truth
from a great deal of chafe, and dross which is oftimes mingled with it. Thus
this is Gods doing: and,

In the second place it is Satan's doing, who has 2. Satan's doing, who has an
hand in all these Breaches, thereby
ever an hand in those Breaches which God permits and orders. So had he in the
great Breach which was made upon Israel, through David's sin in numbering the
people. This happened not without a divine permission, and ordination; whence
it is said, that God moved David against Israel, yet Satan had 2 Samuel 24. 1.
an hand in it, being the immediate instigator of David unto that sin, which
made the Breach, whereat that judgment brake in; and thence we find it else
where attributed to Satan; Satan stood up against 1 Chro. 21. 1.
Israel etc. Which latter text explaynes the former. There is not a Breach that
is made in, or upon the Church, whether it be by open Persecution, or homebred
Dissension, but Satan has an hand in it. So had he in all those Breaches which
were made in, and upon the Primitive Churches. Those persecutions were from
him. The great red Dragon in the Revelation, he persecuted the woman; Those
Rev. 12. 13.
persecutions wherewith the Church was broken under those heathenish Emperouts
until the time of Constantine the great, that man-child there spoken of (as
some expositours conceive it,) that masculine deliverer, they were of Satan's
raising. And ver. 5. Bright man.
we may say the same of those schisms, heresies, errors, superstitions,
wherewith the Church in those Primitive and after ages was infested and
troubled, they were all but the spawne and seed of the same Serpent. The
Serpent cast out of his mouth a flood of water after the woman, so you have it
verse Rev. 14. 15.
fifteen. A flood of water, even that flood of errors and heresies, as that of
Arrianisme and some other, which like a flood (a land flood) had overflowen
almost the whole world: This flood came out of the mouth of that Serpent. And
so has that deluge of Antichristian errors in which the world for many ages
together lay steeped, and drowned; And we may say the same of all those lesser
streams of errors, heresies, schisms, which have or do infest any part of
the Church, they are but as so many smaller brooks or rivolets flowing and
streaming from the same head; divisions, discensions in the Church they are
some of the tares sown by this Mat. 13. 25.
envious man in Gods field; which he does to a clean contrary end then that
which God intends them for; viz. for the ruin, and destruction of the
Intending the ruin and destruction of the Church. Rev. 12. 15. Matthew. 24. 24.
Church. To this end the Dragon cast out that flood of warers after the woman,
that the woman might be carried away of the food. To this end does Satan set
abroach all these pernicious errors in the Church, that (if possible) the very
Elect might be deceived, and so the whole Church carried away, either by
seduction, or destruction. To this end does he sow these tares of differences
and dissentions, that they may hinder the grows of the good corn, the
grows of Religion, as for the most part they do: That hereby the Kingdom of
Christ may be weakened, his own strengthened, which as it was at the first
founded in, and raised by divisions, his dividing betwixt God and man; so it is
exceedingly promored, and built up by the same means, by dividing betwixt men
and men. You see the truth of the point, that it is so; you see the grounds of
it, why it is so. What use shall we now make hereof unto our selves?

Here, to let fall a stone which the text puts into my hand to cast at our
adversaries of Rome; Use 1. Confutation. Bellarm. de notis Eccle. c. 3. Unity,
Prosperity no true marks of the Church.
who amongst their fifteen notes, or marks of the true visible Church, lay
down these for two; Unity, Prosperity: Unity or Union of the members under
one visible head, and amongst themselves: Prosperity, outward and temporal
felicity; which if so, what shall we say to the Church of Israel at this
present, when David complained of so many Breaches in it? Where was then the
union of the Church under one visible head, when that Kingdom (to which the
Church was then confined) was so divided betwixt two; some cleaving to the
house of David, others to the house of Saul, yet both making up one visible
Church? Where was the outward felicity, and temporal Prosperity of the
Church, when the foundations of that Kingdom, and consequently of the Church,
the whole Church, were so shaken, both by foraigne invasions, and homebred
seditions? But I pass by this, leaving them to talk of that, which is not,
nor ever yet was to be found amongst themselves. What ever may be said for the
latter (Temporal Prosperity) sure we are, as for the former (Unity) it is a
thing which they have no cause to boast of.

The use I intend to make of it, shall be only to Use 2. Infosmation. Our
Breaches no just cause of triumph, scandal, or discouragement to any, though
made so.
take off the triumph, scandal, or discouragement, which any may happily
either make or take, at the present Breaches which are to be found amongst us
in this, and the neighbor Kingdom. In the behalf of both these we are this
day, and at this time assembled together, viz. to seek God for them, as David
does here for Israel, that He would heal the Breaches thereof.

That there are Breaches in both, and those very considerable ones, but for
number, and nature, many and great, shaking the very foundations of them, it
cannot be denied. And in these Breaches some happily will be ready to triumph.
So did both the To some matter of triumph.
Edomites, and Philistines here spoken of, over Isreal's Breaches. Isreal's
Breaches were their Triumph; so were they to the Philistines. O Philistia
triumph thou because of me, or over me, says the Psalmist here verse 8.
speaking by way of Ironie, and mockage, bidding them go on in their rejoicing
and triumphing over the Church of God, insulting over her Breaches and ruins
as they did. The like did the Edomites. So we may hear the Prophet Obadiah
Obad. 12.
charging it upon them, ver. 12. of his prophecy. Edom looked upon the day of
his brother Jacob, the day of Isreal's affliction, the day wherein he became a
stranger, was carried away captaive. This day the Edomites looked upon in a
rejoicing way, insulting over the misery of the Church; so it follows, Edom
rejoiced over the children of Juda in the day of their destruction, and spoke
proudly (insultingly) in the day of their distress, etc. with such an eye (no
question) do the enemies of God and his Church at this day look upon the
distressed, distracted state, and condition of this and the neighbor nation.
Romish Edomites, those children of Edom which say of our Jerusalem, our
reformed Religion, Race it, race it, even to the foundations thereof; Psalm.
137. 7.
uncircumcised Philistines, such as have gone about to set up the Ark of God by
their Dagon, as 1. Sam. 5.
the Philistines once did; to make Rome and England meet together; I doubt not
but they are ready to triumph, and insult over these Breaches, which themselves
have made; these divisions, distractions, seditions, rebellions, whereof
themselves are the Authors, and fomenters; hoping that at these Breaches
themselves shall re-enter, setting up their standards again upon the Churches
battlements; raising themselves upon the Churches ruins, which they hope these
distractions do presage.

Others there are to whom these Breaches may happily be a matter either of
scandal, or discouragement.

To some of scandal, unsettled and unstable To some, of scandal
Christians, reeds shaken with the wind, carried about with every blast. Upon
this ground happily they may be brought to scruple and question the truth of
our Religion, and so to entertain thoughts of relinquishing it, flying from it,
(as some have Vid. ep. Dr. Hall to Mr. W. L. Decad. 3. Ep. 5. To some, of
discouragement.
done) because of some divisions amongst the Professors of it.

To others of discouragement; Weak and fainthearted Christians, who because
they cannot at the present see how these Breaches should be repaired, and made
up, therefore they are ready to yield up the City, to give the Church, and
cause of Christ in it, for lost; as if the condition thereof were forelorne,
and desperate.

Not so: No just gro^nd for any of these; whether for triumph, scandal, or
discouragement. Breaches No just ground for any of these.
there are amongst us, it cannot be denied; and those such Breaches as deserve
to be lamented with tears of blood: but yet, are they any other then what the
Church of God upon earth is subject to? Surely no. It is Saint Paul's
consolation to his Corinthians touching their temptations. There has no
temptation taken you but such as is common to man. And the 1. Cor. 10. 13.
like may I say of these temptations, distractions, divisions, wherewith the
Church of God in these parts at this day is exercised, they are no other then
what are common to the Church, may befall the Church, the true Church of God.
To make this good, parallel and compare we the state of the Church in these
Isreal's Breaches and ours compared
two Kingdoms with that of Israel in David's time, and see, what greater
Breaches shall we find in the one then in the other?

In the neighbor nation, the Trumpet of rebellion is sounded, the Kingdom
divided, put into blood, engaged in a civil war, by the means of a seditious
party of Romish confederates, who, under a pretense of vindicating the liberty
of their own, seek and endeavor the extirpating, and rooting out the true
Religion of God, of late through the mercy of God begun to be planted amongst
them, together with all the professors of it. But what is here more to be
seen, or heard, then was in Israel at that time when she bad the son of Bichri,
a man of Belial, blew a trumpet, and said, we have no part in 2 Samuel 20 1. 2.
David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents
O Israel; whereupon the whole 10. tribes made a present revolt, following after
him, the tribe of Judah only cleaving to their King.

Amongst our selves however (blessed be God, and blessed be his Anointed, and
blessed be the multitude of his wise and faithful Councillors) this fire has
not yet broken forth into such open flames, yet how has it smoaked? how does
it smoke? To let pass here that late Breach, so happily healed, and made up,
betwixt the two Nations, (at least so some would have had it) which threatened
us with the dreadful judgment of a civil war (of wars the worst.) To let
that pass, (which yet we must not let pass without a thankful
acknowledgement of the power, wisdom, goodness of God manifested in making up
of that Breach; not only healing it without a skar, but bringing a more firm
union out of it.) As also to forbear the mention of those late Breaches made
both upon Church, and state among our selves. Breaches made upon the estates of
men, upon the liberties of subjects, the bodies, nay the souls and consciences
of Christians, which through the goodness of God inclining the heart of his
Anointed to hearken to his great Council of state are in part already repaired
and made up. Besides these, other Breaches there are which yet lie upon us.
Breaches in the Church and Breaches in the state; both in measure still rent
and torn, distracted, and divided. I shall not need to name particulars, which
are too obvious to every vulgar eye. But in all these what is here more then
was to be found in Israel at that time when the whole land was shaken, that
Kingdom divided betwixt the two Houses of Saul and David; some siding with the
one, others with the other; taking of parts to the great indangering of the
state, of the Church therein? True it is, the enemies of our peace are many.
Besides a dangerous party at home of such as do (in their hearts and affections
at least) cleave to the House of Saul, the old House as they falsely call it)
Papists, and others popishly affected, together with a Malignant party of
malcontents, persons ill affected to Church and state; besides these, it
cannot be thought but that we have enemies abroad; enemies to our Religion we
are sure, many of them vassals to that Man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome,
who (as they at the present insult over our breaches, so) if occasion were
offered, we cannot think but that they would be ready to break in at them.
But herein again, what is our condition other then Isreal's was at this time
when David penned this Psalm, when besides that seditious party amongst
themselves they had also many foraigne enemies; enemies both to their Kingdom
and Religion, and that almost on every side: Moabites, Edomites, Philistines;
Moabites and Edomites on the East; Philistines on the West. Thus paralelling
our condition with Isreal's, we find no great odds of breaches betwixt them;
not more in the one then was in the other.

And therefore (to draw toward a conclusion of this point and exercise.) In
the first place, let not No cause of triumph to our adversaries. Mic. 7. 8.
our adversaries triumph over our breaches; Rejoice not against me O mine
enemy. Or, if they will, let them triumph; Triumph thou O Philistia because of
me or over me. Let our adversaries of Rome and their adherents, the sedicious
and ill affected party amongst our selves, triumph and lift up their heads,
insulting over our breaches: in the mean time we could tell them of their own
breaches, and enquire Whose Breaches are not less then ours.
of them where their Unity was when their Church was divided betwixt two
visible Heads at once, (two Popes I mean,) both set up, and both ruling at the
same time, the one in Italy, the other in France; the one at Rome, the other
at Avignion: a considerable number of Cardinals and Prelates siding and taking
part with either of them. Then was the state of their Church like that of
Israel, when after the death of Saul some sided with David, others with
Ishbosheth. We could mind them of their own present divisions, which long
have, and still do distract that Church of theirs; which howsoever they (having
more of the Serpent, and being wiser in their generations then the children of
Light,) carry Luke 16. 8.
more closely, with less noise, (wherein I wish we could imitate them,) yet
are they both for nature, and number so considerable, as that it should make
them ashamed either to boast of Unity amongst themselves, or to insult over the
Breaches of others. One of their own modestly tells us of 20. Gene brard.
several schisms amongst them. Another, their great Cardinal Bellarmin by
name (to the everlasting glory of their Churches unity,) ingenuously
acknowledges no less then 237. differences, or contrarieties in Doctrine
amongst their own Divines. But these we pass by, contenting our selves with
this; this was Isreal's condition, and it may be the condition of the true
Church of God, to be divided, distracted, no matter of triumph to them.

Nor yet, in the second and third place, of scandal or discouragement to
others.

Not of scandal: What though the natural body No cause of scandal.
of Christ be pierced, rent, torn, with thorns, nails, the spear of the
soldier? yet let none be offended at it. Blessed is he (says our Savior)
whosoever Mat. 11. 6.
shall not be offended in me: What though the mystical body of Christ, the
Church be pierced, rent and torn, pierced with the spear of persecution; rent
and torn, with the thorns and nails of homebred divisions and dissentions?
let none be offended at it. Nor yet

Discouraged by it. The natural Body of Christ, for all it was so pierced,
rent, and torn; yet it rose again the third day. They are not all the rents,
Or discouragement to weak ^hristian Hos. 6. 1 2.
breaches, divisions, distractions in the mystical body of Christ, the Church,
that shall hinder the resurrection of it. The Church in Hosea complains, that
the Lord had torn her, and smitten her; Yet mark what follows, After two
days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall
live in his sight. God has at the present done the like by this, and the
neighbor Nation, smitten the one, torn the other: Smitten the one with the
sword of a Civil, but Barbarous and Savage enemy: Torn the other, with
unhappy differences and distractions; yet let not either of these discourage:
He that has torn us, he can heal us: He that has smitten us, he can bind us
up; and this (we trust) in mercy he will yet do. It is the speech (I remember)
of the wife of Manoah to her hu^band; If the Lord had had a purpose to destroy
Goo^ hopes that God will heal our Breaches. Jude 13. 23.
us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our
hands, neither would he have showed us all these things. And let us in an holy
considence say the like, touching the Church of God in this, and the neighbor
Kingdoms: Had God had a purpose to have cast us off from being a Church, from
being a people, to have unchurch'd us, to have taken his Gospel from us, surely
he would never have accepted our offerings, our prayers, and the prayers of his
people amongst us, which we are assured he has door, having given us most
gracious and comfortable returns of them, assured evidences of their
acceptance: Neither would he ever have showed us all these things. Discovered
and consounded so many plots, so many trecheries and conspiracies of our
adversaries, still turning their councels upon their own heads; carrying the
great council of the Kingdom through so many (to flesh and blood) insuperable
difficulties: Nor yet would he have begun to repair and make up our Breaches,
so as in part already he has done, and (we hope) is doing. Do we see one
bestowing cost upon an old garment, in darning up the holes, drawing up the
rents, making up the Breaches in it; we thereupon conjecture, surely it is not
his intent as yet to cast it off, and to lay it aside. Surely (beloved) such
have been Gods dealings with us, (specially of this Kingdom) of late, as that
we may say that they are, at least seem to be, sweet intimations of a gracious
purpose and intention toward us: Only in this will the Lord be sought. And
for this, let every of us seek him, that it may not repent him of the good
which he has seemed to intend toward us, but that he would return, and come
unto us with healing in his wings; coming unto us as Mal. 4. 2. Cant. ^ and last
the Spouse desires that her Beloved might come unto her, Like a Roe, or a
young Heart upon the mountains of Bether, the mountains of division, as the word
signifies. In his own time (which let not us prescribe) healing and making up
all our breaches. This is David's Prayer for Israel in the text: And for this
Let us pray.

ISREAL'S CURE. The second SERMON. March 2o.
PSALM. 60. Verse. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof, for it is shaken.
UPon this Text, I made an entrance the last day, being then led unto it by
that * Public Fast.
Solemn occasion. We brake it into two parts, David's Request. Reason.


In the former of these, we took notice of three particulars. Isreal's Disease.
Cure. Physician.


Upon the first of these we then insisted. Come we now to the second, viz.
Isreal's Cure.; which is the healing of her Breaches. Heal the Breaches Explic.
what meant by Healing.
thereof.

To Heal, properly you know what it is, viz. do a Cure upon the Body in
healing the sicknesses or sores thereof, whether in an ordinary way, by
natural means, Medicines, or Salves, as the Physician or Surgeon does, or
in an extraordinary and miraculous way, without means, as our Savior and his
Apostles did, who cured all manner of diseases only by their 107. Ps. 20. Math.
8. 8.
word, Math. 8. 3. 15.
touch, Math. 9. 20. Luke 8. 44. Act. 19. 12
garments, Acts 5. 15. 2 Chr. 7. 14.
shadow. From the natural body, it is transferred to the Political, or
Ecclesiastical Body in a Kingdom, the Commonwealth, the Church. The
remedying of the evils whereof, is sometime in phrase of Scripture called an
Healing. If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, (says the Lord) I
will heal their Land, i. e. Redress and remedy the evils which lie upon it:
Heal the breaches thereof, says the Text, i. e. Repair them, make them up.
This it is that David here prays for; and Doct. The Healing of the Churches
breaches, should be the desire of every Christian.


This should every true Israelite desire and seek after, The healing,
repayring, making up of Isreal's breaches. It was the first work that Nehemiah
and the rest of the Jews did after their return from Captivity; they set upon
the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem, which they began, as you may see in
the 3. chap. of Nehem. and finished chap. 6. not giving over, till there was no
breach found therein, Neh. c. 3. c. 6.
as you have it verse. 1. of that 6. chap. What they did for the Typical; this
ought all true Israelites Verse 1.
do for the Spiritual Mystical Jerusalem, the Church of God upon earth, viz.
seek and endeavor what they can, the building up the Walls, the repairing the
breaches thereof. This is David's prayer elsewhere, Lord, buid up the walls of
Jerusalem: Psalm. 51. 18.
Jerusalem the Metropolis, both Civil and Ecclesiastical of that Kingdom,
the Head City of Israel, a Type of the Church visible; For this David prays,
that God would build up the walls thereof, repair the breaches thereof;
restoring to it, and establishing in it Peace, and Prosperity. And what
himself does, he stirs up others to do the like: Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, i. e. Psalm. 122. 6.
for the public tranquillity and happiness of the Church; for the continuance
of it, if enjoyed; for the restoring of it, if wanted; that it may not be
troubled, whether without, by persecuting Tyrants putting it into blood; or
within, by Schisms, and Heresies, rending and tearing of it. These are the
breaches of the Church (as I have showed you in the former Point) and both
these every true Israelite should defire to have healed, repaired, made up;
that so there may be Peace within her Walls, and Prosp erity (or quietness)
within her Palaces, as it follows verse. 7. of that 122. Psalm.

And great reason for it, why Christians should Reas. 1. All members of the
same body
thus desire and endeavor the healing of Isreal's breaches, they being all
members of that mystical body: ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular, says the Apostle to his Corinthians. The Church the body, 1 Cor.
12. 27.
all true Christians Members of that Body; and being so, they should have a
simpathie with the whole. So is it in the natural body; If the body be
wounded, or hurt in any part of it, there is never a part but is sensible of
it: If the foot be wounded, the eye sees it, the heart feels it, the tongue
complains of it, the hand is ready to apply salves and Plasters to it, for the
healing of it. So should it be in the Mystical body, and so it will be. If
the Church be wounded, rent, torn, the eye of a true Israelite being a living
member of that body, seeing it, his heart cannot but be affected with it, his
tongue will be ready to complain of it unto God, his hand will be ready to
apply such healing remedies as God shall put into it. Christian affection in
the hearts of Christians, it both should, and will incline them to seek the
Cure of Isreal's breaches.

Take a second Reason, and that fetched from the Reas. 2.
Nature of these breaches, which are

1. Unseemly. 2. Dangerous.
1. Unseemly, not unlike a rent or breach in a Breaches in the Church unseemly.
Garment; which, because uncomely, we will therefore get drawn, sown up: Or
like a Harelip in a good face; which, though it be not a sore, yet because it
is an eyesore, a blemish, we will therefore (if possible) get healed. Upon this
ground should Christians seek the healing of Isreal's breaches. They are an
eyesore, a blemish in this mystical body. It was the outward Beauty of the
Typical Jerusalem, that the buildings thereof were contiguous, and uniforme.
Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together. Ju^cta sibi simul,
Psalm. 122. 3.
as Montanus renders the Original, the Houses not scattered, but joining
together. Even as it was with the Curtains of the Tabernacle, which were of one
measure (says the Text) and coupled together. Surely it is a piece of the
visible Churches visible Exodus 26. 2, 3.
beauty, her unity, her breaches, her divisions make the least of them, make
the best of them, they are a blemish, an eyesore; I, such an eyesore, as
friends cannot behold without grief, enemies with triumph, Neuters with
scandal. And being so, were there no other reason; Christians should seek the
Healing of them. But besides this,

2. In the second place, these Breaches are dangerous. Dangerous, being
Dangerous to the Church; and that two ways, being

1. Disadvantagious to her. 2. Advantageous to her enemies.
1. To her disadvantagious. In that, like Domestical Disadvantagious to the
Church.
Breaches in a Family, which are great hindrances to all the business in it;
whether Civil, or Religious; for the most part hindering the grows both of
Grace, and Estate. So prejudicial and detrimentall are these Breaches to the
State of the Church, hindering the grows of it, the increase of it. This
Mystical body being joined, compacted and knit together, it increases with
the increase of God, says Saint Paul to his Colossians; It makes 2 Col. 19.
increase to the edifying of it self in love, says the same Apostle to his
Ephesians. On the other hand, Ephesians. 4. 16
being divided, rent, and torn, it withers, wanzeth, it grows not.

Not but that God can, and sometimes does bring good out of this evil, light
our of this darkness; Note.
making the truth (which is but one) againer by division, improving
distractions to the Churches benefit. But this is by accident, no thanks to
these divisions, distractions, for this gain; which being enemies to Unity,
they are in their own nature no friends to the Truth, no friends to the Church,
but enemies to it: Enemies hindering the growth of it; nay, threatening the
ruin of it. Our Savior has said it of a Kingdom, an House if divided
against themselves, they cannotstand. These Mark 3. 24, 25.
Breaches in the Church, are like wounds in the body, though not all mortal,
yet in their own nature destructive, (as I shall show you (God willing) in the
latter part of the Text) shaking the Church, as well as hindering it. And in
this respect, Christians who bear good will to Israel, wish well to the Church,
should seek the Cure, the Healing of them; they are disadvantagious to the
Church.

And Secondly, Advantageous to her enemies. In Advantageous to her Enemies.
this, like Breaches made in the walls of a City, which are an Inlet to the
Enemy, giving him the advantage of entering, and taking possession, if they be
not either repaired, or looked to. Of such dangerous consequence are these
Breaches in the Church, they are In-lets to the Adversary.

In-lets (in the first place) to Satan, that common Adversary; who by these
breaches, breaks in upon the Church; as by domestical breaches, he breaks in
upon a Family, hindering the affairs of it.

In-lets (in the second place) to the Instruments of Satan, False-Teachers,
Seducers; who make great advantage of these Breaches, to let in their own
pernicious errors by them: Even as by the Grecian Horse, that fatal Engine
was let and drawn in, by that Breach which the Trojans themselves had made in
their own Walls, to the overthrow of their City. So dangerous are these
breaches; disadvantagious to the Church, advatagious to her Enemies: Great
cause why Christians should desire, and endeavor our the Cure, the Healing of
them.

Dwell we no longer upon Confirmation, or Illustration: It is a truth (I
suppose) which in Thesi, in the general, will easily be granted, and yielded
at all hands. That which I principally aim at, is the practical part, the
bringing it home, the setting it on by way of Application, which I shall direct
these two ways; By way of Reprehension. Exhortation.


By way Reprehension, is this; The duty and practice of every true Israelite,
to seek the Healing Use 1. Reprehension.
of Isreal's breaches; What then,

In the first place, shall we say to them, who instead of Healing, make them?
Breach-makers; 1. To breach makers.
whether in the Church, or State. To let pass the latter of these:
State-Incendiaries, such as have troubled and distracted the Politic State of
this In the state.
Kingdom, for their own private ends and advantages, that they might have the
better fishing in these troubled waters.

Them I refer, together with the Cure of those breaches by them made, to that
wise and venerable College of State Physicians, at the present assembled to
that purpose. The Breaches which my eye is principally upon, are Isreal's
breaches; Breaches in the Church, specially those wherewith the Church in this
Kingdom is distracted, and torn. In the Church.
And here give me leave briefly to tax, and censure those which have been, or
are either the makers, or maintainers of them, whether Principalls, or
Accessaries.

Q: But who are they?

A. For Answer, I shall have recourse to the Who they are, cleared from the
Type.
Type; who were they which made these breaches in Israel, which the Psalmist
here complains of? I have showen you it already. They were either strangers, or
Israelites. Strangers, Enemies to their Kingdom, and Religion, Moabites,
Edomites, Philistines, or else Israelites, that factious, seditious party,
which cleaved to the House of Saul, and so were enemies to the House of David.
Parallel Breachmakers amongst us (as in Israel) of two sorts.
hereunto, behold we also in our Israel two forts of Breach-makers: Strangers.
Israelites.


First, Begin with the former. Strangers; I mean strangers, and Enemies to our
Religion: Such as 1. Strangers enemies to our Religion, Papists, etc.
though they be amongst us; yet they are not of us, Papists, and persons
Popishly affected. Amongst whom, how ever I cannot think, but that there are
some blindly zealous, poor misguided souls, who follow after their Ishhosheth,
Or Adonijah, with simplicity of heart, and so are both more quiet and innocent;
Yet others amongst them there are, and that many, very active and practical in
this worst piece of Arithmatick, which they study more than anvother Division.
Dividing of Houses, Cities, Parliaments, Kingdoms, States, Churches; Setting
Subjects against Subjects. In this Hellish Art, how many famous (I should say
infamous) Practitioners have there been amongst them in all Ages? Witness the
Histories of the late and frequent Irish Rebellions; Some of them Masters in
that Science, Prosessours in it. Those devoted and professed Incendiaries, the
Jesuits, and their scholars, Hellish Engineers, who make it their work to be
continually laying of Trains, and springing of Mines, for the blowing up the
gates and walls of our Jerusalem, endeavoring to make Breaches therein, that
themselves and their party may re-enter and take possession. It was the speech
of the Syrians, and others their Confederates: Let us go up against Judah and
Isa. 7. 6.
vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us. What they determined against
Judah, that do these Romish Consederates practice against our Israel;
continually vexing us by their wiles (as the Midianites did Israel) seeking to
make a Breach amongst Number. 25. 18.
us for themselves, their hopes being founded upon our divisions. Upon them in
the first place do we charge these our Breaches, both in this, and the
neighbor Kingdoms; but charging them, we cannot discharge our selves.

2. A second sort of these Breach-makers are to 2. Israelites, Protestants
professing the same Religion with us. Iud. 12. 6.
be found amongst our selves: Israelites, men professing the same Religion,
Protestants by name; who to approve themselves such, can readily pronounce the
Protestants Shibboleth, willingly submitting to the late Protestation; wherein
amongst other things, they have vowed and promised to praeserve and maintain
the union and peace of the three Kingdoms; and yet they either are, or have
been Breach-makers, breaking the peace of the Church. Of these, we may take
notice of two sorts; (Pardon my plain and home-dealing, in prosecuting of this
charge.) The design which I aim at, is the Healing of Isreal's Breaches: Now a
wound (you know) that it may be Cured, it must first be searched. This I shall
do with as tender and gentle and hand, as possible I can; that whilst I go
about to make up Breaches, I may not make any.

Two sorts of persons there are amongst our Amongst them, two sorts of
Breach-makers.
selves, upon whom these Breaches of our may, and must be charged. Some, who
have turned aside after error. Others, who have followed the Truth.


Deal we first with the former, as having the greatest share in this
business; such as have turned 1. Such as have turned aside after Error.
aside after error. In this rank must we reckon all those Schismatics, and
Sectaries, who have departed from the truth of God, professed amongstus; or
elfe have renounced all communion with us; Anabaptists, Familists, (of
Christians the worst) Antinomians, Socinians, Arminians, Brownists. I cannot
reckon all, neither will I go about it. Upon these must we charge a great part
of our homebred Breaches, which are caused by their Divisions, dividing and
cutting themselves off from the unity of the Faith, or the unity of the
Church. These are obvious Breach-makers, to whom we wish (with the Apostle)
that God would give them Repentance, to the acknowledgement of the 2 Timothy 2. 25.
Truth; turning their feet into the ways of peace. Luke 1. 79.


And to these must we join (not as accessaries, but as principalls) those late
Superstitious Innovatours; Superstitious Innovatours.
who, not contented with the simplicity of the Gospel, would have put a new
dress, and that a garnish one, upon the face of our Religion: together with
those unhappy and unfaithful Engineers, whether Masters of the Ordinance, or
their subordinate Officers, who being be-trusted with the Churches Artillery,
have turned the mouth of her own Canons against her self, battering her
Bulworks, Hab. 2. 1.
beating her watchmen from their Watchtowers, making Breaches in her Walls,
driving out her Inhabitants, by laying taxes and impositions upon their
consciences. This (if I mistake not) was the first ground of that first Breach,
made in the first Church under the Gospel; for the healing whereof, that first
Synod was called, and Congregated at Jerusalem, Acts 15. Some there were, Act.
15. 1.
who being converted from Judaisme to Christianity, they still hanging upon
the old haunt themselves, they would needs have imposed some burdens upon the
consciences of the converted Gentiles, Putting a yoke upon their necks (as
Saint Verse 10.
Peter lays it down) which (says he) neither our Fathers, nor we were able
to bear. What yoke was this? A yoke of legal Jewish Ceremonies, then
antiquated and abolished; a voake of Carnal Ordinances (such as the Author to
the Hebrews speaks of) which were imposed on the Jews, until Heb 9. 10.
the time of Reformation. This yoke would they have put upon the Gentiles
necks, pressing and obtruding upon them some things offensive, others not
necessary. And this it was which made that Breach; I will not spend time in
making the Application thereof to our own Church, and times. I know your
thoughts therein, run before me; my desire only is, and my prayer shall be,
that as our disease is not unlike theirs, so we may in Gods time find a like
Cure, by a like means, (a lawful Synod, other means I know none) after the
like manner; (Imposing upon the Consciences of men, no burdens Act. 15. 28
but what are necessary.)

Pass we from hence, to what may happily more nearly touch and conscern some
of our selves.

A second sort of Breach-makers amongst our selves, are such as have followed
the Truth (it may 2. Followers of Truth, but not
be) but they have not done it. 1 In Love, 2 with Wisdom.


First, some who have done it in love; This they 1. In Love. Ephesians. 4. 15.
should have done, speaking the Truth in Love, (faith the Apostle.) (...):
Veritatem lectantes, following the Truth in love, so the old vulgar Translation
reads it; not without some warrant from the Original. In Love, viz. To the
Truth it self, Our Brethren.


To the Truth followed; To our Brethren, followers of the Truth with us. Thus
should the Truth be followed, but thus some have nor followed it, do not follow
it; they follow the Truth (it may be.) To the Truth is self.


But First, not out of love to the Truth it self, but rather out of self-love;
drawn by some By and sinister respects, and inducements; led and carried (it
may be) rather by the examples of others, whose persons they have in admiration
(happily) because of advantage, (as Saint Jude speaks) then by Jude 16.
the dictates of their own judgments: Thus following the truth, not in love to
the truth, but to themselves, their own credits, reputations, advantages. Or,

Secondly, Not in love to their Brethren, followers of the truth, as well as
they: Hence are those To their Brethren.
unchristian jealousies, and heart-burnings, disdainful thoughts and speeches,
mixed (it may be) with uncharitable Consures; which some are ready to pass
upon those, who in any thing are otherwise minded then themselves: Insomuch as
they cannot walk with any, unless they be in all things agreed; The least
Difference breeds a Distance, the least difference in Judgment, severs them
in their Affections: Plain evidences against them, that they do not follow the
truth in love; which if they did, it would certainly cover a multitude of
weaknesses and infirmities, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
in those whom they walk with, specially they being such, as they have no cause
to think but that they are followers of the truth, according to light received,
as well as themselves. Others there are

In the second place, which do not follow the truth with wisdom. Thus should
the truth be followed: 2. Not in wisdom.
Wisdom being the Pilate which should stear, and direct the whole Course of a
Christian; regulating all his actions, which if they be not ordered by wisdom,
though materially, (and in themselves never so good, yet) they loose their
grace and acceptance both with God and man. Now there are some amongst us,
which in following after the truth, loose this stearage; whose aims, and
Intentions, happily are good in what they do, or seek after; but their Actions
are unadvised, rash, heady, unwarrantable. Such was that act of Vzzahs, in
putting forth his hand to stay the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6. ver. 6.
when it was shaken: The intention good, but the action evil, because
unwarrantable; he having no calling to do what he did: Whereby it came to
pass, that whilst he went about to prevent a breach, he made one: God smiting
him for his error, (or Rashness, as the Margin reads it:) So making a ver.
7.
breach upon him, which gave the denomination to the place, thereupon called
(Perez-Vzzah) i. e. ver. 8.
The breach of Vzzah. And even thus fares it with some amongst us, who
beholding the Ark of God shaken, the religion of God (as they apprehentd it)
endangered, they presently step forth, putting their hands (being private
hands) to the work of Public Reformation; not staying for them to whom that
work properly belongs, but they will step forth before them in an irregular,
and unwarrantable way. By this means instead of healing or preventing a breach,
making one. You know the story Genesis 38. of Tamars twins: She being in her
travel, the one puts forth his hand first, about Gen 38 29.
which the Midwife tied a scarlet thread, as a token or mark of the firstborn;
the Purple or scarlet color also, well agreeing to the birthright,
Oreldership, (as Musculus notes upon it. Notwithstaning this, the other breaks
forth before him, not tarrying his time: Whereupon Tamar wondering at it, and
enquiring after the cause or reason, of this strange, and extraordinary birth:
She breaks forth into a passionate expostulation with her son, saying unto
him, How have thou broken forth, This breach be upon thee; from thence giving
him his name Pharez, i. e. a breach. And is it not the case (my brethren) of
some amongst us, who waiting, (or rather not waiting,) thinking long for the
Churches delivery, they will not tarry their time (Gods time,) but they will be
breaking forth in a preposterous and inordinate way: I, notwithstanding that
God has brought deliverance to the birth, so as they see an hand put forth
already, an hand with a scarlet thread about it, the Nobles and Senators of the
Kingdom (to whom that color Lam. 4. 5. Dan. 5 7.
most properly agrees) reaching forth their hands, being at work for the
reforming of what is amiss, and the suppying of what is wanting; yet they will
anticipate them, out of a rash and preposterous zeal stepping forth before
them. To such let me say (and if there be any here present; as happily there
may be: I shall say it unto them) speaking in the language of Tamar to her son,
how have you broken forth? This breach (also) be upon you: We cannot but charge
you amongst others as accessaries to these breaches, if not to the making, yet
to the increasing of them of them: And being thus charged, see you to it how
you can discharge your selves, either before God, or man.

I have done with the first Rank of those who come within the compass of this
just reprehension; such as are so far from seeking, and endeavoring the
healing of Isreal's breaches, that they make them, 2. Breach-maintainers, whether
or else (in the second place) keep them open, keep them from healing; being
means, or occasions to hinder the making up of these breaches, which they do
either purposely, or unadvisedly.

Purposely foam. So do the enemies of God, and his truth, the Malignant party
amongst us, who Purposly.
cannot endure that the Breaches amongst us, should be made up. In that like
Sanballat and Tobiah, and Nehe. 4. 7. 8.
their confederates, who when they heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made
up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, they were very wroth (says the
text) and so conspired altogether to come fight against (...)
Jerusalem, and to hinder it, (or to make an error in it) as the Margin in our
new Translation reads Errorem.
it according to the Original. Such back friends to the peace of our
Jerusalem, there are many amongst us at this day, who cannot endure that the
breaches amongst us should begin to be stopped: And therefore they do what they
can, to hinder the work; still casting in new jealosies, and new obstacles;
thinking thereby either to hinder the work, or to make an error in it: That so
our breaches either may not be healed or else slightly healed: as the Lord
complains against the false Prophets Jer. 6. They have healed the hurt of the
daughter of my people Ier. 6. 14.
slightly: So healed, as that they may soon break forth again: which they do
for their own advantage. In this like water-foule in a frost, which by their
continual padling, keep open a weak in a river, not suffering it to freeze
over, that so themselves may have room to swim and fish in: Or like some
wretched Surgeons, who keep open a wound for their own gain.

Others do the like, but unadvisedly, besides their intention. I spare them,
and hasten to Or unadvisedly.


A third sort, who come under Reprehension here. Such who, as they have no hand
(as they think) in Such as will be no Healers.
the making of these Breaches, so they will have none in the Healing of them.
It is that which the Lord says of the Jews, in that great confusion which
should befall them; every man should resuse to be an Healer. When a man shall
take hold of his Brother, etc. In that day he shall swear, I will Icr. 3. 6, 7.
not be an Healer. And is it not so with some amongst us at this day? They are
not, they cannot be ignorant of the breaches which are made amongst us in this,
and the neighbor Nation; Breaches shaking and endangering both Church, and
State, and vet they decline this Christian office, They will be no Healers; No,
their resolution is for a wise, and wary Neutrality; they will be standers by,
and lookers on, to see what will become of things. Like men standing upon the
shore, and looking upon others in a stresse at Sea, to see what will become of
them, whether they shall sink or swim; In the mean time they will not put
forth an hand, a finger to the making up, the healing of these breaches. Truth
is, they are not at all affected with them, so themselves may but keep their
own heads whole, and sleep in a whole skin (as we say) they care not what
breaches there be in the Church, whether at home, or abroad. In this, not
unlike some simple man at Sea; who, so his own Cabin be but tight, he cares not
what leaks there be in the Ship he sails in. Surely, such there are, some
amongst us, and I wish the evidence were not too strong, too clean against
them. Whence is it, that some amongst us are so loath, so backward in parting
with any thing, for the making up of any of these breaches? not willing to part
with a little earth to fill them up. It is a case which Divine Providence at
present puts into my hand, let me not over-looke, or neglect it.

I suppose there are none of you here present, but take notice what a great and
fearful breach is Benevolence, and Loan for Ireland pr^ssed.
made upon the neighbor Nation, our Brethren in the Kingdom of Ireland;
where, through the open Rebellion of a Romish Confederacy, rending and taring
of that Kingdom, the State therein tottereth, and the Church lies a bleeding.
For the repairing and making up of this breach: It has pleased Authority
(that Authority which may Command it, the King, and his Parliament) to
request, and desire from you, either by way of gift, or Loan, a little of your
earth, (your Gold is no other, no better, Red-earth, thick-clay, as the Prophet
Hab. 2. 6.
Habakkuk phraseth it.) This they desire for the filling, and making up of this
Breach; by succouring your Brethren which are driven from thence, and relieving
those which do stand in the breach. But (alas) how unwillingly, how cravingly,
how sparingly does it come from some aamongst us? Surely (my Brethren) thus it
would not be, if the Town wherein we now are, were besieged, and a Breach made
in the Walls of it. In this case (I suppose) there is none of us but would be
ready both to carry baskets of earth, and to lend our Wool-packs or Featherbeds
(if we have them) for the stopping, the making up of that Breach. And shall we
not do a little for the Church of God in that Kingdom; the welfare whereof, is
of so great and near concernment to our selves? Insomuch as some wise Starists
have thought these two Kingdoms to be like Hypocrates his Twins, the one
whereof could not subsist, at least not well, without the other. Surely (my
Brethren) such Parsimonius spirits, may be conceived to be far from the
resolution of that noble Roman Marcus Curtius, whom the Histories of Live. lib.
6 Oros. 3. c. 5. Plutarch. vit. Aristid. paral. Val. max.
those, and after Ages have rendered famous to the World, for his unparaleld
affection to his Country, and in special, to the City of Rome whereof he was
a Member: Wherein, when by reason of an Earthquake their happened a prodigious
Chasma, a great Gulpb, or opening of the earth in the midst of the
Marketplace; and the Oracle had signified to them, that there was no way to
fill up that breach, but by casting the best thing in their City into it: He
thereupon presently mounting his Horse in complete Arms (which was then the
Acceptam a Patria vitam, eidem impendere non dubitavit. Live.
chief glory of that City and Nation) cast himself into the Breach for the
making it up; so yielding up his life (says my Author) to, and for his
Country, from which he had received it. This did he with a Roman resolution.
And the like should Christians be ready to do in a Christian way for the Church
of God, in case that God shall be pleased to call them to it, even cast
themselves into the breaches thereof, for the filling, making them up; not
thinking their natural lives too dear for her, to whom (under God) they owe
their spiritual. How far then do they fall beneath themselves, beneath
Christians, who will not so much as part with a little of their superfluities
in such a case? It is no more that is desired from you; not the Widows two
Mites, her whole livelihood, all that she Mark. 12. the last.
had: but a little (...) of your abundance, your superfluity. And hereof, he
that will not spare a little to so good a work, must pardon me, if I leave him
where I find him, within the verge and compass of this just Reprehension,
charging him to be in the number of those, that will not be an healer of
Isreal's breaches.

I have done with the first of these Uses, which makes way to the latter. An
Use of Exhortation, wherein I should excite and exhort you, and all true
Israelites, even all the Lords people amongst us, that they would first desire,
secondly endeavor the healing of Isreal's breaches. But this I must defer till
another occasion.

ISREAL'S CURE. The third SERMON. March 16.
PSALM. 60. Verse. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof, for it shakes.
THe healing of Isreal's breaches, is a thing which every true Israelite should
desire and endeavor. This was the Conclusion which I insisted upon, the last
time I spoke in this place; prosecuting it both by way of Doctrine, and
Application. The former of these, I then dispatched; the latter I entered upon,
but left imperfect. Then insisting upon an Use of Reprehension, which I
intended only as a needle, to make way for, and draw in a thread after it. If
that needle seemed then sharp to any, pricking and smarting as it went, let not
them blame either it, or me. A Chrugion in searching a wound, if he put his
Patient to pain, it is besides his intention, who intends his Cure, and not
his smart; but he cannot help it, it will be so, and being so, it makes the
Cure the more hopeful, because the part is sensible: In which regard the
surgeon is not discouraged by it, nor yet sorry for it, though his Patient
be. And in this regard, I must confess, and say as the blessed Apostle
sometime to his Corinthians; Though I made you sorry, with a Letter (says he)
with a Sermon 2. Cor. 7. 8.
(say I) I do not repent. This sorrow (I trust) shall prove unto you, as theirs
to them, but temporary, (...), for a season, and shall in the end produce the
like effects; so as you shall have cause to acknowledge, what they found. That
you have received damage by us in nothing. In the hopes hereof, ver. 9.
I now come to that which I pincipally intended when I first took this Text in
hand; A word of Exhortation; which I shall direct generally, indefinitely, to
all true Israelites, even all the Use 2. Exhortation.
Lords people; exciting, and exhorting them, that they would 1. Desire, 2.
Endeavor
this Cure; the Healing of Isreal's breaches; the repairing and making up of
these breaches which are amongst us at the present in this, and the neighbor
Kingdom, whether Political Breaches, or Ecclesiastical Breaches; Breaches in
the State, or Breaches in the Church, how ever made, or by whomsoever, whether
by strangers, or Israelites; seek we the healing To desire the healing of
breaches amongst us.
of them. This desire we, this endeavor we.

First, Desire it: This does David here for that Kingdom, that State, that
Church, whereof he was the Head; and this do we for this Kingdom, this State,
this Church, whereof we are members. And that we may do it, Labor to be
affected with it. That we may seriously desire the Cure, labor to To that end,
be a^^^^^ed with them
be thoroughly affected with the Disease. So was David with Isreal's Breaches;
very sensible of them, and deeply affected with the apprehension of them. And
so have others of the Saints of God been in like cases.

First, with Breaches made amongst themselves, in, or upon the Church, or
State, where they lived. It is the word which Jeremie must say unto the Jews,
Jer. 24. Thou shall say this word unto them: Let mine eyes run down with tears
night and day, and let them not cease, for the virgin daughter of my people
Ier. 24. 17.
is broken with a very great Breach: What ever the false prophets said unto
them, making light of that Breach, that judgment threatened; promising them
that either it should not be, or if it were, yet it should be healed, and made
up well enough, yet ver. 15. ^
Jerimie, for his part, he lays it to his own eyes and heart; mourning over
it, being deeply affected with it, and wills all the rest of the Jews to do
the like.

Secondly, with Breaches made upon others; their brethren in other parts. The
divisions of Ruben were Iud. 5. 15, 16
great thoughts of heart to all the rest of the Tribes. The whole congregation
of Israel, even all the other Tribes, they were sorry and repented for
Benjamin, Iud, la. 15.
because of that great Breach made upon that tribe. And thus let us, all of us
be affected, with the breaches at present made upon this, and the neighbor
Kingdom. God has broken in upon both, breaking the one, and rending the other.
O let these breaches be to all of us, great thoughts of heart: Take we notice
of them, and be we deeply affected with them; which it is to be feared the
greatest part amongst us, as yet are nor. Histories tell us of Archimedes the
great Mathematicion, that when the City Syracuse was sacked, and plundered by
the Romans, the soldiers some of them breaking into the house, and study
where he then was, they found him so intent in drawing of lines and figures in
the dust, as that he took no notice either of the Cities loss, or his own
danger, until on of them disdaining that seeming disrespect, drew his sword,
and sheathed it in his bowels, running him through. And is it not thus (my
brethren) with some, with multitudes amongst us at this day? Whilst the
neighbor Kingdom is on fire already, and our own in danger; the fire of Gods
wrath flaming in the one, smoking in the other, fearful breaches made in
both, breaches in the state, and breaches in the Church, threatening every one
of us in our particulars, insomuch as we may say of our selves, as it is said
of seamen, we know not whether to reckon our selves amongst the living, or
dead, so eminent is our hazard, so eminent our danger; yet for all this they
are wholly taken up with drawing of lines in the dust, still wallowing, and
cumbling in dust, minding nothing but earth, burying themselves in the dust of
worldly thoughts and employment, seeking their own things, their own private
lucre and gain, the increasing of their estates, the building and raising of
their houses: In the mean time let heaven, and earth go together; let Church
and state sink or swim, or clash one aganst the other to the breaking, and
drowning of both, what care they? they regard it not, they are not affected
with it: Too plain an evidence against them, that they are but as woden legs
or arms, tied on to this mystical body, no true gemime, living members of it:
Which if they were, it could not be but that they should be sensible of the
wounds, and ruptures in it, the breaches thereof; so sensible of them, as to be
affected with them. And thus let every of us labor to be, that we may in the
first place, find our Hearts working toward the healing, and repairing of
these breaches. The heart must first work, before the hand will work. That we
may put an hand to the healing of these breaches, lay them to heart: That we
may both desire, and endeavor the Cure, let us be affected with the Disease.

Which that we may be, let us consider and look Look upon this disease 3. ways.
upon it these three ways, even as Physicians are wont to do upon the diseases
of their Patients. 1. In the Causes 2. In the Symptoms 3. In the Prognostics
of it.

In the Causes of it, breeding and feeding it. In the Symptoms or effects
attending upon it, going along with it. In the Prognostics or events portended
by it, and following upon it. All these three As David does here upon Isreal's
breaches.
ways does David here look upon Isreal's Disease, her Breaches here in the Text.

First, In the Cause of them, which he found to be Gods displeasure and anger
conceived against them, and broke forth upon them for their sins. O God, thou
have cast us off, thou have scattered us, thou have been displeased, viz. for
ous sins, which is the only cause of Gods displeasure: So you have it, Verse 1.

Secondly, In the Symptoms of it, which were fearful and terrible. The earth
trembled, it was broken, Riven and torn as it were with an Earthquake;
affected, and afflicted with frequent and dangerous Commotions and
distractions, Verse 2.

Thirdly, In the Prognostics of it. It shakes (says the Text) i. e.
presaging nothing but Ruin, and downfall; unless it be speedily underpropped,
and the Breaches thereof made up, and Healed. Thus did David look upon Isreal's
disease; and hereupon it was that he was so deeply affected with it, so
earnestly desiring the Cure of it. That we may be alike affected with the
Breaches of our Israel; look we also upon this Disease, these three ways.

First, In the causes of it; what is the true Cause of all these Breaches,
which do for the present lie In the causes of it: viz.
upon this, and the neighbor Kingdom? Surely it is no other, than that which
David here pitcheth upon, even the wrath and displeasure of God, conceived
against us for our sins. Other Causes may Gods wrath for.
be assigned as Isntrumental; but these are the chief and principal. In
Isreal's case, David was not ignorant that some Foreign enemies, Moabites,
Edomites, Philistines, together with some of his own Kingdom, Israelites, that
seditious party which cleaved to the House of Saul, had an hand in making, and
maintaining those Breaches: Yet see he rests not here, his thoughts rise
higher, to the first and Primary cause which sets them awork, and that he
finds to be Gods displeasure against that Kingdom for the sins thereof. In
this and the neighbor Kingdom, there have been and are many Instuments, which
have had hands in making, and maintaining there Breaches, even all those
Breachmakers which I named before; yet (alas) these are but Instruments, which
move as they are moved; the Chief and Principal cause is the just anger, and
Displeasure of God conceived against us for sin. And so let us conceive of it.
When the Plague was broke forth in the Camp of Israel, beginning to make a
Breach upon them, Moses presently tells Aaron, There is wrath gone out from the
Lord. Number. 16. 46


What ever plague or Judgment, in what kind soever it be, breaks in upon a
Nation, it is but a token and effect of wrath, even Divine wrath, the wrath of
God. It is the breath of the Lord which Isa. 30 last
kindles these Tophets. And kindling them blows them up. It is wrath which
both makes, and maintains these Breaches.

Wrath conceived for our sins; that is the fuel which this firetaketh hold
and feeds upon. Gods Our sins.
wrath takes hold upon man's sins. Where no wood is there the fire goes out:
were there no sin, there would Pro. 26. 20
be no wrath. For this is it that the wrath of God comes upon particular
persons, who being sinners bynature, Ephesians. 2. 3.
they are also by nature children of wrath; and Rom 9. 22
being sinners by Practie, they are made vessels of Romans 2. 5.
wrath; treasuring up unto themselves wrath, even that wrath which is, and
shall be revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of man. This wrath
Romans 1. 18
is, and shall be powered out upon the heads of men for their sins. Because of
these things (says the Apostle Ephe. 5. 6.
speaking of sinful lusts) comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. And as upon particular persons, so upon whole Kingdoms and
Nations: Never did the wrath of God break forth upon Israel, but when he was
provoked by their sins. The Breach first ever begun on their part in their
breaking Covenant with God: Still they break with God, in breaking his Laws,
before he brake in upon them by his judgments, which were ever sent only to
avenge the quarrel of his covenant, as the Lord himself tells them. And
surely (my Lev. 26 2. 5
Brethren) here is the first rise, and spring of all those Evils, which either
already are Broken in upon us, or else do threaten us: They are no other but
tokens, and effects of Gods displeasure against us for sin. And so conceive we
of all these Breaches, at which God himself, having been long provoked, seems
now to be breaking in upon us to aveng the quarrel of his Covenant, which we
have violated and and broken. Here are the Causes of this disease.

In the second place, look we upon it in the Symptoms 2. In the symptoms of
it, which are dreadful.
of it. Those we shall sinde very dreadful and terrible: Not unlike the the
Symptoms of an Earthquake, where the earth trembles and shakes and breaks,
being riuen or split with prodigious ruptures and openings, yawning and gaping,
even threatening to swallow up the inhabitants, as once it did Korah and his
Confederacy. Thus was it with Israel at this time when David made this
complaint Number. 16. ^2.
of the Breaches thereof. Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken
it; ver. 2. And is it not so in this, and the neighbor Kingdom at present?
does not the earth even seem to tremble under us? Has not the Lord even made
us a Cup of trembling (not unto others, as he says he would make Jerusalem;
Behold I will make Jerusalem a Zach. 12. 2.
cup of trembling unto all the people round about. Time was when it was so with
us, we were a cup of trembling to all the Nations round about; but) to our
selves: Having begun to drink of that cup, which Jerusalem was once made to
drink of, I, to drink Isa. 51. 17
off, even the cup of the Lords fury, the cup of trembling. Insomuch that we
may say in the words of the Psalmist, that Horror (I, and Rigor or shaking
too, two symptoms of a violent Ague) has taken hold Psalm. 119. 53. Frigus
Horror, Rigor, Fernel:
upon us; the earth under us seeming to tremble, as the bed does sometimes in
the Paroxisme of a cold fit under him that lies upon it. And how should it be
otherwise? when as the foundations thereof are moved or out of course, as the
Psalmist has it. Sure Psalm. 82. 5.
we are, (what ever it is athome) so it is in the neighbor Kingdom, where by
reason of that civil combu^^ion all things are out of order, many of the chief
rulers also, upon whom the Commonwealth there should rest, as a house does
upon the foundations, bearing a part in that tragical commotion. And amongst
our selves, how is the earth riven, and broken both church and commonwealth,
rent and torn by homebred divisions, and distractions? Sad symptimes, but
sadder Prognostics.

Which if we look upon in the third place, what 3. In the prognostics, which
are prodigious
can we conjecture and look for, unless God be pleased speedily to step in
un^o us, frustrating our fears, and our enemies hopes, by healing and making up
our breaches, but Confusion, desolation? It shakes, says the Psalmist here of
Israel. It shakes, it shakes may we say both of Church and State, in this and
the neighbor Kingdom. These unhappie breaches being in themselves, and
oft-times proving ominous presages, prodigious forerunners of Ruin and
Destruction. But of this (it may be) I shall have occasion to speak more fully
hereafter, in handling the second part of the Text. David's Reason, Isreal's
Danger.

And are these the Causes, these the Symptoms, these the Prognostics of the
disease? Oh what cause then have every of us to be affected, deeply affected
with it? laying to heart the breaches both of Church and State in this, and the
neighbor Kingdom; so laying them to heart, as that our hearts may work toward
the healing of them, and not our hearts only, but our hands also.

Desiring this Cure, let us (in the second place) 2. Endeavor this cure.
Endeavor it. Endeavor we the healing of Isreal's breaches, the repairing and
making up the Breaches which are amongst us, whether in Church, or State.

And what arguments should I use, to whet your Motives.
endeavors this way, to put you forwards upon this (I had almost said so
meritorious a) work? Those considerations which I named before as Reasons, may
also serve again for Motives, and that forcible ones.

First, Ye are all members of this Mystical, this Political, this
Ecclesiastical body; and being so, seek the Healing of the breaches thereof.
Which breaches

2. (In the second place) are unseemly in the Church. And

3. Dangerous both to Church, and State, being disadvantagious to both; great
obstructions exceedingly hindering the affairs and proceedings of both, as by
woeful experience we find it true. What is it that hinders the business both
of Church and State at present, that it sticks in the birth, and comes off
so slowly? Surely (next to our sins) our divisions. Not more disadvantagious to
them, then advantageous to their enemies, being an Inlet to enemies both
Foreign, and Domestic, to break in upon both.

To these three, let me briefly add three other; 3. Arguments moving David to
seek the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 8. 9.
and I will not straggle far to seek these sticks to make this fire withal.
You shall find them all lying close together in a little compass, in the two
last verses of that 122. Psalm. where David exciting both himself and others to
pray for the peace; seek the happiness of Jerusalem, that Peace might be within
her walls, and prosperity within her Palaces. He sets down a threefold
Motive or inducement, putting him on to that duty. This he did for his own
sake, this he did for his Brethrens sake, this he did for Religions sake. The
two former of these, you have v. 8. the one of them expressed, the other
insinuated and implied. For my brethren and Companions sake, I will now say,
Peace be within thee, i. e. not only for my own sake; so some happily would
have been ready to construe it, that David in being so zealous for the good,
and happiness of Jerusalem, had an eye only to himself, for the establishing
of his Kingdom, and settling the Crown upon his own head, and the head of his
Posterity. To clear himself from this imputation, and take off this suspicion;
David here by a Prolepsis, by way of anticipation or prevention, he sets down
the cause which moved him to it. It was not only his own Cause (though he
might herein have, and had an eye to himself also,) but the cause of his
brethren and Companions, i. e. of all the people of God, descended from the
same stock of Israel, professing the same Religion of God. The peace and
happiness of them all, being as it were bound up in the peace and happiness
of Jerusalem. If it went well with it, it should go the better with them; none
of them but having a share in Jerusalems peace and happiness. He did it for
his own sake, he did it for their sake.

And thirdly, for Religions sake, that you have verse last; Because of the
House of the Lord our God, i. e. for the Religion of God, the true and pure
worship and service of God, whereof God had then made Jerusalem, as it were the
Staple, putting his Name there. In this threefold respect does David seek the
peace and welfare of Jerusalem, and wills others to seek it; viz. that it
might be continued and increased, if enjoyed; repaired and restored, if
impaired and decayed. And upon this threefold ground, let every of us be
excited to seek the V^efull to us in this case.
public peace and welfare of this our Israel, the restoring and settling of
Peace, by healing the breaches Seek this Cure for our own sakes. Ier. 29 7.
thereof.

This do we (in the first place) for our own sakes. It is the Reason which the
Lord gives, why he would have the Jews in their Captivity to seek the Peace
of Babylon; Seek the Peace of the City whither I have caused you to be carried
away Captive; Pray unto the Lord for it, why? for in the peace thereof, ye
shall have peace. And for this reason should all of us be earnest in seeking
the peace of Jerusalem, the peace of the Church, the peace of the State wherein
we live. In the peace thereof, we shall have peace. On the other hand, if they
miscarry, none of us but will feel of it. It is Mordecaies message to Hester,
which he uses as an argument to put her on, and cause her to break through all
discouragements and fears, in seeking and endeavoring the rescue and
deliverance of Gods people, her Countrymen the Jews. Think not with thy self
(says he) that thou shall escape in the Kings house, more than ^^st. 4. 13
all the Jews. The Court, the Kings house should be no Sanctuary to her. No
more shall any of our Estates which we have, or the places where we live, or
any other outward privilege be unto us; and therefore think not of taking
Sanctuary in any of these, as our foolish carnal hearts are very apt and ready
to do, thereby eluding and bearing off the blow of Gods threatenings, so as they
take no place with us, to cause us to seek the averting and turning of them
away. No, if it go il with the Church, with the State, it cannot go well with
us. Think not to escape in our particulars. If a ship founder and sink at sea,
all the passengers which are in it, for the most part, perish with it. And in
that respect there is none but will be more solicirous and careful for the
ship it self, then for their own Cabins; for the stopping of the leakes in the
one, then the chinks in the other. And in this regard Christians should be more
solicirous for the public weal, then for their own private wealth: bonum
quo communius. The Commonwealth should be preferred before a man's own private
wealth, and much more the Church, the house of God 1 Timothy 3. 15
(as the Apostle calls it) before our own houses: so was the Psalmist (who
ever it was that penned that Psalm) affected toward Jerusalem; If I prefer not
Psa. 137. 6
Jerusalem before my chief joy; the head or top of my joy, as the Original
has it. Thus should we stand affected toward the Church of God, preferring
the welfare thereof before our own welfare, making it as the top of our joy, so
the top of our care, and desire and fear. If it go well with the Church
wherein we live, it will go the better with us; our private happiness is
bound up in the public peace and tranquillity thereof: In the peace thereof we
shall have peace. Seek and endeavor this cure for our own sakes.

Seek it (in the second place) for our brethrens 2. For our Brethrens sake.
sake; For my brethren and companions sake (says the Psalmist.) If it went
well with Jerusalem, not only David and his Family, but all the inhabitants in
Jerusalem, nay, all the people of God in the whole Land of Israel, or where
ever they were, they should fare the better for it.

And for this cause seek we the peace and welfare of this our Israel, the
Kingdom wherein we live, that the breaches thereof may be healed. Seek it for
our brethren and Companions sake; our Brethren at home, our Brethren abroad;
not only those of the same Nation in Foreign parts, but all others of the same
Religion with us, even all the true Churches of Christ throughout the World;
all which have a venture in this bottom, being greatly interested in the woe
or welfare of this Church. If we compare all the Protestant Churches, to a
Fleet or Navy of Ships (as fitly in many respects they may be.) In this Fleet,
the Church of England must needs be acknowledged to be the Admiral, having
long carried the Flag in the Maintop, and having been a security and Protection
to many other Churches (I wish I could have said to all) which have come under
her Lee. Now the Admiral miscarrying, oftentimes indangers the whole Fleet.
Certainly, all the Foreign Churches, how ever they have not a dependence upon
this Church for their being, (in that respect they being all independent, all
Sisters, Daughters of the same Father (Churches of God) I, and of the same
Mother too, daughters of that Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4. 26.
which is the Mother of us all: and in that like Zelephehads Number. 27.
daughters, joynt-heirs in their Fathers Inheritance, none having power over
other, nor priority before other;) yet in respect of their well being they
seem to have. If it go ill with this Church, so as that miscarry, there is
none of the Churches of Christ this day under Heaven, but are like to feel of
it; and as things now stand, to smart for it. Oh for our brethren and
Companions sake, let us seek the Peace of Jerusalem, the healing of the
breaches of this our Israel.

And this do we (in the third place) for Religions 3. For Religions sake.
sake, Because of the house of the Lord our God, says the Psalmist, i. e. the
Tabernacle and Temple, the Religion, worship and service of God, whereof
Jerusalem then was the seat. If Jerusalem went to wrack, what should become of
the Religion of God, the public exercise of it? God having chosen that to be
the place to put his name in. Let the same argument prevail with us to make us
seek the peace of this our Israel, by endeavoring the healing of the breaches
both of Church and State amongst us. This do we because of the house of the
Lord our God. The public exercise and profession of the true Religion of God
depends upon it, which cannot but suffer if the state suffer, if the Church
suffer, as now for the present it does, and is likely more to do (if it be not
speedily remedied) by these unhappy divisions and distractions amongst us. In
the midst of these, how shall we think that the Religion of God shall grow?
The Temple was 1 Kin. 6. 7.
built without the noise of Axe or hammer; when it was built, axes and hammers
were fatal to it, at lest to the beauty of it; They break down the carved
work thereof with axes and hammers (says Asaph, Psa. 74. 6.
by a prophetical eye and tongue, foreseeing and foretelling the destruction
of the Temple.) And what does the noise of axes and hammers amongst us at this
day presage; I mean those sharp and eager contentions, divisions,
distractions? Certainly, if these be not silenced and quieted they will
endanger, at least, our carved work, the beauty of our Church and Religion.
In the mean time we are sure they hinder the growth and progress of it: You
know what it was that hindered the building of Babel; and the same means will
hinder the building Genesis 11. 7.
of Jerusalem, the Church of God, the Religion of God, confusion, division.
Division of tongues and hearts. Oh, because of the house of the Lordour God,
the Religion of God professed amongst us, therefore seek we the peace of
Jerusalem, seek and endeavor the healing of the breaches of this our Israel.

By this time (me thinks) I feel your pulses begin to beat, and your hearts
to work, burning within you, so as you are ready to say; O but how shall the
breaches of this our Israel be healed? how shall this Q: How shall the Churches
breaches be healed.
Cure be effected? the cure of this Nation, this State, this Church; that is
the patient I confess I principally have in hand, and that is the Cure which I
principally aim at, though the other is so twisted in with it, as that I
cannot speak of the one, but I shall touch now and then upon the other. How
shall the Church amongst us be cured?

A. A useful Question. Take the resolution A. Means of cure.
of it from the Churches Physician, God himself, who promising to undertake
Isreal's cure, the healing of her breaches, those breaches which the Babilonians
had made upon her, he sets down the ratio medendi, tells her how, and in what
way that cure should be, viz. by revealing upon her abundance By abundance of
peace and truth.
of peace and truth. So you have it, Jer. 33. Behold, I will bring it health
and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal upon them the abundance of
peace and truth. Behold, the way and means whereby a Nation, a Church that is
broken, may be perfectly healed and cured, viz. by Revealing upon it, and
establishing in it abundance of Peace and Truth. In which sovereign
Restorative, we may take notice of two things; The Ingredients, Quantities.


The Ingredients, which are but two, but two principal ones, each of them of
great price and value; Peace the one, Truth the other: The Quantity of each,
Abundance; abundance of Peace and Truth. These two together, taken in this
Quantity, will make a perfect Cure upon any Nation, any Church; I, upon this
Church. Peace and Truth both together; the one without the other will not do
it. Peace without Truth, will make but a slight Cure, only skinning over the
wound for a time. Such a Cure it was that the false Prophets wrought upon
Israel, in healing her breaches. They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of
my people Ier. 6. 14.
slightly; saying Peace, peace. Nor unlike an unskilful Chyrurgion, who by
applying some healing plaster to an ulcerous sore, cilatrizeth the wound,
skinneth it over, when it is not sound at the bone. On the other hand, truth
without peace may make the Church sound at the bone, but it will not heal the
wounds of it; both together make a sovereign salve: Like that usual, but
useful one, of Minium or red-lead and oil mixed together, where the one
draws out corruption, and makes the part sound, the other skins and heals;
both together making a perfect Cure of any ordinary wound. Oh, then in the fear
of God, following the prescript and direction of this great Chyrurgeon, this
great Phisician; Let all of us seek and endeavor the furthering and effecting
of the Churches Cure in this way, by seeking after both these; Seek Peace,
seek Truth, seek Peace and Truth. Peace. Seek Seek after both these Peace
and Truth. 1 Pe. 3. 11 Pro. 23 23
Peace and ensue it, says St. Peter. Truth. Seek it, and buy it. Buy the
Truth, says the Wiseman. Fundamental Truths, Truths simply necessary at any
rate, what ever they cost. Other Truths be content to buy them, but not
over-buy them, give See the next Sermon.
not too much for them. It is but an ill bargain which some make, to buy some
truths with the loss of Peace; Seek the one, and seek the other, but seek
both together; Peace and Truth, that they Both together.
may be both revealed upon us, and established amongst us, and that in
abundance. In this abundance there is no danger, I mean in the abundance of
both these together. Of the one without the other, there may be. Abundance of
Peace without Truth, will breed a Lethargy; abundance of Truth without Peace,
may breed a Frenzy. The one will breed a senseless security, the harbenger
of Ruin and destruction. When they shall say Peace, peace, then sudden
destruction comes upon them. The other 1 Th. 5. 3.
by accident may breed a swelling Timpany of Spiritual pride, and
selfe-conceitednesse, then which (as hereafter happily I shall show you) there
is nothing more opposite to this Cure, the healing of the Churches Breaches:
You see then the way whereby this great and much desired Cure is to be effected.

But what shall we do for the furthering of this Quest.
Cure in this way?

It is a great question, and it will ask some time to answer it, more then I
have to spare at the present. In answer to it, my design and purpose is to
Answ. Directions for furthering this Cure in this way.
lay down some rules and directions which may be asefull to you this way, for
the furthering of this Cure, the healing of the breaches in this our Israel; to
which, the good Lord give a blessing, that they may conduce to the end for
which they are intended.

These Directions I intend to reduce to two Two sorts of them. 1. Restorative.
2. Preservative.
heads, laying down two sorts of them. Some restorative, others preservative.
The former directing to the curing and healing the Breaches already made: The
latter, to the preventing of the like Breaches for the time to come. I should
begin with the former, Restorative directions; which again The former
concerning 1. Our selves, 2. Others.
are of two sorts some of them concerning our selves; others of them concerning
others, viz. those which have been, or are the breach-makers amongst us,
showing how we are to order our selves toward them, and what we are to do to
them, or for them.

Of the former sort I should have given you three or four; Take one of them
for the present, (for I will not multiply particulars under any one head) A
Prepative.
which may serve as a fitting Preparative for all the test; and therefore I
shall put it in the first place.

Let us have faith to be healed. It is said of Paul; that Beholding the Criple
at Lystra, and perceiving Dir. 1.
that he had faith to be healed, he said unto him, stand Have Faith to be
healed. Act. 14. 9.
upright. This faith in him was a Passive miraculous says. But what have we to
do with this faith? Surely (Beloved) if we look at our Disease, the
dangerousnesse (I had almost said the desperateness) of it, we shall see that
we have need of a says, not much inferior unto this. Miraculous Cures, call
sor mira^ulous faith. Wonderful and extraordinary Cures, call sor a says
answerable. And such is the says that this Cure (to flesh and blood, carnal
reason so difficult) calls for at our hands, a more then ordinary faith, which
may break through all those clouds of apparent difficulties and seeming
impossibilities, laying hold upon the great Phisician, GOD himself, for the
healing of these breaches.

Why, but in what have we to support and bear Quest.
up our faith, in apprehending, in beleeiving this? The hand of faith is like
Moses his hands, which he Ex. 17. 12.
held up in Isreal's cause against A maleck, ready to flag and fall down, if it
be not supported. Now what supporters shall we have for this faith?

Instead of many, make use of two; two supporters which may be to our faith in
this case; as Aaron Answ.
Faiths supporters in this case, two.
and Hur, were to Moses in that, to uphold both the hand and head of it, to
make it steady. The one is the Power of God, the other his Promise.

1. The Power of God; this he can do. The disease indeed is dangerous, and Cure
difficult, but not The powor of God
exceeding the skill of this great Phifician, who can put life into a dying,
nay a dead body. He that said unto those dry bones, live; and to Lazarus after
Eze. 37. 4. Ioh. 11. 43
his four days burial, Come forth: He can much more put life again into this
our languishing dying State, and Church. He can do it. True: this we doubt not
of; I, but the question is touching his Will.

2. For that (in the second place) take a promise, His Promise.
which if we shall yet but perform the condition, it may give us at least
comfortable hopes, (should I say assurance, it would bear me out) that God will
make it good to us. And me thinks there are rays and beams of comfort shining
in, and streaming from the face of that promise, in as much as God has in part
already wrought for us, and amongst us that work, which there he calls for
from us: You have it 2 Chr. 7. 14. If my people which are called by my name (or
upon whom my Name is called) shall 2 Chr. 7. 14.
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn srom their wicked
ways; then will I hear srom Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal
their Land. The former part hereof, (blessed be God) it has been in measure
already done; as by the Representative body of the Kingdom, the heads of our
Tribes; so by a considerable number of others of all sorts, even all the Lords
people amongst us, whose hearts the Lord has touched, and stirred up to stand
in these breaches: They have endeavored to humble themselves, and pray, and
seek the face of God; this they have done privately, and this they have done
publicly, upon those solemn days of Public humiliation, set apart by
Authority to that purpose; for which I hope this Nation shall have cause to
bless the God of Heaven for ever. Oh! that the second part were but now
performed; that we were all of us, from the highest to the lowest, turned from
our wicked ways; that we had but given a Bill of divorce to all those
wrath-provoking sins, which cry for vengeance against us; then might we with
confidence set faith a work, to apply and lay hold upon that promise, That God
will hear in Heaven, and forgive cur sin, and heal our Land. In the hopes
whereof, yet raise we up our drooping spirits, not suffering our hearts to dye
within us, as Nabals once did, when he heard what David's intention was 1 Samuel
25. 37.
in coming against him. Let us rather stir up our selves to act Ahigals part,
to interpose our selves, using all the ways and means which God shall direct
verse. 18.
us to, for the appeasing of his wrath, for the procuring of his favor; that
through this his power and goodness, the breaches of our Israel may be so
healed, and his face may so shine upon us, that we Psa. 80. 3.
may be saved. For other Directions, I must defer them till another occasion.

ISREAL'S CURE. The fourth SERMON. March 23.
PSALM. 60. Ver. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof.
THe healing of Isreal's breaches, is a Cure which every true Israelite should
earnestly desire, and seriously endeavor. This is the maine conclusion which
my eye was upon, when I first took this Text in hand. Some time I have spent
upon it already, prosecuting it both by way of Doctrine, and Application. The
latter of these I directed two waves: By way of Reprehension, Exhortation. With
the first of these we have done, and have made some way into the latter;
Exciting and stirring up all sorts of Persons, to the desire, and endeavor of
this blessed Cure; the healing of the breaches amongst us, in this, and the
neighbor Kingdom, whether in Church or State. To set on this Exhortation, I
made use of some Arguments and Motives, tending and serving to set an edge,
both upon your desires, and endeavors; that both your hearts and hands might
work this way. Having laid this foundation, I came to build upon it. For your
direstion, showing you

First, Wherein this Cure consists, and how it must be effected; specially
the Cure of the Church, which is properly my Patient at present, viz. by
Revealing unto it, and upon it abundance of peace and truth.

Secondly, What you are to do for the furthering of this Cure in this way. This
latter I entered upon the last day, and but entered; then only chaulking out the
way wherein I intended to walk; which is to lay you down some Rules and
directions, which may be useful unto you in this way. Those I ranged into two
Ranks, dividing them into two sorts; some Restorative, others Preservative. The
former directing to the making up of Breaches already made; the other, to the
preventing of Breaches for the time to come. We have begun to bring up the
former Rank. Restorative directions, which again are of two sorts; Some of them
concerning our selves; others of them, concerning others, viz. those which are,
or have been breachmakers amongst us, teaching us how to demean, and order our
selver toward them. Of the former of these, I have given you one, and but one,
which I laid down as a fiting Preparative to make way for all the rest. Which is

That we should have faith to be healed. It is said Dir. 1. Have faith to be
healed.
of our blessed Savior, that when he came into his own Country (Patriam
nutrition is, the place where for a time he was educated and brought up,
Nazareth;) He did not many mighty works there (says St. Mat. 13. last.
Matthew;) He could not do them (says St. Mark.) Why? Because of their
unbelief. Unbelief does Mar. 6. 5.
after a sort, break the arm, and evacuate the power of the omnipotent God,
putting a kind of impossibility upon things, otherwise possible: Whereas on
the other hand, faith puts a possibility upon things in appearance, to flesh
and blood impossible. If thou can believe (says our Savior Mar. 9. 23
to the father of the Demoniack) all things are possible to him that believes.
Let not us then through our unbelief, either weaken the power, or make void
the promise of God. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established
(says the Lord to Isa. 79.
Ahaz and his people in a like case.) And if we will not believe, surely we
shall not be healed. And therefore stir we up our hearts to Believing; Even
against hope, believing in hope, as it is said of the Father To. 4. 18.
of the faithful; Still resting upon the power and mercy of God, for the
pardoning of our sins, and healing of our Land, which he is easily able to do;
only believe. Said I not unto thee (says our Savior to Martha, objecting unto
him the impossibility of her Brother Lazarus his Resurrection, after his four
days burial.) Said I not unto John 11. 40.
thee (says he) that if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of
God?

Q. But will faith alone do it?

A. Not so; we know what St. James tells us concerning a fruitless faith,
Faith without works, Iam. 2. 20. 2^.
is dead. So may I say in this case; It is not a mere passive faith that will
do us any good, unless it be accompanied with active, and effectual
endeavors, it will be of no avail. What then shall we do to further this
Cure, the healing of these breaches?

Why (in the second place) Pray them whole. The prayer of faith avails much
(says St. James) I, 2. la. 5. 15, 16.
even in the curing of sicknesses; The prayer of faith shall save the sick. A
sick person (says he,) a sick Pray the breaches whole. Verse. 16.
State, a sick Church (say I.) No means more sovereign then this. It must needs
be so; Prayer being an express sent from Heaven to the great Phisician. Not
unlike those friends which the Centurion sent as Messengers to our Savior, to
desire Luke 7. 6. 7.
him to give the word for his servants Cure; Say but the word, and my servant
shall be healed: Make we use of this Messenger. Earth will not afford it, send
to Heaven for a Cure; Dispatch we our prayers and tears to that great Phisician
upon this errand; that He would but speak the word, and we shall be healed. In
this way we may have hopes of speeding, having a promise for it. If my people 2
Chr. 7. 14.
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, etc. I will hear in
Heaven, and will heal their Land. Be we incessant then, in sending out these
Ioyn fast^ng to our Prayers.
Messengers day after day; never resting until God has been pleased to make
a gracious return, by granting what we sue for.

And that our Prayers may be the more prevalent; join fasting to them. Fasting
is to Prayer, as feathers to the Arrow; which (though in themselves be light
matter, yet (being glued or fastened to the shaft, they make it both fly far,
and strike sure. Oh such use is fasting unto Prayer; In it self little worth.
Bodily exercise profits little; 1 Timothy 4. 8.
But being joined unto Prayer, it makes it the more prevalent, and that
because the more servent. And therefore add we this to the other, as being of
special use in this case. It is the Phisicians rule, and it is a good one, did
we but know how to make a ^ight use of it. Such diseases as will Morbi qui
medianon curantur, medecina curentur. Fernel.
not be cured by fasting, cure by Physic. Make we experiment of this exercise,
and try what it will do for the curing of the diseases both in Church and
State. I remember what our Savior tells his Disciples concerning the worst
kind of Devils; They go not out (says he) but by Prayer and fasting. Math.
17. ^1.
Now surely, that which will cast out Devils, will lay them, bind them,
restrain them. But what speak I of binding of Devils, when as by this means God
yields himself to be bound? It was no less then a sacred violence, that made
God say unto Moses, Let me alone. It is the Lords speech unto Exodus 32. 10.
Job (I remember) concerning the Leviathan. will he make supplications unto
thee? will he speak soft Job 41. 3.
words unto thee? That which the Creature disdaineth to do; Behold, the
Creator stoopeth to do! Such force and prevailencie is there in humane
supplications, being prayers of faith, that they do even draw supplications
from the Almighty; after a sort binding his hands, the hands of his revenging
justice that he cannot break in upon a nation, a people, as otherwise he would
do. This course then take we for the appeasing of Gods wrath already broke
forth upon us, and consequently for the repavring and Healing of these
Breaches: Pray them whole. But of this directon, I shall have occasion to speak
again in the next Point, viz. Isreal's Phisician, to whom we are to repair for
a Cure; and that (as by other ways, so) by prayer.) Pray them whole.

But God hears not finners; so the Blind man upon whom our Savior had
wrought that great Ioh. 9. 30.
miracle, and Cure, told the Jews; But if any man be a worshipper of God, and
does his will, (says he) him he hears. And therefore

(In the third place) that our prayers may take place, and prove avaylable, not
only for our selves, Dir. 3. Make up our own breaches, getting our own sins
healed.
but for others, for the State, the Church, let it be our care, and our first
care every of us to get our own sins removed, and taken out of the way. These
(as I have already showen you) they are the great Breachmakers, and the first
Breachmakers, first making a Breach in heaven; making a Breach, and separation
betwixt God and us: (Your iniquities Isa. 59. 2.
have separated betwixt you and your God.) Provoking God to break in upon us by
his judgments, as upon our persons and families, so upon the places where we
live; sometimes making public Breaches upon States, and Kingdoms for the sins
of some particular persons, as upon the whole Houst of Israel for the sin of
one Achan. That we may be Joshua 7.
Healers then, all of us in our places, furthering this blessed Cure, the
healing of breaches abroad; let it be our first care to make up the breaches at
home, our own Breaches. Luke 4. 23. Our Savior tells the Jews what they were
ready to object unto him, Phisician heal thy self. In this case it must be
so; Luke 4. 23.
they which would have any hand, so as to lend any effectual endeavors to the
healing of Public breaches; they must first practice at home inprivate,
practice upon themselves, upon their own hearts and lives, to get the breaches
of both healed by Repentance and Reformation. Repentance for evils past,
Reformation for the time to come. Without this our Prayers, will be to little
to no purpose; mark the connection of these two together, in the place
forenamed. If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face,
and turn from 2 Chr. 7. 14.
their wicked ways; then I will hear from heaven, and forgive their sin, and
heal their Land. The one without the other, is but lost labor, all our
bumilation, and supplication, without Reformation will be of no avail. And
therefore set we upon this course, and this work, all of us beginning this so
much desired, Public Reformation at home, in private: every one sweeping
before his own door, which is the readiest way to make the street clean.

And as all ought to do it, so specially Public persons, Specially public
persons.
Magistrates, Rulers, who are by their office Phisicians, healers. Church and
State (if sick) they are their Patients, the Breaches and Ruins of both being
under their hands. A man shall take hold of his Brother (says the Prophet
Esaias;) saying, Isa. 3 6. 7.
Be thou our Ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand, viz. for the healing,
repairing of it. And in that day he shall swear (so he goes on) saying, I
will not be an healer, etc. Make me not a Ruler of the people. A Ruler and an
healer then are both one; this Office and charge lying upon them after a
special manner. Now that they may have success in this Cure, let them first
be Phisicians to themselves. Heal themselves, make up their own Breaches, by
getting their own sins taken away. The sins of Publik persons, they have often
a dangerous influence upon the Public State both of Whose sins have a
dangerous influence upon the Public State.
Church and Commonwealth. Not unlike a prodigious Comet, or Blazing-star,
which has for the most part a malign and dangerous aspect and influence upon
the Kingdoms, and Countries over which it is. It is a good note of Scultetus
his upon that passage in the 51. Psalm. where David makes this his suit, that
God would build up the Walls of Psa. 5. 18.
Jerusalem. Build them (says he,) why what breach was there in those Walls,
that David should put up such a request? Yes (faith he) David himself had made
a Breach in them; and that by his sins, those sins which he there confesses,
his Adultry, Murder; Two murdering Pieces which had made a Battery upon, and a
breach in those Walls, the Walls of Gods gracious Protection. And hereof David
was sensible. Sensit se quasi denudasse Jerusalem. He apprehended that he had
even laid flat the Walls of Jerusalem, and laid the City naked, exposing it,
as much as in him lay, to ruin and desolation. Of such dangerous consequence
are the sins of Public persons, of Rulers, specially of chief Rulers.
Principes peccantes denudant muros Jerusalem, (so my Author goes on.) Princes,
(and we may say the same of the Priests too) if they transgress; by their sins
they make a Battery upon the Walls of Jerusalem, lay the Church and State where
they live, naked. This did Aaron to the Israelites, by consenting and giving
way to that Idolatry of theirs, he made them naked (says the Text) in the
midst of their enemies, i. e. he stripped them naked of the gracious Protection
of God, Exodus 32. 25.
which was their best covering, and so exposed them to the incursions of their
enemies. Such a dangerous influence have the sins of Public persons upon the
States, Churches, Kingdoms wherein they live, oft-times making dreadful
breaches in them; as David's sin in numbering the people, made that great breach
upon Israel, at which the Destroying-Angel 2 Sa. 24. 15.
brake in, smiting no less then seventy thousand men in less then three days
space. And as making, so maintaining them. And therefore let all such, that they
may be in truth what they are by Office, healers, labor first to get their own
breaches healed, their own sins taken away, and that (as I said) by Repentance
and Reformation; Reforming themselves, their Families, and Charges as much as
may be; that so the Breaches being made up at home, they may with more success
undertake this great Cure, the healing of Isreal's breaches.

Take a fourth, and a last; for I shall not give Dir. 4. Every one cast in
something into these breaches.
you many particulars under any one head. That we may further the healing* and
making up of these breaches, let every of us cast in something into them. This
(you know) is the readiest way to make up a Breach in a wall, by casting earth
and Rubish into it, every one his Basket. And like course take we to make up
the Breaches in the walls of our Jerusalem; every of us cast something into
them. So did they into the Churches Treasury, Luke 22. Every one Luke 22. 1.
cast in something according to ability. Do we the like into the Churches
Breaches; Every one cast in something. But what shall we cast in? I might
answer; Cast in our Prayers, cast in our sins in the ways already prescribed.
To these I might add, Be ready to cast in our Estates, at least a
proportionable part of them, if God shall call for it. But these I have touched
upon already. Besides these, there is yet one thing more, which every of us
have, (most of us too much of it.) And could we be but persuaded to cast it in,
I should make no question, but it would undoubtedly fill up all these Breaches,
at least in the Church; And what is that?

Why, Every man cast in himself; So did that Every man himseie, viz. His own
will.
noble Roman whom I mentioned before, Marcus Curtius for his Country, for the
making up of that Breach in the Marketplace at Rome, he cast in himself. Oh,
that every of us, and all others professing the same Religion with us, would
but be contented to do the like for the Church of God, every one to cast
himself into the breaches of it; I mean that which is most properly called
himself, viz. His own will; A thing which multitudes are so wedded to, and
make so much of, as if it were indeed their own self. Whence it is sometimes
so called; If any man will come after me, let him deny Luke 9. 23.
himself, i. e. his own will. And this (self) let every of us, who desire
the Healing, and filling up of these Breaches, cast into them, and that by
learning and taking out this great lesson of self-denial. What is it that
has made these Breaches, and having made them maintains them? Why, surely
(Self) the greatest breach-maker, and therefore ought to be sacrificed. 2 Pe.
2. 10
even that which is the greatest breach-maker in the world (self.) This it is
that makes Breaches in Families, Breaches in Societies, in Towns, Cities,
States, Churches, Kingdoms; in all, the great Breach-maker is self. That men
are selfe-willed and selfe-conceited: Presumptuous are they, and selfe-willed,
(says Saint Peter, speaking of the false Teachers and their followers,) (...)
standing in their own conceits (as the Geneva renders it.) Certainly (my
Brethren) there neither is, nor ever yet was Breach in the Church, but this
(self) had an hand in it. And therefore for the Churches peace let every of us
be content to sacrifice this universal breach-maker. Even as the men of Abel,
following the counsel of that wise woman dealt with that rebellious
Arch-breach-maker, Sheba the son of Bichri, who sounding the trumpet of
rebellion made a great breach, and rent thein kingdom of Israel, they cast his
head over the walls, and so made up the breach. 2 Sa. 20. 21.
Thus deal we with this breach-maker (self) our own wills, our own conceits;
be not so much wedded to them, as that we will rather hazard the Churches peace
and being, then part with them: but labor for humble hearts and yielding
spirits, that we may be contented as to do much, and suffer much, so to part
with much for Peace. Peace is a Pearl; the Latin word (Vnio) signifies both.
Let not any of us trample this Pearl under-foot, so far undervaluing it, as to
think every little too much to give for it, preferring every seeming truth
before it. It is a mistake (I said it the last day, and I say it again) if any
shall think that some truths may not be overbought, viz. when they are bought
with the loss of Peace. Of these ill bargains the Church of God in all ages
has had too great experience. And in other cases we will not spare to censure
and condemn this folly. We will not buy gold too dear (we say.) And we would
account him but a very simple man (says a late reverend Divine of our own,)
who would Doctor Staughtons Sermon upon 1^2. Psalm. verse 6.
set his house on fire to roste his egg: Such, and no better is the wisdom of
those, who shall contend so hotly and eagerly for some truths, being not of the
foundation, nor near it; as that in the mean time they regard not the setting
all on fire, rather then part with them. Certainly, they which will not (in a
good sense) be content to part with some truths, (and those, it may be, useful
ones) for peace; they are not worthy of it, nor yet must ever look to enjoy it
upon earth.

Let it not be mistaken; loath I am that any, in the darkness either of
ignorance or prejudice, should Ho^ truth may, and ^ught to be parted with for
Peace.
stumble at this truth of parting with truth. Part with it; How? Not by
abjuring; denying any Truth against conscience. This a man may not do upon any
terms; Peace of conscience must be maintained what ever it cost: But, by not
avowing, not openly contending and contesting for it, whether by Profession or
Practice. And for this I think we shall need no other warrant then that rule
and direction of the Apostle, Romans 14. Have thou faith? have it to To. 14. 22.
thy self. Faith, i. e. acknowledge, and assurance either of the truth or
lawfulness of something indifferent, which thou can not either profess or
practice, without the offense and scandal of thy weak Brother, to the
breaking of Peace. In this case (says the Apostle) have this says to thy
self; enjoy thine own knowledge and persuasion, but keep it to thy self,
not letting it break forth to the scandal of others, much less to the
indangering of the Churches Peace, which ought to be of more price and value to
us then many of these Truths. It is the speech of Elkanah to Hannah his wife,
when she was so inordinately desirous of a Son that nothing else could give her
content; Am not I better to thee then ten Sons, 1 Sa. 1. 8.
i. e. then many children. The like may the Church of God say unto us, Am not I
better unto you then many children? then many fruits and conceptions of your
own brains; I, though issues of truth.

This I speak, not that I would have Truth, any truth (which I acknowledge to
be a part of the image of God) slighted and undervalued. Goldsmiths will not
cast away the dust and filings of their gold and silver; No more should
Christians cast away such ends and shreads of truth as God either has, or
shall be pleased to reveal unto them. Only my aim is that I would have a
higher price set upon Peace then (for the most part) it is bought and sold at.
This, I am Peace purchased with the blood of Christ.
sure (what ever may be said for some truths, truths of the new Covenant, for
of them only it can be said) was a piece of that great purchase, purchased by
the blood of Christ. He is our peace (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 2. 14.
i. e. the Author of it, our Peacemaker, making peace, as it follows verse.
15. And this he has verse. 15.
done by, and through the blood of Christ, (as the same Apostle has it) there
purchasing peace, and Col. 1. 20.
not only peace with God, but peace with and amongst men. Of that peace the
Apostle speaks in that 2 to the Ephesians, Peace betixt Jews and Gentiles,
making them one. To this end Christ came down from Heaven to earth, to make
peace, (as in heaven, so) upon earth. Glory be to God on high, on earth Luke 2.
14.
peace, (so sings that Quire of Angels at the birth of our Savior.) This he
purchased, and having purchased it, he left it, bequeathed it; Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you, (says he to his Disciples, when he was to
take his last farewell Joh. 14. 27
of the world and them.) And let not us, any of us slight this Legacy; we will
not do so by th Legacy of a dying friend. If it be a Ring, an emblem of union
and concord, we will wear it for his sake. And shall we not do the like by the
Legacy of a dying Savior, make much of it, make use of it, and be content to
part with something for it, for the keeping of it, if enjoyed, for the recovery
of it, if lost? By this means shall we much further this blessed Cure, the
filling and making up of the breaches in this our Israel, by casting every one
something into them, every one himself. I have done with the directions which
merely concern our selves, which if they may but be taken, and kept, not
naufeated and cast up again, as tuely stomachs are wont to deal with their
distastefull Potions; I doubt not, but that they will have a kindly working,
conducing much toward the cure desired, and intended.

Pass we in the second place to such directions as may concern others, viz.
those which are or have 2. Directions concerning breachmakers, what to do them.
been breach-makers amongst us; concern them not as agents, but as patients;
teaching us how we are to order and demean our selves toward them, what we are
to do to them, for them, or against them, for the effecting of this Cure.

These Breach-makers (as I have alreay shown you) the Isntrumental causes of
the present breaches in this our Israel, they are of two sorts. Either
Strangers, or Israelites. Strangers, professed enemies to our Religion; or
Israelites, such as professing the same Religion with us for substance, have
been through weakness seduced, and drawn aside, either from the ways of
Truth, or Peace. Now what shall be done to the one, and to the other?

For answer hereunto, I shall have recourse again to the Type in the Text;
observing what David's course with the breach-makers in his Kingdom.
course David here pitcheth upon, and intends to run with both these, which
were the causes of those Breaches in tha this Kingdom. Strangers, Israelites,
he would deal with both, but after a different manner; subduing the one,
reducing the other. So you shall find it in the 6, 7, 8, verses of the Psalm.
As for those which were enemies to his Kingdom, Moabites, Edomites, etc. He
would subdue them, and bring them under by force. So much is intended in those
two emphaticall expressions, verse* 8. Moab is my wash pot, over Edom will I
cast out my shoe. Each importing a servile and contumelious subjection, (as
Expositers note upon it.) Moab should Calvin. Mollerus. Somnius.
be his wash pot, a vessel to wash his feet in, according to the custom of
those Eastern Countries, then and now, i. e. the Moabites; they being
conquered, should be employed about base services, and servile offices. Over
Edom he would cast out his shoe, i. e. pass through it as a Conqueror,
trampling upon it, treading down the Inhabitants under foot, handling them in a
disgraceful and contumelious way, as they had done the people of God before.
Thus would he deal with the professed enemies of his Kingdom. As for his own
people, that seditious party of Israelites which cleaved to the house of Saul,
he would use means to reduce them, to bring them under his Government. I will
divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth; so you have it verse 6. i.
e. I will possess my self of them, and rule over them; not as a Conqueror,
and Slaves, but as a Lord over subjects, as a Father over Children, owing and
acknowledging them as mine. Gilead is mine, and Manasseth is mine, ver. 7. i.
e. they are my Inheritance, and shall be my people, my subjects. This was the
course which David intended to take with these Breach-makers, for the making up
of the Breaches in his Kingdom. And from him learn we what course is to be
taken with 1. Prosessed enemies, subdue them.
the Breach-makers amongst us, whether in this, or the neigh bour Kingdom.

1. For Strangers. Moabites, Edomites, professed enemies to our Religion, the
only way is to subdue them; and that by bringing under some, and keeping under
others. Those which have been, or are the disturbers and troublers of our
peace, whether in Church or State. The Malignant-party of Papists, and their
Adherents amongst us, which have showed themselves active in these
disturbances, the way is to bring them under, to cast the shoe over them,
putting a yoke upon their necks. Not that I intend, what I have no warrant for,
to excite and stir up any to the unchristian exercises of savage cruelty, or
yet rigor, so to repay them in their own coin, as to return cruelty, for
cruelty. Yet in the mean time, I must subscribe to the equity of that divine
Law, the Law of Retaliation, Levit. 24. As a man has done, so shall it be done
unto him again, Breach for breach, etc. Lev. 24. 19, 20.
Those which have made a Breach upon us, to make a breach upon them, were no
injustice. It is Gods own order to Moses; Vex the Midianites Nu. 25. 16
and smite them, for they vex you with their wiles. And it is Joshuahs speech
to Achan; why have thou troubled us, the Lord shall trouble thee this Josh. 7.
25
day. Thus to deal with the Midianites, the Achans, who ever they have been,
which have vexed and troubled our Israel, to vex them, to smite them, were but
sustice. But this I leave to the wisdom of Superiors, to our Moses, and
Joshuahs, of whom I may say as David did of and to his Son Solomon in a like
case. They are wise, and know what they ought to do unto them. To them I
refer 1 Kin. 2. 9
this act of justice; and that as for the suppressing and bringing under of
some, so for the Repressing and keeping under of others; such as being of the
same disposition, acted and moved by the same principles, want nothing but the
opportunity, either for the cherishing and somenting of these, or else the
kindling and breeding of new distractions. Only for our selves, let us, all of
us remember that solemn Vow and Covenant which of late we have made and entered
into, for the joint defense of our Royal Sovereign, His Parliament, and
Kingdoms; Gods Religion, against all that shall rise up against them: And
remembering it, let us by all lawful ways and means, according to the several
ranks and stations wherein God has set us, be ready to perform it.

Pass we (in the second place) to the Breach-makers amongst our selves,
Israelites, our Brethren, 2. Seduced Brethren.
such as have been and are seduced, and drawn aside, either from the ways of
Truth or Peace, and that through weakness: Such I have now to deal with, not
presumptuous malicious opposites, to whom the Psalmist would have no mercy
extended. Be not merciful unto them which offend of malicious wickedness,
Psalm. 59. 5.
(so the old Translation reads it;) but such as err and stray through
infirmity. And for such, what shall we do to them, or for them? Quest.


To this I answer in the general; Seek to Reduce them, to heal them. That
which is lame, or Ans.
turned out of the way, let it be healed, Heb. 12. And Reduce them. Heb. 12.
this do we in as gentle and tender away as possibly may be; even as we would
deal with a bone out of joint. It is the Apostles one Metaphor; If any 13. With
gentleness.
man be overtaken with a fault, restore such a one: Gal. 6. 1.
(...), Put him in joint again. And this do (as it there follows) in the
spirit of meekness.

Q: But how shall this be effected? Ans. For What to be done to this end.
the answer, let me descend into particulars, showing you distinctly what every
one should do in this case 1. What Public persons are to do? 2. What private?


For the former; Public person are Magistrates, Ministers.


Begin with the former; Magistrates, Rulers, Directions for Magistars in this
case. Isa. 41. last.
who being by office (as Healers: so) Shepherds, (Cyrus my Shepherd; they
ought to have a care for the reducing and bringing home of straying wandering
sheep. And to this purpose, let me commend unto them a twofold Direction.

In the first place, let them take stumbling blocks 1. Take stumbiing blocks
out of the way.
out of the way, such as are so in truth; what ever it is, which being a just
ground, or obvious occasion of scandal, has either caused any to stray, or
else confirms them in their straying; so either making or maintaining these
breaches; for the reducing of the one, and healing of the other, this must be
removed. And this is properly the Magistrates work to do, or see done. Express
is that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 57. Where the Lord speaking to Darius and
Cyrus, (as Mr. Calvin and others interpret it) gives them this in charge; that
they should remove and take away all the Remoraes and stumbling blocks out of
the way of his people, even what ever might hinder their passage out of
Babylon, or return to Canaan. He (i. e. the Lord) shall say, cast ye up, cast
ye up, prepare the way, take up the Isa. 57. 14
stumbling block out of the way of my people. What ever it is that may keep any
of the Lords people in Babylon, or upon the Confines and Borders of Babylon;
keep them from coming out, or else make others to think of returning thither
again, it ought to be removed and taken out of the way. Such are all Relics,
Monuments, Shows, and apparances of Idolatry and Superstition. And all these
it is the Magistrates duty to see removed and taken away.

This being done, then (in the second place) Let 2. Set up a Standard for the
people. Isa. 62.
them set up a Standard; so the same Prophet prosecuring the same charge
elsewhere, he wills, that for the reducing of the people of God, and
gathering them into one body, they should erect, and list up a Standard for
them. Prepare the way, verse. 10.
etc. Gather off the stones (i. e. the stumbling stones) and lift up a standard
for, (or over) the people (so I read it according to the Original, not (of)
but (for) or (over) the people.) A Metaphor taken from Princes, who gather
their Subjects, or Commanders, (...) Super populos.
who gather their Soldiers into a Warlike posture and order, by setting up a
Standard which they may repair unto, and follow whether it shall be carried
before them. So you read of the Standard of the Camp of the Children of Judah,
which was carried in the Front of the Army. Such a Standard should the
Commanders of the Lords Number. 10. 14. viz. Christ in his ordinances.
Army, his Church, set up for his people. But what Standard? why, even that
(says Bullinger, writing upon that Text of the Prophet Esaias) which Simeon
speaks of in the 2. Luke; Behold this Child Luke 23. 34.
(says he, speaking of Christ) is set up for a sign; (...), a sign, an
Ensign, a Standard. Behold, the Standard of the people, which all the Lords
Commanders should labor to set up for them, even the same which Moses
typically erected in the Wilderness, the Brazen Serpent lift up on high, Number.
21. 9.
on a perch or pole, a lively representation of Christ lift up upon the
Cross, as our Savior himself (for I conceive the words to be his) expounds
it, 3. John. This is the Standard which Ioh. 3. 14
should be set up. And how should it be set up? Why by the Preaching of the
Gospel; (so the same Expositer prosecutes it.) Gods Ministers they are the
Lords Standard-bearers, whose office it is to carry this Standard before the
people, as the Priests under the Law did the Arc; and this they Deu. 10. 8.
31. 9.
are to do by the preaching of the Gospel. Set up Christ, by the preaching of
Christ. Hereby is this Standard set up, Christ being in the preaching of the
word, as it were lift up upon the Cross before the eyes of the people. So Paul
tells his Galathians, that Christ had been evidently set forth, and crucified
Gal. 3. 1.]
before their eyes, viz. in and by the preaching of the Gospel. By this means
is this Standard set up; and this is the best means for the gathering the
people into one body. Oh then let all in their places, specially the
Commanders in the Lords Army amongst us (to whom after a special manner it
belongs) as they desire the reducing of straying wandering souls, and the
uniting of all into one body, let them by all means endeavor to set up this
Standard, providing as much as in them lies for the liberty and free passage
of the Gospel, that this standard may be set up where it has not yet been
seen, that it be continued and displaied more and more where it is erected.

And here let not any think or fear that this will This is the only way of
gathering the people.
be a means to scatter the people (as some, no wel-willers to the Gospel) are
ready enough to do, who stick not to charge all our divisions upon the Gospel,
and the Preaching thereof; as if the clocking of the Hen, were the means to
sever and scatter the the Chickins. No, this is the only means of gathering
them. Oh Jerusalem, how often would I have Mat. 23. 37.
gathered thy children together, (says our Savior) viz. by the sending out of
Prophets and Apostels, and Ministers to them, to set up Christ in the Ministry
of the Word, as in other of his ordinances, to set him up, and that not only in
his Priestly, and Prophetical, but also in his Kingly office; not only as the
Savior and Teacher, but as the King and Ruler, and Lawgiver of his Church.
And here let me repair again to the Type. David here projecting and
propounding to himself the way and means of reducing his own subjects, and
bringing them to unity; amongst other, he pitcheth up this, that Judah should
be his Lawgiver. Judah is (or shall be) my Lawgiver, i. e. all his subjects
should be brought under one Head, one Governor, who verse. 7. Let Judah be the
Lawgiver.
should give them Laws according to which they should be ordered and governed,
which power and authority belonged to the Tribe of Judah, according to that
Prophecy of Jacob Genesis 49. to which Ge. 49. 10
the Psalmist here alludeth. No way, no means to bring the people unto unity,
to bring them into one body, but by bringing them under one head, one
Lawgiver, by whose Laws they may be regulated and governed. Now in the Church,
and in matters of Religion, this one Head is Christ, even that Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, as he is called Reve. 5. He Reve. 5. 5.
is the Lawgiver of his Church, and let him so be. This will be found one; I,
and the only means to breed an holy and Religious unity, to reduce and bring
home straying, wandering sheep, (for such, and only such they are that I now
have to deal with or speak for; sheep, not wolves, such as seek to make a prey
of the flock, whom I put in the former rank, reckoning them as enemies.) And so
consequently for the repairing and healing of these Breaches. It was the first
thing which David looked at, as giving to his Kingdom hopes of a Cure of these
breaches; but God had given a Banner, an Ensign to his people, setting David
over them as their head, verse. 4.

You see what Magistrates and Rulers the Lords Commanders amongst us ought to
do, or see done; and for this they shall have my prayers, as well as
directions, that they may do it.

But what shall we of the Ministry do? This is the next head which I should
have now fallen with, but time takes me off for the present. This with what
remains of this point, I see I must yet adjourn till another occasion.

ISREAL'S CURE. The fifth SERMON. April 6.
PSALM. 60. Ver. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof, etc.
THe healing of Isreal's breaches, is a Cure which every true Israelite should
seriously desire, and endeavor. Once more this useful conclusion comes to
hand, which I have already prosecuted by way of Doctrine and Application. I yet
stick in the latter of these, the latter part of it; wherein my design was to
lay you down some Rules and directions for the furthering of this desired Cure
in the Church of God amongst us. These directions we ranked into two sorts;
some whereof were restorative, others preservative. Of the former sort we found
some concerning our selves, others of them concerning others, viz. those which
have been and are Breach-makers amongst us, teaching us how to order our
selves toward them. These breach-makers (as you have heard) are either
strangers, or Israelites. Strangers, enemies to our Religion, or rather Gods
Religion professed amongst us; with these we have done. Israelites, some of our
brethren who through infirmity and weakness have been seduced and drawn aside,
either from the ways of truth or peace. Concerning them the question was; what
shall be done to them, or for them? This we answered generally, let them be
reduced, and brought home with all tenderness and gentleness. More
particularly, for full satisfaction, I entered upon a way of giving to every one
his portion. Showing first, what public persons are to do. Secondly, what
private. Public persons are either Magistrates or Ministers. The former of
these have had their directions, which the Lord teach them to make a good use
of. It remains now that we come to the latter, and so proceed to that which
remains.

2. What shall we of the Ministry do? For 2. Directions for ministers. Iere.
6. 14
answer, as briefly as I may. Gods Ministers, they are also by office healers.
They have healed the hurt of the Daughter of my people slightly, so the Lord
complains of the false Prophets. To heal was their office, that they did it
slightly was their error. And what shall they do that they may be healers in
truth, furthering this Cure, by reducing those which are gone astray, which is
a part of their office (they being also the Lords Shepherds) to seek straving
Eze. 34. v. 2, 7, 8. etc. Mat. 18. 12.
wandering sheep, and finding them to bring them home again. To this purpose,
let them make use of a threefold direction (the best that either my reading,
or experience will furnish me with.) Let them first be blameless in their
lives. Secondly, Painful in their Callings. Thirdly, Meek and wise in their
carriage. I will but touch upon each, having a respect to the Audience.

1. Blameless in their lives (...). This 1. Let them be blameless in their
lives 1 Timothy 3.
Paul requires from his Bishop or Pastor, for in that place they are both one.
A Bishop must be blameless. Blameless, viz. in life and conversation, walking
(as it is said of Zacharias the Priest, and his wife Elizabeth) (...): without
just reproof. 2.


This blamelesnesse of life and conversation, consists in three things. You
have them all together in that known place, 2 Tit. viz. in living Tit. 2. 13.
First, soberly. Secondly, righteously. Thirdly, godly. All which (as all
Christians, so) the Ministers of the Gospel ought to have a special regard
unto; to live Godly, that they may be Patterns of Piety, and Holiness; to live
righteously, that they may be patterns of Justice and Integrity; to live
soberly, that they may be patterns of Sobriety 1 Pet. 5. 3.
and Temperance. In all being Ensamples to the flock, (as Saint Peter has
it;) that so those which are weak, may not stumble at their lives; which being
scandalous, are great scandals, bringing an evil report upon the ways and
Ordinances of God.

We know what is said of Elies Sons; how that they by their scandalous lives
and courses, made men even to abhor the offering 1 Sa. 2. 17
of the Lord. And surely it cannot be denied, (I would not uncover it; if it
could be hid) but that the same cause amongst us has had the same effect; Many
being turned aside, and many others confirmed in their strayings, and that by
reason of the scandalous lives of some of the sons of Aaron. To help to make up
these Breaches, let all the Lords Priests, which serve at his Altar, have
Holiness to the Lord written (as in their Hearts* so) in Exodus 28. 36. 38.
their foreheads; That their lives, and conversations may be sober, Righteous,
Godly, every ways Blameless, then which, there will be found no means more
effectual for the reducing of those which are gone astray.

2. Being Blameless in their Lives, let them (in 2 Painful in their Callings.
the 2d place) be Painful in their Callings, Luke 2. 8.
watching over their flocks, Acts 20. 28.
Feeding them, Ib. verse 31.
Warning 2 Timothy 4. 5.
them, not turning over the oversight, and care of them unto others, which
without question has been, and is no small cause, or occasion of straying
unto many, and so of making, or increasing these Breaches. When Vzzah and Ahi^
and the rest of the Levites for their own ease, shifted off the Ark of God from
their own shoulders, (which should have been the supporters of it) and laid it
Number. 4. 11.
upon the Carts, the Ark it self was shaken, endangered, and a Breach thereby
made, as you may see, 2 Samuel 6. To remedy and prevent the like evils 2 Samuel 6.
v. 6. 8.
that might happen to the Religion and Church of God amongst us, let the Lords
Ministers take the Ark of God upon their own shoulders, putting not their hands
only, (as Vzzah there did) but their shoulders also, (as Vzzah should have
done) to the work, seriously intending the work of the Lord, Preaching the
Word, being instant in season, 2 Timothy 4. 2.
and out of season, (as St Paul. charge it upon his Timothy) Reproving,
Rebuking, Exhorting, and that with all long-suffering.

3. Let them be Meek and Wise in their Carriage: 3. Meck and wise in their
carriage.
I put these two together, therein following our Savior, who wills his
Apostles, whom he sends forth to preach the Gospel, that they should be Wise
as Serpents, simple as Doves. Let Mat. 10. 16.
the Ministers of Christ have an eye to both.

To Meekness; The servant of the Lord must not 2 Timothy 2. 24. Meek, bearing
with infirmities of weak Brethren.
strive, (says the Apostle) but be gentle unto all men, Patient, (...),
Bearing, forbearing. A Grace, and virtue which the Ministers of Christ had
never more need, or more exercise of, then at this day. In Meekness
instructing those which oppose themselves, (so the Apostle there goes on)
(...), i. e. (says Beza) (...), Men which are contrary minded, to whom the
Truth is not yet fully, and clearly revealed; Such Instruct with meekness.
This will be found the next way to reduce them; not to fly upon them with tart
and bitter invectives, spitting gall, and vinegar in thoir faces; nor yet
presently to fall upon ways of compulsion, making use of the Brachium
seculare, calling in the secular power, (which yet in some cases may be done,
though in the last place, as being the last remedy) but by Instructing them
with Meekness. Thus deals the good shepherd with his tender sheep; if it be
strayed from the fold, finding it, he does not presently set his Dog upon Luke
15. 5.
it to worrie it, but he lays it upon his shoulders, and so brings it home;
such bearing, forbearing, must the Ministers of Christ use in reducing, and
bringing home straying, wandering sheep, instructing them with Meekness,
waiting if per adventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledgement
of 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26
the Truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snares of the
Devil, (as it there follows.) Let them be Meek,

But Wise, I add this to the other, as being very Wise, not feeding their
weakness. I am. 3. 13.
requisite; Who so is awise man (says St James) etc. Let him show out of a
good conversation his works with Meekness of wisdom. Such a Meekness
becomes the Man of God, not the meekness of Pusillanimity, and weakness, but
the meekness of wisdom. A wise meekness, that so whilst he bears with the
weakness of others, he may not feed it, nourish it; not so bearing and
forbearing as that he should thereby, in stead of rectifying, and reducing,
rather confirm, and strengthen others in their deviations, and wanderings. A
Caution of great use, and I wish it may be accordingly regarded by all. It was
so by the blessed Apostle, who though he condescended to the weakness of some
Acts 16 3.
near converted ews in Circumcising Timothy, yielding to the use of that Rite,
not as a necessary Sacrament, but as an Indifferent Ceremony, (so Mr Calvin
conceives of it) using it adfovendam charitatem, non ad pietatis exercitium,
(they are his words) not as a Religious Exercise, an Ordinance, but as a means
to preserve Unity and Charity; yet afterward he would not do the like by
Titus, nor Gal. 2. 34.
yet yield that it should be done, and that because he would not, by betraying
Gods truth, and the Churches liberty, confirm and strengthen others in that
erroneous opinion, which they had of the necessity of that then Indifferent
Ceremony, as you may see it in the 2d Gal. Thus Paul was willing to yield to
the weak Brethren in what he might, but yet so, as that he would by no means
feed their weakness, by confirming them in their Iudaisme. Therefore was it
that he, who in other cases (Chameleon like) became (as himself says) All
things to all, To the Jews a Jew, to the Gentiles a Gentile, to the weak,
weak, that so By all means he 1 Cor. 9. v. 19, 20, 21, 22.
might gain some, yet when Peter was fallen into that unwarrantable Separation,
withdrawing and separating himself from the Gentiles, breaking off open, Gal.
2. 12.
and visible communion with them, and that because of the Jews, with whom he
desired to comply more then was fitting, this Paul could not, would not bear
with, or connive at, but thereupon breaks forth into an open Reprehension. When
he saw that they did not (...), that Peter and the rest, which were by his
example drawn into the like Dissimulation, they Halted, and did not walk with
an upright foot according to the Truth of the Gospel, he reproves him openly.
This did he. And this (I take) will be warrant sufficient to bear me out (as
in my practice in some other The use of the Lords Prayer A warrant for speaking
against Brownists, and whom meant thereby.
particulars, so) in what I have lately done, in speaking openly against the
new separation of those whom I taxed by the name of Brownists. A Term too well
known to the Church of God: so well, that (for my part) I cannot but wonder
that it should now seem to need any explanation. Yet for satisfaction to those
who otherwise happily might either take offense at it, or advantage by it,
(both which I desire equally to decline) I shall actum agere, do that again
which I then did. When I named the word, I explained whom I meant by it, viz.
Such as renounce all Communion with us; and with the Churches of God in this
Kingdom. I now add, such as do this upon this ground, because our Churches
(as they conceive, and doom them) are Antichristian Churches, our Ministers
Antichristian Ministers, our Worship Antichristian worship; neither true
Churches, nor true Ministers, nor true worship, all Antichristian. A charge
both harsh and heavy; In imposing whereof, little do they think what service
they do to that Antichrist, whom they Masters Balls Answer to Master Cans
Treatises, in the Answer to the Epistles.
pretend to fly from. It is a charge laid upon them by a late reverend,
Godly-learned Divine, and let them see how they can discharge it; for my part I
cannot. That They, though they do not in words maintain Antichrist, yet
really they do him more credit then his chief upholders. A charge as heavy
Brownists do more credit to Antichrist then his chief upholders.
as the former; But how shall it be made good against them? Why? even out of
this Charge of theirs, wherein they charge our Churches, and Ministers, and
worship to be Antichristian. For herein, what do they but confess and
acknowledge (which they cannot, I think will not deny) That in Antichristian
Churches (I will use the words of my Author) the entire Faith may be purely
professed, the Doctrine of salvation plentifully preached, the seals of the
Covenant for substance rightly administered; and by the blossing of God upon his
own means, Christian souls ordinarily converted, and nourished up unto life
eternal, which is much more then all the factors for Antichrist shall ever be
able to make good; And if true, nothing could be said more to the praise of
Antichristianisme. Thus far he: This was the error I then glaunced at, and (I
think) not without either cause, or warrant; It being an error of very great
dangerous consequence, tending most directly to the making of a Breach, and
therefore not to be connived or winked at, lest by our continued silence we
should seem to betray Gods Truth, his Churches Innocence, and confirm and
strengthen those in their error, whose weakness we are willing, as much as
may be, to bear with. And this all the Ministers of Christ ought to have a
special regard unto, and I pray God they may have it, that so whilst out of
Meekness they bear and forbear, which they ought to do, they may not through
Imprudence feed and nourish the weakness of any, which they ought not to do.

I have done with what belongs to Public persons, both Magistrates, and
Ministers. What shall Private person do in this Case? How shall they
Directions for Private persons.
order, and demean themselves toward those which are turned aside? To give
them their portion in a few words. Let them only reflect upon that 3d and last
Direction given to Ministers, and let them make use of it, of both parts of it,
viz. Let them carry themselves toward all such, First, with Meekness:
Secondly, with Wisdom.

1. With Meekness. It is S. Paul's own direction, 1. Walk in meekness.
which he not only propounds to, but presses upon his Ephesians. I beseech you
(says he) that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,
Ephesians. 4. 1, 2.
with all Lowliness, and Meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in love: Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace. It were to be wished, and it is to be endeavored, that there might be
a Unity in Judgment bet wixt all the Lords people, that they might be all of
one mind: But this is not to be looked for upon earth. In the mean time let
them endeavor to keep the Unity of the spirit, that they be all of one
Heart. And to that end let them walk with Lowliness and Meekness, bearing,
for bearing one another in Love, ready to perform all Christian offices to
their weak brethren, so endeavoring to win and overcome them by love.

2. Thus walking in Love and Meekness, let 2. In Wisdom.
them also walk in Wisdom. It is Paul's direction to his Colossians. Walk in
wisdom toward them which are without. He spoke it of Infidels and Heathens.
Col. 4. 5.
Amongst such we do not live; and yet we may walk amongst some which are
without: Such as either are not, nor ever were of us, or else such as are gone
out from us, in the way aforesaid; of whom I will not, I dare not say as S.
John does of those Antichristian Apostates, That They went out from us, because
they were not of us; 1 John 2. 19.
No. I hope of many of them (if there be many) both have been of us, and are
of us, true members of the same mystical Body, though severed in respect of
outward, visible Communion with us. (Peter was a good and an holy man, though
for a time he separated himself, (...), 2 Gal. 12.) And toward such walk in
wisdom, that we may neither do, nor receive hurt: Neither do hurt to them,
nor receive hurt from them: Do hurt to them by so complying with them, as that
we should confirm and strengthen them in their errors, or else receive hurt,
by drawing in any unwholesome breath from them, as Barnabas and many others did
from Peter, who by the prevalencie Gal 1. 12, 13.
of his example were carried away with the stream of that his unwarrantable
separation.

And thus I have as briefly as I could laid you down the first sort of
Directions, Restorative directions, tending to the Repayring and Healing of
Breaches already made.

The other sort are yet behind, preservative directions, tending to the
preventing of the like Breaches for the time to come. In these I will be
Preservative Directions.
brief, hasting as fast as I can to the Conclusion of this point, which has
(I confess) fled before me farther then at the first I made account of.

Physicians having recovered their Patients, they do not send them away
without some directions and Instructions for preventing of relapses. Thus dealt
our Blessed Savior with that Patient of his, that impotent person whom he had
restored to the use of his limbs; meeting him in the Temple he bids him, Go
thy way and sin no more, Joh. 5. 14.
lest a worse thing come unto thee. Following this course, having laid down a
Method for the Curing and Healing of these Breaches, let me briefly show you
(if ever God please to work a Cure upon us) what is to be done for the
preventing of Relapses in this kind, and so for the preserving of peace and
unity in the Church of God being once restored to it. And here, (as in the
former) I shall deal particularly, giving to every one his portion, dealing
first with Public persons, and amongst them with Magistrates, to whom I shall
For Magistrates.
here again commend only a twofold direction, each being an off-set from the
former directions which I propounded to them as Restoratives.

1. Having cleared the Churches way by taking the stumbling blocks out of it,
Let them keep it clear, and that by vindicating, and asserting (as Keep the
way clear from stumbling blocks, by asserting Christian liberty.
much as may be) that which we call Christian liberty, the liberty of
Conscience in the use of things indifferent; providing that that may not be
pressed and burdened with unnecessary burdens. To this purpose I shall only
propound to them a President, Not suffering Conscience to be pressed with
unnecessary Burdens. Acta. 15.
viz: that of the Apostles, 15 Acts. who having in that Council or Synod of
theirs disputed and debated the differences betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, at
length they agree upon it, what course to take for the settling, and keeping of
peace in the Churches: The Result of all with their Consultations you have in
the 28. and 29. Verses of that Verse. 28. 29.
Chapter. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burdens then these necessary things, viz: That ye abstain from meats
offered to Idols, etc. In which Determination of theirs there are three things
very considerable, first, the Injunctions which they impose upon the Churches
were viz: few, not many. Secondly, Necessary, though not in themselves, yet pro
tempore, for that time. Thirdly, they were Negative, which entrench less upon
Conscience then Affirmatives do. In all these I do not peremptorily prescribe
what Magistrates (those which have authority) ought to see done: I only
propound a President, which if followed, I conceive it will tend much to the
continuance, and settlement of the Churches peace. Sure I am; if burdens, and
unnecessarie burdens be imposed, whether directly upon the conscience, or
having reference unto conscience, either we must introduce, and set up that
Popish Idol, a blind obedience, (which some of late have cried up for the best
obedience) that so men may swallow down all without chewing; or else give
inevitable occasion unto scandal, and consequenttly unto Breaches.

2. (In the second place) having set up a standard for the people, let them
make it a Standard; 2. Having set up a Standard, let them make it a Standard.
by their authority enjoining, and requiring all in the public exercise of
Religion to observe the same rule and order, the same form of Public
worship, regulated (as near as may be) by the laws of Christ in his Word,
and so made conformable to that pattern, that standard: Not permitting Deuteronomy.
12. 8.
every one therein to use what weights, and measures they please, to do what
is right in their own Judge. laft cap. and Verse.
eyes (as it was in Israel when there was no King, and as it is amongst us at
this day in this unhappy Interregnum of the Church) which, if given way unto,
will prove a passing bell to the Churches peace where ever it is admitted. It
is noted 1 King. 7. 27. 30. 37.
of the ten Bases in the Temple which were made to bear and carry the ten
Lavers upon their wheels, They had all of them one casting, one measure, and
one size. Of such use is outward order to public Ordinances, a vehiculum
serving to bear and carry them super Rotis suis (as the original Prove. 25.
11. (...) Super Rotis suit Montan.
has that of the Wiseman. 25. Prove. 11. A word spoken upon his wheels, so our
margin reads it according to the Hebrew) upon the Wheels of meet and
convenient circumstances, as Time, Place, manner, etc. that so they may be the
more serviceable, and useful; And being so, it is most fit it should be
uniforme. But I must but touch upon things. This for Magistrates.

As briefly for Ministers, to whom also I shall Directions for Ministers.
commend but two directions.

First, Let them seriously intend the main work of their Ministry, therein
looking right forwards; 1. Let them look, and go right forwards. 1 Samuel 6. 12.
as it is said of the Philistines kine which drew the Arc to Bethshemesh, They
took the straight way, and went along the high way, and turned not aside, to
the right hand, nor to the left. Thus should the Lords Ministers do; In
Carrying the Ark of the Lord before his people, let them go right on, in the
Kings high way, (Gods way) not turning aside to the right hand or to the left,
not seeking their own things, their own ends, their own profit, credit,
popular applause, or the like, but let Phil. 2. ^1.
them both look, and go right forward, seeking the glory of God, and the
salvation of his peoples souls. Noe such way for them to preserve, and
maintain peace in the Church as this.

It is the song of the Angels at the birth of our Savior, Glory be to God in
the highest, on Earth Lu^e 2. 14.
peace, Good will toward men. O that all the Angels of the Churches would but
have a respect to the first, and last of these, seeking the Glory of God, and
expressing their Good will toward his people by seeking their salvation, then
no doubt but the second would fall in betwixt them, there would be Peace on
Earth, peace in the Church.

Secondly, Let them labor as much as may be for an holy unity and Agreement
amongst themselves: Labor for unity amongst themselves.
that they I may not be divided, not in Judgment, if it might be, however
not in Affection; that though they be not of one mind in all things, yet they
may be of one heart, I mean with those which desire to be found faithful,
following the Truth according to the measure of light vouchsafed; in this Case,
though there be some differences in Judgment (as some there will be) yet let
not these hinder their walking together in Love. A lesson which we may learn
even from those creatures which of all other are most quarrelsome. (Pardon the
homeliness of the similitude, the aptness shall make amends for it.) A pack
of Hounds in the field, in hunting they chop upon diverse trayles, and sents,
some of them traversing this way, others that, yet in as much as they all hunt*
the same game, and follow the same chase, how well do they agree, and accord
amongst themselves? From them (for there is no creature so mean, but man (who
was once their master) may now go to school to it) let the Ministers of
Christ learn a Christian harmony. As long as they are all followers of the
Truth, the same Truth, though with some difference about the finding it out,
yet let them follow the Truth in Love, by all means seeking after an holy
concord, and agreement betwixt themselves, which will be of great use in
preserving peace, and unity amongst the people. And to this end, Let them,

First, Reverence, and esteem highly of one another, (I mean so many as they
see painful and godly) Maintaining the credit ea^h of other.
not despising, not contemning them in respect of some differences in
Judgment, or disparitie in parts, Romans 14. 3.
and Gifts, but still upholding the esteem of them in their own hearts, and
laboring by all means to uphold and maintain their credits and reputes in the
estimation of others.

Secondly, Let them by all means avoid open Contests. If there be private
differences betwixt Avoiding Pulpit-jars, and Public contests.
them, let them not break forth to a public view, nor yet come into a
popular cognizance, by Pulpit-jars and Clashings; which, for my own part, as I
have ever desired to decline, so I shall ever endeavor to do it, though (I
might say) justly provoked to it. It was a good direction of a late godly,
learned, and judicious Divine of our Church, one that was no friend (I am sure)
either in judgment or practice to the supposed Corruptions in it. It is not
(says he) to be held want of M. Hilderch m. Lect. 65. upon Ioh. 4. cap.
Zeal, or alteration in Judgment, but true wisdom in a Minister, to shun in
his Ministry, and doctrine (so far as in him lies) those points which
Brethren differ in, and to spend his time in such points wherein we all agree,
and which are more profitable for the People to know. Paul kept back nothing
that was profitable. Acts 20. 20.
And let not any here conceive that my self have run counter to this
Direction, in speaking against that dangerous error of those, which, upon the
grounds aforesaid, Renounce all Communion with us: Wherein I have done no more
then that Author himself (whom that industrious Comment. sup. 1 Samuel in Ep.
Dedicat.
Dr Willet, for his zeal and abilities showed in that quarrel, calls
Brownistarum malleum, the Hammer of Brownists) frequently and strenuously does
both in that Tract, and in other of his writings. But I have yet diverse
particulars to touch upon, which I see I must but name, willing to discharge my
self of this point at the present, which has hung in my hands longer then I
made account of.

For Private Persons what shall they do? Directions for Private Persos.


1. In the first place, let them labor for Humble Hearts. A sovereign
Preservative against these 1. Labor for Humble hearts.
Breaches. What is it that makes them? Pride. Only by Pride comes
Contention (says the Wiseman.) He that is of a proud heart stirs up strife.
Prove. 13. 10. c. 28. v. 25.
This is The Breach-maker, and making these Breaches it maintains them. As long
as there is proud flesh in a wound, it will not heal, or if it do, it will
break forth again. For the Healing of these Breaches, so healing them that
they may not break forth again, labor to get the proud flesh cut out of our
Hearts, all of us seeking for humble spirits. A general direction; To which I
may subjoine 3. other particulars being subordinate, and subservient to it. You
shall find them all together laid down by the Apostle in that one verse, v. 16.
of the 12. chap. to the Romans: where the Apostle Romans 12. 16.
exhorting his Romans to an holy unanimitie and agreement, that they should be
of the same mind one toward another, he shows them by what means they should
both attain it, and keep it. First, Mind not high things: Secondly,
Condescend to men of low estate: Thirdly, Be not wise in your conceit: All of
them very useful for the present times; And I wish Christians would make use
of them.

First, Mind not high things: things above your Not minding high things above
their reach.
reach. By this means women with child sometimes come to miscarry, by reaching
too high. And surely this has been, and is none of the least causes of some of
those miscarriages amongst us: Private Christians, (whose reach and
apprehension is but short and shallow, yet) they will (...), be reaching at
High things, things above their reach and capacity, and beyond their line; (I
spare particulars) whilst in the mean time they neglect those fundamentals of
Faith and Repentance, both the study and practice of them. Beware of this
Presumption, remembering that weak Brains being set on high are subject to a
Vertigo, a Giddiness.

Secondly, Condescend to men of low estate. Despise Condesce^ding to weak
Christians.
not poor Christians, weak Christians; though neither their estates, nor
parts, nor places, nor graces, be answerable unto yours, yet despise them not.
But condescend to them, close with them; If they be such as do (...),
endeavor to walk uprightly according to the measure of light and grace
received, be not ashamed to own, and honor the graces of God in them; bearing
with their weaknesses, and infirmities, considering that the strong God (whose
power is made perfect in weakness) is able to make them stand; And that they
may be as necessary and useful members 2 Cor. 12. 9. Romans 14. 4. 1 Cor. 12.
22, etc.
to the Body as thy self, though not so honorable.

Thirdly, Be not wise in our own conceits: In our own Eyes, (so the Wiseman
has it) to whom the Not being wise in their own Conceits. Prove. 3. 7. Esaias 5.
21.
Prophet Esaias denounces a woe, woe unto them. I, and woe oft-times to the
Church because of them. No such a Breach-maker as this (as I have shown you
already.) Every of us beware of it, being ever jealous of our selves, ready to
suspect our own judgments in points controversall, where we have not clear
evidence of the Word for deciding them. Were these directions observed,
certainly they would conduce much to the preventing of Breaches, to the
preserving of Peace.

Take two or three more, each in a word.

2. In the second place, Follow after Holiness. The direct, and next way to
peace. Therefore 2. Follow Holiness. Heb. 12. 14.
the Apostle puts them together. Follow Peace with all men, and Holiness.
Certainly, did men study Holiness more, the Theorie and Practice of it, (as
it would divert their thoughts from many fruitless Controversall speculations,
so) it would be a means to cement and unite their hearts to all those which
truly fear God, so as every trivial difference should not divide and sever
them.

Thirdly, Following Holiness; Study also Quietness. So the Apostle exhorts
his Thessalonians, Study quietness.
showing them withal, how they should find what they study for. Study to be
quiet (says he) and 1 Th. 4. 11.
do your own business, and work with your own hands. Certainly were this
regarded; did men and women love their own houses, (and them best) meddling 1 Timothy ^. 13.
with their own business, conscionably, and diligently attending upon their
own callings, therein Abiding with God, (as the Apostle exhorts 1 Cor. 7. 20.
24.
his Corinthians) it would be a great, and sovereign preservative, to prevent
many Breaches, many differences, which by the contrary are occasioned.

Fourthly, In the fourth place, Take heed of Minister-worship. Beware of
Minister-worship.
Flying other Idolatry, beware of this. This it was that caused those breaches
in the Church of Corinth; they after a sort made Gods, and Christ's of their
Ministers, making them their Heads. Some were of Paul, others of Apollos, a
third of Cephas, a fourth of Christ. As ever you 1 Cor. 1. 12.
desire to maintain peace in the Church of God, take heed of this, of making
Ministers, in this sense, your Heads. Know them to be as they are, the
servants, and Ministers of Christ. Who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Ministers by whom ye believed? 1 Cor. 3. 5.
Being so, give unto them that honor and respect which is due unto them; I,
(...), that Double 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Honor to whom it belongs, viz: to those which are (...), those which labor
in the Word and Doctrine; harkening to them, obeying them in Heb. 13. 17.
and for Christ: But in the mean time take heed of making Gods, or Idols of
any: which is done, Ministers made Idols 4. ways.


First, when we shall so adhere and cleave to any, as that we shall take all
their words for Gospel, receiving them, and building upon them without farther
discussion, or trial.

Secondly, when we shall make their examples a Rule to walk by, a Compass to
steare by.

Thirdly, when we will not receive the Word from any hand, from any mouth, but
such as we affect; though having no just exception against others whereupon to
decline their Ministry; like some nice humorist that will drink in no cup
but his own, though another may be as clean as that.

Fourthly, when we shall so far extol, and admire some, as that we despise,
and contemn others, See M. Hildersh^m 66. Lect. upon Joh. 4.
because (it may be) inferior to them in some parts, and gifts; so Deifying
some, whilst we Vilify and Nullify others; The disease of the times, of which
take we heed. And let not any here misconceive my words, or misconstrue my
intentions, as if I spoke this out of a base principle of Envy to the deserved
respects given to any in this place, or elsewhere, which I shall ever be
ready, and desirous to uphold, and maintain: Nor yet out of any sense of any
want of respect to my self, which I must with thankfulness to God and his
people acknowledge, I have no cause to complain of, specially in this place:
Only I speak it out of a deep apprehension of the great evil which at this
door is like to break in upon the Church of God, where ever it is set open.
And herein what I have said, let it be taken as spoken as well against my
self, as any other.

Fifthly, Let me add one more, which I shall but Distinguish betwixt a Tender
and Scrupulous Conscience.
name, though as useful as any of the former: Learn to distinguish betwixt a
tender and a scrupulous conscience: The former precious, the latter noxious,
betraying the soul to causeless, and groundless fears, and doubts; making
stumbling blocks where there are none, scrupling and questioning the truth or
lawfulness of every thing, either without any ground, or upon very slight
grounds; without any warrant either from the Word, or else from sound and
rectified reason. An Infirmity very prejudicial (as to private, so) to
public peace, (as to the peace of a man's own Conscience, so) to the peace of
the Church. But I cannot dwell upon it.

These Directions being laid down (some few of many) what remains but that I
should commend them to your practice and Gods blessing, upon which depends the
success of all our endeavors? All that we can do in this case is but to
minister to you, as Apothecaries do their patients; In the mean time the Cure
is Gods: So it follows in the third particular in this former part of the
Text, which directs us to the great Physician, who is the Healer of these
Breaches, even God himself (O God Heal the Breaches thereof.) But of this
(God willing) hereafter.

Isreal's Physician, THE VI. SERMON. APRIL. 13.
PSALM. 60. 2. Heal the Breaches thereof, for it shakes.
A Request and a Reason (as you have heard) divide the text. In the former of
these we took notice of three particulars: Isreal's Disease, Cure, Physician.
The two first whereof I have insisted upon. It remains now that we come to the
third and last, and so pass on to the second part of the Text, both which I
shall pass over with as much brevitie as conveniently I may, having already
dispatched that which I principally intended when I first took the Text in
hand. Isreal's Physician, To whom it is that David here repayres for this
desired Cure, the Healing of the Breaches in this Kingdom, and that is, God
himself. So the first word in the Psalm expresses it: O God -- Heal the
breaches thereof.

Behold, who it is that is the Healer of Isreal's Breaches, D. God is the Healer
of Isreal's Breaches.
even God himself, the great Physician, (...), he that heals all diseases.
So David describes him, Ps. 103. Bless the Lord o my Soul, who heals all
thy Diseases, all personal diseases, and that Psalm. 103. 6.
whether of Body, or Soul. Bodily diseases. Go tell Hezekiah (says the Lord
to the Prophet) Behold, I 1 King. 20. 5.
will heal thee. I am the Lord that heals thee (says Exodus 15. 26.
the Lord to the Israelites, speaking of their Bodily diseases.) Soul
sicnesses; and that whether of sin, or sorrow. Of sin. Heal my soul, for
I have Psalm. 41. 4.
sinned against thee (says David.) Of sorrow. He heals the broken in heart,
and binds up their Psalm. 147. 3.
wounds. He it is that heals personal diseases. And as personal, so
Domestical, making up Familie-breaches, making man and wife to be of one
heart, restoring and repayring that peace and unity betwixt them which at the
first he created, and ordained. And as domestical, so Political and
Ecclesiastical diseases. Those are the maladies, which the Text leads us to,
National diseases, Breaches in the State, in the Church. To both these God is
the Physician, curing and healing both. Political breaches, restoring and
settling peace in the Commonwealth. He makes wars to cease: 46. Psalm. He
makes Peace in thy borders. Psalm. 147. As Political and Civil, so
Ecclesiastical breaches, Psalm. 46. 9. 147. 14.
restoring the Church to former peace and happiness. In that day shall the
Lord bind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of her wound,
(says the Prophet Isay, speaking of the restoration Isa. 30 26.
of the Church of the Jews.) A promise seconded by the Prophet Jeremy
speaking in the same language. I will restore health to thee, and heal thee
Jer. 30. 17.
of thy wounds. This Cure is Gods, the Restoring of the Church, and so the
cementing and uniting of the hearts of his people together, making them one. I
will give them one heart, and one way, Jer. 32. 39.
(says the Lord.) Behold the Churches Physician, who it is that must heal the
Breaches thereof, if ever they be healed.

And who but he should do it? He it is that breaks, that wounds, and who but
he should heal? R. He wounds, and Heals. Deur. 32. 39. 2 King. 5. 7.
I wound and I heal them (says the Lord.) Vna eademque manus. The same hand
kills, and cures. He has torn, and he will heal us, (says the Hos. 6. 1.
Church) He has smitten, and he will bind us up. That which God makes, man
may sometimes mar; but that which God marreth, none but he can mend. He it
is that heals Isreal's Breaches.

For further Illustration I might show you, how God effects this Cure. This
he does ordinarily This Cure is his though effected by Instruments and means.
by Instruments, and means. How ever he can do it immediately by his word, us
in Cures of the Body, He sent his word and healed them, (it is Psalm. 107. 20.
said of men in distress.) Speak the word only and my servant shall be
healed, (says the Centurion to Mat. 8. 8.
our Savior) yet ordinarily God makes use of Instruments and Means. Even as
in the Cure of the Body he makes use of Physicians, and Medicines, so in the
healing of a Church, a State, he makes use of Church-Physitians,
State-Physitians, making use of the Ministry of man. Yet still so, as that
the maine work is his, and the Cure his: Even as the Cure is the Physicians,
though the means be applied by his Apothecary. But I will not dwell upon the
Doctrinall part of this point, being desirous to finish it and the Text at the
present.

The Use I shall make of it, shall be only twofold. Is God the Healer of
Isreal's Breaches? here is Comfort, and here is Counsel.

1. Comfort. Is God our Physician? why then let not us despair of a Cure, of
the healing of the Breaches Use 1. Despair not of a Cure for this and the
neighbor Kingdom.
amongst us. These breaches, it must be acknowledged, are both many and great,
the disease dangerous, yet not exceeding the skill of this great Physician. If
God undertake the Cure, we shall be cured. Heal me O Lord, and I shall be
healed, Icr. 17. 14.
(says Jeremy.) It is not so with other Physicians: They may, and oft-times
do meet with diseases which are past their cure, diseases which being violent
or inveterate scorn the force and virtue of all their drugs, though never so
sovereign. And it may be so with a State, a Church, they may be past humane
help, to man Incurable. Such was Babylons disease, desperate, and incurable,
her Physicians could do nothing to her for her Care. We would have healed
Babylon, (says the Prophet) but she is not, (she could not be) Healed, (as
the Ier. 51. 9.
Geneva reads it.) And it may be so sometimes with Sion, with Jerusalem. The
Church of God may be in a forlorn and desperate condition, her wound being (as
Jeremy complains of his) Incurable, Ier. 15. 18.
refusing to be healed. So was it with Jerusalem when Jeremy lamented over her
Breach as being past man's Cure. Thy Breach is great like the Sea, who can heal
thee? The Churches Breaches Lam. 2. 13.
may be sometimes like Sea-breaches, such as the whole country cannot repair
and make good; so as her friends and lovers may stand, and mourn over her, as
Jeremy there does over Jerusalem, and as the Merchants of the earth are said to
do over Rev. 18. 11.
Babylon, but in the mean time cannot help her, cannot heal her: Not unlike
Dorcas her friends Acts 9. 39.
and neighbors, which wept over her corpse, but could do nothing to the raising
of her up again, til Peter came. Yet in this case despair not. Vbihumanu^
deficit, ibi incipit divinum auxilium. When the wine was spent, then it was
Christ's time to work 2 John 3.
a miracle. When my Father and Mother for sake me (says David) then the Lord
will take me up. When Psalm. 27. 10.
Physicians leave a man, and give him over, then it is Gods time to take him in
hand, which oft-times he does, restoring and raising him with great facility
and celerity, beyond his own, and others expectation. Turning man to
destruction, he then says, Come again ye Children of men. And this he is able
Psalm. 90. 3.
to do for this, and the neighbor Nation, the State, the Church in both. What
ever the condition of them at the present be, be it as forlorn and desperate
as our fears and jealousies are ready to present it; suppose to our
apprehensions Incurable; yet let not this discourage. If God undertake the
Cure, he can and will effect it. It is the comfort which the Lord gives unto
Jerusalem against the desperateness of her disease* Thus Ier. 30. 12, 13.
says the Lord, Thy bruize is incurable, and thy wound is grievous, there is
none to plead thy cause that thou may be bound up, thou have no healing
medicines, etc. Yet mark what follows. v. 17. I will restore health unto thee,
I will heal thee of thy wounds, v. 17.
(says the Lord.) The desperateness of the disease makes the Cure difficult
to us, not to God* difficult for us to apprehend, not for God to effect. And
therefore let not our fears, (how justly so ever bottomed and grounded) devour
and eat up our Hopes; as those meager kine did the fat ones. Genesis 41. 20.
Our fears are from the valleys, our hopes are from the Hills. Mine eyes are
to the Hills. Our fears are Psalm. 121. 1.
from Earth, our hopes from Heaven. Our fears are from men, our hopes are in
God. O Israel thou have Hos. 13. 9. Ps. 124. v. last.
destroyed thy self; but in me is thy help. Our help is in the name of the
Lord; And so is our Health; depending upon this (...), this great and chief
Physician, who is able to heal all our Breaches. Here is Comfort.

Only that he may be a Physician, a Healen unto us, working this Cure for us,
Let us seek it from Use 2.
him; Returning unto him, Resting upon him, and, if ever we be healed, Give the
Glory to him. Here is Counsel, running as you see in 4. streams or channels.
Pass over them severally, briefly.

Seek ^e unto God for this Cure. So do Parients to their Physicians,
apprehending the disease 1. Seek this Cure from God.
dangerous, what sending and posting, messenger after messenger? never resting
until the Physician either come or send. Do we the like unto this great
Physician in all our diseases. For the healing of our bodies, if sick and weak,
go to him. So does David. I am weak Lord heal me. Not but that we may in this
case have recourse to the Physician Psalm. 6. 2.
also, as being the Minister of God for our health. But let not our addresses
be only unto him. That was Asahs sin. In his disease he sought not to the
Lord, but unto the Physicians. Nor yet in the first 2 Chro. 16. 12.
place unto him. Let God have the honor to hear of us, and from us in the
first place, who is able to bless our blast counsels and means.

The like do we for our souls. Heal my soul (says David.) Not but that we
may in this case Psalm. 41. 4.
also repair to Gods Ministers being Soule-Physitians, or others who are able
to advise, laying open our sins, and sorrows unto them, seeking Cure from
them; but go to God in the first place.

And what we do in our own private, do we the same in the public case of
the State, of the Church amongst us; for the healing of the Breaches in both,
go we with David unto this great Physician, putting up our suit unto God in
their behalf; O God heal the Breaches thereof. Not but Not, but that we may
seek it from men.
that we may also have recourse unto men in this case, viz: to those whom God
has made Healers by office, Rulers, Magistrates in this our Israel, whether
supreme, or subordinate, under whose hands these Breaches, these Ruins, at the
present are for the Cure of them, that Sage and honorable Council of
State-Physitians congregated, and assembled for this purpose. To them we may,
we ought to have recourse, seeking this Cure at their hands, wherein my
Petition shall ever be ready to go and run with the first, the sum whereof
shall be, O ye Gods heal the Breaches in this our Israel; and this do with
what speed may be Sero medicina-Medicines come too late when diseases are
grown inveterate. It is the speech of the Ruler to our Savior, pressing him
to haste his Journey, for the Cure of his son, Come down (says he) before
my Son dye. I forbear the Application, as not Ioh. 4 47.
ignorant of the exemplary forwardness of those to whom I now speak, of whom I
may say, as Paul once of the Christians of Achaiah, They were ready a year
ago. The good Lord show 1 Cor. 9. 2.
them the way, and clear it for them, taking away the (...), what ever it is
that withholds, or keeps back their Religious Intentions from an happy
execution. This seek we from them, but so as that we seek it from God, and from
him in the first place.

Pardon my Jealousy, if causlesse: My fears tell me there are some who have
done the one, but never yet did the other; have signed Petitions, one, or more,
to that Honorable Assembly, who never yet put up a serious Petition unto God
in the Churches cause. And what is this, but with Asah to seek to the
Physicians, and not unto the Lord? Know we, that if ever our Breaches be Cured,
it is God must cure-them. Men are but his Instruments, I, such instruments as
cannot move but as they are moved. In him we move: Acts 17. 28.
Like Cisternes and Cunduitpipes, which can contain, and convey no more water
then what is put into the^. And therefore have we recourse to the fountain, to
their God and our God, and that in the first place, seeking this mercy at his
hands, Pleading with him for his Church. It is the Lords complaint over Israel,
There is none to plead thy cause that thou may be bound up. Blessed be God,
it cannot Ier. 30. 13.
be so said of this Church of ours, that she has none to plead her cause;
Advocates, and Orators she has many, continually lying at the throne of
Grace, pleading her cause with God, that through his goodness and mercy she
may be bound up, that she may be Healed. Let every of us strive to be in this
number, all suitors, and suppliants unto this great Physician, that he would
make the Church amongst us his Patient, undertaking her Cure; to that end
guiding and directing those whom we look at as the Instruments of our good,
directing them to the choice and use of right means, and then commanding a
blessing upon those means, making them effectual to ends desired. Thus seek
we unto God for this Cure.

And that we may find what we seek for, (in the second place) Return we
unto him; not 2. Go our selves unto God, Returning unto him.
thinking it enough in this case to send, but go; So did Naaman the Leaper
unto the Prophet, for the Cure of his Leprosy, he comes in person. Do 2
Kings 5. 9.
we the like in this case; think it not enough to send our Prayers, and Tears
as messengers to heaven, but go our selves, returning unto that God from whom
we desire this Cure. It is said of Egypt. 19. Is. They shall return even
unto the Lord, Is. 19. 22.
and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal them. God will never be
entreated of a people to Heal them, unless they return unto him. And
therefore let this be the general, universal design of all, even a
National Conversion, that from the highest to the lowest we may all of us
turn, return unto the Lord our God from whom we have gone astray. This is
the next way to healing. Come (says the Church) Let us return unto the Lord,
He has Hos. 6. 1.
torn, and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. This
do we, and stir we up one another to do it, as the Prophet there brings
in the Church, as speaking one to another, Come, etc. Without this no healing
to be expected, at least not a perfect Cure. And therefore set we upon this
way. That God may return, let us return. This is the Counsel the Lord gives
his people in that known place, 2 Joel. Thus says the Lord, Turn ye unto
me, etc. Rent your hearts, Joel, 2. 12, 13, 14.
and turn unto the Lord; who knows if he will return, and repent, and
leave a Blessing behind him? Some grounds of Hope yet there are, that God has
a blessing in store for this Nation. O, that he may return unto us (who at
the present seems to threaten a departure from us) and leave this blessing
behind him, return we unto him, turning away from those evil ways whereby
we have provoked him. It is one condition in that promise which God makes
unto his people, If they shall turn from their wicked ways, I will heal 2
Chro. 7. 14.
their land; and Turning unto him by renewing and keeping our Covenant with him
of a closer walking with and before him: Endeavoring (as much as in us lies)
for the time to come to make amends, (as for other errors, so) for barrenness,
and unfruitfulnesse under the means of grace: Surely amongst other this is none
of the least provocations which has drawn down this wrath upon us; Even our
abuse of the Gospel so long a time enjoyed, our abuse of the ordinances of
God, his Word, his Sacraments, for which (as ever we desire to be Healed) let
us endeavor to make amends for the future. It was the Counsel which the
Priests of Dagon gave to the Philistines, when they were smitten with diverse
plagues, and judgments, and that (as they rightly apprehended) for the wrong,
and injury done unto the Ark of God; that they should send back the Arc,
and that not empty, but send a Trespasse-offering, a Present with it, thereby,
as it were, to make amends for 1 Samuel 6. 3.
former indignities, and so doing (say they) Ye shall be healed. Surely
(beloved) shall we enquire after the cause of all the Evils which either lie
upon us, or threaten us at this day, we shall find this as one of the
principal, the Indignities offered to the Ark of God, the worship and
Religion of God, the Ordinances of God; the Captivating, and as it were
imprisoning of them, with the Abuses offered to them; that the Word has not
had such free passage in the mouths of Gods Ministers, in the hearts of his
people, as it should have had; that the Truth of God has been detained, and
withheld in unrighteousness, not finding fruits worthy of it, answerable unto
it; That some have gone about to set up God's Ark and their Dagon together;
That others have polluted the Ordinances of God, handling them (as the
Philistines did the Ark) with common, uncircumcised, hands. Certainly, had we
no other sins, these were enough to kindle all that wrath which is either broke
forth upon us, or else smoking against us. Now therefore, that we may be
healed, Let us make a return of the Ark of God, endeavoring to restore the
worship and Religion of God, to Primitive Liberty, Purity, Power; And let us
return it with a Trespasse-offering, a Present; And what shall this Present
be? Why, even that which the Apostle calls for from his Romans, That (...),
that Living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God; even Romans 12. 1. 2.
Our selves, our Bodies, our Souls; Present, and give up both unto God,
binding our selves by solemn vow and Covenant, to a closer walking with and
before him, so to walk as Becomes the Gospel, bringing forth those fruits of
Holiness and Phil. 1. 27.
Righteousness, which may be by Jesus Christ to the Verse. 11.
praise and Glory of God. Thus Return we unto him who is the God of our health.

And Returning to him (in the third place) let 3. Rest upon him for this Cure.
Is. 30. 15.
us also Rest upon him. In Returning, and Resting shall ye be saved, (says
the Lord to his people.) Returning to God, Rest we upon him, and him alone. In
vain to Rest elsewhere. In vain is the help of man (says the Psalmist.
Verse. 11. of this Psalm. 60. 11.
Psalm.) So David apprehended it in the case of his Kingdom. So desperate
were the Breaches therein, that they were past his Cure. David a wise, and a
gracious Prince, one that wished as well to Israel, as ever did Cing to his
Kingdom; and no question he wanted not a wise and faithful Counsel, which
were both able, and willing to advise him for the best; yet so desperate was
the condition of that Kingdom, that it was past all their skill to know how to
heal it; In vain was the help of man. And therefore he betakes himself
unto God; looking up unto him, and resting upon him. It is not our King, or his
Great Council, (I speak it with a reverent boldness) though the one
Gracious, and the other many and wise, that can heal the breaches in this our
Israel. All that they can do is to wish well to the Case, and put forth their
hands to work; In the mean time it is God that must work the Cure. As it is
said of that strange Cure of the King's Evil; Tangit te Rex, Sanat te Deus, The
King may touch, but it is God must Cure. And therefore though we seek and sue
to them, and look at them as Instruments whose hands God makes use of, yet
let us not rest upon them, being but an Arm of flesh. To rest Jer. 17. 5. Not
upon Instruments, being but an Arm of flesh subject to be broken.
upon the Arm of flesh is the next way to break it. I will not say that this
has been the means to break this Arm of flesh heretofore: But this (I
suppose) I may say, that our overmuch looking at, leaning, and resting upon
Parliaments, has been neither advantageous to us, nor them. David will Psalm.
44. 6. Psalm. 18. 34. Job 20. 24.
make use of his Bow, but he will not trust in it. I will not trust in my bow.
No, though a bow of steel, the strongest metal, and best for that purpose:
Such is the bow, (we must acknowledge) which is at the present ready bent for
our good; An excellent bow, promising much; yet trust we not in it, It being
a bow subject to be broken. So was David's bow, though of steel, yet he could
break it. A bow of steel is broken by mine arms. And such is this Psalm. 18.
34.
bow, a bow which, being in the hands of God* he can break at pleasure. He
breaks the bow. What Psalm. 46. 9.
herein he has so frequently done before our eyes, shows sufficiently what
he can do. It matters not what any may think of it now, that this bow is
better strung then formerly; yet still is it subject to be broken. Who is
there but sees some flawes in it already? Those unhappy Misunderstandings
betwixt the Royal Head, and Loyal Members of that Representative Body,
(which what eye sees, and mourns not over, what care hears of and tingleth
not at?) make the best and least of them, they are flawes, and these flawes ill
Presages, showing that this bow is subject to be broken. It is one of the
threatenings which the Lord menaceth Israel with, Am. 6. Behold, the Lord
commands, Amos 6. 11.
(says the Prophet) and he will smite he Great House with breaches, and the
little (or lesser) House with Clefts. The Great House, and the lesser House,
what means the Prophet hereby? M. Calvin, and some others* by the former of
these understand their Nobles, by the latter their Commons, Proceres, and
Gregarios, seu Plebeios. Calvin. Gualt.
both which the Lord there threatens to divide, and break. This God can do by
these two Houses in any Kingdom, in this Kingdom, though never so well
anchord, and bound together by never so many ties, and bonds, Natural, Civil,
Politic, Religious, yet if he give the word, at his command they shall be
smitten with breaches, with Clefts, divided, rent, broken. This they are
subject to. And therefore learn we to look higher; looking at them, not to
trust in them. Nor yet in any other secondary cause or means what ever. This
was the sin of the Jews charged upon them by the Prophet Isay; when they saw
the breaches Is. 22. 9, 10, 11.
of the city (of Jerusalem) that they were many, they used means to repair
them, Pulling down their houses to fortisie the wall (as you have it Verse.
10.) But mark what follows (Verse. 11.) ye have not looked unto the maker
thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago. They trusted
more in their own fortifications, carnal means of safety, then in God
himself. A vain thing so to do. It is not the Arm of flesh in these cases
that can help or heal. It is that which the Lord tells Ephraim or Israel,
5. Hos. When Ephraim saw his wickedness, and Judah his wound, Then went Hos.
5. 13.
Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could he not heal you,
nor cure you of your wound. And why? I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion (says
Ver. 14.
the Lord) and as a young Lion to the house of Juda, and I will tear and go
away. If God, being provoked against a Nation, shall give it over unto
confusion, being unto it as a Lion, and as a young Lion rending, and tearing,
it will be in vain to send abroad for Cure. In this Case we may say of all
helpers and healers, as Job does of his friends, They Job 13. 4.
are Physicians of no value, not able to do us any good. And therefore let it
be our care first to seek unto God, Returning unto him, thereby seeking to
pacify, and appease his wrath. Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omina. Make peace
in heaven, there will be peace upon earth: Then give this honor unto him, Rest
upon him, and him alore for the effecting of this great Cure, and that in his
own Way and Time. Take heed of prescribing unto God in either of these. He
that believes shall not make have. Be we content to tarry Gods leisure, and
then Esaias 28. 16.


In the Fourth and last place: If God shall Give God the Glory of the Cure, if
ever effected.
ever be pleased to work this great Cure for us, forget not to Give him the
Glory of it, and him alone: If we may not trust to our Bow, neither may we
sacrifice to it. If the Physician by his skill work a Cure upon his patient,
the honor is his, not his Apothecaries who ministers what he prescribes. All
the instruments of our good, they are but as Instruments which must be strung,
and tuned, and touched before they will make any Music. So take, and so
acknowledge them, giving unto them what honor and thanks is their due, but in
the mean time reserve unto God what is his peculiar, the praise and Glory. And
thus I have at length done with the former part of the Text, (David's Request.)

It remains now that I come to the latter (David's Reason.) Let me borrow of you
a little time, and but a little, and I shall dismiss both you and the Text, of
which I am desirous to discharge my own thoughts, and your attentions at the
present.

Isreal's Danger.
It shakes.
AN Argument or Reason (as I told you) taken up by the Psalmist to press his
request, taken (as you have heard) from the eminency of the Danger wherein that
his Kingdom then was. It shakes, or it is shaken. A metaphorical expression
borrowed from an Earthquake, (as I have already explained it) where the Earth
being big, and in travel, as it were, with some windy vapor, which it strives
to bring forrh, and to be delivered of, it trembles, and shakes. So wavering
and unsettled was Isreal's condition at that time, by reason of those foreign
Invasions, and homebred Divisions, and Distractions, that the very foundations
of it seemed to shake, threatening Ruin, and Destruction.

Such may the state of the Church of God upon earth D. Israel subject to
shakings.
sometimes be, wavering, tottering, shaken. Even as we read of Mount Sina at
the giving of the Law, though it stood fast in respect of the foundations of
it, yet it was shak^n, it quaked. The Church of Exodus 19. 18.
God, in respect of the foundation, it stands sure, being built upon a Rock,
so as the Gates of Mat. 16. 18.
Hell, all the Power, and Policy of Satan, and his Instruments shall never be
able to prevail against it; yet may it be shaken. So was the Ark of God at the
threshing floor of Nachon or Chidon 2 Samuel 6. 8. 1 Chronicles. 13. 9.
though it fell not, yet it was shaken. So may the Church of God, and Religion
of God be; though they shall never be quite overthrown, yet they are subject
to shakings. So is the Church.

And that through these Breaches, which are both from Without, and from Within:
(as I have already shown you in the case of Breaches.)

From without, by persecution, and Opposition from Enemies abroad. From within,
by and through homebred Divisions and Distractions, which like a windy vapor
enclosed in the bowels of the earth cause shaking and trembling. This it was
that made Israel shake, her intestine, and civil Combustions. Nothing more
dangerous to a State, a Church, more ominous, and pernicious then Breaches are
shakings.
these, Intestine Breaches. Such Breaches are shakings, dangerous presages, in
their own nature Destructive, presaging downfall, and Ruin, unless they be
Healed. Both these ways is the Church subject to shakings.

And that (as I have said heretofore) partly through Satan's malice, who hereby
intends the Ruin and downfall of the Church. Thence is it The Church subject
to shakings through Satan's malice. Job 1. 19.
that he raises, and brings storms, and tempests in, and upon it: Even as
he did that Tempest which he brought from the wilderness, which smote the
four corners of the house wherein Iohs children were banqueting, so as it
fell, burying them in the ruins of it.

Partly through Gods effectual Permission, and Ordination, who sometimes
shakes his Church 2. Through Gods Providence, hereby
as he did Mount Sina: Thereby intending,

First, Sometimes to manifest his Displeasure against a People, a Nation. Thus
at the Death of our 1. Sometimes manifesting his displ^asure. Mat. 27. 51.
Savior the Earth shook and trembled, as a token of Gods indignation against
the Jews for that horrid Act of theirs in Crucifying the Lord of Life. Like
construction David makes of this Earthquake, these shakings here in the text,
he took them as tokens and evidences of Gods wrath and displeasure, O God, thou
have been displeased.

Secondly, Sometimes God shakes his Church to Purge it, as the Husbandman
shakes his Come 2. Purging his Church.
to and fro in the fant to cleanse out the Chafe and Dross.

Thirdly, Sometimes God does it to Humble 3. Humbling his people, and so
preparing the^ for some special mercy.
his people, and so to fit and prepare them for some special mercy. Thus when
God descended upon Mount Sina he shook the Earth, both the Place, and the
People; putting both into a trembling fit, thereby fitting and preparing the
people for the receiving of that holy Law of his. Thus when God intends to come
down upon his Church in a way of special grace and favor, he oft-times
prepares it by these shakings: Even as the Whirlewinde, and 1 King. 19. 11, 12.
Earthquake at Mount Horeb, made way for the still voice, wherein God was.
Seldom it is that God works any great Changes in his Church without these
shakings going before. But I must not dwell upon it. The use I shall make of it
shall be only a double exhortation.

1. That we would lay to heart the present state Use. Be we affected with the
shaking of our Israel.
and condition both of this, and the neighbor Kingdom, which by reason of the
Breaches made in them and upon them are shaken. So was Israel, and so are they.
Be we affected herewith. So we would be with an Earthquake. Did we feel the
Earthquake and tremble under us, who but would tremble with it? This does the
State, the Church in these Kingdoms at the present. Let every of us be deeply
affected with these shakings; so laying them to Heart, that,

In the second place, we may be excited and stirred Seek the healing of her
Breaches.
up every of us to do that office and duty to, and for the Church of God
amongst us, that David does here for Israel, viz. to seek the Healing of the
Breaches thereof. These Breaches (how slight so ever any may make of them)
they are shakings, presages of Ruin and Downfall, unless they be healed. And
therefore let both our Hearts work, and Hands work toward the Healing of these
Breaches. This it was that made Vzzah so forward in putting forth his hand to
touch the Ark, he saw that it was shaken, and 2 Samuel 6.
he knew not what the danger might be. Stupid is that Heart which apprehends
the Ark of God shaken, and shall not be ready to put forth an hand to the
staying of it. This let every of us do. Every one in his Place.
Only taking heed of that Error into which he through a sudden unadvisednesse
fell; observing the several places and stations wherein God has set us, do we
what appertains to the^. Public persons in their places, and Private persons
in their places. Those which may not touch the Ark it self, let them lay hand
upon the Cart, which if Vzzah had done, and no more, that act of his (I
suppose) had been not only warrantable, but acceptable. This caution being
observed, then let it be the holy ambition of every of us to be found of God,
and man in the number of those, which shall be called (not the makers or
Maintainers, but) Esaias. 58. 12.
the Repairers of Breaches, and the Restorers of Paths to dwell in; Even of
those ancient, and truly Christian paths (which I wish were more beaten and
trodden then they are) of Religious Peace and Love, which if they be wanting,
the Church (how well so ever accommodated, and furnished with all other
necessaries, and conveniences, yet) will scarcely be found habitable. For the
furthering of you in this blessed work, I shall say no more unto you, then what
the Apostle does to his Philippians, Phil. 4. 9. with whose words I shall
dismiss both you and the Text: Those things which ye have Phil. 49.
both learned, and received, and heard from me, (I go no further) Do, and the
God of Peace shall be with you* Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
page line read 2 13 sad story 3 2 before the text 11 15 was a sufferer: 12 5 a
sharp contention, 29 1 to do a Cure 32 4 Enemies without triumph, 5 Neuters
without scandal. 38 6 garish 39 19 who have not done 40 29 Pilot 54 9 these
Breaches, 68 19 Why, but what 72 29 our selves 74 3 they be light matter marg.
inedia non 81 25 rent the kingdom 85 26 in that his 86 21 over slaves, 93 27
fallen upon, 123 13 or blast*


