Good News From IRELAND.

OR A True Relation of a great Victory obtained by the Protestants in the
Province of Munster in Ireland.

Where 400. Horse and 1600. Foot under the Command of the Lord Inchequeene, and
the Earl of Corkes Son, overthew the Army of the Rebels consisting of 10000.
Horse and Foot.

Also the number of the Rebels that were slain in the Battle, with the
surprising of three Pieces of their Ordnance, one of which was called the
Elizabeth of Limericke, with 7. Barrels of Powder and Match.

Likewise a Confirmation of the Earl of Corkes Son, slain in this service.

Sent in a Letter from Lieutenant Colonel Broket, Governor of Kinsale, to his
Brother Mr. Samuel Broket Grocer on Snow-hill London, September. 29. 1642.

With an Order of both Houses of Parliament, for raising 1000. Dragoneers in
LONDON.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D.C.

London, Printed for I. Thomas, October. 6. 1642.

Good News from JRELAND, October 3. 1642.
BROTHER,
THis is to acquaint you, how we drew all our forces we had in Munstor
together, to give the Rebels Battle, who were coming to lay their seige
before Cork; And being very strong, having with them the best Demicannon that
was in the Castle of Limericke, and 2. Sakers, the one of brass, and the other
of Jron, with the which they have taken the Castle of Ashketon, my Lady Dudleys
Castle, and all the Castles within 20. miles of us, in the province of Munster,
and the Lord Muskery, L. Roch, General Barry, Purcell, and all the rest of the
Rebels Cavalrye, did engage all the honor and creditt, and the Major of
Limericke also, to the value of many Thousand pounds, for the safe return of
the aforesaid Guns into Limericke again. Upon Wednesday the last of August,
Orders came from my L. Jnche queen to Kinsale, that 100 men might be chosen
presently to march, with the which 100. men, I was by my Lord Inchequeene
commanded to go withal, upon Thursday the 1. day of September I marched from
Kinsale by 3. a clock in the morning, and came to Cork by 12 of the clock and
was commanded to march through the Town to a place where my Lord Inchequeen
himself mustered his forces, to know how strong we were for present service
after that we presently marched away and came to Mallow that night, being 12
miles from Cork, and upon Friday the second of September, we marched to
Butfoard, being 4 miles further where we met together with all the forces we
could make in the whole Province of Munster, viz. from Kinsale, Bandonbridge,
Cork, and Youghall, and we were found strong about some 400. horse and 1600.
foot, and our horse was very ill horst and armed, yet nevertheless, my Lord,
and all of us did put on our resolution to fight, the Rebels Camp was then
within four miles of us, and did lie in such a place, where they had a bogge
about them, they being of horse and foot about ten thousand strong, all very
well armed, they having 3 times as many Musketeers as we had, also better
horse, and better armed then our horse by far.

The enemy likewise had 100. Muskets that they wanted men to carry them, but
they made an account to have gotten all Munster before Michaelmas day. This day
above mentioned, we saw some 600. of the Rebels Horse, on Satterday being the
3. of September, about 4. of the clock in the morning, we marched toward them
to Pristcarel, where they were strongly encamped having made a strong Fort,
with the great Piece called the Elizabeth of Limericke mounted thereupon, and
hard by that they had a Battery, where the 2. other Guns were mounted, and a
great high ditch round about this Fort, and the Battery, and within a Musket
shot from thence, they had a Brestworke, and within half a Musket shot from
the fort, they had a strong Castle which they took but the night before, and
between these, a fortification of great strength, there the Rebels stood in
Bataile array.

And this Satterday Morning about Eight of the Clock, our Field pieces played
upon them; And their pieces played upon us.

And thus continuing till about nine of the clock in the morning, our horse
and 500. Musketeers did charge the body of the Rebels, and I was (my self)
commanded to charge upon a forlorn hope only with a 100. Musketeers, our
Horse was once beaten to a retreat, in which time, we all thought to have had
the worst of the day, but we stood to it with 500. Musketeers, and having by
the Almighty providence of God, the Sun and the Wind on our backs, blinded
them so with the smoke of our guns, that thereby both their horse and foot
confnsedly made their retreat, upon the which, all our horse charged most
bravely the second time upon them, and likewise so did these 500. Musketeers,
and did put them all to flight, into, and over the boggs; and moreover they did
forsake their Brestworke, Battery, Fort, and Castle, where we took the great
gun called the Besse of Limericke, being of 6.80 weight, and the other 2.
sakers, with some 5. barrells of powder, and 2. barrells of match, all the
hands of our side that came to fight that day was only 500. musketeers at the
most, and hardly 400. horse, we hold it, (for which we give God wany thanks)
the greatest overthrow that ever the Rebels has had, they being so mighty and
strong, and we so weak; we slew above 1200. of them, being all most of their
chiefest Commanders, and we lost but 12. at the most, only the greatest loss
that we had, the which did encourage the Rebels very much before we came to the
Bataile, that the Governor of Bandonbridge, was killed out of an Ambush, and
stripped naked, he was the Lord of Kinealmekie, the Earl of Corkes Son.

We took Colonel Butler prisoner, Pursell is shot, and they say my Lord
Muskery, I saw General Barry run hard for it upon his white horse, and the
Major of Limericke with him, all the forces that we left behind us in all our
Garrisons in Munster, was not above 2 or 300 men, able to pass upon duty,
therefore all the province of Munster stood upon us then, and now we stand in a
great deal of extremity, for want of more forces, for about 5000. horse and
foot would clear this province and preserve it, our company here have
recruted, and the soldiers and Officers in general do stand in great need of
their pay, and we stand in great doubt, that we shall be in great want of
Victuals before winter is half done, becauese we are not strong enough to
fetch it in, this was the great work of the Lord who did direct and fight for
us, that his power and providence in his own cause might be the more clearly
discerned by us, for they had all taken the Sacrament to fight it out to the
last man, also it was reported the Friars had given many of them charms to
keep them shotfree, so in every thing it is plain, the Lord was our deliverer,
and we shall I hope in few days be able to gather some relief for our Towns,
so I Rest.

Kinsale, Sept. 19. 1642. Your Loving Brother, William Broket, Governor of
Kinsale.

THis Letter Was brought over by Master Edmond Broket September 29. 1642. Who
is Ensign to his Brother Lieutenant Colonel Broket Governor of Kinsale, and
Brother to Mr. Samuel Broket Grocer at the Mayden-head upon Snow-Hill, who can
attest the truth of this Relation, and desires it may be Printed and published,
That it might communicate to the High Court of Parliament.

DIE LUNAE OCTOBER, 4. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: That
such persons as will advance Horses and Arms toward the furnishing of the
Thousand Dragoneirs, mentioned in an Order of both Houses of Parliament, made
the 29. of September last, shall have the Public Faith for their security for
the prices thereof, with such other Recompense as the Subscribers of the 16000.
pounds mentioned in the same Order are to have, and that Master Maximilian Bard
and others already appointed; for buying Horses for the said Thousand
Dragoneirs, or any three of them shall be persons appointed for the vale wing
and prising of the said Horses and Arms so to be advanced. And the Horses are
to be brought to Moore-fields, there to be viewed and prized.

Hen: Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

