A LOOKING-GLASS FOR GOOD WOMEN,

Held forth by way of Counsel and Advice to such of that Sex and Quality, as
in the simplicity of their Hearts, are led away to the embracing or looking
toward any of the dangerous Errors of the Times, specially that of the
SEPARATION.

As it was lately presented to the Church of God at Great-YARMOUTH, BY JOHN
BRINSLEY.

2 COR. 11.3. I fear least as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ.

October. 9. 1645.
Imprimatur

JA: CRANFORD.

London, Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1645.

To all the well affected, but ill advised of the weaker Sex, who are either
turned, or turning from the way of the Church of Christ in Old England, to the
refined Error of separation, Specially those in the Town of Great Yarmouth.
Daughters of Jerusalem,
TO you is this Glass presented, with a Request, That you will vouchsafe to
look into it, and that with an Eye not prejudiced against it. Possibly you may
here see more of Satan, and your selves, his wiles, your weakness, then before
you were aware of. If any shall herein espy some spots and blemishes
discovered, not becoming the face of profession, let them not blame the Glass,
which represents things as they are, but themselves, or others, who have given
the ground to these Reflections. For my own Intentions, in holding forth this
Glass, they are such as I can approve unto God, sincere and candid. As for
aspersing of Religion, disparaging the weaker Sex, discouraging of any in their
holy endeavors of going before others in the profession and power of
godliness, sadding the spirits of any that are truly godly, or opening the
mouths of any that are profanely wicked, my heart smites me not with the
guilt of any of them. That which first put this subject into my hand, was
chiefly a tender respect to the peace and welfare of this place where God has
cast me. Where I could not without a deep resentment take notice how many of
the weaker Sex, being by degrees distasted with the public Ordinances, came at
length to be quite weaned from them: No more owning that Ministry, or those
means which to some of them had been heretofore the avowed and acknowledged
power of God to their salvation. For your sakes were these meditations first
conceived; And for your sakes are they now brought forth to a more public
view: That so what you would not vouchsafe to hear with the ear, you may yet
have opportunity to see with the eye. May the eyes of any of you be hereby
opened, so as you may see the error of these your wanderings, and be persuaded
to return again to the fold from which you have strayed, I should account it
an acceptable service both to God and You. However, I shall acknowledge it no
small recompense, that some others may be stayed from following after you. In
the experience, and hopes whereof, with my hearty prayers unto God for them and
you, I sit down, and rest,

Yarmouth. Yours in the service of Christ, JOHN BRINSLEY.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR GOOD WOMEN.
1 TIMOTHY 214. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression.


THis Text is Scripture, and such a portion of Scripture, as is but too proper
for the times wherein we live: Other Apology, I shall need none for my taking
it up, and handling of it in this place.

To make way to the words; Look but a little back into the Chapter, and you
shall meet with a parcel of Apostolical Canons, partly concerning Men, partly
Women. The former you have in the 8. ver. Coherence.
I will therefore that men pray every where, etc. The latter in the four verses
following: Wherein the Apostle orders the female Sex: First touching their
Apparel, ver. 9, 10. In like manner also, that the women adorn themselves in
modest apparel, etc. Then touching their demeanor in the public worship and
service of God, ver. 11.12. Wherein (as Henimgius resolves those two verses) we
may take notice of a double Injunction, and a double Prohibition. Two things
commanded, and two things prohibited. The things enjoined, are, that women
should hear and learn: 1. Silently, then submissively: Let the women learn in
silence, with all subjection, ver. 11. The things prohibited are; First, their
Public teaching; Secondly, their usurping authority over their husbands; I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp Authority over the man, ver. 12. And
both these the Apostle presses by a twofold Argument: The former taken from
man's precedence in his Creation, ver. 13. For Adam was first formed then Eve.
The woman was made after the man, and for the man; And therefore, for her to
take upon her the office of Teaching, or to usurp authority over the man; what
were it but to invert the course and order of nature: The latter taken from the
Woman's priority in her defection: That you have in the words of the Text, And
Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.

In which words for our better handling of them, Division.
we may take notice first of the Negative, then of the Positive part of them.
The former concerning the first Man, denying him to have been deceived: And
Adam was not deceived. The latter concerning the first woman; affirming her,
first, to have been deceived; then, to have been in the transgression: But the
woman, etc. Three clauses, yielding us three distinct Propositions, or
Conclusions. 1. Adam was not deceived. 2. The woman was deceived. 3. Being
deceived, she was in the transgression. Touch upon each, and but touch upon
them, by way of Explication, Illustration, that so I may make way to
Application, which is the main thing which at present I aim at.

And Adam was not deceived] No? How came he then to fall? 1. How it is said
that Adam was not deceived.
How came he to adventure upon the eating of that forbidden fruit, the core
whereof yet sticks in the throats and hearts of all his posterity to this day?

Ans. Diversely resolved.
To this is answered variously: Six or seven resolutions (such as they are) I
find returned to it by the Jesuit Estius. Estius, Com. ad loc.
I shall only single out two or three of them, such as I find most approved of
by Orthodox Expositours.

1. Adam was not deceived, that is (say some) not formally, not properly, 1. He
was not deceived properly and formally.
Proprie nemo decipitur, nisi a decipiente (says Estius) Properly and formally
no man is said to be deceived, but by a Deceiver; who must be such a one as
has animum fallendi; a mind and purpose to deceive; so was the woman deceived
by the Serpent (or rather by Satan in the Serpent) intending to deceive her.
But so was not Adam deceived. The woman in tendering the Apple unto him, she had
no purpose to deceive him. Hoc secit decepta, non decipiens (says the foresaid
Author) This she did being her self deceived, not with an intention to deceive
her husband: No, Merc. in Genesis 3.6.
that which herein she did, was only out of a desire to make him partaker of
her supposed happiness. As for deluding, deceiving of him, it was far from her
thoughts. And hereupon (say some) it is said, that Adam was not deceived: But
this seems a little too acute, and curious.

2. More plainly and simply, (in the second place) Adam was not deceived, that
is, not Primarily; 2. Not primarily
he was not the first that was deceived: So some expound it, by borrowing a
word from the verse foregoing, which they conceive should here again be
repeated, (...), but Adam was not first deceived, (...), Verse 13.
but the Woman, etc.

3. Adam was not deceived, viz. not Immediately by the Serpent: So was the Woman
deceived, giving ear to Satan, 3. Not immediately by the Serpent.
speaking in and by the Serpent, she was deceived; but so was not Adam
deceived: Deceived indeed he was; but it was by the means of the Woman, handing
those suggestions unto him, which she had received from the Serpent: withal,
soliciting, and enticing him; to whom he yielded, partly, Ex amicabili quadam
benevolentia, out of a loving and indulgent affection toward her, and so was
overcome, even as Sampson was by his Dalilah, and Solomon by his Wives.

These two last Resolutions, (being in effect one and the same) we may safely
pitch upon. Adam was not deceived, viz. so as the Woman was deceived: not
firstly, not immediately, so was the Woman deceived; and being so deceived, she
was the Instrument to deceive her Husband: So it follows; But The Woman being
deceived, she was in the Transgression.

The Woman was deceived.] So she was both properly, How the woman was deceived.
and primarily, and immediately. How deceived? By what Means? By what Agent? By
what Instrument? By what Arguments and Suggestions? You may read them all in
that third of Genesis, which I shall have occasion to reflect upon anon: For
the present I shall only enquire;

Q. Why Satan singles out the woman to deceive her?
Why Satan singles out the Woman? Why he first sets upon her, to deceive and
seduce her?

A. For this take a double reason: Satan looked upon her as a fitting Object,
and a fitting Instrument: A fitting Object to work upon, and a fitting
Instrument to work by.

1. A fitting Object to work upon: In as much as she was the weaker Vessel, 1.
She was the more fit object to work upon, in regard of her weakness.
less able to withstand the stroke of his Temptations. Had he encountered with
the Man, there might have been more probability of resistance, less hope of
prevailing: Therefore he singles out the Woman, as apprehending more hopes of
prevailing there, by reason of the natural infirmity of her Sex.

2. As fit to work upon, so to work by; A fitting Instrument, being her sell
deceived, 2. A fit instrument to work by, in deceiving the man.
to deceive her Husband, by conveying the same suggestions unto him, who would
the less suspect what came through her hands, of whose cordial and entire
affection he was so sully persuaded. Such Instruments Satan often makes use of
in seducing of others: Unsuspected Instruments: such was the Woman to her
Husband. And hereupon Satan singles out her, that she being her self deceived
might be the Instrument to deceive him, which accordingly came to pass; so it
follows in the Text.

3. The woman being deceived, she was in the transgression; (...), in the
transgression. 3. How the woman is said to be in the transgression.
The phrase here imports two things.

1. Hereby she became a Transgressour; Obnoxia facta est Transgressioni; So
Erasmus, she became obnoxious, guilty of the transgressionof the Law of God; 1.
She was a transgressour.
a truth, but not the whole truth.

2. She being hereby made a Transgressour, she became also the Author and
Original of transgression; 2. And the Original of transgression.
so Beza, Causa transgressionis fuit; She was the cause of transgression, (...)
put for (...); so Ambrose renders it well, Facta est in Praevaricationem. She
became the means and instrument to seduce her husband, and so to draw him into
the like transgression. A truth, which for the doctrinall part of it, is so
clearly held forth by the Spirit of God in that third of Genesis, that it
admits of no further, either Confirmation or Illustration.

That which I mainly aimed at when I took this Text in hand, Introduction to
Application
was the making of it useful to the Times and Place wherein we live: Wherein,
let not any of your jealous thoughts anticipate, and forerun my innocent
Meditations, as if I intended to cast any Disrespect upon the weaker Sex, which
as God has many ways honored, so shall I; much less, any Disparagement upon
any of the ways of God, wherein any of them desire to walk; not yet to rebate
the edge, or cool the fervor of a holy and well tempered Zeal in them or any
other. Far be all these from my thoughts, and yours: My intentions herein are
candid, and so I hope shall my words be, free from all gall and bitterness,
and (as much as may be) from sharpness; which yet (I must tell you) the
Minister of Christ may in some cases make use of, and that not without good
warrant from the Apostle; Tit. 1.10.
who writing unto Titus concerning some persons that were unruly, (...),
disorderly and Refractory, viz. to the Reprehensions, Admonitions, and Orders
of the Church, (as the Reverend Diodate glosseth upon the word;) and
Vain-talkers, (...), whose discourses tended more to the ingendring of strife,
then to Edification; and Deceivers, Seducers, (...), such as deceived the
minds, and so seduced otherwise well-meaning souls; Verse 13.
such (says the Apostle) Rebuke sharply, (...), Precise, in express and down
right terms, not smoothing them up in their Errors; nor yet going about the
Bush to tell them of their miscariages; This course I might take: But I shall
for the present (as much as may be) decline it, 1 Cor. 4.21.
choosing rather to come unto you in the spirit of meekness, remembering who
they are whom I have chiefly now to deal with; viz. the weaker and tenderer
Sex, and some of those of tender Consciences, I shall deal with them
accordingly; Genesis 33.13, 14.
Even as Jacob dealt with his Children, which were tender, and his Cattle which
were great with young, he will not over-drive them, for fear of miscariage; but
will lead them on softly, so as they may be able to endure it. So shall my
desire be to deal with you, with as much mildness and tenderness as may be:
And to that end, I shall baulk and decline Uses of Reprehension, which yet the
Text gives a fitting occasion for, and the inordinate practices of some amongst
us, have too justly merited, of whom I may say, and that but too truly, That
they have been, and are but too willing to be deceived; Betaking my self only
to Instructions and Directions; which I shall direct first to the one Sex, then
to the other; Beginning with that which the Text directly and properly leads
me to, the weaker Sex, the Woman; Concerning whom it informs us; First,
Application to Women.
that she was Deceived: And secondly, That being deceived, she was in the
Transgression. Each useful.

Use. 1. Woman that was so deceived at the first? Then, let those of that Sex
learn hence to be for ever jealous of themselves; Let them be for ever jealous
of themselves, least they be deceived.
Being Conscious of their own natural infirmity and weakness, withal of
their natural pronenesse and propensity to be deceived and misled; let them be
for ever jealous over themselves, cautelous and wary, least they also should be
deceived. That they are naturally more prone to be deceived and misled; Women
naturally more prone to be deceived.
had former ages never yielded any evidence for it, the present times would
afford but too many instances of it; not to go out of those walls within which
our selves live. How many of Eves Daughters do we daily here see following
their Mother? Praestigiatricem ne sinito vivere, Exodus 22.18.
being deceived, drawn aside, to the embracing of the Errors of the times; some
one way, some another.

The Woman is deceived: Prestigiatrix potius nominatur quia proctiniores sunt
ad hoc sietas ex infirmitate mulieres. Iun. ad. loc.
I wish I might speak it in the Language of the Text, and say, that The Man
were not. It cannot be denied; some also of that Sex are gone along with them,
being carried away with the stream: But (blessed be God,) the number of them is
not considerable. As it was at the first, so now, (it cannot be hid) The Woman,
the Woman, she is deceived.

Now surely, thus it would not be, were there not a natural aptitude, Special
Caution in them required.
and inclination in that Sex to be deceived. Taking notice hereof, be excited
in the name and fear of the Lord, to be the more wary, the more circumspect
over your selves: which if you be not, The first Woman, the best of Woman.
he that deceived your great Grandmother, (a good Woman) as good, nay take it
not amiss if I say, better then the best of you, (such I am sure she was, when
Satan first met with her,) will also deceive you. Hereof the Spirit of God
gives you warning, by setting before you this fatal miscariage of your first
Parent. The Woman, the first Woman, she was deceived: And wherefore is this
Recorded? Why? even as the Apostle says of the Murmurings and Lustings of the
Israelites in the Wilderness, and the consequents of them; 1 Cor. 10.6.
These things were for our Examples, that we should not lust as they also
lusted; we should not murmur, as they also murmured. So may I say of Eves being
deceived. This stands upon Record for your Example, for your Admonition, to the
intent, that you should not be deceived, as she also was deceived.

Q. As she was deceived? Why, How was that? How the first Woman came to be
deceived.
The Resolution of this Question will prove very useful for our present
design and purpose. As the Mother was deceived, so are her Daughters: As the
first Woman was deceived at the first, so are many of that Sex deceived at this
very day. Looking upon the one, you shall see the other. But how was the first
Woman deceived?

Ans. To show you how, will you go along with me, with your Patience and
Attention: I shall lead you through the several Doors, at which this deceit
brake in upon her: And as I go along, I shall still shut and bar them after me,
that the like deceit may not break in upon any of you at any of them.

These Doors, The ways and means of her deceiving, reduced to three Heads.
these ways and means (I mean) whereby the Woman came to be deceived, are
many: I shall reduce them all to three Heads. They were either in the Woman her
self, or in the Instrument, or in the Object: In every of these we shall meet
with some particulars suiting very fitly with our present purpose: All which
you shall find laid down in the beginning of that one Chapter, the third of
Genesis.

1. Look upon the Woman her self, and see what there was in her that occasioned
this her deception. 1. In the woman her self.
In her take notice of three or four particulars.

1. Her dislike of, and discontentednesse with her present condition. God had
made her after his own Image, 1. Causlesse discontentednesse with her present
condition.
both Holy and Happy: So she was, and so she might have been, had she but known
her own happiness. But upon Satan's tampering with her, she took some dislike
that she was not so well, so holy, so happy, as she might have been, and as
another was; she was not as God. Again, God had placed her in Paradise, where
she had what ever her heart could desire, the free use of all the choice Fruits
of the Garden: Only there was one Tree, which she might see, but not touch, at
least not taste of; the Tree of Knowledge. And hereupon, being instigated by
Satan, she grows discontented, and that discontent was the first step to her
fall and ruin: All which may be, and by Expositors generally is collected from
Satan's Suggestions, and her Replies to them in the six first verses of that
Chapter.

Now (beloved in the Lord) is it not the very self same door that the Errors of
the Times do ordinarily first break in at upon those which are deceived by
them, Applied to the present state of the times.
whether Men or Women? The Errors of the times breaking in at the same door.
They first fall into dislike with their present state and condition:
Notwithstanding, that they are well, yet they are not so well, so well as they
would be, and as they apprehend some others to be: True indeed, they do enjoy
many precious Liberties and Immunities: They do, or may partake in all the Holy
Ordinances of God, Word, Sacraments, Prayer: Only there is one Ordinance,
which the Church at present has not the exercise of, viz. Discipline,
Government: And when it has it, yet they conceive (this I speak of Men, for
Women never yet challenged it,) it shall not be put into their hands; they may
no more touch it, then Vzzah might the Ark, or Eve the Apple. And hereupon they
grow Discontented, and fall into dislike with the present state of the Church;
and that discontent lays them open to Satan's delusions, who readily works
upon such an advantage. And indeed, a greater advantage he cannot have. A
discontented spirit, Satan's Forge and Anvile.
A discontented spirit is a forge and Anvile fit for Satan to forge and hammer
any thing upon that is evil: In the fear of God would you not be deceived as
your Mother was; take heed of such a spirit: Beware how you entertain
groundless and causlesse dislikes, which should make you discontented with
your present personal state, or the state of the Church of God wherein you
live.

Mistake it not: Not but that Christians may take notice of both: As of their
own personal wants, so of what is defective or wanting in the Church: And
taking notice of it, they not only may, but ought by all lawful ways and
means to seek a supply: But through the apprehensions of that defect, to grow
discontented and impatient, so as thereupon to slight and undervalue all other
the mercies which they enjoy: This is a dangerous weakness.

Yet such a weakness, as Gods own dear, dearest servants are subject to. It
was Abraham's case you know, Genesis 15. Gods own servants subject to it.
When God comes to him, with as sweet and full a promise as could be brought
to him, telling him that he was, and would be, his shield, and exceeding great
reward: What says Abraham? Genesis 15.1.2.
Lord (says he) What will thou give me, so long as I go childelesse? Even so
say some amongst us at this day, when they hear what great things God has
already done for this Church of his, and what further mercies he seems to be
about to reach forth unto it, in the liberty and purity of his Ordinances; yet
what are all these to them? so long as there is some one thing, which for the
present they want, and for the future have little hope to enjoy.

O Brethren and Sisters (for to you I am now principally speaking) take we heed
all of us of such dangerous, A Caveat against causlesse discontents.
and pernicious discontents as these, the very Spawne, and first borne of
Satan. So they were in the first woman; The first product and issue of Satan's
temptations in her, was a secret dislike of, and discontentednesse with her
present condition, the condition wherein God himself had set her; and that
lets in a Sea of Temptations upon her, so making way from her seduction.

To prevent or heal the like evil in you, Our present discontents examined, and
found to be such.
give me leave in the spirit of meekness a little to reason with you, about
the ground of this discontent; I beseech you, what is it that should so far
distaste any of you with the present state and condition of the Church of God
in this Kingdom, and with the way, which you apprehend to be now laying forth
unto you, as that you should desert the one, and decline the other? Certainly,
if there be any ground at all for this dislike, it must arise from one of these
two heads; either from something that you want and would have, or else from
something that you have, and would be freed from.

Now for the latter: What burdens are there, Old burdens taken off.
which at the present lie upon this Church, which are so gravanimous, which the
tenderest conscience, being rightly informed, may not submit unto. As for those
stumbling blocks, the cause (or rather occasion) of the unhappy Separation of
the last age, (viz. Ceremonies and humane inventions, mingled with the worship
and service of God.) I think it will not be denied, but that they are removed,
and taken out of the way: What then is the grievance?

Repl. But happily there is something that you want and would have. Pure
Ordinances here administered.
And what may that be? Why, Pure Ordinances. And have you not them? Is not the
word truly preached unto you? Are not the Sacraments rightly-administred
amongst you?

Possibly some may here hit that old blot, and challenge our mixtures in
Church Communion: That in participating in holy mysteries the Precious are not
separated from the Vile, Ier. 15.19.
as they ought to be.

Ans. And are they not? I beseech you where lies the fault? For us of the
Ministry, what can we do mere then we have done? And for you, has there not
been a Liberty in this place publicly granted, for any who intended to come to
the Table of the Lord, to give in any just exceptions (in time convenient)
against any, who should tender themselves to that holy Ordinance, being persons
justly obnoxious, either ignorant, or scandalous? together with a promise of a
stricter scrutiny and discrimination for the future, according to power
committed (or rather transmitted) by lawful Authority: And what can be more
done for the present?

Reply, The exercise of Discipline to be warted for.
Why, but there wants the Exercise of discipline and Government for the right
ordering of the Church.

Ans. To yield it: What then? will you not stay and expect till that Order can
be drawn up? and the power for the exercise thereof be duly and regularly
transmitted?

You know whose speech it was, 2 Kin. 6. ult.
and how ill it was taken, What should I wait for the Lord any longer? Let
there not be such a Rebellious thought in any of our hearts. We have waited,
and let us yet wait. Shall we precipitate the work and run before God? it may
happen unto us, as it daily does to many others: Even as to passengers in a
ferry boat, that will be stepping and leaping out before the Boat can be haled
to shore, where some are over shoes (as Separatists) others over head and ears
(as Anabaptists and some others) so drenching or plunging our selves into
dangerous and destructive errors.

Reply, But wherefore should we wait? When we have what is expected, yet will
not that satisfy our desires. There is yet some one thing more: And what is
that? Why, the entire and absolute government of every Church, every particular
Congregation within it self, commonly (how fitly, I dispute not) known by the
name of Independency.

Ans. Now herein God be merciful to us, Affectation of Independency the
undoing of the world at first.
and to his Churches: Was it not such an other thing that undid the world at
first: viz. The inordinate affectation of Independency: Our first parents would
be absolute: Me thinks the remembrance hereof, should make us for ever jealous
both of the name and thing.

Rep. But what if Christ have purchased and given such a Liberty, such a
Privilege to his Church? Ought not we to stand for the maintaining of it?

Ans. What if? As for those who make this plea, Independency of Churches no
privilege.
let them but show their Charter, and we shall yield to it.

In the mean time know we, that this is no such privilege, as it is by many
taken to be: Nay, in truth no privilege at all. For a Church to subsist alone,
and to exercise such an entire and absolute jurisdiction within it self, true,
it may do it ( viz. In case of necessity) but not so well: Adam when he was
alone, he might have so subsisted. But he who knew what was better for him
concluded it, Genesis 2.18.
that it was not good for the man to be alone. No more is it for Churches,
which are likely to stand, and flourish, surer and better in a holy and
brotherly Combination, and Go-ordinate subjection, then in a divided, and
affected singularity.

I confess I am transported beyond my intentions: But you see how (as it is in
errors) one thing draws on another: I shall make you amends in some of the
following particulars: You now see the first of them; pass we to the second.

2. In the second place, the woman being discontented with her present state,
2. The woman's inordinate desire of bettering her condition by any way
propounded.
she is inordinatly desirous to better it by what ever way or means should be
propounded to her. I, be it to touch, and taste the Apple, though a prohibited
fruit, yet so there may be but hopes of bettering her condition, she will
adventure upon it. And is it not so (beloved) with some amongst us (as it is
with many in some other parts of the Kingdom?) who being discontented with
their present condition, they will adventure upon any way or means that shall
be reached forth unto them by what hand so ever, with hopes of bettering it; It
matters not though prohibited by the Laws of men, and for ought they know, may
be so by the Laws of God, yet they will try it; so running from way to way
(even as Solomon did from vanity to vanity) and from Church to Church, Seekers.
till they have run through, and outrun all the Churches in the world, and so
have lost both the Church and themselves, coming at length to stand alone (like
a lost sheep in a desert) as the new and strange Generation of seekers at this
day are said to do.

Beloved, A dangerous adventure to try every new way.
a dangerous adventure: For you (in the fear of God) take heed how you make it.
Shall you so deal with your Bodies, take every medicine that is prescribed you,
it matters not by what adventrous, and unskilful Emperick, you may make but
ill work in the end: Surely your souls challenge as much, and more care from
you: Take heed how you embrace every new way which is held forth unto you, how
promising soever. In this case look before you leap; and Try before you Try: Be
thoroughly convinced, and see good and clear evidence out of the word, before you
renounce, and engage your selves against any received truth; or yet against
that way which the Church of God in this Kingdom is now holding forth unto you,
betaking your selves to new ways different from it, much more contrary to
it. Otherwise you may be deceived; Nay, let me tell you, this is the next way
to be so, to pitch upon new ways without due examination, and Trial: So was
the woman deceived at the first; being discontented with her first condition,
she adventureth upon a new way for the bettering of it, though held forth by
Satan himself to her ruin and destruction.

3. A third thing in the woman, which made way for her deceiving, 3. The woman's
curiosity in affecting of a prohibited novelty. Genesis 3.3.
was her Curiosity, her affecting of Novelties, and that so much the rather,
because prohibited; Such was the Tree of knowledge: The Fruit thereof she had
not yet tasted: Besides there lay a prohibition upon it: She might not touch
it; So she tells the Serpent, (though therein she seemed to add somewhat to the
prohibition) And no question this was one thing that edged her teeth, and made
her fingers itch at it: It was a prohibited Novelty. And is there not a tang of
this curiosity to be found generally in all the sons and daughters of this
common Mother? The Female Sex much affected with novelties.
Specially in the latter. The Female Sex, how exceedingly are many of them
affected with novelties? New fashions in apparel, though never so uncouth and
uncomely, yet if New, how are they taken up by them? The Female Sex much
affected with Novelties.
Thus it should not be amongst Christian women. Paul teaches them another
Lesson in the ninth verse of this Chapter, I will that women adorn themselves
in modest Apparel, New fashions.
with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broyded (or playted) hair, or gold,
or pearls, or costly array; that is, 1 Timothy 2.9.
not affecting new fashions, garish dresses, or rich apparel, unsuitable to
their quality and degree. But thus it is amongst too many: And is it not so (I
beseech you be not unwilling to hear of it) with new Opinions, new Ways, new
Doctrines, new Truths, new Light, New opinions and ways, etc.
new Teachers, new Phrases and Expressions? O how do these affect? and that often
times for no other Reason, but for the Novelty of them, because they are New:
Specially if Prohibited, that sets a further gloss upon them, making Women,
(I, and Men too often times) the more earnest in looking after them: The men of
Bethshemesh will be looking into the Ark, though it cost them their lives for
it, 1 Samuel 6. 1 Samuel 6.19.


Such is the corrupt nature of Man, Corrupt nature delights to swim against the
stream.
that (like as it is with some Fishes) it delights to swim against the
stream. Nitimur in vetitum. Things are the more desired because forbidden. Even
as it is with sick persons; what the Phisician prohibites, that they most long
for. Thus what Authority forbids, that the sick nature of man often times most
affects; a truth which I might make good in many particular instances; But I
spare you.

Thus it is, (and I think, if you will but every one feel your own pulse, you
will acknowledge it so to be,) Novelty in Religion, no commendation but a
disparagement.
but thus it should not be. In Religion, Novelty is no Commendation, but a
Disparagement. Even as it is with Wines; The New may be sweeter, pleasanter,
but the Old is wholesomer, I, and (to a judicious Palate) toothsomer too. No
man having drunk Old Wine, (says our Savior,) Luke 5. ult.
( viz. being able to judge of Wine) streightway desires New; for he says the
Old is better. Even so is it in Religion. New ways may be sweet, and pleasant
to those that first enter into them. I, but the Old is better, safer, surer.
And therefore it is that the Lord by the Prophet bids the people enquire for
the Old way. Ask for the Old way, Ier. 6.16.
which is the good way, and walk therein. The Old way, that way which the
Patriarks and Prophets walked in. And so the Old way, that way which the
Apostles and Apostolical Churches, being directed by the Spirit of God, walked
in. This is the Old way, and this is the good way. Enquire we for this.

And is not this the way which the Kingdom is now seeking. The old way now
sought for in and by the Kingdom.
To which end, the best course that can be thought of, has been taken. It was
the course which King Herod took, (and it was the wisest course that he could
take,) when he would be rightly informed concerning Christ himself, The best
means used to find it out. Matthew. 2.4, 5.
touching the place of his Nativity, he gathers the chief Priests, and
Scribes of the people together, consulting with them about it. Like course has
Authority in this Kingdom, taken to find out the Way of Christ. They have to
this purpose gathered together some, many (let it be spoken without Flattery,
and heard without Envy) of the Chief Priests and Scribes of the people;
Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven; such as in probability should be
best acquainted with the Mysteries of that Kingdom; Men of known Piety,
Integrity, Ability; And with them they have now for a long time consulted. And
what more likely course can be taken for the finding out of that way? Now far
be it from us, Take heed of causlesse preiudices against the way of the Kingdom
before it be known.
for any of us to entertain any causlesse Prejudice, against that way before we
know it; much more by any inconsiderate preingagements, by putting our selves
into New ways aforehand, to render our selves incapable of it, when God shall
hold it forth unto us, though with never such clear evidence of truth. Nay
rather, as for these New ways, how sweet, and pleasant, and plausible soever
they may seem to be; yet it will be a great deal more wisdom to deal with them
as Vintners do with their Wines, which they let stand and settle, before they
pierce and use them.

Let not Affectation of Novelty, of New ways, inordinatly transport any of us,
least thereby unawares we be brought to reject and renounce old Truth, as some
of late times have done.

Much less suffer we our selves to be carried on with a spirit of opposition,
Beware of a Spirit of Contradiction.
to swim against the stream of Authority, so as to like any way the worse,
because Commended and Commanded; or yet the better, because prohibited and
oppugned. True indeed, it is possible the way of God may be every where spoken
against, (as the Jews tell Paul concerning his Sect.) Acts 28.22.
But it is not therefore the way of God, because spoken against. Much less is
it ever the better to be liked, because every where spoken against True indeed,
were it so that it were spoken against only by wicked and ungodly men, or by
Time-serving superstitious Formalists; this might be like a dark shadow to a
beautiful Picture, that makes it the more Lightsome; or a dark foil, to a
fair Diamond, which makes it sparkle the more. But when a way shall be
oppugned by good men, holy men, learned and judicious men, and that not by a
few private spirits, but by the general consent of the Churches, in this case
certainly such opposition renders it at least very suspicious. Let not any of
us then like a way the better for this. Much less because Lawful and
Christian Authority strikes in against it. In this case Christians should be
very wary, and tender, Romans 13.1, 2.
least in opposing and resisting the Powers which are of God, they also resist
God in them. I have done with the third Particular. Take but one more.

4. And that was, the Woman's Incogitancy, or unadvisednesse in Parleying with
the Serpent, 4. The woman's unadvisednesse in parlying with the Serpent in the
absence of her husband, and consenting to him without his privity.
entering dispute or conference with him about a received Truth, and that not
only hearing of him, but harkening unto him; nay, yielding, and consenting,
and engaging her self by an Act of her own, and all this without the privity of
her husband, whom God had set over her, and who might have been able to have
Resolved and Informed her better. This (says Pareus) this unadvisednesse or
Rashness, (call it as we will) was the beginning and first occasion of her
downfall. And surely so it has been in many of her Daughters, who have been
deceived and seduced by the very same means, Parum consulto se certanimi
periculoso committit marito absente vel inconsulto. Ista sive incogitantia,
sive temeritas principium fuit and occasio sequentis lapsus. Pareus, in Genesis 3.
ver. 2.
viz. through their own Adventrous Rashness in harkening to subtle Deceivers,
and Dangerous Seducers, (these terms, when ever I use them, let it not be
conceived that I have the least thought of reflecting upon any of our Reverend
and Godly Brethren of the Congregationall way, whose persons I respect and
honor, but in reference to some others, who by their smooth and subtle
insinuations, have drawn some of the weaker Sex into dangerous and destructive
Errors,) and not only harkening, but yielding, consenting, engaging themselves
in their ways, and that without the consent or privity of their Husbands, or
without advising with any other who might have been more able to inform them.

This latter clause I cannot but take notice of, and let you know that I do so.
The unwarrantablenesse of women's engaging them selves in new ways without the
privity or consent of their husbands
Not but that I might also take just occasion to deal with the former, viz. the
unwarrantable rashness and presumption of some women in embracing, and
engaging themselves in new ways without the privity of their husbands (and so
of children without the consent of Parents) to whom they are so far in duty
bound, as to take their advice, (specially if they be able to give it) however
to acquaint them with their intentions, and the reasons of them, desiring their
consents: But letting that pass now, Peoples engaging themselves in new ways
without conferring with their Ministers.
which probably I may have occasion to touch upon again hereafter.

The latter I cannot but take notice of, as being a matter which somewhat
concerns my self, and my fellow laborer in the Ministry here; whom God in
respect of our Ministerial Office, has appointed to be as Counselors to his
people in things appertaining to himself: So runs that old Statute: They should
seek the Law at the Priests mouth. Mal. 2.7.
Such is our Office, and such use our people ought to make of it. But how few
are there that do it? Herein let me appeal to the consciences of those that are
gone aside into any of the Errors of the times, how sew are there of them that
ever addressed themselves to either of us to be resolved in their doubts, and
scruples of this kind. Some I will not deny but have done it, who through the
blessing of God have been at least stayed, if not satisfied. But how few?

Reply, I know what will here presently be replied; Though we have not heard of
them, yet some others have: such as they apprehended able enough to resolve
them.

Ans. But who were those others? were they not such as they were persuaded
would speak what they were desirous to hear? A pretended, but false way of
seeking resolution.
Such whose judgments they knew beforehand to be consonant, and agreeable to
their own minds and wills: If so, then this is not the way to be resolved, but
rather to be confirmed in a Resolution. You know it was Ahabs case, (let none
abuse the Comparison, by stretching it beyond the Staple, extending it beyond
the point to which it is intended. Sure I am, our Saviors parables of the
Thief, and unjust Steward will bear it out) Ahab pretending to seek resolution
concerning his expedition against Ramoth-Gilead, 1 Kings, cap. ult.
whether he should go up to it, or no, he consults with the Prophets about it.
But what Prophets? His own Prophets, such as he presumed would speak what he
would have. But as for that other Prophet of God whom Jehoshaphat minds him
of, in as much as he suspected him to be of another mind, and so would be
averse to his intended design, therefore he declines him, is loath to confer
or consult with him. Now this I say, is not to seek, but rather to confirm
Resolution. The most probable way to be resolved in scruples.
The way to be resolved in scruples and doubts of this nature, is to hear what
both parties can lay, specially those of a differing judgment from our selves.
This is the most probable, and rational way to be rightly informed.

And is it so? The more is the wonder that it should be so much neglected, and
declined as it is, and that not only in private, but (as the report is) also
in public. Strange, are there any such? (I should hope there are not) who are
so far wedded to their own wills, as to take up resolutions aforehand, in case
their opinions be meddled with, An evadence of some that are too willing be
deceived.
or their ways touched upon, though never so tenderly, yet they will come no
more at the public Ordinance, at least not to hear such a Minister? Now surely
Christians, Is this Christian? Even Foelix the Heathen was of a better mind,
or at least durst not avouch such high, and presumptuous obstinacy: At the
hearing of Paul's Sermon, he was troubled, and much troubled, yet he promises
to hear him again another time. Shall any dare to resolve otherwise? Let them
take this home with them: Act. 24 25.
This is but too clear an evidence, that they are but too willing to be
deceived.

I have done with the first head of particulars, taken from the woman her self,
who gave occasion to her own deceiving, by her Discontentednesse with her
present condition; her inordinate desire of bettering it by what ever way
should be propounded; her Curiosity in affecting of prohibited Novelties; and
her unadvised rashness in parlying with the adversary about a received truth,
and not consulting with her husband about it.

Pass we now to the second head, looking upon the Instrument which Satan made
use of in deceiving the woman, 2 The Instrument by which the woman was deceived.
the first woman, the best of women. And here again we shall meet with diverse
particulars, all very fitly appliable to our present purpose: Refer we them to
two heads. The Quality of the Person, and his Arguments.

1. For the Quality of the Person. In the general, an unsuspected Instrument.
1. The quality of the person; an unsuspected Instrument.
Such Instruments does Satan at this day make use of, in perverting and
seducing of simple and wellmeaning souls; unsuspected Instruments; such as are
neither suspected by themselves, nor others, to do any such office.

1. Not by Themselves. Certainly the Serpent in deceiving the woman had no
purpose, Such Instruments now made use of by Satan.
no intention to do what it did. Only Satan made use of it as his Instrument,
speaking in it, and by it. And surely so is it with many of those who are made
isntrumental in seducing and drawing others into errors at this day. What
herein they do, it is Praeter intentionem, they have no such thought, 1.
Unsuspected by themselves.
no such purpose. Only they are secretly acted, and carried on by Satan, who
works in them and by them, being unsuspected by themselves. It was the case
of that Old Prophet, 1 Kin. 13.15. (as is most probably conjectured) in
deceiving, seducing of the Man of God, that cried out against the Altar at
Bethel; In turning him out of his way, he had no ill design upon him, no evil
intent toward him. What he therein did, he did only to express his affection
to him, by giving him the best entertainment he could: Yet we see what was the
issue. However, sure we are, it was Peter's case, when he suggested that
Counsel to his Lord and Master, that he should not go up to Jerusalem, but
rather decline that service, those sufferings, which he had told his Disciples
awaited for him there. Mat. 16.22.
Be it far from thee Lord (says he) This shall not be unto thee. (Council as
pernicious, as any that the Serpent gave to the Woman (had it been followed)
the salvation of mankind depending upon the one, as the destruction thereof
did upon the other:) Full little did Peter think what disservice herein he did;
That he should have any hand in crossing the determinate Counsel of God, or in
hindering that great good work, which his Lord and Master was then about, the
Redemption of mankind. No, what herein he did, he did it out of a true
cordial affection to his Lord and Master. Yet was he herein secretly
instigated, and acted by Satan, abusing and perverting his good intentions, to
sinister, dangerous, and destructive ends. So much is intimated by our Savior
himself in that tart Reprehension of his, Ver. 23.
Get thee behind me Satan, etc. Certainly so fares it with some, with many at
this day; who are so active in drawing people aside into the errors of the
Times. This they do, not out of any ill will they have either to Christ or
them; but rather out of a zealous affection which they bear to both. Only they
are herein seeretly acted by Satan, who makes use of that their preposterous
zeal to the furthering of his own designs, in disturbing the peace of the
Church for the present, and (if it might be) in hindering that great good work
in hand, the Reformation of it for the future. Thus Satan makes use of
Instruments not suspected by themselves.

2. Much less by others: Full little (without Question) did Eve think, 2.
Unsuspected by others.
that such deadly poison should be breathed out of the mouth of that smooth
Creature, as should impoyson her, and all her Posterity. And as little do many
well-meaning souls at this day suspect, that they should suck errors from those
lips, which they apprehend to be like the Spouses lips, Cant. 4. Cant. 4.1^.
(and in some respect they are so) Dropping as the Honycombe, having Honey and
milk under their tongues; such tongues as afford them many sweet and
soul-refreshing instructions, and consolations. And yet even through such lips
does Satan sometimes breath forth both dangerous and deadly poison.

A truth which may be verified in some of the Antinomian and Anabaptisticall
Teachers and Preachers of the times. In whose Sermons and writings there may be
found some very useful, profitable, comfortable Truths; and those happily set
out with sweet, and soul-Ravishing expressions. But withal, there is a mixture
of poison with that honey: dangerous, and destructive errors, being interwoven
with those Truths. Interwoven, and that as Thread is sometimes with silk,
where the warpe frets, and eats out the woofe: Or like some of those leaprous
garments spoken of in Leviticus, Lev. 13.48.
where the Warpe might be clean, and yet the woofe infected with the Plague of
Leprosy. Such Instruments does Satan make use of in venting, and propagating
of the errors of the times (in this not unlike the Serpent at first)
unsuspected Instruments. The Serpent then an Innocent, but subtle Creature,
both applied to some seducers.


I might descend here into some particulars, taking notice of some qualities in
the Serpent at that time, which may very fitly be applied to some of those
seducers which are abroad in the world: as viz. his Innocence, and subtilty.
The Serpent was then an Innocent, Genesis 3.1. 2 Cor. 11.3.
and harmless Creature, as all the rest of the Creatures then were before the
fall; though full of poison within, yet outwardly harmless: But Secondly, a
subtle creature (...) The Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the
field. And truly if we look at some deceivers (instance in that Serpentine
brood of Romish Jesuits, Romish Jesuits, and some English Anabaptists
dangerous seducers.
and I shall take leave to join some English Anabaptists with them) shall we
not find them such, and that both for Innocence and subtilty? For Innocence;
in their lives demure, austere, harmless, blameless not to be censured, not
to be taxed. But withal subtle; I, more subtle then any ordinary generation
of men; hiding their poison; withal, slily insinuating and winding themselves
into the bosoms of others by their smooth and plausible insinuations: Closely
conveying themselves, and cunningly creeping in and out by their subtle
evasions and distinctions, even as the Serpent could in and out of the Garden.

Such Deceivers (my Brethren and Sisters) there are abroad in the world; even
such as the Apostle speaks of Ephesians. 4. Who by their sleight of hand (their
Cogging and Cheating, so the word there properly signifies ((...)) a Metaphor
taken from playing at Dice, Ephesians. 4.14.
where Cheaters can Cog the Dice to make them serve their own turns) and
cunning craftiness, lie in wait to deceive. I will not charge this place with
any of this kind. 2 Timothy 3.6.
Yet possibly there may be some such, who (as the Apostle describes them, 2 Timothy 3.6.) Creep into houses, and lead captive silly women. And truly, it is to
be feared some such there have been even in this place, who though themselves
be gone, yet they have left some of their stings behind them.

Now the case standing thus, Great need of caution.
that Satan makes use of such Instruments (such as the Serpent at first was)
in the general, unsuspected Instruments; In particular, Innocent, and subtle
Instruments; O what need have you to be cautelous and wary? Not believing every
spirit: That is Saint John's advice, 1 Ioh. 4. Every spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.11.
that is, every one that pretends to, and boasts of the spirit: Nay, in this
sense, believe not any spirit. What says the Apostle, Romans 3.4.
Romans 3. Let God be true, and every man a liar. God only is Infallible. As for
men, be they what they will, they are Liars, and that both Passively, and
Actively, subject to be deceived themselves, and to deceive others. You see it
in our common Mother, who has transferred this her natural infirmity to all
her Posterity. And therefore Try before we Trust. Try the spirits whether they
be of God. Not resigning up our belief to the judgment of what ever man or
men. Though never so learned, never so holy, never so wise, never so innocent,
yet take heed of giving the divine honor of an absolute credence unto them,
which is no less then a a kind of Anthropolatreia, a piece of Man-worship.
But try their spirits; and try their Doctrines.

This I speak in the first place with reference to my self. The Spirits and
Doctrines of all men to be tried.
What ever shall fall from my mouth, take it not up, unless you see evidence
for it, either in the word, or in the nature of the thing. And I wish you
would do the like by all others. As for hearing of others, (such I mean as are,
(or at least have been) Ministers; for as for mere private persons, Teaching
Brethren (as they are called) I dare give no allowance to the public exercise
of their gift (as they call it) for which I know no warrant that they have
either from God or man unless it be in case of necessity, which (blessed be
God) is not our case) but for the hearing of others, though in some things of
different judgments, yet (so it may be done without any affront to Authority,
and without giving any countenance to any of the errors of the times, and
particularly to that of Separation) I dis-allow it not. Only therein, take heed
of sucking in, and svvallovving down all such doctrines as shall be delivered
by them, and that without any chewing, taking them upon the credit of the
speaker, least in so doing, together with some truths, you also swallow down
some errors. So was your first mother deceived, viz. by giving ear to an
unsuspected Instrument, and taking the word from his mouth without due Trial,
she took in that which might have proved the ruin of her, and all her
posterity. This for the Quality of the person.

Come we now to his Arguments. 2. The Arguments which Satan put into the
Serpents mouth.
What were the Arguments which Satan puts into the Serpents mouth for the
deceiving of our first parent? What were those Reasonings, those (...) (as Paul
calls them, 2 Cor. 2.11.) those Devices, those Wiles or Methods (that is the
Apostles word, Ephesians. 6.11. (...)) which this grand Deceiver here makes use of?
Of these take we notice of four or five.

1. The first is a doubtful interrogation, wherein he questioneth a received
and known Truth. 1. A doubtful Interrogation, calling a known Truth into
question.
Yea, has God indeed said, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? Genesis
3.1. This Prohibition Eve had either heard from Gods own mouth (as is most
probable) or else she had received it from her husband, and that with such
strong and clear evidence, as that she was fully convinced of it, as appears
from the second, and third verses of that Chapter: Now Satan having to deal
with her, the first thing that he attempts, is to kindle a jealousy in her
breast concerning that word; to render it suspicious to her, as if either it
were not true, or at least not equal. And is not this the way whereby Satan
ordinarily prepares the hearts of those whom he intends to deceive, for the
receiving of his suggestions and delusions? First, he shakes and unsettles
them, by bringing them to call in question, received and known truths; such
truths as they have by clear evidence been formerly convinced of. A practice
which this subtle Sophister never made more use of then in this age,
Sceptiscisme in Religion a dangerous evil
wherein many Christians are turned mere Scepticks, Questionists, questioning
every thing, scarce building upon any thing. How many truths of God (clear and
evident truths) are by some in this age called into question, (and those some
of them of very great and high concernment) which former ages ever looked upon
as undoubted and unquestionable. Now what a subtle piece of Sophistry is this?
Hereby Satan first renders the truths of God, and the ways of God suspicious
unto men, draws a jealousy upon them, and so prepares their hearts for the
drinking in of many dangerous, and some damnable errors. In the fear of God
take we heed how we give entertainment to any such faithless doubtings and
questionings.

Not but that Christians both may and ought to desire, How Christians may
que^tion received and known Truths, and how not.
and endeavor a further settlement, and establishment, in known and received
truths. And to that end they may take notice, not only what can be said for
them; but what can be said against them, that so they may not take things upon
trust, but may see with their own eyes. But to call any of them in question
without some good, and clear, at least probable evidence, this, as it is
dangerous to our selves, so is it injurious to the truth, and dishonorable
unto that God whose Truth it is. Which of us but would account it so for our
selves, to have our names brought in question, much more to have our persons
brought to the bar, merely upon the groundless information of some jealous
head, without any evidence at all. Take we heed therefore how we so deal with
the truths, or ways of God.

Specially how we bring them to the Bar of man's judgment, calling in
question the equity of them, Take heed of bringing Gods truths or ways to man's
bar. Ezekiel. 18.25.
the equity of Gods decrees, precepts, prohibitions, dispensations,
providence. So did some of the Jews of old, as the Prophet Ezekiel charge
it upon them, Ezekiel. 18. Ye say the way of the Lord is not equal. And even so
do some at this day make bold to weigh the mysteries of Heaven, viz. the
decrees, and providence of God, at the beam of their own carnal reason,
questioning the equity of them, which because they cannot see, they will not
believe, (the case of Arminians, and Socinians.) A high and dangerous
presumption, which who so gives way unto, is in the direct way to be deceived.
So was our first Parent deceived at the first, by harkening unto Satan,
questioning the truth or equity of a Divine prohibition. Has God indeed said?
etc.

2. In the second place; the next step that Satan makes, is from questioning
to opposing; from a doubtful interrogation, 2. Confident opposition.
to a peremptory negation. Having questioned Gods precept, now he denies his
threatening, which he does with a great deal of confidence. Nequaquam
morieminis, Ye shall not surely dye, Genesis 3.4. Applied to the times.
or surely ye shall not dye. And is not this the method wherein Satan still
proceeds with such as he seduceth, and draws into Errors? First he brings
them to question received truths, then to oppose them; and that not in a
submissive and humble, but in a confident and peremptory way. A property very
observable in many of the Sectaries of the times. For a time they stand
doubting, and wavering; and if partly resolved, yet they carry their
differences in judgment with some fair respective moderation, but afterward
they grow so confident, so peremptory, so violent, and that not only in
maintaining their own opinions, and ways, but in opposing, and affronting all
others who are contrary minded, as if they had received some immediate
revelation from Heaven. Now truly, such confidence, at least such violence,
does not become humble Christians: Specially in points controversall betwixt
them and their brethren; and those neither of, nor near the foundation. True,
were they fundamentalls, principles of Religion, now confidence, and earnestnes
do well. (...), It is St. Iudes word in the fourth verse of his Epistle, Jude 4.
That ye contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints. But being
only matters of order, (such as most of the differences of the times are
about) now Christians though possibly they should be in the truth, yet they may
be ever earnest and confident.

3. In the third place, This grand deceiver, from confident opposition he falls
to an unjust and foul crimination, 3. Unjust and foul crimination; charging
Gods way with rigor and envy.
changing this way, these proceedings of God, both with rigor, and envy. With
rigor, as if God had dealt hardly with our first Parents in abridging them of
their liberty, not allowing them to eat of that tree, as well as the rest. So
much is insinuated in that interrogation, v. 1. Yea; has God indeed said, ye
shall not eat of every tree in the Garden? Interrogatio criminantis, or
calumniantis. As if he had said, this a very hard thing that you should be so
restrained, so abridged of your liberty. With envy; as if God had envied the
happiness and perfection of man, specially his perfection in knowledge. So he
charge it expressly, v. 5. for God does know that in the day ye eat thereof,
then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods.

And is not this the very direct course that Satan takes in the deceiving of
many simple well-meaning souls at this day? Applied to the times
viz. to prejudice them against that way of God which is intended to be set up
in this Kingdom, and that by casting the like foul criminations upon it, that
he may thereby render it not only suspicious in their eyes, A generation of
serpents stirred up to blaspheme the Church; and way of God in this kingdom.
Psa. 140.2.
but Odious. To this end it is, that he has of late stirred up, and set on
work such a Generation of Serpents. So I may well call them, and that without
any breach of Charity. For sure I am, (as David says of his Doeg, and some
other Whelps of that litter, his virulent and foulmouthed Adversaries,) They
have sharpened their tongues like a Serpent; Adders poison is under their lips.
Selah. So says David of some in his time, setting a Note of Admiration upon
their heads, (Selah.) And truly so may we upon some in our time. When we read
the writings of those Shemei's and Rabshakehs, whom Satan has of late stirred
up to revile, and blaspheme the ways of God, the Ordinances of God, the Church
of God, the Ministers of God, the People of God, well may we set a Selah upon
their heads, and stand and wonder; wonder that ever any that profess the name
of Christ, specially such as pretend to greater strictness then other of their
brethren, should ever dare to belch out such prodigious blasphemies, as those
libellous Pamphlets are stuffed withal.

But what are the criminations of these accusers of the brethren? Crimes
charged, the same with these of the Serpent.
What are the crimes which they so deeply charge upon that way which they
apprehend to be now setting up in the Kingdom?

Why, even the very same with those which the Devil here puts into the mouth
of the Serpent (so as you may plainly see where they found them, and from
whence they had them) viz. Rigor, and Envy. Amongst their many foul and
virulent charges, which they discharge upon this way, you may observe these two
to be the chief and principal.

1. Rigor; That any way, which has the name of God called upon it, should be
prohibited. 1. Rigor.
That people should be restrained from the professing and holding forth of what
Religion they please, at least in what way they please; Oh this is a rigorous
abridgement of their Christian Liberty, savouring too strongly of the Egyptian
Task-Master. A thing not sufferable, that Conscience should be tied and
fettered, and not left at Liberty, not only to think, but in matter of Religion
to speak, write, profess, practice, hold forth what it pleases. Here is the
great Charge.

A Charge how like to that of the Old Serpents here? Paralleld with that of the
Serpent.
even so like, as if it had been spit out of his mouth. Yea, (says the
Serpent) Has God indeed said, ye shall not eat of every Tree in the Garden?
What a rigorous and injurious restraint is this, that they for whom all these
Fruits were made, may not use them at their pleasure? Even so says the Spawn
of this Serpent now; Yea, has Authority indeed said, Ye shall not proesse what
Religion you please? Nor yet hold forth the true Religion in what way you
please? What a rigorous restraint is this? that they who were borm Freemen,
specially such as are set at liberty by Christ, may not enjoy the use of this
their liberty? That they for whom all the Ordinances were instituted and
ordained, may not enjoy them, and use them as they shall think fitting. This is
a thing which they know not how sufficiently to declaime, and inveigh against.
And thence are those loud outcries of Tyranny and Persecution Tyranny worse
then Prelaticall, and persecution as bad as ever Antichristian was. And as they
charge this way with Rigor;

Envy. 2. Envy.
That some Ordinances and Administrations should be peculiarly appropriated to
some particular persons; Preaching, to the Ministers of the Gospel, such as are
devoted and set a part to that work; Administration of Censures and Discipline
to them, and some select persons joined with them, so as in the mean time the
generality of the people shall be excluded; Private Christians how great so
ever their abilities be, yet may they not exercise their gifts in a public
way, to the public edification of the Church; much less may they intermeddle
with the Government of the Church, What is this (say they) but Envy? even the
height of envy. What was it that made that busy young man to bring his
complaint to Moses against Eldad and Medad, Numb. 11.26, 27, 28.
that being private persons, persons out of Office, yet they prophesied? Was it
not Envy? And what made the Disciples to inhibit that man in the Gospel, the
Exercise of his gift in casting out of Devils, only because he did not join
himself unto them? was it not, Envy? And what else is it (say they) that
makes the Ministers of the Church to appropriate the Office of preaching to
themselves? Surely nothing but Envy to the people. They know well enough that
in case there were a liberty left for every one to exercise his gift as he
pleased, the people would soon attain such perfection in knowledge, as that
their Teachers would be despised and brought into contempt. And hereupon also
is it, that they exclude them from intermedling in public Administrations, in
managing the business of the Church, only to maintain their own Prelaticall
dignity and pomp. Such are the suggestions which of late have fallen from the
pens of some, and mouths of many.

But alas, Paralelled with that of the Serpent.
are they not again the very same with that of the Serpent here, which he
charge upon God himself? For God does know (says the Serpent) that in the
day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods.
And even so say they, Ministers know well enough that in the day there is such
a liberty granted as is desired, the peoples eyes would be opened, and they
would be as Gods, equal to themselves, both in knowledge and Authority. The
Parallel you see runs so punctual and full, that me thinks the very comparing
of them together should be a sufficient disswasive to people, to keep them from
giving any entertainment unto such foul suggestions, which are (as you see)
spit out of the mouth of the Old Serpent. Yet take one or two of these sleights
more. I will be brief in them.

4. In the fourth place; Satan casting this Crimination, 4. New light held
forth.
this charge upon this way, these proceedings of God with man; withal he
holds forth unto the Woman a New-light concerning it, telling her that which
neither she nor her husband before ever heard of, giving her another reason and
ground for that Prohibition, then ever she dreamed of. God does know (says
he) that in the day ye eat thereof, Applied to the Times.
your eyes shall be opened, etc. And is there not a great deal of such new
light held forth in this Kingdom at this day? Strong Doctrines Preached,
Printed, Vented; some of which having lain asleep, nay dead and rotten, for
more then a thousand years together, are now awakened, and revived. Others of
them never hatched, never disclosed until this present age. And these are held
forth to the world as New-light, which being brought to the Test, upon due
Examination and Trial, will be found to have no more light in them, then was
in this suggestion, which the Serpent here holds forth to the woman. So as we
may say of them (as that Greek Critic did of the Bow, (...), The name of it
signified life, but the work was death) that are in name Light, but in truth
Darkness.

5. In the last place; 5. A promise of some great good.
Holding forth new-light to the woman, withal he makes promise to her of some
great good that should accrue to her from following his Counsel; specially of
a great increase of knowledge, and of atchieving an excellent, and transcendent
honor and dignity: A practice imitared by all Sectaries.
Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knovving good and evil.
And is it not even such air that the Heresiarchs, the heads and prime leaders
of all schisms and factions in the world have in all ages used to feed their
Sectaries, their Disciples with? In case they will but hearken to their
counsel, and put themselves upon the vvayes whith they hold forth unto them,
they promise them some great good that shall accrue unto them. In particular,
hereby they shall come to know that which they never yet did, nor others do,
nor can do, being out of that way. Besides, they shall hereby be translated to
the highest form of Christianity, attain to such honor and perfection, as
without this they are not capable of. These things I do but touch, being very
willing to dismiss this second head of particulars, taken from the quality of
the instrument which Satan here makes use of, and the Arguments which he
puts into his mouth.

Pass we now to the third, which I shall dispatch with all convenient brevity;
3. The Object, the Apple presented to the Woman, which was
being as willing to dismiss this Text, and this subject, as possibly some of
you would have me. In the third place then look upon the Object; the Apple it
self which is here presented to the Woman.

And therein we shall take notice only of three particulars. You have them all
together in the beginning of the sixth verse of that third of Genesis; Genesis 3.6.
1. She saw that it was good to eat. 2. That it was beautiful, pleasant to
the eyes. 3. That it was desirable to make one wise. Each appliable to our
present purpose. A word of each.

1. 1. Good to eat, pleasant, and nourishing.
It was good to eat, pleasant, and delectable to the palate; and withal
useful for nourishment. Such she apprehended it to be; and such (no question)
in truth it was. Not but that there might be, and most probably were, some
other Trees in the Garden equalizing it in both these respects; As for
instance, The tree of life; which how ever it was so called (as Augustine
determines it well) not effective, but significative, not in regard of any such
operation, or virtue that it had, to give life, or preserve life to Eternity,
but in regard that it was a Sacrament, a Sign, and Seal of life and
immortallity to man upon his obedience; Yet in all probability (as Mercer
conceives of it) the fruit thereof was both most delectable, and nutritive,
most pleasant to the palate, and nourishing to the body. But yet such
properties there were also in the Tree of knowledge, and happily the Woman
apprehended more then there was.

And these enticed the Woman the rather to taste of it. Applied to the times.
And truly such are the arguments that do much prevail with many of those who
are drawn aside to the embracing of new vvayes, specially that of the
Separation.

They apprehend a great deal of sweetness, a great deal of goodness in that
way. Much sweetness in the Communion of Saints. Much goodness both in the
Persons that go that way, and in the means which there may be had for
Spiritual edification, No sweetness in the way of separation but may be
enjoyed without it.
and soul-nourishment. And we will not deny but it may be so. But withal, may
there not be as much both sweetness, and goodness in another tree, as in this
forbidden one? May not both these be found in some other way? as viz. in that
one way which the Church is now holding forth in this Kingdom? As for that
sweetness in the Communion of Saints (which is indeed a true sweetness, that
cannot but relish well to a gracious palate;) What lets but that it may be
enjoyed as well in this way, as in any other? Let but any judicious Christian
give me a reason for it, and I shall be silent. In the mean time, know we that
if it be not so, it is the fault of the Persons, not of the way,

For the Persons, I shall not in any wise detract from their real goodness;
(in this I shall desire to have, and use as much charity, as some of them
want.) But (if we may take the boldness to move the question,) where did they
get that goodness? Was it not in the Church of God, and under the Ministry in
this Kingdom? I presume there are few, very few, that are now adopted into any
of these new ways, incorporated into any of these new bodies, but they will do
the Church of England this right, as to acknowledge it their Mother, and some
of the Ministers of this Church their Fathers in Christ, by whom they were
begotten unto God. And if so; seeing this womb bar them, why may not these
breasts give them suck? (You will not allow it, that Mothers which are able
should put forth their children to nurse; What would you think of those
children that should put forth themselves?) why may they not expect sufficient
nourishment; from those means from which at the first they had their
spiritual subsistence?

Obj. But there is more full, and more liberal means, and maintenance in that
way.

Ans. Pretense of better means no sufficient warrant for separation.
Should this be supposed, yet cannot this be conceived to be a sufficient
warrant for any presently to forsake and renounce that Church, where God by his
Providence, and Ordinance has cast them: No more then it would be for sheep
or other cattle to break their fence; because there is better feeding in the
next pasture. But, as for the means which through the goodness of God may be
in the Church amongst us enjoyed, let me say this of them, and I will speak it
with confidence, that such is this pasturage, that if the sheep of Christ will
but take their feed, here is enough not only to keep them life-ward, but to
feed them fat. Such are ^h^se means, as if Christians be not wanting to
themselves in the use of them, here is sufficient not only to maintain the
life of grace in them, but to make them rich in grace. But I hasten.

2. The second thing which enticed the Woman in the fruit which she saw, 2. The
beautiful outside of the Apple.
was the fair and beautiful outside of it, she saw that it was pleasant to
the eyes. And surely is not this one thing that daily inticeth, and carries
away many to the embracing of new-wayes? Many amongst us carried away with
specious outsides of new ways.
even the fair and beautiful outside of them. I mean, those specious
glosses, those goodly styles, and titles which are put upon them. Never a one
of them but is set out with some of them. As namely, that which is so common in
the mouths of some amongst us, (though separated from us,) viz. the Church
way. A word which I must profess (as it is impropriated to that one particular
way) I cannot hear but as I do a harsh and jarring sound, which sets my teeth
on edge; In as much as this one word so applied and used, it at once strikes
thorough the sides of all the Churches of Christ that ever were in the
Christian world, as if never any of them were in a Church way till this last
age, and now only some few of them. And of like kind are those other of, Gods
way and Christ's way, and the Cause of God, and the Government of Christ, and
the Godly party, and the close walking people (which two latter terms, what
ever truth there may be in them, yet they do not so well become their own
mouths.) Now these goodly styles, and titles, and compellations, they do
marvelously take many simple, and well meaning souls, (who (as I cannot therein
blame them) would willingly be in the best way, with the best company,)
specially when they are on the other side set off with such foul and
opprobrious terms as are cast upon the ways of other Churches, and the
members thereof, which are different from, or opposite to that way of theirs,
as if they were all Antichristian, having the mark of the beast upon them,
opposers of Christ's kingly Government, and what not? Now with this outside are
many taken, even as the Woman at first was with the outside of the Apple. But
alas, what a weakness is it to be thus taken? He that should adventure to
taste of what is in an Apothecaries box, because he espieth the name of some
sovereign Cordial on the outside of it, might sometimes find that saying to
be too true, Extra remedium, intus venenum, that there is medicine without, but
poison within. A word for the last, and I have done with this use.

3. The third thing in the Apple which enticed the Woman, 3. A supposed
property in the Apple of giving wisdom to those which eat it. Knowledge gained
by embracing new ways often times like that of the woman's.
was a supposed property of making those wise that should eat of it, viz. by
the augmentation of their knowledge. And surely such a supposed property it is
that wines much upon some, enticing them to the affecting of new ways, because
thereby they expect such an increase in knowledge, as in this way which we are
in, they cannot expect to attain unto. But what knowledge that may be, for my
own part I know not, neither can I conjecture, unless it be such a knowledge
as the Woman attained to by eating of the Apple, a knowing of good and evil,
and that not by a more excellent science, but by a miserable experience, from
which kind of knowledge the good Lord deliver us, and his Churches.

You now see by what ways and means the first Woman, this good Woman, the
best of Women, came to be deceived. Now let not all these, any of these fall to
the ground. You have heard to what end it is that they are held forth unto us
in sacred records; and that use let all of us make of them: looking upon them
as exemplary to us, to the intent that none of us should be deceived as she
also was deceived. And so I have done with the former Branch of the Text, so
far forth as it concerns the weaker Sex.

Pass we now to the latter Branch, which informs us that the Woman was not
only deceived, but being deceived, she was in the transgression, that is, the
cause and original of Adams transgression, by whose means he was seduced to
the ruin of himself and all his posterity.

To this let the Apostle himself return the answer. A double lesson for the
weaker Sex.
I presume you will not take it amiss from his hands, the remembrance hereof
(as he applies it) should reach those of that Sex a double lesson; 1. Of
Silence. 2. Of Subjection. Silence, not to take upon them to preach, or teach,
or speak in the public. Subjection, not to usurp Authority over their
Husbands, but to be subject to them. Both these lessons you have laid down by
the Apostle himself in the two verses next save one before the Text. Let the
Woman learn in silence with all subjection: But I suffer not a Woman to teach,
nor to usurp Authority over the man. And the two verses following are (as I
told you in the entrance upon the Text) reasons and arguments for both. So much
that first particle imports, ( For.) For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And
Adam was not deceived but the Woman, etc. The Woman, Posterior in ordine,
prior in culpa (says Primasius upon it) she was last in order, but first in
Error. For this double reason must she learn this double lesson, viz. to learn
in silence, and be in Subjection. I shall look upon each, as standing in
reference to the Text.

1. 1. Woman must learn in silence.
In the first place, Women must be silent, viz. In the public Congregations:
where they must hear, and learn in silence, not taking upon them the exercise
of any office, or gift in public. So are we to understand the Apostles
injunction, and inhibition.

Not as if women were hereby interdicted, Women not forbidden to read, or
confer of the scriptures. Rhem. Annot. in 1 Timothy 2.12.
and prohibited either to read the Scriptures, or to confer of them. So it
seems the Doctors of Rhemes would fain have it, whose note upon the 12. verse
of this Chapter runs thus, In times of Licentiousness, Liberty, and Heresy,
women are much given to reading, disputing, chatting, and jangling of the holy
Scriptures (that is their Language) etc. An impious gloss. A sense which never
came into the Apostles thoughts, to forbid any, whether men, or women, the
reading, or talking of the Scriptures; which so it be done with modesty, and
sobriety, with a desire to benefit themselves or others, is not only lawful,
but commendable. A thing which Jerome in his time, (as Doctor Fulk tells those
his adversaries) highly commended in many virtuous and godly women. Amongst
others, he exhorts one Laeta a godly Matron, that she would season the tender
tongue of her young daughter with godly Psalms. This women may do; Read the
Scriptures, and confer of them. Nor to instruct their families.
And more then this. They may, and ought to teach, and instruct their families,
to Catechize children and servants, I, and to perform other. Family Duties
with them, in case the husband be absent, or not able, or not willing to
discharge them. As for their Husbands, they may give Counsel, Nor to give good
Counsel to their husbands. Genesis 21.12.
and advice unto them: Who, in case the Counsel be good, ought to receive it
from their hands; Abraham must hearken to the Counsel of his wife Sarah,
concerning her servant Hagar. More then this. They may admonish them, putting
them in mind of their duties, I, and of their faults too sometimes, so it be
done not in an imperious way, but with due observance, and respective
acknowledgement of duty and subjection. They may and ought to hold forth their
light, communicate their knowledge to them, if ignorant, instructing them in
the ways of God, that they may bring them home unto Christ; or if brought
home, that they may further build them up. 1 Cor. 7.16. 1 Pet. 3.1.
How else should the believing wife save her unbelieving husband, (as Paul
gives her hopes of it) but by her godly conversation, and wise Instruction?
This they may do to their Husbands, and this they may do to others. And that
not only to those of the same Sex (as Paul requires of Matrons, that they
should be (...), Nor to instruct others in a privare way. Tit. 2.3.4.
Teachers of good things: viz. To young Women. So it follows. That they may
teach the young women to be sober (or wise) (...): which they were to do both
by example, and instruction also, as occasion was offered) But to Men also, in
a private way. Thus did Briscilla communicate her knowledge in the way of
Christ unto Apollo^, who was then (though otherwise a learned man) a novice and
new beginner in Christianity She and her Husband Aquila expounded unto him the
way of God more perfectly. Act. 18.26.
But this they did in a private way. (...), They took him unto them. And thus
indeed Women may teach and instruct others, both Women, and men, communicating
the knowledge which God has given them, in a private way. Wherein God is
pleased sometimes to own and bless their endeavors, making them effectual
for the converting of some, and confirming and building up of others. Cornelius
a Lapide writing upon the 12. verse of this Chapter, gives diverse instances
for it, wherewith I shall not trouble you. All this Women may do.

But to teach publicly, But to teach publicly.
or to exercise any public Administration in the Church, this they may not do.
This (as it seems) some in Saint Paul's time began to do. Some being endued
with extraordinary gifts, as of Prophecy, etc. (as we read of Philip the
Evangelists four daughters, Act, 21.9.
all Prophetesses) they took upon them to speak in the public Congregations:
And herein (as Estius conjectures) they might possibly be imitated and followed
by some others. A like practice whereunto has been taken up by some of that
Sex in after Ages.

Epiphanius amongst his Heresies, Epiphan: Haer: 49. The Error of the
Quintillian in admitting women to Ecclesiastical offices. Vide Danaeum de
Haeres.
tells us of a certain Sect known by the name of Quintilliani (so called from
one Quintilla a pretended Prophetess) who in honor of their great Grandmother
Eve, and of that act of hers in eating of the forbidden fruit (which they
highly magnified, as being the most beneficial act to her posterity that ever
was, in as much as it made way for the bringing a Savior into the world;
directly contrary to this of the Apostle, who here censures it for a high and
heinous Transgression) they would have women admitted to the Ministry, to be
Presbyterae, and Episcopae, shee-Presbyters, and shee-Bishops, allowing them
not only to Preach, but also to Administer the Sacraments. The latter of these
it has been, and yet is permitted by the Church of Rome, viz. That Women may
in case of a pretended necessity, administer a Church Sacrament, the Sacrament
of Baptism.

And I shall not need to tell it you, how the former has been of late time
practiced by some of that Sex. Instance in that notorious Mistress Hutchinson of
New England, who under a colorable pretext of repeating of Sermons, held a
weekly Exercise, whereby in a little time she had impoysoned a considerable
part of that Plantation with most dangerous and detestable, desperate and
damnable Errors and Heresies.

Now this it is that the Apostle here interdicts and prohibits: enforcing his
Inhibition with this Argument in the Text, The woman for ever suspended from
the exercise of any office or gift in the Church.
The woman at the first being deceived, she was in the transgression. Taking
upon her to be a Teacher at the first, she thereby seduced her husband, and
undid all her posterity. From thenceforth therefore, in regard of the ill
success of that her first teaching (as Chrysostom, and some others after him
enforce the Argument) all of that Sex are for ever suspended from the exercise
of any such office, or gift in public. Chrysostom: Hom. 9. in 1 Timothy Cum male
cessit decendi mumes quod sibi usurpavit Eva, rereliquae muliercs a docendi
munere abstineant. Hening. Com. in Tex. 1 Cor. 14.34. ver. 35. Allegations for
Women-Preachers, cleared. Psalm. 60.11.
A point wherein the Apostle is very precise, and punctual, (as it seems the
necessity of those times required it) Writing to his Corinthians, he gives an
express order about it, 1 Cor. 14. Let your Women keep silence in the
Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak, etc. And in the ver.
following: It is a shame for women to speak in the Church. A shame, because not
only against a positive Law, but against the order of nature.

Henceforth then no more Women Preachers.

Object. No, (it may be said) What say we then to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
68.11? where he makes mention of Women Preachers, The Lord gave the word,
great was the company of Preachers. In the Original, the word is feminine
(...), Annunciatricum, as Montanus renders it) shee-Preachers,
Women-Evangelists, publishers of glad tidings.

Ans. To this let Mr. Aynsvvorth return the Answer, who will tell us, that
however the word there be Feminine, yet the sense is Masculine, and is to be
understood of men, as both the Chalde and Septuagint there render it; for which
he gives some parallel instances of like nature. But, take the word literally
and strictly, then it is to be understood only of such Women as were wont to
sing songs unto God after the obtaining of any great Victory, or public
Deliverance, Exodus 15.20. Judge. 5.1. 1 Samuel 18.6.7.
which was usual for women then to do: As we may see in Miriam, Exodus 15. and
Deborah, Judge. 5. and the Women of Israel, who came out to meet King Saul and
David after the slaughter of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18. No warrant then for
Women-(...)

Object. Why, but was not Miriam and Deborah, and Huldah, and some others which
we read of, Women Teachers.

A. True, they were so, but that was extraordinary, and therefore ought not to
be drawn into president, Dr. Fulk Annot. in Rhem. 1 Timothy 2.12.
unless it be in extraordinary Cases. In which cases (as Doctor Fulks tells
his adversaries of Rhemes) God has sometimes made use of Women as public
instruments of great service to the Church, even for the converting of great
Nations.

Object. Why, but Paul himself seems to give allowance to such
Women-Preachers, 1 Cor. 11.5. explained.
and that in an ordinary way, 1 Cor. 11. where he tells his Corinthians that
every woman which prays or prophecieth with her head uncovered, dishonors
her head. So that it seems he did not disallow the practice, though he
condemned the manner.

Ans. To this it is variously answered. The Apostle (says Calvin and P.
Martyr) there takes occasion only to censure the manner, yet not giving any
allowance to the practice it self, which afterward he expressly forbids. Others
conceive that here he speaks of private praying and prophesying, 1 Cor. 14.24.
not in the Church, but at home: Others that he speaks only of women being
present at the public prayer, and prophecy performed by others. Others that he
speaks there of such as were inspired with an extraordinary spirit of Prayer
and Prophecy. So the Ancients generally carry it. And that seems to be the
most probable. Sure we are that in an ordinary course the Apostles prohibition
is expresle, Women may not teach in public. And were there no other Reason for
it, this alone might be sufficient to silence them. The woman by her taking
upon her to teach at the first, became the Instrument of Seduction, and Author
of Transgression to her husband, and consequently of ruin to him and all his
posterity. Henceforth then no more Women-Preachers. A point wherein Master
Calvin seems to be very zealous, and earnest, averring this, Quaerc calum
quodammodo terrae miscebitur, si docendi jus accipiant mulieres. Calv. in v. 12.
for women to take upon them the office of Teaching, to be no less then a
mingling of Heaven and earth together, an inversion of the course and order of
nature. But for my self I shall spare my heat in this cause, not knowing whom
to spend it upon, in or belonging to this place. If any such there be, I shall
say no more but, Partem aliquam ventireferatis ad aures.

I wish this truth might find some conveyance to their ears and hearts.

Pass we to the second of these Lessons, which is, Women must be in subjection.
that women should be in subjection, not usurping Authority, but submitting to
it, and that whether Ecclesiastical or Civil: not taking themselves exempt
from either. True indeed, in some cases they are exempt from some formal
obligations, (as of late they were from the National Covenant,) which Men are
engaged in. Yet are they never the more exempt from Obedience, to which, though
they be not formally, yet they are vertually bound. Even as it was in
Circumcision; the Females were Circumcised in the Males. So may I say of
Obligations of this nature; and particularly of this late Covenant. The Females
Covenanted in the Males, Women in their Husbands, to whom I am sure they ought
to be subject.

That is the subjection which the Apostle here principally aims at, (though
not excluding other.) Not usurping Authority. Mulier natura (hoc est ordinaria
Dei lege) ad parendum nata est. Calv. in 1 Timothy 2. v. 11. 1 Cor. 14.34. Genesis
3.16. Not Ecclesiastical Authority. A Woman Head of the Church; A Popish
Cavil against Queen Elizabeth, refuted. Estius, in 1 Timothy 2.12. Monstrum
borrendum! Corn. a Lap. ibid.
So he explains himself in the twelfth verse of the Chapter, I suffer not a
Woman to teach, nor to usurp Authority over the Man. Not to usurp Authority
in what kind soever. All such usurpation (says Calvin,) is against the Law of
nature, in as much as the Woman (says he,) Ad parendum nata est, was made to
obey. Which is no more then what the Apostle himself says in that forenamed
place, 1 Cor. 14.34. where speaking of Women he tells us, that They are
commanded to be under Obedience, as also says the Law: They may not then
usurp Authority. Not Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church.

Object. No? (say our Adversaries of Rome,) Why then did you allow a woman to
be the head of your Church? It is an obvious blot. Romish Commentators writing
upon this of the Apostle, cannot miss it. Estius and Cornelius a Lapide both
hit it. What, (says the latter) may not a Woman teach in the Church? Much
less may she Rule it. And if neither Teach nor Rule, How is it then that a
Woman should be the Head of a Church? This they exclaim against as a most
prodigious and unheard of monstrosity.

Ans. Bishop Jewels, Defense of the Apolog. part 6 cap. 11. divis. 1.
To this let our renowned Bishop Jewel return them an Answer, (as he has done
to their Mr. Harding, taking up the same Quarrel) who will tell them, that as
for this Title so much exclaimed against, be it what it will. Statute Anno 26.
Hen. 8. c. 1: Stows Chron.
1. We devised it not. The device was their own, their Forefathers, even the
Romish Clergyes in their Convocation; who first bestowed this strange style
upon that Famous Prince, King Henry the Eight, and that (as it may be probably
conjectured) purposely to bring him into the talk and slander of the world. 2.
Our Princes use it not. 3. They claim it not. However (as he charge it upon
his Adversary) their Queen Mary did both, both own it, and use it; yet Queen
Elizabeth did neither. No more do her Successors. To be the Head of the
Church, (or a Church) in propriety of speech, is a title peculiar only unto
Christ, whose Body the Church is. And therefore (however, (as he says) it may
also in sober meaning and good sense be sometimes applied to some principal
member, Videntur mihi istae mulieres caput fuisse Ecclesiae quae illic erat.
Chrysostom in Epist. ad Philip. Hom. 13.
or members of a Church, as he brings in Chrysostom speaking of some Women at
Phillippi, and calling them the Head of the Church there, yet) in a proper
sense, it cannot be challenged by any Man, much less Woman.

Who whether she may be the Head of a Civil State, or no, some have made it a
Question. Calvin, being (as I Conjecture) seasoned with the principles of the
Salique Law in France, which forbids a Woman to inherit the Crown in that
Kingdom, Whether a woman may be the Head of a civil State.
seems to be somewhat earnest against it. But who so reads but the stories
of Isreal's Deborah, and Englands Elizabeth, may see by experience that a
Kingdom may flourish, and be happy under such a Government. (...) omnes
prudentes semper instar portenti repudiarunt. Calv. in 1. Tim. 2. v. 11
Neither is this to be looked upon as any inverting of the roder of Nature for
a Princess to wear the Crown to which she is born, and to Rule over her
Subjects, more then for the Mistress of a Family to rule over her Children and
Servants. This the Woman may do, in as much as God has made them subject to
her, and consequently can be no usurpation.

But to usurp Authority over the man, Women may not usurp Authority over their
husbands, but must be subject. 1 Pet. 3.1. Ephesians. 5.22. Col. 3.18.
over her Husband, this the Apostle Paul and Peter will by no means allow. In
this case (...), of necessity she must be subject. Ye Wives (says St. Peter)
be in subjection to your own Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.1. Wives submit your selves to
your own Husbands, (says St. Paul) Ephesians. 5.22. Repeated again, Col. 3.18.

Reason it should be so. This being the Law of the creation, that the Woman who
was made after the man, The Law of the woman's creation. A penalty inflicted
upon the woman for seducing the man; viz. stricter obedience. Minus liberalis
conditio parendi. Calv. in Text. Genesis 3.16.
and for the man, should be subject to him; Seconded with a penalty inflicted
upon her, upon her defection in regard of that ill office which she did unto
him at the first in seducing him. Being deceived (says the Text) she was in
the Transgression. Hereupon she is enjoined, (though still as free and
ingenuous, yet) a stricter kind of subjection, and obedience then formerly.
Henceforth, (says the Lord to the Woman, Genesis 3.) Thy desire shall be subject
to thy Husband, and he shall Rule over thee. Why, did he not so before? Yes,
but now his Patent was enlarged, and her liberty somewhat abridged. And it was
but Reason (says M. Calvin) that it should be so; that she who had given such
pernicious Council to her Husband, Cato. ibid.
should ever after be under his Government; that she who had been the
Instrument to withdraw her Husband from his Allegiance to his God, should
thereupon forfeit her own liberty, which accordingly she did, and that both for
her self, and all her posterity.

A Point not unusefull to be considered, A Lesson for high and imperious
spirits of the Female Sex.
and sometimes seriously thought of by all of that Sex, specially such as are
of such high and imperious spirits (if there be any such here, let them take it
home with them) as if they were made only to Rule, not at all to obey. Their
spirits will not stoop to any kind of subjection, specially to their Husbands,
(whom it may be) they look upon as Michal did upon her Husband David when she
saw him dancing 2 Samuel 6.16.
before the Arc, dispising them in their hearts; No, they are resolved they
will have their wills. Let their Husbands say what they will, they will do what
they list; not regarding their Counsels, much less acknowledging their
Authority. It may be they stick not to usurp Authority over them. So did
Jezabel over her husband Ahab; He rules the Kingdom, 1 King 21.8.
and she will rule him, not sticking to make bold with his name, I and with
his signet too, signing what she pleases with it.

Such Spirits there have been, and surely yet are in some of that Sex. If their
Husbands wear the Crown, yet they will sway the Scepter. If their Husbands be
in places of Authority, they will Rule with them, if not over them. Now as for
such, it will not be amiss for them often to reflect upon this fatal
miscarriage of their first Mother, which God has purposely left upon record to
humble them, to bring down, and keep down their spirits, that they may not be
lifted up within them above what is meet; however, not so, as to put them upon
any such unnatural Ambition, as to usurp Authority over their husbands, to
whom they ought and must be subject.

Quest. Wherein the woman must be subject to her husband.
But wherein subject? What, in all things?

Ans. Not so. This subjection is not boundless and unlimited. That were to
make the man a Tyrant, and the woman a stave, neither of which ought to be.
Take the boundary therefore from the Apostle himself in that forenamed place,
Col. 3. where requiring wives to submit to their Husbands, and giving a reason
for it, (...), Vt oportet, as it must be in regard of Gods Institution; or, Vt
convenit, as it is meet that it should be; or, Vt decet, as it is seemly and
comely for to be, in regard of the order of nature; withal he bounds and
limits that their submission. Col. 3.18. In the Lord.
It must be (...), in the Lord, i.e. in the fear of the Lord, with an eye to
his Ordinance, and in the Lord, i.e. in what shall be required from God, and for
God, not against him. This is the common boundary, which bounds and limits
Subjects obedience to their Prince, Childrens to their Parents, servants to
their Masters, and so wives to their Husbands. Shall any of them command any
thing against God; now the rule holds, Better obey God, then man.

Q. But what if it be against Conscience. But what if it be against conscience.


Ans. Conscience must be directed and regulated by the word, otherwise it is
not conscience but will, (which too often is mistaken for conscience) or at the
best an erroneous conscience, which must rather be rectified then satisfied. In
such cases where the evidence is not clear, the safest course is to submit to
this Ordinance, which I am sure is clear, viz. that women should be in
subjection to their own husbands, either in doing what they require, or at
least in not doing what they forbid. I might here instance in some particular
cases, such as the scruples of the times bring to hand. I shall only single out
one, and that I will but touch upon: viz. The woman's forsaking of that Church
whereof her husband is a member, Whether a woman may forsake the Church whereof
her husband is a Member (it being a true Church) and join her self to another
without his consent.
and joining her self by Covenant to some other, and that without his consent,
if not against his will.

In this case it must be acknowledged, that could it be made good by clear
evidence, that that Church from which this departure is made, were no true
Church, but Antichristian, now there might be some plea for this their
Separation: But this being granted, that that Church is a true Church, such a
Church as wherein salvation may be had in an ordinary way (though possibly not
so perfect as some other may be conceived to be) now in this case for the wife
to desert that Church, and to join her self to another, so as they who lie in
the same bed, and in the eye both of Gods Law and man's are both one, should yet
be of two Churches, it is such a solecisme, such an absurdity in Christianity,
as I think the world never saw practiced, much less heard pleaded for, until
this last Age. So it is, though it should be with the husbands consent. Much
more if without it; much more if against it.

It is a thing which Protestants have ever condemned as a foul error in the
Church of Rome, that persons who are not sui Juris, at their own dispose, but
under the command of others (as children that are under the command of Parents,
and servants that are under the command of Masters) should engage themselves in
any Religious vow without the consent of their Superiors, though it be under
pretext of attaining a more perfect State. And if so, then let it be inquired
with what warrant the wife, who is under subjection, can upon a like pretext
desert that Church, whereof her Husband is a Member (being a true Church) and
engage her self by Covenant unto another, and that without his consent, if not
against it. Surely, if this be to submit themselves to their own Husbands, I
know not what it is to usurp Authority over them. But I shall leave this, and
withal the weaker Sex, to whom I have spoken somewhat more fully and largely,
in as much as the Text looks directly and principally at them.

I am engaged by promise to speak somewhat also to the other Sex. Let me
disingage my self with what brevity may be, in as much as their Lesson from
hence comes in only in a Collateral way, and not so directly as the former.

Was the woman deceived at the first, Application to men.
and being deceived was she in the Transgression? What use shall men make of
this:

Nay, 1. What use they should not make hereof.
rather (in the first place) what use shall they not make of it? It is a truth
that is subject to be abused, perverted. And therefore let me first put in a
Caveat to prevent that abuse, which in brief is this.

Let not this be taken up in a contumelious way to the disparagement of the
Sex. Not take up this first infirty in a way of disparagement to the Sex.
Let not any of the Sons of Adam take occasion from hence to disdain or
undervalue the daughters of Eve, so as to disrespect their persons, or despise
their counsels. Holy Job durst not despise the cause of his manservant or
maidservant when they contended with him. Job 31.13.
Far be it from Husbands then to despise the counsels of their Wives, because
of their Sex. The Story tells us in that two and twentieth chapter of the
second Book of Kings, how Hilkiah the chief Priest, 2 King. 22.14.
and Shaphan the Scribe, and diverse other eminent personages, by the order of
King Josiah, addressed themselves to a woman, viz. Huldah the Prophetess, to
consult with her in a matter of Religion, touching the Book of the Law which
was found in the Temple, and to enquire what course they should take for the
expiating of those many and great Violations of that Law, the guilt whereof
then lay upon the Land. And in the second of Samuel, cap. 20. we read how Joab
that great Commander disdained not to hearken to the Counsel of a Woman at
Abel, 2 Samuel 20.19.20.
as did also the rest of the Citizens there. Good Counsel ought not to be
rejected from what hand soever it comes, much less because from the hand of a
Woman. True, the Woman was deceived at the first, and by her counsel was a
means to deceive her Husband. That first Counsel succeeded ill, and proved
Destructive to him that hearkened to it. But what then? Must her Counsel
therefore no more be hearkened to? Not so. Let not this first miscariage be
remembered in such a way, or yet in any way that may be to the prejudice or
disparagement of the Sex.

No reason for it. The Woman repaired in point of Honor by Christ himself.
In as much as Christ himself has sufficiently repaired and restored that Sex
in point of Honor. This he did in the days of his flesh, in showing many
tokens of special grace and favor to some of that Sex. But more sully after
his Resurrection, in appearing first unto them. Therein did he apply a Salve to
this first Soar, and that a very proper one, salving, and taking of the scar
and blemish of that first infirmity, as may appear in some particulars. 1.
Matthew. 28.9.10. Ioh. 20.11. etc.
Did Satan appear and speak first to the Woman? So did Christ after his
Resurrection first appear, and reveal himself to the Woman. 2. Was the Woman
first deceived by Satan's Suggestions? So was the Woman here first undeceived,
as touching the mysteries of Christ's Resurrection, and that by his own
Instructions. 3. Was the Woman made the Instrument to deceive the man?

Lo here the woman made an Instrument to undeceive the man, to undeceive even
the Apostles themselves, who (as it seems) were in a great measure mistaken
about the Mystery of the Resurrection, Ioh. 20.9.
until such time as they had received it from the Women, who had been eye and
ear Witnesses of it. Such honor did Christ himself put upon this Sex; making
those women (as Jerome says elegantly) Apostolorum Apostolas, Jerome: Prolog:
in Zephan:
Apostelesses to the very Apostles themselves. Let not then this old sore,
which is so fairly and thoroughly healed be ever rubbed upon again in any such a
way to the contumelious disparagement of the Sex. This being promised by way of
Caution; Let me now show you what use men may, and ought to make of this
infirmity in that Sex.

Or rather let Saint Peter do it for me, What use men may and ought to make of
this first infirmity in the woman.
who has comprised the sum of all that I shall say in a few words, in the
former part of one verse, 1 Pet. 3.7. Where speaking of Conjugall duties, he
wills husbands to dvvell with their wives, according to knowledge, giving
honor to them as being the weaker vessels. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Mark it. Such is the Woman, in course of nature, the weaker Vessel, weaker
then the man, and that both in body and mind. And being so, in regard of this
her natural infirmity, she challenges from the man a threefold respect: A
threefold respect to be yielded to the woman in regard hereof.
1. That he must dvvell with her. 2. Dwell with her according to knowledge;
and 3. Give honor to her: A word of each.

1. Dwell with her. This respect do Husbands owe to their Wives, 1.
Cohabitation.
Cohabitation, so as not to estrange or absent themselves from them without
just and necessary occasion. In all probability had Adam been present with his
Wife, Satan would not have set upon her, or if he had, yet she had not been so
deceived as she was.

The unnecessary absence of Husbands from their Wives often times exposes them
to many dangerous temptations, which otherwise might either be prevented or
frustrated. Which let it be taken notice of by those ill husbands (so I may
call them in more respects then one) who care not how little they are within
their own doors: A Lesson for ill Husbands who love not their own homes.
There neighbors house (it may be) is better to them then their own. Nay
possibly, they can spend whole days, it may be nights too, in the Tavern, in
the Ale house, Gaming, and Drinking (if not worse,) whilst in the mean time
they leave their wives pensive, and discontented at home. Little do such
regard, or consider what temptations those weaker vessels are hereby exposed
to. Which if they did, and withal bare any true affection to them, they would
not give way to such unnecessary estrangements. Here is the first of these
duties, Cohabitation. Husbands must therefore dwell with their Wives (so far
forth as the calling will permit) because the weaker vessels. Being so weak so
infirm, and so apt to be deceived, it is not good that they should be lest two
much alone.

2. Dwell with them according to knowledge. (...). Scienter, prudenter.
Knowingly, discreetly, wisely. 2. A wise carriage toward her.
The more weak the Woman is, the more wise the man had need to be, that so he
may set his wisdom against her weakness. Exercising his wisdom specially in
these four particulars.

1. In bearing with her weakness. Manifested in 4. particulars.
This respect all Christians owe one unto another; We that are strong (says
the Apostle) ought to bear the infirmities of the weak. 1. In bearingwith her
weakness. Romans 15.1.
Much more Husbands to their Wives. So long as they are infirmities, bear them.
I, though there should be somewhat more in them; yet be contented to bear much.
It will be a point of wisdom so to do, and that in more regards then one.

2. Bearing their infirmities, help them. It is one office which the Spirit of
Christ, 2. Helping her infirmity. Romans 8.26.
performs unto all that are Espoused to him; It helps their infirmities,
Romans 8. And this office should Husbands perform to their Wives. Do what in them
lies to help their infirmities. Help them, and that (as Physicians do the
Infirmities of their Patients,) first in a way of Prevention; then of Cure.

1. In a way of Prevention.
By way of Prevention, doing what they may to keep them from falling, from
being Deceived. To that end leading them, going before them in a holy, and
Religious Example: then staying them, by suggesting to them seasonable Counsels
and Admonitions, and those so qualified, so mixed, and tempered with love and
sweetness, as that they may not be rendered distastefull to them. In some
cases also using gentler, or stronger Revulsions, or restraints, as necessity
requires.

2. By way of Cure.
By way of Cure. In case they be fallen, now seek the raising, and restoring
of them; Which must be done in a Spirit of meeknes. This Paul requires from all
Christians toward their Brethren. If any man be overtaken in a fault, Gal.
6.1.
ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness, Gal.
6. Even as it is with bones, which are broken, (...), ab (...), quod apud
medicos usurpatur pro luxata membra in suum locum restituere, Vid. Scap. and
Steph.
or dis joynted, (for from hence the Metaphor there is taken, as some conceive
it) they require a soft and tender hand to set or put them in again. So should
Christians deal one with another. Specially husbands with their wives. Being
bone of their bone, in case they be out of jont, labor to set them right, but
let it be with all possible tenderness. In case they be deceived, seek to
undeceive them, Genesis 2.23.
but let it be with all lenity and gentleness. Thus the Apostle requires
Ministers should deal with their deceived people; In meeknes instructing those
that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.25. 3. Not feeding their follies. Et sane
multae ineptiae maritis ferende sunt, devoxanda multacaedia, and simul cavendum
(...) sua indulgentia stultitiam foveant. Calv. in 1 Pet. 3.7.
if peradventure God will give them Repentance. And so let Husbands deal with
their deceived wives. Thus Bearing, thus Helping their Infirmities.

3. Bu^ (in the third place) so bearing, and so helping them, as that yet they
may not nourish them. It is Calvin's caveat upon that Text of Saint Peter; Let
Husbands bear with their wives weaknesses, yet so as they do not feed
their follies. Such indulgence is no ways allowable, as not in Parents toward
their children, so nor in Husbands toward their Wives. In this respect
Husbands must dwell with their wives according to wisdom, one property
whereof is so to tolerate evils, as not to foment and cherish them.

4. In the last place; 4. Not being ^^duced by them.
Taking heed of feeding their follies, withal take heed of being infected with
them, deceived by them. So was the first Man; and so was the strongest man; and
so was the wisest man: Adam, Sampson, Solomon, each deceived by the woman. And
surely so have many been, and daily are in these seducing times, drawn aside
into Errors by like Instruments, even those that lie in their bosoms. In this
regard therefore let husbands be cautelous, dwelling with their wives as men
of knowledge.

3. A last respect due unto the Woman in regard of her weakness is yet behind,
of which but a word. 3. Give honor to the Woman: which consists in three
particulars.
And that is the giving honor unto her. Honor, not as from the inferior to
the superior; but honor as to the weaker vessel. Which consists chiefly in
three particulars. 1. In hiding their vveak esse. 2. In defending them against
injuries. 3. In providing what is meet for them. 1 Cor. 12.23.
All these ways nature teaches us to put honor upon the less honorable
parts of the body, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 12.23. And all these
ways both Nature and Grace should teach Husbands to give honor to their Wives.

1. By hiding their weaknesses, Hiding her weakness.
which in truth in regard of that conjugall union betwixt them, are their own
weaknesses: and therefore ought to be hid so far forth as may be without sin.
Not divulged, and proclaimed abroad, as the manner of some is, who do thereby
but discover and blaze their own shame.

2. Defending them against wrongs and injuries; specially being very tender of
their reputations, 2. Defending her against injuries. Matthew. 1.19.
and good names; As Joseph was of the Reputation of his espoused Mary.

3. Providing for them, allowing them liberal and honorable maintenance, 3.
Allowing her Honorable maintenance.
not only for necessity but for convenience, according to their own estate,
degree, and quality. Remembering that they were made non in servitutem, sed in
adjutorium, Estius in 1 Pet. 3.7.
not to be slaves, or yet servants, but helps, yoakefellovves; and so ought to
be regarded, respected, honored accordingly.

And thus I have, as briefly as I could, given you the heads of such duties as
the Woman challenges from the Man in regard of her original, and natural
weakness. And withal at length dispatched what I projected to my self when
I took this portion of Scripture in hand, which I here profess, not any
propense inclination of my own to Subjects of this nature (which from my heart
I wish I might never have occasion any more to meddle with) but the present
necessity of the times and place put me upon. Let me now dismiss it, and you
with Prayer for a Blessing.

FINIS.

