The MYSTICAL BRAZEN SERPENT: WITH The Magnetical Virtue thereof. OR, CHRIST
exalted upon the CROSS, WITH The blessed End and Fruit of that his Exaltation,
in drawing the Elect world to Himself, to believe on Him, and to be saved by
Him. In two Treatises, from John 3.14, 15. John 12.32. Whereunto is added A
TREATISE of the Saints JOINT-MEMBERSHIP each with other. As they were delivered
to the Church of God at Great YARMOUTH, By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the
Gospel, and Preacher to that Incorporation.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.
July 30. 1652.


1 COR. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, saving Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. 1 COR. 1.18. For the preaching of the Cross is to them that
perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved, the power of God. LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Maxey for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1653.

To The truly Honorable, The LADY FRANCIS HOBART, Grace and Peace.
Madam,
I Plead no excuse for the homeliness of this present. Whatever the
Workmanship be, sure I am the matter is such, as shall find acceptance at your
Ladyships hands. I question not but your Honor has often read of what esteem
the Typical Brazen Serpent was with the Israelites, 2 King. 18.4.
even then when it was out of date, a bare Nehushtan, no more worth then what
the metal weighed: And I presume you have as often heard what honor (at
least) the ignoranter sort of the Romish persuasion are wont to give to the
Crucifixes of their own making: Both of them superstitiously and idolatrously
yiedling that respect to the shadow, which is appropriate to the substance.
This it is which I here present to your Honors view; The Mystical Brazen
Serpent; the Real Crucifix, Christ himself exalted upon the Cross. Of whose
Magneticall Virtue, I doubt not but your precious soul has already had so
much experience, as that you earnestly desire to feel more of it. In this way,
if these my poor labors may contribute ought either to your self, or any
other, I shall bless that God who has made use of me as his Instrument in so
honorable a service. In the hope and confidence hereof, I shall put them into
your Ladyships hand, and rest

Great Yarmouth, June 24. 1642. Ready further to serve Your Honor in all
Christian Offices, JOHN BRINSLEY.

An Alphabeticall Table.
A.
ADversaries not to be feared. 140. Affections toward Christ, evidencing man's
drawing to him 183 Christ offered to All, how and why 146 Attractive virtue in
Christ to be sought after 188
B.
BEnefit of Christ's death extending to all Believers. 111 Believing on Christ,
the only means to receive benefit from him 73 Discouragements in Believing
answered 115 Blindness natural to all men 153 Brazen Serpent both a medicine,
and a mystery 3 Brazen Serpent a lively and convincing Type of Jesus Christ 5
Brazen Serpent resembling Christ in five particulars 16 Brazen Serpent to be
looked up unto 96
C.
Carnal persons not drawn to Christ 181 Christ a mighty Savior 17 Christ like
unto men, and sinful men, yet without sin 18 Christ crucified the only
Sole-Remedy 51 Christ a Savior by his Fathers Ordination 22 Christ to be
looked up unto, and how 124 Motives to come unto Christ 71 Discouragements in
coming unto Christ answered 115 Motives to look up unto Christ 97 Strength of
Corruption no just discouragement in coming to Christ 122 Conversion to be
ascribed unto Christ 161 Common work of the Spirit not to be rested in 191
Cross of Christ a memorial of man's sin and misery. 21 Cross of Christ the
way to his Crown 27 The Cross an Exaltation to Christ 28 Christ crucified the
only Savior 62 Cure of the Soul to be locked after 48
D.
Darkness man's natural estate 30 Death passed upon all 115 Death of Christ
necessary in a threefold respect 45 Death of Christ not dubious 132 Drawing of
men by Christ to Christ 143, 150 Drawing, a fruit of Christ's death 134 Men
drawn to Christ as a Savior, and Lord 169 God the Father draws men to
Christ, how 144 All men, and all things drawn to Christ, how 145 Drawing, what
it imports 152 Whence Christ draws men 164 Men drawn out of themselves, how
168 Evidences of men not drawn to Christ 179 Evidences of men drawn to Christ
183 Drawing to Christ a ground of comfort 187 Outward Drawing not to be rested
in 190 Drawing back to be taken heed of 163. 191
E.
Elect ones drawn to Christ 149 Enemies still infesting Believers 53 Enemies of
Christ disappointed 135, 136 Christ exalted upon the Cross 28
F.
Faithfulness of Christ in his obedience 56 Faith justifying and saving, what
75 Faiths object and act in justifying 79 Faith how it heals and saves 80
Faith and Christ as the Ring and the Bloodstone 92 Faith the only Instrument in
healing the soul 93. 101 Weakness of Faith, no just discouragement 123
H.
Christ Healing his people, how 58
I.
Ignorant persons not drawn to Christ 179 Impediments in coming to Christ 119
Man's natural Impotency 154 Weak Instrument effecting great works 174 God
blesses all, and only his own Institutions 10 Intercession of Christ
effectual 57 Inveterate sins not hindering benefit by Christ 119 Civil
Justiciaries not drawn to Christ 182
L.
Lamenesse natural to all men 155 Christ Lift up four ways 25 Lifting up of
the Brazen Serpent shadowing the death of Christ in five particulars 29 Lifting
up of Christ drawing men to him 173 Life eternal, what 109 Life, all men
deprived of 44
M.
Man's Misery the occasion of Gods Mercy in sending his Son 20 Man's natural
Misery described 33 Gods Mercy in providing a Remedy 38 Ministers of God to be
enquired of for Soul-cures 49
N.
Natures power in the work of Conversion, decayed 160
O.
God not tied to costly Ordinances 7
P.
Penitent sinners only capable of benefit by Christ 113 The Estate of Nature, a
Perishing Condition 43 Whether men Perish in death 105 No Perishing to
Believers 107 Profane persons not drawn to Christ 180
R.
Man Repenting God Repents 9 Refusing of Christ a just Condemnation 71 Relapses
dangerous, not desperate 120 Reluctance against receiving of Christ with the
grounds thereof 158, 159
S.
Salvation to be sought only in Christ 63 Satan resembled by a Serpent, in
three particulars 34 Satan hindering men from coming unto Christ, how 156 Men
drawn from under the power of Satan, how 156 Christ a Savior to lost mankind
152 How Christ comes to be a Savior 154 Christ the only Savior 159
Ministers how called Saviors 161 How men save themselves ibid. Christ a
perfect Savior 68 Sense of misery a preparative for mercy 46 The Serpent the
Instrument of man's misery 45 Shadows made use of by God to work real effects
8 Great Sins great punishments 9 Discouragements from magnitude or multitude of
Sins answered 116, 117 Son of man, the phrase opened: being given to Christ,
what it imports 12, 14 Spirit of Christ drawing men to him 175
T.
Type, why made use of by our Savior 4
W.
Liberty of Will in the work of conversion decryed 160 Will, not forced in the
work of Conversion 192 Men drawn out of the World, how 166 The Word Christ's
Instrument in drawing men to himself 171 The Word being the Drawing Ordinance
is to be submitted to 191
ERRATA.
P. 2. l. 27. r. represented. p. 8. l. 9. r. Handkerchiefes. ibid. marg. r.
Fernelius. p. 18. marg. r. per Serpentem. p. 21. l. ult. dele And. p. 23. l.
30. for where, r. whence. p. 29. marg. r. (...), p. 30. l. 11. r. (...). p. 33.
l. 8. for hear, r. here. p. 41. l. 9. for grace, r. cure. p. 70. l. 32. dele
up. p. 7. 6. l. 7. r. quovis. p. 107. l. last. r. turned to dust. p. 145. marg.
r. salvet. p. 149. marg. r. ex Gentibus. p. 160. marg. for decayed, r. decryed,
p. 162. l. 29. r. not all.

THE MYSTICAL BRAZEN SERPENT.
JOHN 3. Ver. 14.15. 14. And as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness,
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,

15. That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.


THE former part of this Chapter spends it self in the report of a useful
conference betwixt our Blessed Savior and Nicodemus. Coherence.
Wherein we may hear a gracious Master teaching and instructing an untoward and
ignorant Scholar insome of the chiefest principles of Christian Religion; as
viz. The Mystery and Necessity of Spiritual Regeneration; that he does in the
verses before the Text. The Meritorious and Isntrumental cause of Man's
salvation. The meritorious cause of it; his own Death and Passion. The
Isntrumental cause of it; Faith in himself. Both these you have in the words
which I have now read unto you. [And as Moses, etc.]

Division.
In which two verses our Blessed Savior informs this his Scholar, and us, of
two things; 1. The manner of his own Death; 2. The end and use of it. The
manner of his death, ver. 14. [As Moses, etc.] The end and use of it, ver. 15.
[That whosoever believes, etc.]

The manner of Christ's death set forth by a Typical expression.
Begin with the former of these; which our Savior sets forth (as you see) not
in plain and open terms, but under a covert expression: making use of one of
the Types and figures of the old Testament for the confirming and illustrating
of what he would have Nichodemus and us to know and believe concerning his own
death, as, viz. That he should die; How he should die; To what end he should
die: What benefit should redound from his death; and By what means it should be
conveyed: all lively presented and held forth in this Type of the Brazen
Serpent which Moses lift up in the Wilderness [ Even as Moses, etc. So must
the Son of Man be lift up.]

Here two things considerable, the Type. Truth.

Here then two things mainly considerable: the Type and the Truth: the Shadow
and the Substance. The Type or Shadow; the Brazen Serpent lift up. The Truth or
Substance of that Type, that shadow, The Son of Man lift up. These two I shall
look upon first severally, then jointly.

Severally; 1. The Type; the Brazen Serpent.
Beginning with the former of them, the Type: For so I look upon this Brazen
Serpent, as having in the first institution of it a double use to the
Israelites; the one Corporal, the other Spiritual. A Corporal use, for the
healing of their Bodies. A Spiritual use, directing them to Christ for the
healing of their Souls. Of such double use was the Mannah to them; both
Corporal and Spiritual food. Corporal food, given them for the present
refreshing and nourishing of their bodies. Spiritual food, as being a
Sacrament of the Body of Christ, and of the nourishment which they might
receive from him. And of like use was the water which issued out of the Rock.
Useful as water for the quenching of their bodily thirst; as a Sacrament,
representing the Blood of Christ: and so was to them not only Corporal, but
Spiritual drink; so says the Apostle himself expressly concerning both these,
1 Cor. 10.3.4. Our fathers did all eat the same Spiritual meat: and did all
drink of the same Spiritual drink, etc.] The same not only with themselves,
but with us Christians, viz. the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, represented by
those Sacraments.

And the like we may say of this Brazen Serpent. The Brazen Serpent both a
Medicine and a Mystery
It was to the Israelites both a Medicine, and a Mystery. Having in it a
Medicinal use for the curing of their Bodies; a Mystical use, for the
representing of Christ to them, by whom their Souls might be cured saved.

And of such use our Savior here makes it; bringing it in not barely by way
of Similitude and resemblance; but as a Type and Figure, purposely destinated
and appointed to point at himself.

So taking it; here premise we these two enquiries concerning it; the one more
General, the other more Particular. 1. Why did our Savior here make use of a
Type, a figure? 2. Why of this Type, this Figure?

Quest. 1. Why our Savior here makes use of a Type?
Quest. 1. For the former, Why did our Savior here make use of a Type?

Answer. Ferus ad loc.
Answ. For this we shall need no other reason, but only to look upon the
Scholar with whom he has to deal, Nichodemus a Pharisee, ver. 1. A Master in
Israel, ver. 10. (...), a Doctor, a Teacher of the Law, one well versed in the
Law, one that stood much upon the Law, Joh. 9.28,
one of Moses his Disciples. And hereupon our Savior being to deal with him,
deals with him in his own Element, fetching an Argument from the Old
Testament, from Moses, to teach and convince him concerning that which should
be accomplished under the New Testament in himself.

Quest. 2. Why this Type.
Quest. 2. But why does he single out this Type, rather then any other? Many
other Types and Figures there were in the Old Testament very lively
representing and holding forth the Death and Passion of Christ. As, viz. the
Paschall Lamb, and the daily Sacrifices; both which the Jews themselves do
acknowledge to point at the Messiah. Why does our Savior here make choice of
this?

Answer 1. To this it may be answered: Answ. 1. No Type more lively
representing the thing typifyed
1. Amongst all those Types there was not any more lively, more fully
representing and setting forth the mystery of Christ then this of the Brazen
Serpent. A Type which contains in it a Sermon of the whole sum, and Marrow of
the Gospel. Little or nothing necessary to be known and believed concerning
Jesus Christ, but we may read it in this one Type.

2. Besides (in the second place,) amongst all the Types in the Old Testament,
2. A convincing Type.
as there was none more lively representing, so we shall find none more
strongly convincing; convincing the unbeleeving Jews: and not only convincing,
but confounding them, and all others, who deride and make a mock of Christ
crucified, as if it were a thing not possible, that a crucified Christ should
be the Savior of the world. How can he save others, (say they) that could not
save himself? Mat. 27.42.
How shall he save others from the wrath of God, that could not save himself
from the rage of men? What power, what virtue can there be in his death? To
them this Type returns answer. Why, how could the Brazen Serpent, being but
the shape and Image of a Serpent, a livelesse piece of Brass, Nehushtan (as
Hezekiah in a vilifying way calls it) a Brazen piece; 2 King. 18.4.
how could this cure and heal their forefathers in the wilderness? That which
had no life, how could it save life? Yet this did that Serpent being lift up,
to the bodies of all that beheld it. And why then may not the Son of Man being
lift up, a crucified Christ, do as much for the souls of all that believe on
him.

It was not without good reason then, that our Savior makes choice of this
Type, this Figure. Amongst all the Types of the Old Testament, none more
demonstrative, none more clearly representing, more strongly convincing what
here he lays down concerning himself.

To make this good, come we now to take a nearer view of this Type it self.
Things considerable in the Type.
The History whereof you have set forth briefly, and fully in those four verses
of the 21. of Numbers, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. which if you cast your eyes upon, you
may at the first sight take notice of diverse particulars very observable
concerning this Brazen Serpent; as viz. 1. The Matter of it: 2. The Form and
fashion of it: 3. Upon what occasion it was made: 4. At whose appointment: 5.
How used: 6. To what end: 7. With what efficacy. All of them to be taken notice
of by us, that we may see what a correspondence and agreement there is betwixt
this Type and the Truth of it, which is Christ. To touch upon the particulars
briefly.

1. For the matter of it; 1. The matter.
it was Nehushtan, Brass; not Gold, but Brass. ver. 9.


Observe. God tieth not himself to the costlinesse of Ordinances, Observe. God
not tied to costly Ordinances.
nor to the excellency of means. By weak and contemptible ways and means he
oftentimes effects great matters.

Reas. This he does, that the work may be known and acknowledged to be His; and
that all the glory of it may return clearly to himself, not sticking by the
way in the Ordinance, or Means. God could have commanded Moses to have made
this Serpent of Gold, as well as the Israelites required Aaron to make their
Calf. But he would not have them to make an Idol of the one, as they had done
of the other. He would not have them to look too much at the means, but through
it to look at him who coveyed that cure and comfort to them through that means.
But this by the way.

2. For the Form or Fashion of it: 2. The form. Serpens aeneus factus est, quo
magis Presterem qui aeri concolor erat, referret. H. Grot. ad Text. ver. 8.
ver. 6.
it was a Serpent; not a true real Serpent; It had neither life nor venom in
it, only an Effigies, the shape of a Serpent, resembling one of those Serpents
wherewith the Israelites were stung, and that both in shape and color. And
thence called a Fiery or Burning Serpent: carrying the similitude of one of
those Presteres, those Fiery Serpents (so called as from the color, so from
the inflammation which they caused in the bodies which were stung with them.)
And this was Isreal's Antidote against the biting of those real Serpents.

Observe. Thus does God sometimes make use of shadows for the working of real
effects. Observe. God works real effects by Shadows.
So we read of Peter's shadow working strange cures upon all that came within
the verge of it: Act. 5.15. and of Paul's Hand-kerchiefe doing the like, and
more, to those to whom they were applied, driving away Diseases and Evil
spirits too. Act. 19. Act. 19.12.
Not that there was any such inherent virtue in either of these, but that God
was pleased to manifest his Power in weakness; 2 Cor. 12.9.
which ofttimes he does: working not only by unlikely, but even by contrary
means; bringing good out of evil, making a Serpent to heal. Thus the skill of
the Physicians turns Vipers into Treacles (which take the name from that
ingredient) Poisons into Antidotes, Theriace, Medicamentum Theriacum. Fernetius
Junius.
repelling or driving out one poison with another. And thus does the wisdom of
our God make use sometimes not only of the enemies, and crosses, but of the
sins of his people, turning them to their great good: making use sometimes of
one sin for the curing of another; I, of many; I, of all; as here he makes use
of one Serpent for the curing of the stings of all other Serpents. Here is a
second particular.

3. The third is, upon what occasion 3. The occasion.
this Brazen Serpent was made. This the story lays down clearly and briefly
thus: Numb. 21.5.
The Israelites beginning to laoth their Mannah, they murmr against God, and
are ready to rise up against his servant Moses. Thus complaining without a
cause, God gives them a cause to complain: ver. 6.
He sends Fiery Serpents amongst them; by the stinging whereof, many of them
die, ver. 7.
others of them come to Moses now complaining of their misery, who before were
surfeited of God's mercy. Their earnest suit to him is, that he would be a
Suitor for them, that God would take away the Serpents from them. This request
of theirs Moses presents, ver. 8.
and God hears and answers, Non ad voluntatem, sed ad Salutem; not removing the
Serpents from them, but providing an Antidote, a remedy against them, which
remedy was this Brazen Serpent.

Observe. Observe. 1. Great sins, great punishments. 1 King. 12.11.
Thus God often deals with the sons of Men, visiting their iniquities not only
with Rods, but with Scorpions (as Rehoboam threatens the men of Israel)
specially their ingratitude, their murmurings and repinings at his
dispensations, their slighting his mercies, above all their loathing of
Heavenly Mannah. For these sins God often sends sharp and stinging judgments.
Despisers of the riches of Gods goodness, treasure up wrath to themselves, Romans
2. Romans 2.4, 5.


2, But (in the second place) upon their repenting he repents; Observe. 2. Upon
man's repenting, God repents. Deuteronomy. 32.39. 2 Cor. 12.9.
upon their humbling and returning, he returns and heals: not always by
removing the judgments. No, Paul's thorn sticks in his flesh, notwithstanding
his frequent and earnest soliciting the Throne of Grace about it. But by
reaching forth unto them something that shall be equivalent; as he did a
sufficiency of Grace to Paul. I hasten. Ibid.


4. By whom appointed.
4. The fourth particular is, by whom was this remedy appointed. The Text tells
us, that Moses set up this Brazen Serpent. (A president for the Ministers of
the Gospel, who in their ministrations, ought to make it their work to advance
and lift up Jesus Christ, as Moses did this Serpent.) But what, did he do it of
his own head? Not so, but by a Divine direction. Numb. 21.8.
It was God himself that found out this way and means of cure; it was he that
directed Moses how to make it, and how to use it.

Observe. God saves by his own means
Observe. God will save only by his own means. He will bless all, and only his
own Institutions. As for humane inventions, how specious, how plausible soever,
yet they have no assurance of a blessing from God. Had Moses made and erected
this Serpent of his own head, as Aaron and the people did their Golden Calf,
it might have proved to them, as that did, a snare, but not a remedy;
pernicious, but no ways profitable. What ever virtue this Brazen Serpent had,
it had it from a Divine Institution. August. de Mirabil. Scripturae lib. 1.
cap. 33.
Non in Serpente, sed in Domini imperio salus continebatur (says Augustine
upon it.) The healing virtue was not in the Serpent it self, but in the
commanding power of God. It was not the Serpent, but the word; so says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 107 Psalm. 107.20.
He sent forth his word and healed them.] His word; Verbum Jussionis, and
Promissionis (says Musculus Muscul. in Text.
) his word of Command, and his word of Promise. This Word it was that made this
an effectual means for the healing of their Bodies. And the same word it is
that makes the Sacraments of the New Testament to be effectual means for the
conveying of Spiritual good to the Souls of Believers. It is not in the
outward Elements, nor yet in the hand that reaches them forth. It is not in
the Water in Baptism; It is not in the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist; which
being in themselves but common water, and common Bread and Wine, what can they
do to the washing, nourishing, refreshing of the Soul; or what virtue can the
Minister infuse into them? No, it is the Word, the word of Divine Institution,
the word of Command, the word of Promise that makes these effectual to such
ends and purposes, which otherwise have no more power and virtue in themselves,
then the Brazen Serpent had, which Moses lift up in the wilderness.

5. There is the fifth particular. 5. The use of it.
How this Brazen Serpent was used by Moses. It was only to be lifted up, set
upon a Pole or Perch, lifted up on high.

6. And to what end must it so be lifted up? 6. The end of it.
Why, that all Israel might see it; specially, that those who felt themselves
stung with those fiery Serpents might look up unto it.

7. 7. Benefit by it
And what benefit had they by thus looking upon it? why thereby they were
healed, how mortally soever they were wounded.

The mystical Brazen Serpent, Jesus Christ.
Thus I have briefly touched upon the most material particulars observable in
the Type. To follow this shadow no further; Come we now to look upon the truth
of this Type, which is Jesus Christ: the truth of all those Types and
Ceremonies under the Law; I am the truth, John 14. 1 Cor. 10.4. John 14.6.
the substance of all those shadows. Among other, the true brazen Serpent. So
it follows, As Moses lift up the Serpent, etc.

So must the Son of man be lifted up.

The Son of man:] The Son of man; the phrase opened.
A style or appellation given in the Scriptures sometimes in common
indefinitely, universally to all men; all sorts of men, all of those sorts; All
which being men, descended from men by the way of natural generation, they are
called the sons of men, and every one the son of man. Instances for both are
obvious. O ye sons of men, (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 4. Psalm. 4.2.
) God is not as man (says Balaam) that he should lie, neither the son of man
that he should repent, Numb. 23. Numb. 23.19.
Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it,
(says the Prophet Isai. cap. 56. Isai. 56.2.
) The son of man, that is every man of what quality or condition soever.
Sometimes it is more peculiarly appropriated to some one particular person; So
we find it given (as I remember) only to three; viz. to Ezekiel, Daniel,
Christ. To Ezekiel it is given by God himself, speaking to him in the second
Person, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, Ezekiel. 2.1. Ezekiel. 2. ver. 1.3, 6. etc.
And so frequently in most Chapters of this Prophecy. In like manner it is
given to Daniel by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 8. Dan. 8.17.
Understand, O son of man.] To Christ, it is given in the Old Testament by
Daniel, who tells us how in his vision he beheld one like the son of man, Dan.
7. Dan. 7.13.
] And (as some conceive it) by Asaph, Psalm. 80. Psalm. 80.17.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, Chald. Paraph. Basil. Muscul.
Ainsworth. Junius.
and the son of man whom thou made strong for thy self.] The Son of man,
that is, the Messia, who is before called the Branch, ver. 16. even that Branch
that grew out of the Stem of Jesse, Isai. 11.1. My servant the Branch, Zach.
3.8. Behold the man whose name is the Branch, Zach. 6.12. even he is there
called the son of man. In the New Testament it is given to him only by
himself, speaking of himself in the third Person. The son of man has not
where to lay his head, Mat. 8.20. The son of men is come to save that which was
lost, Mat. 18.11. The son of man must be lifted up, (says the Text.)

Quest. Quest. Why given to Christ?
But why is this appellation thus frequently given unto Christ?

Ans. Answ. To import
Many answers are returned; some of them more witty then weighty. I shall only
single out three of them; The two former more general; the other more
particularly appliable to the Text: Christ appropriates this style to himself,
to import principally these two things: 1. His Nature. 2. His condition: the
truth of the one, the meannesse of the other.

1. His Nature.
1. His Nature. The truth of his humane nature. To show that he was truly man,
though not descended from man by that ordinary way of natural generation, yet
a true man, having a true humane soul, a true humane body. The Son of God, made
the Son of Man, by taking the nature of man into personal union with his
Godhead. Heb. 2.16.
He took not upon him the nature of Angels, (says the Apostle) but the seed of
Abraham,] And so was he made the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, the Son of
Man. Here is the truth of his humane nature.

2. The Meannesse of his condition. 2. The meanness of his condition.
Thus the phrase is sometime used in Scripture, carrying a Tapeinosis with it.
The Son of Man, that is, mean man, miserable man. Man that is a worm, and the
Son of man that is a worm, (says Bildad in Job) chap. 25. Job. 25.6.
Lord, what is man (says the Psalmist) that thou art mindful of him, Psalm.
8.4. Isa. 51.12.
or the Son of Man, that thou regardest him?] Poor man, base man. So our
Translation renders that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 49.2. Both [Low] and high, rich
and poor together.] And so again, Psalm. 62, 9. Surely [men of low degree] are
vanity, and men of high degree are a lie.] In both places the Original has
it, (...)
Beni Adam, Filii Hominis, The Sons of man, that is, (as the Septuagint renders
it) (...), Earth-born: As the Latins were wont to call ignoble persons, H.
Grot. Annot. in Mat. 8.20.
Terrae filios, Sons of the earth; so here, Filii Adam, Sons of earthie man,
base man, opposed there to Beni Ish, (...)
Filii viri, The sons of noble man. The phrase there imports meanness of
condition. And so it does in those places forenamed, where this style is given
to Ezekiel and Daniel. The Angel calls them, Sons of Man, to humble them by
putting them in mind of their frail condition. And in a like sense our Savior
applies it to himself, importing his state of humiliation and abasement upon
earth, wherein he subjected himself to a mean and vulgar condition. Being God
blessed for ever, and the Lord of all, he emptied himself, (so the Original
has it, Phil. 2.7. Phil. 2.7. Descripsit ha^c voce Christus suam illam (...),
de quae agitur Phil. 2.7 H. Grot. ibid. Quasi ex Omni Seipsum ad Nihil redegit.
Bez. Annot. Gr. Mat. 8.20. Nec aliud est hic (...), quam apud Isaram, cap.
53.3. (...) H. Grot. Annot. in Matt. 8.20.
(...), sese inanivit, he evacuated himself) made himself of no reputation
(says our Translation) devesting himself of his robes of Majesty and glory,
he brought himself (as it were) from all things to nothing; And took upon him
the form of a servant] subjected himself to a servile mean condition, so as not
to be the owner of any thing; And in this regard he calls himself the Son of
man. The Son of man has not where to lay his head; the phrase sounding as much
as that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 53.3, Contemptus, and abjectissimus
virorum (as Junius renders it) a man despised and rejected of men.

3. These reasons of the phrase are general. There is a third which is more
peculiar to the Text; Christ here styles himself the Son of Man, 3. The
Nature which suffered.
showing in what nature he was to be lifted up, to be crucified, viz. in his
humane nature: Not as the Son of God, but as the son of Man. True indeed, by
reason of the union of the two Natures in one Person, and by a communication of
properties (as Divines call it,) the Death and Passion of Christ is attributed
to the whole Person, which is denominated sometimes from one nature, sometimes
from another. And thence it is the Apostle says, That, Acts 20.28.
God purchased the Church with his own blood: that is, that person who was
truly God, as well as man, 1 Cor. 2.8.
he shed his blood, which he did not as God, but as man. Whole Christ was lift
up, suffered, died; but it was according to his humane Nature. So St. Peter
explaineth it, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ was put to death in the flesh. So again
Chap. 4.1. Christ suffered in the flesh; that is, in, or according to his
humane Nature. As for the Godhead, it was immortal, impassible, it could
neither die, nor suffer. It was the Manhood that was the proper and immediate
subject of this Passion. And therefore says our Savior, The Son of Man must
be lift up.

The Type resembling the Truth; the Brazen Serpent, Christ, in
To dwell no longer upon the Phrase. Come we now to bring these two together,
the Type and the Truth, the Serpent and the Son of Man, and see how the one
resembles and answers to the other. These Resemblances are many. But I shall
not take up every particular. I shall only reflect upon those few which I
named already. Beginning with

1. The Matter. Isai. 45.2.
1. The Matter of the Serpent. It was Brass. Brass, a strong and durable metal,
enduring both the Hammer and the Fire; a fit Emblem of strength. Whence it is
that strong impediments are called Gates of Brass, Psalm. 107.16. And an
imprignable strength is called a Wall of Brass, Jer. 1.18. and Chap. 15.20. Dr.
Taylour, Christ revealed. p. 308. Isai. 9.6.
And herein some observe a fit resemblance of Christ, who was the Lord, strong
and mighty, as he is called, Psalm. 24.8. strong, to stand against all the
powers of Hell, A brazen wall: mighty, to deliver his people; Mighty to subdue
and destroy his enemies. And thence described by his feet of Brass, Revel.
2.15. Able to tread under foot all adverse power. Mighty to suffer and undergo
what ever the Justice of God should inflict. The humame Nature of Christ in it
self was weak, but being supported by the power of the Godhead dwelling in it,
it was mightily enabled for the enduring of what ever sufferings: Hereby the
flesh of Christ became as Brass. It was Jobs speech of himself: Is my strength
the strength of stones, or is my flesh of Brass? Job 6. Job 6.12.
Truly, such was the flesh of Christ in his sufferings, made able to undergo
that which all the men and Angels in the world must needs have sunk under.

2. For the form or fashion, 2. The Form.
It was a Serpent; such in appearance, not in truth; having the shape of a
Serpent, but neither the sting, nor poison. And herein again fitly representing
this Son of man, Heb. 4.15.
who was a man like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. Herein two
particulars.

1. Christ was like unto us, To us Men: Christ like unto us men.
He was made in the likeness of men, says the Apostle, 2 Phil. Phil. 2.7.
) that is, of us mere men; I, of us sinful men: Romans 8.3.
God sending his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. Even as that
Brazen serpent carried the likeness of other poisonous and venomous Serpents,
so did Christ carry the similitude of sinful flesh; being a sinner both by
Reputation, and Imputation: In common repute a sinner, a great sinner: We know
that this man is a sinner (say the Pharisees to the blind man) John 9. Joh.
9.24.
that is, a great and notorious sinner: Mark 15.28. Isai. 53.12.
He was numbered among the transgressors, (says the Evangelist, citing that of
the Prophet Esaias;) Nay more, having as a surety taken upon him the sins of the
world (the world of his Elect) he was now a sinner by imputation, and the
greatest sinner in the world. 2 Cor. 5. last.
He was made sin for us, (says the Apostle) viz. by Imputation, having the
iniquities of many, Isai. 53. ver. 6. and 12.
of us all laid upon him: And herein fitly answering the Type; wherein we have
a Serpent stinging, and a Serpent healing.

Romans 5.19. Ex serpente morbi; per serpente medicinae: Per hominem peccatum and
mors, per hominem justificatio and resurrectio. H. G^oti. in Text.
Even thus by a man came sin and death, and by a man comes righteousness and
life: The first Adam wounds, being a man like unto us; the second Adam
heals, being a man like unto us also. God could have found out many other
Antidotes, and remedies against the poisonous stingings of these Serpents, but
he makes choice of this. A Serpent stings, and a Serpent must heal: Even so
possibly he could have found out many other ways and means for the Redeeming
and saving of his people, but his Wisdom puts it upon this way as most
congruous and convenient; 1 Cor. 15.21.
that as by a man came death, so by a man should come the Resurrection of the
dead; that as in Adam all die, so in Christ should all be made alive, (as the
Apostle goes on,) 1 Cor. 15.

2. Christ was like unto us Men, Christ like unto us sinful men. Serpentem hunc
aeneum in eo Christi gessisse imaginem, quod alius erat quam videbatur, recte
notavit adversus Tryphonem Justinus, de eo serpente sic loquens, (...), H.
Grot. ibid.
us sinful men, but himself not sinful. Even as that Serpent was like unto
other Serpents, but without the sting, and poison that was in them. Thus our
blessed Savior, how ever he carried the similitude of sinful flesh, yet he was
no ways infected or tainted with sin, whether Original, or Actual. Free from
the poison of Original sin, which had infected the nature of all other men:
Being sanctified in his conception by the supernatural work of the Spirit, he
was born holy. That holy thing which shall be born of thee, Luke 1. Luke 1.35.
Free from Actual sin. He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his
mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 2.22.


And here again behold the Truth answering to the Type. The stinging of those
poisonous Serpents cured by a Serpent that had neither sting, nor poison. The
sting and poison, guilt and power of sin, taken away by him that was free from
both. Christ has suffered for sins (says St. Peter (the just for the unjust,
that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 1 Pet. 3.18.
He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. last. Here is a second resemblance, in
the form of this Serpent.

3. 3. The occasion of making, and setting it up.
Upon what occasion was this Serpent made, and set up? Why, upon the deadly
biting and stinging of the Israelites by those fiery Serpents, whereof some
were dead already, others in eminent danger of death. Behold here what it was
that occasioned the making and lifting up of this true Brazen Serpent: what
occasioned the Eternal Son of God to take our nature upon him, in that nature
to suffer, to die: It was our Misery that called for this Mercy: we were all
stung, and mortally stung by the old Serpent, who fastening upon our first
Parents, through them transfused his poison unto all their posterity: Even as
one of those fiery serpents fastening upon one member, the poison thereof ran
through the whole body, inflaming, and infecting the blood and spirits in every
part. Even thus that old serpent (the devil) fastening the sting of his
Tentation in the heart of our first Parents, bringing them to transgress the
Command, and so to break the Covenant of their God, he thereby not only wounded
them to the death, but through them trasmitted that deadly poison to the whole
mass of mankind, being then in their loins: Romans 5.12.
so Death passed upon all men (says the Apostle) For that all have sinned. All
the sons of men being in Adam, tanquam in radice, as in the common stock and
root, they sinned in him; and so death, which had seized upon him, passed upon
them; (...), pervasit; a Metaphor taken from poison (say some, Instar occulti
veneni penetravit. Pareus Com. ad loc.
) which being received into the stomach, it passes through the whole body,
secretly dispersing it self through all the veins. Thus did the poison of the
old Serpent, being taken in by our first Parents, it presently passed through
the whole body of mankind, transfusing it self into our veins, so as we are
all by nature no better then dead men; As Mephibosheth once said to David, All
of my fathers house were but dead men before my Lord the King: 2 Samuel 19.28.
Such are all the posterity of Adam through his transgression, and rebellion
against the God of heaven, Dead men, Anshei, Maveth, Men of death; not only
subject to natural, but under the power of a spiritual, and bound over unto
eternal death; And here is the occasion of bringing in this true Brazen
Serpent, of sending a Savior into the world: Had not the Israelites sinned,
and upon their sin been punished after that manner, that Brazen Serpent had
never been made: Had not Adam sinned, and sinning died, and all his posterity
in him, we should not have needed a Savior: The Son of God should not have
needed to take our nature upon him, in that nature to suffer, to die. It was
our sin and misery that occasioned this Mercy.

And let the one ever put us in mind of the other. The Cross of Christ minds
us of our sin and misery.
The Brazen serpent standing in the midst of the Camp, it could not but be a
memorial to the Israelites to put them in mind of what misery they had brought
upon themselves by provoking the anger of God against them. The like use make
we of the beholding of Christ crucified. When he is held forth unto us by the
Ministers of the Gospel, in the Word and Sacraments, Gal. 3.1.
there crucified before our eyes: when we consider what he has done, what he
has suffered for us, and reflect upon our selves, and there take notice of the
occasion of this abasement. What was it that should draw the Son of God from
heaven to earth, to become the son of man, to take our nature upon him; in that
nature to do and suffer what he did? In us there was nothing but our misery,
which we had brought upon our selves by reason of sin. And this it was that
invited and occasioned this transcendent act of mercy; that, next unto the
free grace, and mercy of God, (a motive within himself) moved him to send his
Son into the world.

4. The Author and appointer of it.
4. Which is the fourth particular which the Type leads us to: viz. By whom
was this means of cure devised and appointed? why, by God himself. He it was
that directed and commanded Moses to do what he did about the making and
setting up of the Brazen Serpent. And behold here, who it was that found out,
and appointed this way and means of salvation for poor sinners by Jesus Christ;
even God himself. Hence is it that Christ is sometimes called the Lords Christ,
Luke 2. It was revealed unto Simeon that he should not depart hence before he
had seen the Lords Christ: (...), Christum Domini: that Anointed of the Lord,
Christ, who was designed and appointed by God his Father to the office of
Mediatorship.

He it was that found out this way of salvation: And who but he could have done
it? not men, not Angels. As for men, they without a supernatural light cannot
comprehend this mystery now it is revealed. The light shines in darkness, and
the darkness comprehends it not, John 1.5. The light, that is, Christ (as
the verses following explain it; Romans 1.21. Ephesians. 4 18.
) shines in darkness, that is, in the mind of man, which since the fall, is
full of darkness: but this darkness comprehends it not; 1 Cor. 2.14.
the natural man (...), he receives not, (viz. into his understanding) the
things which are of God; the Mysteries of the Gospel, specially this great
mystery concerning the salvation of mankind by Jesus Christ: No,
notwithstanding that it is now so clearly revealed; how much less could he
ever have invented, and found it out. Had not God himself found out this way
and means of cure for the Israelites by this Brazen Serpent, it was not Moses
could have done it, the Israelites themselves would never have thought of it.
Had not God in his infinite wisdom found out this way and means of salvation
for poor sinners by Christ, man himself could never have thought of it, would
never have dreamed of it.

No nor yet the Angels: As for them, they now stand admiring, and adoring this
sacred mystery, 1 Pet. 1.12.
desiring more and more to pry and look into it (as Saint Peter tells us) though
fully revealed: Impossible that ever they should have found it out: Here was
the Wisdom of God himself, where the Apostle speaking of the Doctrine of
Christ crucified, he calls it the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and the
wisdom of God in a mystery, even hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7. Hidden from men
and Angels; so it was, and so for ever it had been, had not God himself
revealed it.

Devised by God; and Ordained by him; so it there follows. Hidden wisdom,
which God ordained before the world, for our glory,] This God having found out,
he determined with himself before time; and what he determined before time, he
excuted in time; giving, sending his Son; So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc. in the verse after the Text: When the fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his Son, etc. Gal. 4.4. What ever Christ did, or
suffered in his whole course upon earth, it was all by his Fathers appointment,
by Commission from him: This is that which our Savior says of himself, Joh.
6.27. Him has God the Father sealed. A Metaphor taken from men who give
Commission to their Agents and Deputies, under their hand and seal. True it is,
God made use of Instruments in bringing him to the Cross; as here he made use
of Moses as his instrument in setting up the Brazen serpent: But what they
therein did, it was not only by a Divine Permission, but Ordination. Even as
Moses, what he did about the Brazen Serpent, it was by Gods direction and
appointment: So, what ever they did about the Crucifying of Christ, they did it
(though not by Warrant and direction from God, as Moses did, yet) by his
ordination, determination; so Saint Peter tells some of them, Act. 2.23. Him,
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have
taken and crucified.] Act. 4.27. Of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus,
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, etc. were assembled to do; what?
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.] Not a
circumstance in all his passive obedience; but was ordered and determined by
God himself. Here is a fourth particular.

A fifth follows. 5. In the use.
How was this Brazen Serpent used? It was lift up (says the Text;) As Moses
lift up the Serpent in the wilderness. And herein again behold a lively type
of Christ the true Brazen Serpent, who was also lifted up, and so lifted up.
[So must the Son of Man be lift up.

Quest. For the opening of the phrase, Quest. How Christ is said to be lifted
up.
How is Christ said to be lifted up?

Answ. Answ. 1. In his Passion.
Christ may be said to be lifted up diverse ways.

1. In his Passion, his Death: lifted up upon the Cross.

2 In his Resurrection; 2. Resurrection.
lifted up from the Grave, from which he rose the third day.

3 In his Exaltation, his Ascension 3. Ascension.
into Heaven, and Session at the right hand of God. Of these two later, the
Apostle S. Peter speaks, Act. 2.32, 33. This Jesus God has raised up: Therefore
being by the right hand of God exalted, (...), lifted up:

4. And lastly, He may be said to be lifted up in the Preaching of the Gospel.
4. The preaching of the Gospel.
And in this fourth and last sense, Mr. Calvin understands the phrase here in
the Text; The Son of Man must be lifted up; Hoc factum est in Evangelii
praedicatione. Calv. ad. loc.
] And so he is (says he) in the preaching of the Gospel: There is Christ held
forth and lift up even as the Brazen Serpent was lift up in the wilderness:
How was the Brazen Serpent lift up? Why it was set up for a sign, an ensign,
that all the people might take notice of, and look up to for their bodily cure:
And even thus is Christ lift up in the preaching of the Gospel: Lift up for a
sign and an ensign; so the Prophet Isaiah has it, Isai. 11. In that day there
shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, ver.
10. He shall set up an ensign for the Nations, ver. 12. So again, Isai 49 22.
Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to that
people, etc. This Ensign, this Standard is Christ, who is lift up where ever
the Gospel is preached. God's Ministers they are his Standard-bearers, and
their work is to lift up Christ; for indeed, what is the Gospel but a Doctrine
concerning Christ? concerning his one Person, two Natures, three Offices, his
Obedience, Merits, Benefits; In all holding forth Christ, that the people might
behold, look up to him, believe on him. Thus is Christ there lifted up: A
truth, and a useful one, which I will not wholly exclude out of the Text.

The first sense proper to the Text.
But the stream of other Expositors, Ancient and Modern, and that (for ought I
know) with one consent, carry the sense another way, understanding the phrase
in the first sense, of the Death and Passion of Christ; There was the Son of
Man lift up, and that in a literal sense; lift up upon the Cross; and of this
I conceive our Savior here to speak: In this sense we find this phrase used by
himself in two other places of this Gospel, Joh. 8.28. and 12.32. in the
former place he tells the Jews, When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then
you shall know that I am he. Now how did they lift him up? Why, by crucifying
him, lifting him up upon the Cross: The later Text is express and full; And
I, (says our Savior) if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
after me. Lifted up, how? why, the next verse explains it; This spoke he (says
the Evangelist) signifying what death he should die; Thus the people there
understood him: as appears by the 34. verse of that Chapter; and I see no
reason why we should not so understand him here in the Text, as under this
phrase notifying to Nichodemus and us, both his own death, and the Manner of
his Death.

Quest. But here the Question may be, why our Savior should here make use of
this dark and covert expression? Quest. Why our Savior here makes use of this
expression.
why does he not rather in plain and simple terms say, So must the Son of Man
be crucified? but he must be lifted up?

Ans. Answ.
Not to insist upon what some collect from it, though true and useful.

1. Our Savior calls his Death a lifting up, because (say they) it was the
way to his Exaltation. 1. The Cross the way to his Exaltation.
He shall drink of the Brook in the way (says the Psalmist) therefore shall he
lift up the head, Psalm. 110. Psalm. 110. last.
which some understand of the bitter Cup of the Passion, making way to his
glorious Exaltation; Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? Luke 24. Luke 24.26.
He humbled himself, etc. Therefore God highly exalted him, lifted him up,
Phil. 2. Phil. 2.8, 9.
His Humilintion was the way to his Exaltation.

2. Nay more: It was to him an Exaltation: 2. The Cross it self an Exaltation.
Christ in his death, however he seemed to be depressed, humbled, yet he was
even then exalted, in as much as therein he triumphed over his and his Churches
enemies; overcoming even there, where he seemed to be overcome: Overcoming
Death by dying; Sin, Satan, Hell, by suffering, yielding: Even there in his
Passion upon the Cross, he spoiled Principalities and Powers, Colos. 2.15.
triumphing over them (as the Apostle has it.) In it, (...), viz. in his
Passion upon the Cross, which was to him as a Chariot of Triumph: Never did
Conqueror triumph so gloriously in his Chariot, as Christ upon his Cross. And
in this regard the Death and Passion of Christ might here be called an
Exaltation, a lifting up.

3 The phrase alluding to the Type, the Brazen Serpent; which was
3 But to let both these pass. It is enough our Savior here makes use of this
phrase being led to it by the Type, which not only shadowed out his Death, but
the manner or kind of his death; and that most clearly and lively, as I might
show you in some particulars.

1 The Brazen Serpent was lift up above the Earth: 1 Lift up above the earth.
so was Christ in his death, he was lift up from the earth, as himself
phraseth it, Joh. 12.32.

2 The Brazen Serpent was set upon a Pole 2 Upon a pole.
or perch; and thus was Jesus Christ lift up upon the Tree. He bare our sins
(says Saint Peter 1 Pet. 2.23. (...). Just. Apol. 2.
) in his own body upon the Tree, (...), super lignum illud, upon that wood, the
wood of the Cross: The one typifying the other.

3 The Brazen Serpent was lift up in the wilderness, 3. In the Wilderness.
(...), In loco vasto, pleno veneni, in quo figura mundi Christi temporibus
corruptissimi. H. Grot. ad loc.
so says the Text, in a waste and solitary place, full of venom and poison;
and such, (says Grotius) was the world (nay the Church) in the time of Christ,
marvellously corrupted and impoysoned with all kind of Error and Superstition.

4 The Brazen Serpent was so lifted up as that all the Camp of Israel might see
it; and to that end set up in the midst of the Camp, 4. In the midst of the
Camp.
that they might behold it from all quarters: Thus was Christ lift up as it
were in the midst of the world, that the Elect of God in all ages, in all
places of the world, might look up unto him.

5 And lastly. The Brazen Serpent was lift up, that whoever beheld it might be
healed, 5. For a healing medicine. (...).] Simili effectu. Grot.
how mortally soever he was stung: And to the same end was Christ lift up, that
whosoever looks up to him by faith might be saved, as the verse following
explains the resemblance betwixt these two.

Thus was the Brazen Serpent lift up, Christ lift up after the like manner.
and so was the Son of man lift up.

The death of Christ necessary
And it was requisite he should be so, so says the Text, So must the son of man
be lifted up.] Must.] So our Savior often lays it down, inculcating upon his
Disciples, the necessity of his death, Matthew. 16.21. From that time began Jesus
to show unto his Disciples, how that he [must] go up to Jerusalem, and suffer
many things, etc. (...). Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these
things? (...). And so here, (...), Oportet exaltari, He [must] be lift up. The
death of Christ was not a thing casual, accidental, much less needless; no,
it was both needful and necessary.

In a threefold respect.
Necessary, How? What in respect of Christ himself? no. In him it was a free
and voluntary act, Phil. 2. 8.
He humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
cross. How then? Why necessary in a threefold respect. 1 In respect of God. 2
In respect of the Scriptures: 3. In respect of us. In respect of God who had
decreed it: In respect of the Scriptures which had foretold it; In respect of
us, who needed it, had perished without it.

1. Of God.
1. In respect of God, who had decreed it. God in his eternal counsel had
determined that his Son should suffer, should die. Thence he is said to be the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8.
viz. (as in regard of the virtue and efficacy of his death; which extended to
the first age of the world, as well as the last, so) in regard of Gods Decree.
Now Gods Decree being immutable, it imposes a necessity upon that which in
regard of secondary causes, is contingent and accidental. His Decree is
irreversible; Isai. 46.10.
My counsel shall stand. In this respect the son of man [must] die. Must] is
for the King, for the King of Heaven; whose will is a law, imposing a necessity
upon the creature, a necessity of obeying.

2. Necessary in respect of the Scriptures, 2. The Scriptures.
which had foretold it. The Scriptures in the Old Testament they had foretold
the death and passion of Christ, and that both by word, and by sign. By word
fore-prophesied it, by signs fore-typified it. Fore prophesied it; After sixty
and two weeks the Messiah shall be cut off, (slain) but but not for himself,
(says Daniel,) Dan. 9.26. He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, (says the
Prophet Esaias) Isai. 53.7. Both foretelling the death and passion of Christ.
Foretipified it; Isaak lifted up, and laid upon the Altar by his father; the
Paschal Lamb, the daily sacrifices, all shadowed out the sacrifice of Christ,
none more clearly then that in the Text. The lifting up of the brazen Serpent
in the wilderness. Now that all these, these, prophesies, these tipes might be
fulfilled, therefore [must] the son of man be lift up, suffer, die. For (as our
Savior tells the Jews) The Scriptures cannot be broken, John 10.35.
(...). Non potest solvi, It cannot be frustrated, made void. Rather then the
Scripture shall be broken, the son of man, I, the Son of God shall be broken.
He was broken for our iniquities, Isai. 53.5.

3. Of mankind.
3. Necessary in respect of us who needed it. God needed not to have given his
Son: Christ needed not to have given himself; but we needed it. It was not
the Fathers necessity, nor the Sons necessity, nor yet any advantage that could
hereby accrue unto either, but our necessities, that brought the Son of God
to the Cross. He must suffer and die, otherwise we must have suffered and
died, and that eternally. No other way to redeem us, to save us; the justice of
God requiring that the same nature which had sinned, should satisfy; such was
the cure which God prescribed to the Israelites. They were stung by a serpent,
and they must be healed by a serpent; and therefore the brazen serpent must be
lift up; otherwise they were but dead men. And such was the way which the
wisdom of God had found out for the redeeming of lost mankind: Man sins,
and man must suffer; the same nature, though not the same person: Mercy
dispensed with the one, but justice required the other And therefore the Son of
man must be lift up, otherwise all mankind had perished, and that for ever, so
much the verse following clearly imports. The Son of man must be lifted up,
that whosoever believes on him, should not perish: Intimating, that had not
the Son of man been thus lift up, had not Christ died, we had been in a
hopeless condition: no way for us but we must needs have perished. In regard of
us then it was expedient: It is expedient for us (says Caiphas, speaking by a
spirit of prophecy) That one man should die for the people, Joh. 11.50, 51
and that the whole nation perish not. And thus you see how, and in what
respects it is here said, that The Son of man [must] be lift up.

Applic. To make some Application of this useful truth. In the first place by
way of Information. Applic. By way of Information.
Behold we hear the depth of man's misery, the height of Gods mercy. Man's misery
which required such a remedy, Gods mercy in providing and reaching it forth.

Use 1. Take we notice here of the depth of our own misery, our natural
misery Use 1. Man's natural misery.
by reason of sin, fitly represented, and shadowed out in the condition of
these Israelites, being stung or bitten by these serpents. Touching which, that
the resemblance betwixt the one and the other, may more clearly appear, we may
in the Type consider, and take notice of three particulars. Three particulars
notified in the Type.
1. The Serpent it self. 2 The sting of this serpent. 3. The deadly effect of
that sting where it fastened. The Serpent it self, a venomous and poisonfull
creature; such generally are all serpents, but this more then other; and thence
called a fiery serpent, both from the color, which through the abundance of
poison, was shining and glistering like fire: and also from the nature and
quality of its poison, which inflamed and burnt the body like unto fire. The
sting, or teeth of this serpent, the instrument whereby it conveyed that
poison, the effect of that stinging, which was not only painful and
dangerous, but deadly. Now I suppose your thoughts run before my meditations in
applying of every of these. All which read us a useful lecture touching our
natural misery, shadowing out unto us how we are all stung by that old
Serpent, whose sting is sin, and the fruit thereof death. Briefly of each.

1. The Serpent; Satan. Revel. 12.9.20.2.
1. Behold here the Serpent which has stung us; Satan, that old Serpent, as he
is sometimes called, and that not unfitly.

1. A Serpent, in as much as in that shape he seduced our first parents, 1.
Seducing our first parents in that shape.
coming to the woman in the shape of a serpent, speaking in, and by the
serpent, making use of that creature as his instrument in conveying his
suggestions; 2 Cor. 11.3.
whence it is said, that the serpent bebeguiled Eve, that is, Satan in the
Serpent.

2. Resembling the serpent, 2. Resembling the serpent.
and that in two prime qualities and properties of that creature, viz. the
subtilty, and poisonous nature of it.

1. In Subtilty; 1. In subtilty. Genesis 3 1.
The serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field, Genesis 3. Satan more
subtle then any of the sons of men; Crafty to deceive. 2 Cor. 11.3.
[The Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty.] Having his windings and
turnings, 2 Cor. 2.11. (...), Ephesians 6.11. (...).
and subtle insinuations, his Devices, his Methods, as the Apostle calls
them, whereby he winds himself in and out: Even as that serpent was able to
creep in and out of the Garden unespied; so does Satan insinuate himself into
the most sacred societies, Job 1.6.
into the most holy duties; I, even into the bosoms of men, secretly, closely.

2. A Serpent for his poison. The Serpent is full of venom, and so is Satan of
malicious wickedness. 2. In malicious wickedness.
O thou full of all subtilty and mischief, thou child of the Devil, says Paul
to Elimas the Sorcerer, Acts 13. Acts 13.10.
Such was the child, and such is the father; Satan full of wickedness in
himself; thence called sometimes (...), that wicked one. Matthew. 6.13. Ephesians.
6.16.
And full of poisonous malice against God, and his people, which upon all
occasions he is ready to vent, and spit forth in mutual accusations, accusing
God to man, and man to God, seeking to communicate his poison, to infect, and
impoison, and destroy others. Here is the Serpent which stung our first
parents, and in them all their posterity.

But what is the sting of this Serpent? sin. 2. The sting of this Serpent, sin.
Serpents have their stings or teeth, whereby they convey their poison,
wounding where they fasten; so has this old serpent, whose sting is sin. The
sting of death is sin (says the Apostle) and so of Satan, 1 Cor. 15.56.
who has the power of death. Had it not been for this, Heb. 2.14.
Satan could never have hurt our first parents. A serpent may wind round about
the body of man, yet unless it fasten the sting or teeth in him, it hurts him
not. Had not Satan fastened the sting of his tentation in our first parents,
drawing them to sin against their God, all his assaults had been to no purpose.
Hence was it that our blessed Savior came off safe from those incounters with
this old serpent, both in the wilderness, and in the garden. The Prince of
this world comes (says our Savior;) but he has nothing in me, John 14.
John 14.
He assaults him as he did our first parent in the Garden; but he could not
hurt him, because he could not fasten the sting of his tentation in him, to
draw him to sin. But in our first parents he did, wounding first the woman,
then the man, drawing both into the transgression; and so by that means
impoisoning the whole nature of man; inwrapping all their posterity both in the
guilt, and stain, and dominion of sin. Hence is the sting of this serpent.

3. And what is the effect of this stinging? 3. The Effect of this stinging.
why, behold that not only painful and dangerous, but deadly: Hereby whole
mankind was poisoned, and the whole of man. Like as those serpents stinging the
one part of the body, the poison spread it self through all the members: Thus
the poison of sin entering by one man, it has poisoned the whole Mass of
mankind, and every part of man: so as every power, and faculty of the soul,
and every member of the body, they are all poisoned, and that mortally. Such
was the stinging of those serpents; it was mortal, deadly, Romans 6. last.
incurable by any natural means; and such is the effect of sin. The wages of
sin is death. Death not only temporal, but spiritual and eternal. Of which
I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

Lo here then the condition of all the sons of men by nature. Man's natural
condition very miserable.
A condition how miserable? Who is there but so looks upon the condition of a
poor Israelite, being stung with those fiery serpents? what was his smart, his
anguish? Thinking of them, learn to pity our selves, or others, being yet in
the state of nature: having the sting of sin sticking in our souls, O what
horror, what torment will this procure to us, if not speedily cured? That we
feel it not now, it is because we are asleep. An Israelite being asleep,
possibly he might not feel the anguish of his stinging, but being awakened, he
could not but be sensible of it. Hence it is that wicked men now feel not the
smart, and anguish of their sins; Alas, they are asleep: but if ever God awaken
them (as sooner or later he will, in this life, or in hell) what horrors,
what torment will these procure unto them? See it in Judas, when the old
Serpent had fastened the sting of his tentation in him, and brought him to
betray his Lord and Master, at first he feels it not; but so soon as God had
awakened his conscience, see now how in the anguish of his soul he runs to the
Chief Priests, (even as these Israelites being stung did to Moses) bewailing
his condition, complaining of his sin and misery; Matthew. 27.4.
I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: but all in vain, without either
cure or ease. The poison being got to his heart, he swells, and bursts, and dies
upon it. And here is the first thing which I propounded to be taken notice of:
Man's misery by nature, represented and shadowed out by the condition of an
Israelite stung with these fiery serpents.

Use 2. Gods mercy in providing a remedy.
2. In the second place, behold we also in the same glass the height of Gods
mercy, in providing a salve for this sore, a remedy for this misery. What a
mercy do we account it in God, that he was pleased to provide a brusen
serpent, to cure the stinging of those fiery serpents? And so indeed it was,
specially if looked upon according to the circumstances of it: That he who was
justly provoked to wrath against them for their sins, their ingratitude, their
murmuring and repining against him, that he should provide a remedy for them;
and that he should then do it, when all other means had left them desperate;
that he should step into them in this their great necessity; what a mercy?
Behold the like, a far greater mercy in the thing signified: That God should
provide a way and means of deliverance for us when we were enemies to him;
Romans 5.8.10.
and that he should then do it, when neither men nor Angels could do any thing
for us, behold here as infinite wisdom, so infinite mercy. And who can behold
it without a thankful admiration? That God should turn Physician to such a
Patient; that he should devise for them, and prescribe to them, who spared not
to devise, and speak, and act against him; then taking them in hand for cure,
when all other means had given them over, how does this commend the mercy and
love of God both toward them and us? Behold here the truth of that prophetical
protestation, Ezekiel. 33. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live (says the Lord God) I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.
That God punished some of the Israelites with death for their rebellions, it
was but justice: making them exemplary to the rest. Poena ad paucos, terror ad
omnes; That he spared the rest, providing a cure for them, this was mercy;
wherein God declared that he was not delighted in the misery and destruction
of his creature. That God binds some wicked and ungodly men over unto just
condemnation for sin, this he does in justice; yet is he not delighted in the
destruction of his creature; and thence is it that he has provided a way and
means of salvation for others. He that lift up this brazen serpent in the
wilderness for those surviving Israelites, he has also lift up a Savior for
us, delivering his own and only Son to the death for us; that he dying, we
might not die; that believing on him, we might not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Use 3. And has God done this for us? Use 3. Exhortation to make use of this
remedy.
O let not this grace and mercy of his be in vain to any of us! When God had
caused the brazen serpent to be set up in the wilderness, such as were stung
with those fiery serpents, (I suppose) they should not need to have been
pressed to go out of their Tents, to repair and look up unto it for cure. Such
is our condition (as you have heard,) All stung, and that mortally by this old
Serpent: And such has Gods mercy been, he has provided a brazen serpent for
us, caused his Son to be lift up for us: O let us not now neglect so great
salvation, but come forth of our Tents, go we out of our selves, and come unto
Jesus Christ, looking up to him that we may be made partakers of the benefits
of his death and passion. To this end was the brazen serpent lift up, that the
people might look up to it. And to this end was the Lord Jesus Christ lift up
upon the Cross, that poor sinners might look unto him. And this let us do.

I mean, as many of us as feel the need we have of him: as feel the sting of
sin sticking in our souls, and so desire to be freed not only from the guilt
and terror, but also from the power of it. For such and only such they are
that shall have benefit by Christ. The brazen serpent being lift up, all Israel
might look upon it, but they only had benefit by it, who feeling themselves
stung, looked up to it for cure. Thus is it with our Brazen Serpent, the Lord
Jesus. Others may look upon him, and yet be never the better for him: So did
the Jews, who saw him crucified, yet had no benefit by him: Ferus ad Text.
Multi viderunt and oderunt, Many of them saw him, and hated him; and so had
better never have seen him. Thus do many Christians behold Christ in the
history of the Gospel, behold him crucified before their eyes in the preaching
of the word, and yet not feeling the need they have of him, they shall never
have any benefit by him.

O then labor we first to be sensible of this, to feel our selves stung,
mortally stung. Be we sensible of our condition.
So we are, whether we feel it or no? and the less we feel it, the greater
is our danger, and the less hope of grace: only labor to be thus sensible
hereof, that so we may feel the need we have of Jesus Christ, that we may
see our selves dead men without him. Now, and not till now, are we fit for him:
Other qualifications or predispositions he requires none; only that we be
sensible of the need we have of him. Being such, now come we unto him, and come
with boldness and confidence, being assured that we shall find a perfect
cure in him, and from him, we shall not die, but live. So much the verse
following will assure us of, wherein we shall meet with the two other
particulars, which I took notice of in the Type, fully answered; viz. the end
and efficacy of this our Brazen Serpent, To which I now come.

Ver. 15. That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have Eternal
life.]


IN which words we may see the Truth not only Answering, The Truth excelling
the Type.
but Excelling the Type, advanced above it, and that in two particulars: In the
Effect of it, and in the Extent of that effect. For the Effect: The brazen
serpent was the means of a bodily cure, of preserving a temporal life. But
Christ is the means of a spiritual cure, of procuring an eternal life. For
the Extent of that effect; The brazen serpent was erected for the use and
benefit of the Jew; Christ crucified is a Savior both of Jew and Gentile; the
efficacy and virtue of his death extending to both alike. That whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life.]

Division.
Shall we devide the words? we may take notice in them of two things; a
Condition, and a Promise: A condition, the same with the condition of the new
Covenant, the Covenant of Grace; viz. believing on Jesus Christ; Whosoever
believes on him. The Promise, importing the great benefit accruing to them who
shall rightly perform this condition. They shall not perish, etc. Wherein we
may take notice, first of the benefit it self; then of the persons to whom it
extends. The Benefit it self, which is partly Privative, partly Positive.
Privative, deliverance from death, [They shall not perish.] Positive, fruition
of life, and that eternal life; They shall not perish, but have eternal
life.] The Extent of which benefit is indefinite, universal, to all those that
shall perform the condition. [That whosoever believes, etc.]

It is not my purpose to insist precisely in the steps of this Division. I
shall rather, for our better and more profitable proceeding, draw forth the
words into four distinct and plain doctrinall Propositions, or Conclusions.
The first whereof is necessarily employed, the rest plainly expressed.

1. Four Doctrinall Conclusions.
All men by nature are in a perishing estate and condition.

2. The only way and means of deliverance out of that perishing state, is by
Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

3. The only way and means of receiving benefit by and from Jesus Christ, is,
to believe on him.

4. Whosoever so believes on him, shall have perfect salvation by him.

Four main and useful Conclusions, each a Principle of Christian Religion, a
Head of Catechism, necessary even for children to know and understand, and yet
of sovereign use for the most grown Christian. I shall handle them
distinctly, and plainly; still having an eye to the Type here set before us,
wherein (as in a glass) we may read the truth of every of these perticulars,
and of the greatest part of what I shall say concerning them.

Begin with the first: Conclusion 1. All men by nature in a perishing condition.
A truth, though not directly expressed, yet necessarily employed: All men by
nature are in a perishing condition. Mark it; Christ the true Brazen Serpent
was lift up, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, etc. A clear
intimation that without Christ, and without faith in Christ, all men are but
dead men, in a perishing state, a state of perdition, deprived of life,
subjected unto death.

1 Deprived of life.
1. Deprived of life, that life which the Text speaks of, viz. Eternal life,
which is begun in Grace, perfected in Glory; of this life are all men naturally
deprived. Being destitute of the Life of Grace, so says S. Paul of the
Gentiles before conversion, Ephesians. 4 18.
They were alienated (estranged) from the life of God. That life whereby God
lives in his Saints, the life of grace; they were strangers to it, they knew
not what it meant; destitute of this Spiritual life, and shut out from the
life of glory; Romans 3.23.
All have sinned (says S. Paul speaking of the universality of mankind) and
are deprived of the glory of God;] They come short of it, (...), Deficiuntur,
they are cast behind; A Metaphor (says Beza) taken from runners in a Race,
Beza Gr. Ann.
who through natural weakness, or by a fall, or some like impediment, are so
far cast behind, as that it is not possible they should ever fetch it up again,
so as to win the prize. So fares it with all men naturally; through the fall
of Adam, in whose loins then they were, and through their own natural
weakness thereby contracted, they are so far cast behind, that do what they
can, improve the power of nature to the uttermost, they can never of themselves
come up to the goal, so as to win the prize, never attain eternal life. All
deprived of life. And

2. All subjected unto death; 2. Subjected unto death. Genesis 3.17.
and that by virtue of that first threatening, The day thou eatest thereof thou
shall die the death, Genesis 3. All subjected to a threefold death, Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal. Temporal of the Body; Spiritual of the Soul;
Eternal both of Soul and Body: Being all inevitably subject to the first,
lying under the power of the second, and under the sentence of the third:
Having their Bodies mortal, their Souls dead, Dead in trespasses and sins:
Ephesians. 2.1.
Souls and Bodies bound over unto Eternal death, which consists in an
eternal separation from the presence of God, in whose presence is life: an
eternal confinement to that place and state of torment, prepared for the devil
and his angels; all which (if need were) might be made good in particulars. And
herein is the forlorn perishing state and condition of all men by nature; that
it is so, it cannot be denied. But how comes it to be so?

See the ground and cause of it in the Type: This has the Serpent done; Reas.
This has the Serpent done.
The Israelites being stung or bitten by those fiery serpents, though both
strong and healthful before, they were now but dead men, carrying death in
their bosoms; and so fares it with the sons of men, however created in a
blessed state and condition, in a healthful constitution (as I may say) with a
posse non mori, a possibility of being immortal, yet upon the stinging of the
serpent, the old serpent fastening his sting in Adam, through him transfusing
his poison, the deadly poison of sin to all his posterity, hereby they are
become so wretched, so miserable, all dead men, in a perishing condition; so
the Apostle lays it down clearly and plainly in that known Text, Romans 5.12.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so death passed upon
all, for that all have sinned:] Mark it; Here is the head and spring of all
that evil of sin and misery which has broken in upon mankind. Adam sinned,
and sinning died, being thereupon subjected to that threefold death. Now Adam
thus dying and perishing, all his posterity perished in him, and with him; even
as it is with a tree, the Root dying, all the Branches die in it, and with it:
So stands the case betwixt Adam and his posterity: Adam was the common Root
of mankind, all others of the sons of men were in him Tanquam in radice, as
Branches in the Root; and so consequently he dying, they all die in him, and
with him. Thus briefly you see both the truth of this first Conclusion, and the
ground of it. As briefly bring we it home by way of Application, and so pass
to the other Conclusions which are here more expressly laid down in the Text.

1. By way of Conviction: Use 1. Conviction. See this to be our state.
Is this the state of all men by nature? Be we then convinced that this is our
estate in particular. An easy matter it is to believe, confess and
acknowledge this truth in the gross, in the general, that all men by nature
are in a perishing state, lost men and women, children of perdition. to bring
it home to a man's self in particular, to be convinced and made sensible that
this is my estate, thy estate, here is a difficulty; a thing which few do, or
endeavor to do; and hence it is that men being in the state of nature, are so
little or nothing affected with the dangerousnesse of that condition: They can
lie and continue in that estate wherein they were born, and yet never be
troubled at it, never affected with it: What is the reason hereof? Why, they
look upon this truth only in the gross, in the general notion of it; Now
Generalities do not affect; Genera nec agunt, nec patiuntur. Certainly, were
men but once thoroughly convinced and persuaded that this is their estate in
particular, they would not so quietly and contentedly sit down in it; they
would never be at rest until they have got some evidence, some assurance unto
their own souls, that they are gotten out of that estate, brought out of this
state of nature into a state of grace.

And therefore in the fear of God, as many of you as were never yet thoroughly
convinced of the truth hereof, now let it into your souls, and do not suffer
vain thoughts to lodge within you, as viz. that you shall do as well as others,
(so you may, and yet be miserable enough;) or, that whatever become of others,
yet it shall go well with you; what says our Savior to the Jews flattering
themselves with the like thoughts? viz. That however the judgments of God
might light upon others, yet they should escape. Not so (says he) Except ye
repent, Luke 13.3.
ye shall all likewise perish: Let it be spoken to every secure sinner that
stands before me this day, that lies sleeping in his natural state and
condition, flattering himself with a self conceited apprehension, that he is
not as some others, (as the Pharisee said of himself) no Swearer, no Drunkard,
no profane, no scandalous person, and hereupon speaks peace to his own soul,
promising to himself immunity from that wrath of God which shall fall upon
others, I tell you nay; but except ye repent, except ye be renewed, changed,
brought out of that estate of nature, and brought home unto God by Christ, ye
shall likewise perish; Your estate being for the present that estate wherein
you were born, it is a perishing state, a state of perdition; so as living and
dying in it, there is no hope but you must perish, and for ever perish. An
Israelite being stung, was now but a dead man; and so art thou being under the
guilt and power of sin. O that this apprehension were but let in, and thoroughly
set on upon every soul here present, then should I not need to press, what at
present I intend only to propound by way of Exhortation.

Use 2. Look out for cure.
That every one of us here present would look out for our selves, our own
safety, our own security, never giving rest unto our souls until we be upon
good grounds ascertained that we are got out of this state. My Brethren, will
any creature (man only excepted) rest in such a state as threatens destruction
to it: Such is the state of nature, a state of perdition, threatening certain
destruction to every soul that lies and continues in it.

And therefore every of us (in the fear of God) be excited to a serious and
earnest inquiry after some way and means of deliverance out of this estate;
that having found it out, we may put our souls upon it, so as we may not perish
with the rest of the world. The Israelites feeling themselves stung with these
Fiery Serpents, they look out for cure: To that end, they repair unto Moses,
making their moan unto him: the like will we do for our bodies; Do we find them
distempered, wounded, we will look out to the Physician, Chyrurgion, for
remedy and cure. O, be as wise for our souls! Do we feel them wounded, stung
with this Old Serpent? Do not now lie and die in our sins; God has provided a
means of cure, seek we, enquire we after it, and make use of it.

And to that end, come with these Israelites to Moses, come to the Ministers of
God, Come to Moses, the Ministers of God.
enquiring from them out of the word what course is to be taken; this will a
wounded soul, a soul rightly humbled do, feeling the sting of sin sticking in
it, and apprehending the deadly consequence of it, it will now have recourse to
God, to his Word, to his Ministers, asking counsel of them. So did the Jews
being pricked in their hearts, they come unto Peter and the rest (even as the
Israelites here did unto Moses:) and what is their errand? Men and Brethren,
Act. 2.37.
what shall we do? The Jailer the like; being stung, and sensible of his pain,
he comes to Paul and Silas; and what is his Question? Act. 16.30.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? O that men would take the same course;
feeling the sting of sin sticking in their souls and consciences, not let it
alone festring and wrankling, and spreading the venom of it more and more,
till it be past cure; nor yet seeking out after indirect and unprofitable ways
and means of cure: As it is in the case of some, of many, when they feel the
smart, the sting of sin galling their consciences, what course take they? Why
(it may be) with Saul, send for a Musician to charm that evil and unquiet
spirit; or with Cain, fall to building of Cities, plunge themselves into
business and employment of the world; use some dangerous, it may be desperate
Anodynes, some means or other to cast the soul into a dead sleep, to benum the
sense of it, which they ordinarily do by drowning and surcharging it with the
pleasures or profits of the world; Alas, it is not this will do it. It was not
all the Physicians and Magicians in the world that could have cured a stung
Israelite. No, when they have done all, they must come to Moses: They are not
all the carnal comforts and contentments in the world that can cure a wounded
soul; possibly they may lull it asleep for a time, and stupifie it so as it
shall not feel the pain; (as happily some stupifying medicines might have been
found out for the Israelites) but it is only God and his Word that can
prescribe means of comfort and cure: And therefore hither have we recourse,
enquiring of God's Ministers what we shall do; by what means we may obtain
deliverance and salvation. This being the question, now know we for our
comfort, that God has provided a way and means for this purpose; when neither
Man nor Angel could do it, God himself in infinite wisdom and mercy has
found out a way and means for the curing, healing, saving of our souls: And
what is that way, that means? Why, only Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And so
I am fallen upon the second Conclusion.

2. The only way and means of deliverance and salvation for poor perishing
sinners, is by Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Conclus. 2. Christ crucified
the only remedy.
A Truth clearly held forth in the Type: The Israelites being stung with these
deadly Serpents, they had no means of cure but only this Brazen Serpent being
lift up; this was to them the Sovereign and only Antidote, and remedy. Even
thus mankind being mortally stung by that Old Serpent, brought into a perishing
condition by sin, they have no other remedy, no other way or means of salvation
but Christ, and Christ lifted up upon the Cross, Christ crucified; so the Text
it self plainly expresses and applies it; So must the Son of Man be lift up,
That whosoever believes on him should not perish, etc.

A Principle, I, the Principle of Christian Religion, The Cardinal Principle of
Christian Religion.
containing in it the sum and substance of the Gospel. For the better handling
of it, I shall draw it forth into three distinct Branches. The Conclusion
divided into three Propositions.
1. That Christ: 2. Only Christ: 3. Only Christ crucified is the means of
man's deliverance and salvation. Open these three severally by way of
Explication, Illustration; put them together in the Application.

Prop. 1. Jesus Christ is the Savior and deliverer of lost mankind. Prop. 1.
Christ the Savior of lost mankind.
A Truth first preached in Paradise by God himself; where he tells the
Serpent, that the Seed of the woman should bruise his head, Genesis 3.15. It shall
bruise thy head.] It, viz. the Seed of the woman, Christ the Seed of the
Virgin, the singular seed of the woman. Shall bruise thy head, i. e. Break the
power of that old Serpent, Satan; And this has Jesus Christ done, and daily
does. And hence is it that he is called sometimes by the name of a Redeemer, a
Deliverer. I know that my Redeemer lives (says Job: Job. 19.25.
) The Redeemer shall come to Zion (says the Prophet) Isai. 59. Isai. 59.20.
There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer (says the Apostle, relating to
that of the Prophet) Romans 11. Romans 11.26.
Elsewhere and often a Savior, Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior (says Peter) Act. 5. Act. 5.31.
The Author of salvation, and that, Eternal salvation. Being made perfect
(says the Apostle) he became the Author of Eternal salvation to all them
that obey him, Heb. 5. Heb. 5.9.
A Savior to his people, his Elect: So much his name imports, Thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people (says the Angel to Joseph, Mat.
1. Mat, 1.21. Saving them from spiritual enemies, sin and Satan.
Save them; from what? why from sin and Satan, their Spiritual enemies; He
shall save his people from their sins: Sin is the sting of the Old Serpent (as
I have shown you.) And from this Christ the true Brazen Serpent, saves his
people.

Obj. Saves them, you may say, How it is that Believers are infested with both?
How then is it that they are daily so infested as they are? Infested by sin
and Satan; assaulted by the one, and foiled by the other?

Answ. To this let the Type make answer, which meets with it fully. The
Israelites after the Brazen serpent was set up, they were still infested with
those Fiery Serpents, still stung by them, and that stinging as painful to
them, and in it self as dangerous and deadly as formerly it was; but it was
not so mortal to them who looked up to that Brazen serpent. Here was the
virtue of this sovereign Antidote. The brazen serpent saved them not from the
stinging of the Serpents, but from the deadly consequence of that stinging.
Thus does Christ save his people from sin and satan in this life, not from
being infested by them (though in part also he restrains the malice of Satan,
and abates the power of sin in his people; the Truth herein again excelling the
Type) but from perishing by them. Mark the Text, [That whosoever believes on
him, should not perish:] Thus does Christ save his people, though not
altogether from sin it self, yet from the consequence of sin, which is death,
and condemnation: There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1. In the wilderness, the Serpents themselves were not taken away, nor
yet the sting from these Serpents, nor yet the venom from that sting; only
rendered not mortal to those who made use of this means of Cure. Thus in this
life sin is not quite abolished, nor yet the guilt taken away from the sin: No,
even in a justified person sin still remains, and that as sin, which the
believer often feels the smart of, but the guilt, and punishment, and power
of it is so taken away by Christ, as that it shall not be mortal to the person
that looks up unto him: They shall not perish, but have eternal life. Thus is
Christ a Savior to his people.

Quest. Quest. How Christ comes to be a Savior.
But how comes he to be so?

Ans. He is so by his Fathers appointing, his own undertaking, and discharging
of this office.

1. By his Fathers Ordination Answ. 1 By his Fathers Ordination.
and appointment. How came the Brazen Serpent to be an Antidote against the
biting or stinging of those fiery serpents? why God had designed and appointed
it to be made, and set up for that end and purpose. Even thus comes the Son of
man to be the Savior of mankind. God his Father designed and appointed him to
this office; Psalm. 89.19.
I have laid help upon one that is mighty, (says the Psalmist.) It is spoken
literally of David, mystically of Christ, upon whom God the Father laid the
office of reconciliation, of propitiation. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, (says the Apostle, speaking of Christ) Romans 3. Romans 3.25.
A Propitiation, that is, a means of reconciliation and atonement. Hereunto
God his Father appointed him; (...), fore-appointed, foreordained him, viz.
from eternity. This God did before time, and having designed him to this
office, he fitted and furnished him for it. A Body have thou prepared (or
fitted) for me. Heb. 10.5.
It is spoken in the Person of Christ: And having thus fitted him for it, he
puts him upon it, sending him into the world upon this service, to be the
Savior of it. John 3.17.
God sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved, (says the 17th verse of this Chapter. 1 John 4.14.
) We have seen, and do testify (says this same Apostle) that the Father sent
the Son to be the Savior of the world. Thus he came by his office; His
Father designed him to it, fitted him for it, put him upon it.

2. By his own undertaking. 2 By his own undertaking.
Being thus put upon it, he undertook it, and that voluntarily, willingly: Lo I
come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7.9.
(It is the speech of Christ himself to his Father) Heb. 10. And what was the
will of his Father? why, that he should undertake this great work of
Redemption, the saving of his Elect people, that none of them might perish.
This is the Fathers will which has sent me, (says our Savior to the Jews)
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. John 6.39, 40.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes on him, may have everlasting life, etc. And this will of his he
came to perform. Luke 19.10.
The Son of man is come to seek, and to save that which was lost.] He is come,
venit promptus and paratus, ready to do whatever his Father required from him,
for the saving, and redeeming of his Elect.

3. What he undertook, he has also discharged. 3. By his faithful discharging.
As he undertook it willingly, so he has discharged it faithfully. He was
faithful to him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2. Faithful in discharging that
office which God his Father had appointed to him for man's redemption. In that
regard, called a faithful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. A faithful High Priest in
things appertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

Christ faithful in his obedience. 1. Active.
Faithful. So he showed himself both in his Active and Passive Obedience.

1. In his Active Obedience, fulfilling the Law. It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, (So he tells John the Baptist.) Mat. 3.15. This he came to do,
I am come not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. Mat. 5.17. And this he
did, He fulfilled the Law, not only the Ceremonial Law, which was fulfilled
in him; but also the Moral Law, which was fulfilled by him; and that, as by
instruction to others, so by observation in himself.

2. In his Passive 2. Passive.
Obedience, he suffered the curse of the Law. Gal. 4.2.
Being made under the Law, (as the Apostle has it,) as under the Observation,
so under the Malediction of it: Being a Surety for his Elect, he made a full
and plenary satisfaction, (as by doing, so) by suffering what the justice of
God required at their hands: Bearing the sins of the world, (the world of his
Elect;) which were laid upon him by his Father: He bare the sins of many,
(says the Prophet) Isai. 53. Isai. 53. last.
Of many, id est, of his Elect. He bare them as a Surety: They being charged
upon him, he bare the penalty of them: He bare our sins in his Body upon the
tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. And thus bearing them, he expiated them, took them away.
Behold, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29.
(...), ferens, and auferens; Bearing them, and bearing them away, Even as that
Leviticall Scapegoat, having the sins of the people put upon it by the Priest,
it bare them, and bare them away, carried them into the wilderness out of
sight. Even thus did the Lord Jesus; having the sins of his Elect laid upon
him by God his Father, he bare them, and bare them away, taking them out of the
sight of God. This he has done, this he has suffered for his people.

3. To which I might add what he yet continues to do for them, viz. to make
Intercession 3. His effectual Intercession. Isai. 53. last.
for them: He bare the sins of many, and made Intercession for the
Transgressors, (says the Prophet in the place forenamed.) This he did upon
the Cross: There he prayed for his Persecutors; Father, forgive them; And this
he still does being in Heaven: It is Christ who dyed, ye rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. Romans 8.34. By which means he becomes a complete and perfect Savior to his
people; daily applying to them, what by the once offering up of himself he
impetrated and obtained for them; Wherefore (says the Apostle) he is able to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

And thus you see the first of these Branches opened unto you; viz. That Christ
is a Savior to lost mankind, and How he comes to be so. I might here for
further Illustration, show you yet more fully,

Quest. Quest. What Christ has done for the healing and saving of his people.
What Christ has done for his people in order to their salvation, for the
healing and saving of them.

Ans. Answ. 1. He was made the son of man.
1. For answer hereunto, I shall not need to go out of the Text; He was made
the Son of Man, and being so, he was lift up for that purpose. Even as the
Brazen serpent, it was first made in the form and fashion of other Serpents,
and being so made, then it was lift up on high; even thus the Lord Jesus
Christ, he was first made the Son of Man, a man like unto us, In shape and
fashion as a man (as the Apostle has it; Phil. 2.6. Vid Muscul. ad loc.
) Not that he was not a True man, as the Manichees, and some other Heretics
would have it, who bring in the Type here in the Text for countenance of this
their error. The Brazen serpent (say they) was not a true Serpent, only it had
the shape and fashion of a Serpent: So Christ (say they) he was not a true man,
only he was in shape and fashion as a man. Not so, Our Savior himself here
sufficiently refutes this error, calling himself the Son of Man: A phrase
importing the verity of his humane nature: He took a true humane nature upon
him, being made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.

2. And being thus made the Son of Man, 2 He was lift up.
he was then (in the second place) lift up: Lift up upon the Cross, suffering,
dying for the sake of his people; Humbling himself and becoming obedient unto
the death, even the death of the Cross. Of which more anon. Pass we to the
second Branch of this maine Conclusion.

Prop. 2. Prop. 2. Christ the only Savior.
Christ is the only Savior of lost mankind. Mark the Text; Like as Moses lift
up the Serpent, etc. so must the Son of Man be lift up. The Israelites in the
wilderness had no means of cure against the stinging of those Fiery Serpents,
but the Brazen serpent; and that not many, but one Brazen Serpent. Christians
have but one Jesus; To us (says the Apostle) there is but one God, and one
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. One Savior:

True, Temporal saviors we have read of many, whom God occasionally and
successively raised up unto his people, as Moses, and Joshuah and Gideon, 2
King. 13.5. and last. Nehem. 9.27.
etc. Instruments employed by God for the working of temporal salvation and
deliverance, unto his people; and in that respect sometimes called Saviors:
But these were all but Types of this true Savior, the Lord Jesus, who is the
only Eternal Savior to the sons of men. That of Saint Peter (as it is full,
so it) is very Emphaticall, specially as some, and most Greek Copies read it,
Act. 4 12. Neither is there salvation in any other. (...); Non est in alic, in
nemine: Salvation is not in another, in any other; For there is no other name
under heaven given amongst men by which we must be saved: No other Name, i. e.
no other power, or virtue by which salvation can be hoped, or looked for: By
this Name were the Fathers before Christ saved, and by the same Name must we be
saved; We believe (says Peter) that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
we shall be saved, even as they, Act. 15.11. Even as it was in the Camp of
Israel, there was but one Brazen serpent, which they looking upon from all
quarters, were all cured by it; Thus but one Jesus, one Savior in, and for the
whole world; whom the Fathers looked upon forwards, we backwards, both alike
saved by him. Christ the alone Savior.

Ministers how called saviors, and how men said to save themselves.
Object. Here a trivial Objection meets us (which I should not have taken
up, did not I find the Type in the Text so fully meeting with it.) How then are
Ministers said to be Saviors? How are men said to save themselves? It is Paul's
charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 1 Timothy 4. last.
that he should take heed to his Doctrine, etc. adding this for a reason,
Because in so doing, he should save both himself and others. And it is Saint
Peter's exhortation to the Jews, that they would save themselves from that
untoward generation, Act. 2. Act. 2.40.
viz. from partaking in their sin and punishment.

Answ. For answer. Ministers save others, and private persons save themselves.
How? Why, only as Gods Instruments, in holding forth, and working out of this
salvation. Thus do Ministers save others, even as Moses saved the Israelites,
by lifting up the Brazen serpent amongst them. This is all we can do, to lift
up the Brazen serpent, to lift up and hold forth Christ crucified; to crucify
him before your eyes in the preaching of the Word; to set him before you, to
offer him to you, to persuade and command you to look up unto him. On the other
hand, Men save themselves, How? Why, even as the Israelites did by looking up
to the Brazen serpent; this is all that we can do, and more then we can do of
our selves, but being enabled by the grace of God opening the eye of the soul,
we look up unto Christ for cure; in the mean time the healing, saving virtue is
not in the Minister, not in our selves, but in Christ; even as that healing
virtue was not in Moses who lift up the Brazen Serpent, nor yet in the eye that
looked up to it; but in the Brazen serpent being lift up, and looked upon. The
saving virtue is not in the Minister that lifts up and holds forth Christ
in the Ministry of the word, though dispensed with never so much evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit; Act. 3.12.
Why look ye upon us (says Peter to the people) as if we by our own power or
virtue had made this man whole? There was no virtue in the Apostles themselves
to do any outward cure upon the Bodies of men, much less to do any spiritual
cure upon their souls; The virtue is Christ's, the merit is his, the efficacy
his; who is the alone Savior of his people. The third Branch is yet behind, of
which but a word.

Prop. 3. Prop. 3. Christ [crucified] the only Savior.
Only Christ [crucified] is the means of man's salvation. Mark the Text, So must
the son of man he lift up, (viz. upon the Cross) That whosoever believes on
him (viz. so lift up) should not perish, etc. The Savior of lost mankind is
Christ crucified: Hence is it that Paul attributes such a saving virtue to the
Cross of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.18.
The preaching of the Cross is to them which are saved the power of God, 1 Cor.
1. that is, the preaching of Christ crucified, so the 23. verse of that Chapter
explains it; We preach Christ crucified, ver. 23.
etc. to them which are called, Christ the power of God. This was the subject
of Paul's preaching, Christ, and Christ crucified: 1 Cor. 2.2.
I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. He is the alone Savior of the world; and how has he wrought this
salvation for it? Why, by his Cross: By this means he wrought that
reconciliation betwixt God and man; He reconciled both (viz. Jews and Gentiles)
unto God in one body by the Cross, Ephesians. 2.16.
having slain the enmity thereby. By the Cross, that is, by his sufferings
upon the Cross, which is the meritorious cause of man's salvation. True it is,
salvation is the fruit and result of the whole obedience of Christ, his Active,
his Passive obedience; but the Spirit of God ordinarily attributes it to the
later, his Passive obedience, and that to the last Act of it, his suffering
upon the Cross; in as much as that was the chief part of his obedience: Phil.
2.8.
He humbled himself and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross. And thus you see this principle of Christian Religion opened and
illustrated in the several branches of it. That which remains is the
Application of it, which I shall direct only by way of a serious Exhortation.

Exciting and persuading every one of us, that renouncing all other ways and
means, Use. Seek salvation only by and through Christ
we would put our souls only upon this, seeking salvation only by, and through
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. The Motion consists of two Branches; the
former taking off our eyes and hearts from all other things; the later
directing and fixing them upon Jesus Christ. Touch upon them severally.

1. Away with all other ways and means of salvation but this. This is Gods
way, 1. Renouncing other ways.
which in his infinite wisdom and mercy he has found out, and laid out; All
other ways are but by-ways, false ways. Such are the ways of our own
devising; ways wherein we may, and certainly shall lose our selves, but never
find what we seek for. And therefore away with them, Take heed of setting up
any thing.
taking heed of setting up any thing in stead of Christ, or together with
Christ.

1. In stead of Christ. 1. In stead of Christ.
Had the Israelites any of them left the Brazen Serpent of Gods appointing, and
trusted to Chyrurgeons or Physicians, or made use of any salves or medicines of
their own, how skillful soever the one, or sovereign the other, yet they had
died for it. And so is it with the soul that seeks for justification and
salvation, in or by any thing but the Cross of Christ; so doing, he shall
perish in his sins. Renounce we then all other means.

In special, away with our own Righteousness, Renounce our own
righteousness.
the righteousness of the Law, that great Idol which not only blind
Romanists, but even many ignorant and formal Protestants among our selves, set
up in stead of Christ. Ask them how they hope to be saved? Why, by their good
doings, their good meanings, their just and righteous dealing, their harmless,
and blameless lives and conversations. Now alas, what is this, but as if the
Israelites being stung, should have applied only plasters of their own
making? in the mean time neglecting the Brazen Serpent, the means of Gods
appointing. Away with this, knowing that it is not the Law that can cure, that
can save us. It was not Moses could cure the Israelites when they came unto
him: No, he sends them to the Brazen Serpent. It is not Moses, it is not the
Law that can cure, that can justify and save us: Romans 3.20.
By the deeds of the Law, (says the Apostle) there shall no flesh be justified
in the sight of God. For by the Law is the knowledge of sin. This is all that
the Law can do, to convince a man of his sin and misery; Help him it cannot.
Wound the soul it may, thrusting that sting of sin deeper into the conscience,
irritating the guilt, and by accident increasing the power of it; but heal it,
it cannot: And therefore never look for cure in this way; A mistake that is
common and ordinary. Men when they are a little awakened, and begin to feel
the sting of sin sticking in their souls and consciences, being convinced of
the dangerous condition they are in, what course take they? why, presently they
run to Moses, they fly to the Law, they resolve upon a new course of life,
thinking of doing this or that, setting upon a course of duty; but in the mean
time never think of the Brazen Serpent, never think of Christ, in, and by whom
alone salvation is to be expected: Alas, be not deceived; It is not Moses, it
is not the Law can do it. True, a time there was when the Law might have done
it. In state of innocence when man was able to have fulfilled the
Righteousness of the Law, then might the Law have given life: But now it
cannot do it, being grown weak and impotent through the flesh, Romans 8.3.
(as the Apostle tells us.) Weak through our weakness; Impotent through our
impotency. As for the Law it self, it is in it self as strong now as ever; as
able to give life as ever, were we but alike able to fulfill it. But this we
cannot do. And therefore rest not here, lean not upon the Law; but renounce
our own righteousness, what ever is ours. Learn we wholly to go out of our
selves. An Israelite that was stung, must go out of his Tent; whatever
medicines or plasters were there, they could not cure him. A Christian is
never in the way of cure, until he has learned wholly to go out of himself,
to renounce his own righteousness, whatever he has done, or can do. Take we
heed of setting up any thing in stead of Christ.

2. Or, Together with Christ. 2. Together with Christ.
This is the thing which the more learned of the Papists plead so much for:
They will by no means shut out Christ, so as to set up any thing in stead of
him; but they will set up something together with him. This they do, and this
they plead for; Why may they not do it? Set up the Brazen Serpent and Moses,
Moses and Christ together. Trust in the merits of Christ, and yet in their own
merits, and the merits of others: Abundans cautela. He that stands upon two
Branches of a Tree, (it is their own illustration,) he may be supposed to stand
surer, then he that stands only upon one.

1. Ans. Not so (say we) in case the one be sound, and the other rotten. Popish
allegation refuted.
And that is the case here: As for Christ, we know him to be a sound and firm
Branch, that will bear all the weight which we can lay upon it: But so is not
our own righteousness, which being imperfect, defective, is but like a rotten
bough, Man's own righteousness a rotten bough, not to be trusted to.
which being trusted to, will fail us. Whereupon Bellarmine himself, when he
had pleaded all that he could, for a man's own merits, and confidence in them,
yet he concludes ingenuously, Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, etc.
In regard of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, etc. The safest way and
course is to repose all a man's confidence wholly and alonely (totam in sola) in
the mercy of God, and in the merit of Jesus Christ.

2. Besides, in this supposition they suppose what is not to be supposed; viz.
That a man may trust to, and rest upon both these together, Christ's
righteousness, No resting upon Christ, and a man's own righteousness together.
and his own righteousness; Christ's merits, and his own merits. Not so, (say
we) In as much as resting upon the one, he falls from the other: So much
Saint Paul tells his Galatians expressly, Gal. 5. Gal. 5.4.
Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from Grace. Mark it; the Galatians some of them were sowred
with this very leaven, they were of the self same opinion that the Papists at
this day are, viz. that they might trust to Christ, and yet trust in Moses,
that they might set up the Law together with Christ in the point of
justification, and salvation: This the Apostle there tells them they could not
do. Moses and Christ, the Law of Works, and the Law of Faith, they are two
Masters, which in this case, it is impossible to serve: leaning to the one, a
man falls from the other. Putting confidence in our own righteousness, or
what ever it be besides Christ, we fall from Christ: Christ will either be a
whole Savior, or no Savior.

Christ a perfect Savior.
And therefore as ever we desire to have any benefit by Christ, renounce all
other things besides him. He is a perfect, an All-sufficient Savior, (as God
willing I shall show you hereafter.) And whither shall we look for salvation
but unto him? John 6.68.
Master, whither shall we go, thou have the words of Eternal life? (says Peter
to our Savior.) Whether shall an Israelite being stung, go, but to the Brazen
Serpent? And whither shall a poor soul feeling the sting of sin in his
conscience, whither shall he look but unto Jesus Christ? Him has God his
Father caused to be lift up; Him has he designed and appointed to be the
Savior of the world: And who shall lift up any thing in stead of him, or
together with him? There was but one Brazen Serpent in the whole Camp of
Israel, neither were any so bold, as under whatever pretense, to set up
another. There is but one Sun to enlighten the whole world; And but one Sun of
Righteousness, one Son of Man, one Savior, that brings light of comfort and
deliverance to lost mankind.

Be we therefore persuaded to turn our eyes from all other things. Away with
those Romish Romish Rags to be cast to the dunghill.
Rags which false Teachers hold forth, and their ignorant Disciples are ready
to catch at to cover their nakedness with. Our own works, merits,
satisfactions, indulgencies, pardons, the merits or Intercessions of others,
Saints or Angels, the Churches Treasury, etc. such mock-stayes Satan has cast
into the world for despairing consciences to lean upon; knowing that drowning
men will catch at any thing, though fitter to sink them, then to save them: and
such indeed are all things whatsoever a poor sinner shall lean upon in stead
of, or besides Christ: They may, and will help to drown it, to sink it deeper
into the pit of destruction; but save it they cannot. This is peculiar to Jesus
Christ, whom God has therefore caused to be lift up, that poor sinners coming
and looking up unto him, might not perish. Away then with all other things, I
mean all affiance and confidence in them.

2 And (secondly) having laid all other things aside as useless, 2. Come unto
Jesus Christ.
helpless in the matter of Justification and salvation, now be we persuaded to
come unto Jesus Christ: It is that wherewith our Savior upbraids the Jews,
Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life; And it is this
which shall one day be cast in the teeth of all faithless unbeleevers (I mean
such as live within the pale of the Church, where Christ is lifted up before
them preached and offered up unto them;) Ye will not come unto me, that you
might have life: This is the great charge which shall be laid against them. As
for others who are without the pale of the Church, such as never heard of
Christ, it shall be enough to condemn them, that they would not come unto
Moses; that they have rebelled and risen up against him (I mean) rebelled
against the Law of God, the Law which was written in their hearts; this shall
condemn them. But as for unbeleevers, such as live under the sound of the
Gospel, within the kenn of this Brazen serpent, under the offers of Grace, this
shall be their condemnation, that they will not come unto Jesus Christ.

And who but must needs acknowledge this a deserved condemnation? Refusing of
Christ a just condemnation
When God had provided a Brazen serpent, and caused it to be lift up in the
Camp of Israel, for a remedy against those fiery Serpents, had there been any
amongst them who feeling themselves stung, yet out of a contempt or neglect of
the ordinance of God, had refused to repair unto it, who but would have
adjudged him guilty of his own death, and have accounted him worthy to perish
and die? This has God done for us; we being all of us mortally stung by that
Old serpent, God himself of his infinite wisdom and mercy has found out, and
laid out a means of cure for us. He has given his Son for us, to be made like
unto US, to take our nature upon him, in that nature to be lift up upon the
Cross, to suffer, to die for us: Not only so, but he causes him also to be
lift up in the Ministry of his word, there to be held forth, to be crucified
(as it were) before our eyes daily; nor yet only to be set before us, but to
be offered to us with a Command and a Promise; The one requiring us to look up
unto him, the other assuring us of a perfect cure upon our so doing; Now what,
shall we slight and neglect so great salvation? Shall we so far abuse this
grace and mercy of God, as not to make use of this means of salvation? What
shall now be said for us! Our blood be upon our own heads; we must perish in
our sins, and that deservedly. And therefore (to draw to a conclusion of this
point) be we all of us persuaded to look out for our selves; Come we; O come we
unto Jesus Christ, that we may be made partakers of this healing, saving virtue
which is to be found in, and from him.

Motives Motives.
(me thinks) I should need none, to set on such a motion, to persuade all of us
to come unto Jesus Christ.

1. Do but consider our own misery 1. Our misery without Christ.
without him, fitly (as I have showed you) represented and shadowed out in the
condition of a poor Israelite being stung with some of these Serpents. We are
by nature in a perishing state; and there is no Medicine can cure us but this;
no name under Heaven, by which we can have any probable or possible hopes of
salvation but this; Let our necessities then drive us unto Christ: Without him
we perish, having no other means of cure but by him. Had there been any other
Salve or Medicine in the world that could have cured a stung Israelite, he
should not have needed to have made use of the Brazen serpent: Were there any
other way or means whereby salvation might possibly be attained, there might
be some plea for our not coming unto Christ. But we are here concluded and
shut up; unless he save us, we perish. Let our necessities drive us.

2. Attractivenesse in Christ.
2. And (secondly) there is that in him which may draw us; viz: His willingness
to receive us, and his Ability to help us. Of the former of these our Savior
himself assures us, Joh. 6.37. He that comes unto me I will in no wise cast
out, (...). The later we may see in the Type in the Text: The Brazen serpent
was a present cure to all that came, it matters not how mortally stung they
were, in what part of the body; whether with one or more Serpents; of what
continuance it was, here they found a present remedy; Even such virtue is there
to be found in the Lord Jesus: It matters not what our sins be; what for
number, what for nature, what for continuance, how many, how great, how
inveterate soever, only come unto Jesus Christ, we shall find it true by
experience, that he is an Alsufficient Savior.

Quest. The Question then will be, How shall a poor sinner come unto Jesus
Christ, so as he may obtain salvation by him.

Answ. To this the third Conclusion returns Conclus. 3.
answer; Only by believing on him; So you have it in the Text; The Son of Man
must be lift up, That whosoever believes on him should not perish.

Doct. Behold here the only way whereby a poor perishing sinner may come to be
made partaker of that saving virtue which is in Jesus Christ, viz. By believing
on him. Believing on Christ, the only means of receiving benefit by him.
A Truth lively shadowed out in the Text (which still upon all occasions I
shall have recourse unto.) What was the way and means whereby an Israelite
being stung came to partake of healing virtue from the Brazen Serpent? Number.
21.8, 9.
Why it was by looking up unto it; When he looks up upon it he shall live:
Even thus is the saving virtue derived from Christ unto sin-stung sinners; viz.
By looking upon him. Looking upon him, not with a bodily eye, as Papists do
upon their Crucifixes, or as the Jews did, who beheld him hanging upon the
Cross, who had better never have seen what they did; but with a Spiritual
eye, the eye of the Soul, the eye of Faith: by believing on him; This is the
way and means which every where we are directed to. This was John the Baptist's
Doctrine, he preached Faith, as well as Repentance; John Baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on Jesus Christ, Act. 19. Act. 19.4.
This did our Savior himself press, Ye believe on God, believe also on me,
John 14. John 14.1.
And the same did his Apostles after him. When the Jaylour came to Paul and
Silas, putting the question unto them, Acts 16.31.
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? They presently return him this brief
answer, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Even as if a poor
Israelite being stung, had come unto Moses, enquiring of him what he should do
to be healed; Moses could have returned him no answer but this, Look up unto
the Brazen Serpent, and thou shall be healed. Thus, when a wounded soul,
feeling the sting of sin sticking in the conscience, comes unto the Ministers
of Christ, and desires direction from them what to do; their answer is, Go,
look up unto Christ: Believe on the Lord Jesus, thou shall be saved. Here is
the way, the only way and means of obtaining benefit by Jesus Christ; Heb.
2.4.
Faith. Justus ex fide, The just shall live by faith.

Explic. For the opening and illustrating of this useful Truth; give me leave
briefly to unfold unto you these three particulars. 1. What this faith is which
heals and saves? 2. Three particulars unfolded.
How this faith heals and saves? 3. Why this should be the only way and
means to heal and save? Briefly of each, it being not my purpose now to insist
largely upon the Doctrine of Faith, which I reserve to another occasion.

Quest. Quest. What saving faith is?
1. What is this Faith by which we obtain salvation? by which we draw this
healing, saving virtue from Christ?

Ans. Answ. Illustrated from the Types.
To this I cannot answer more aptly, and clearly, then by having recourse to
the Type, which most excellently shadows out unto us the nature of that Faith
whereby we are justified and saved, which is done by looking up unto Christ; so
looking up unto him, as the Israelites did to the Brazen Serpent.

Q. Now how did they look up to the Brazen Serpent? A. Therein we may take
notice of two things: 1. Their Action. 2. Their Affection. There beholding it,
and the Affection wherewith they beheld it.

1. They beheld it, looked upon it, saw it made, and saw it lifted up: withal
taking notice for what end and purpose it was made and lift up.

2. As they thus saw it, so they looked unto it, viz. in an Affectionate way,
with a twofold affection, 1 Of Desire. 2. Of Hope, or Trust: desiring to be
cured; hoping and trusting to be cured by it. Thus did they look upon the
Brazen Serpent; not only seeing it, Numb. 21.9. (...), aspicicbat, (...)
intucri, quod majus est quam (...), videre) unde (...), Expectatio.
but looking upon it with desire and expectation of receiving benefit by it,
(as the word in the Original there properly signifies.)

And thus does the true Believer look up unto Jesus Christ; Beholding him, and
believing on him. You have them both together in that one verse, John 6.40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life. (...).

1. Beholding Christ. 1. Faith, beholding Christ.
(...): viz. with the eye of his soul, rightly apprehending, and seriously
considering him. For that the word (...), Non de nihilo est quod (...) hic
potius dixit, quam (...). Vide 1 John 1.1. (...). H. Grotius. ad loc. Cicero.
Tuscul. 5. Nec enim quis qui^ videt. (...). Beza G^. Annot. Dr. Taylour's
Brazen Serpent.
properly signifies (as Beza and Grotius note upon it, Non quavis modo, sed
cum attentione videre; not a bare and simple Intuition, a casting a glance upon
a thing, but a serious and advised observing, and viewing of it; Studiose
perspicere (as Tully renders it,) studiously to view and consider a thing. This
is properly (...). And thus does the true believer behold Jesus Christ;
considering him as made the Son of man, taking the nature of man upon him; then
in that nature lift up: Lift up two ways: Ratione ligni, ratione regni, (as
some distinguish.) First, In his Passion upon the Cross, there suffering: Then
in his Session upon the Throne of his glory, there triumphing. Both these the
Believer takes notice of, looking upon Christ in his twofold state, of
Humiliation, Exaltation. And here is the first act of this faith: it looks
upon Christ, as held forth in the word, apprehending and believing what is
there revealed concerning him, touching his Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession: withal, taking notice to what end all
this was done, viz. for the redeeming and saving of lost mankind: And here is
the Vision of Faith.

2. The second thing is the Affection of it. 2. Faith an affectionate looking
up unto Christ.
The believer thus beholding Christ, he also looks up unto him. Looking upon
him, even as the lame man which lay in Solomon's Porch, looked upon the
Apostles, Peter and John, Act. 3. Look on us (say they) ver. 4. And so he did,
not only casting his eye upon them, as he did upon other passengers, but he
looked upon them wistly, affectionately, with desire and hope: He gave heed
unto them, expecting to receive something from them, ver. 5. Thus does the
believer look upon Christ, not only beholding him by a bare and simple
intuition, taking notice of what he was, what he has done, what he has
suffered, and to what end, etc. all which the very devils themselves know and
believe; but he looks up unto him in an affectionate way. So says the
Prophet of the converted Israelites, Isai. 17.7. At that day shall a man look
to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the holy One of Israel. And
the Prophet Zachary speaking of the Spirit of Grace, which God promised to
pour out upon his people, says, that then, They should look upon him whom
they have pierced, Zach. 12.10. viz. in an affectionate way. And thus does the
true believer look upon Christ viz. with a double Affection, of Desire and Hope.

1. Desire. 1. With Desire.
Earnestly desiring to partake of the merits, and benefits of Christ; desiring
to to be healed, saved by him. Which desire arises from the sense and
apprehension of his own misery: from the sense of sin, and the apprehension of
Gods Wrath due unto it. Even as an Israelite feeling himself stung, and
apprehending the eminent danger he was in, out of that apprehension he looks
up to the Brazen Serpent with desire of cure. Thus the soul of a believing
sinner feeling it self mortally stung by sin, apprehending it self in a lost
state and condition, it looks up unto Jesus Christ, earnestly desiring pardon
of sin, and eternal salvation by and through him.

2. Confidence
2 And as it desires it from him, so it hops for it by him, resting upon him
for it, for the obtaining of what it desires, and stands in need of; thus
does the Believer look up unto Jesus Christ; even as the Psalmist says, Psalm.
123.2.
the Eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters, and as the eyes of
a maiden to the hand of her Mistress, viz. (as for direction, so) for
Protection, and Provision, expecting to receive benefit by them: Even so does
the true believer look up unto Christ, waiting, resting, depending, and relying
upon him for what he stands in need of, viz. the pardon of sins and eternal
salvation. And herein lies the principal act of that faith whereby we are
justified and saved; viz. in this soul-recumbencie, this resting, and relying
upon Christ for Justification and Salvation.

Believing [on] Christ importing,
So much the phrase here in the Text imports; (...); Not, Qui credit in ipso (as
the Vulgar Latin renders it) but in Eum; He that believes on him: Wherein we
have two things pointed out unto us: 1. The proper Object: 2. The proper Act of
faith as it justifies and saves.

1 The proper Object of faith as it justifies and saves, is Christ. True it
is, 1. The proper object of faith as it justifies.
that faith whereby we are justified and saved, it looks at other things: It
has an eye at every truth revealed in the word, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets (as Paul says of himself; Act. 24. 14.
) assenting to every promise, every threatening; but as it justifies and
saves, it looks only at Christ. Even as the Israelites with the same eye
wherewith they beheld the Brazen Serpent, they beheld other things also; but
they were cured only by looking upon the Brazen Serpent. Thus that faith which
justifyeth looks at other things; but as it justifies, it looks only at
Christ, at Christ lifted up, crucified. Here is the proper Object of faith as
it justifies.

2. And what is the proper Act of this faith? 2. The proper act of faith as it
justifies.
Why, to believe in Christ, on Christ; that is, (as I have said) to look up
unto him with hope, confidence, affiance, resting and relying upon him, and him
alone for pardon of sins and eternal salvation; This is truly to believe on
Christ; not only to believe Christ, that there is a Christ, that Jesus the son
of Mary is that Christ, that he is an All-sufficient Savior, that he has done
and suffered all things requisite for our salvation: but to look up unto him as
our Savior, applying the merit of his obedience unto our selves, resting and
relying upon him as our Jesus, the alone means of our Justification and
Salvation. And this is that true Faith which draws this healing saving virtue
from Christ by which a poor sinner comes to obtain these great benefits.

Quest. How faith comes to heal and save.
A second Question follows. How comes this Faith thus to heal and save?

To this I may answer, first Negatively, then Positively.

Answ. 1. Negatively.
1. Showing you how it does not Justify and save; viz. Not as it is a work done
by us, not as it is a Habit or Quality, a Gift or Grace inherent in us: Thus
faith justifies not, saves not, neither can it; being in it self imperfect
and defective (as all other graces in regenerate persons are) it cannot
justify it self, much less the person in whom it is: there is no such virtue
in Faith it self; no more then there was healing virtue in the eye of an
Israelite. It was not the eye that healed them; neither is it Faith as faith,
either as an Act or Habit that helps us.

2. Affirmatively, viz. as,
How then? Why, Faith heals and saves these two ways, 1. As a Condition; 2.
As an Instrument.

1. A condition of the Covenant.
1. As it is a Condition of the New Covenant, the Covenant of Grace; a condition
upon which God has promised freely to justify and save us. Even as looking
was the condition of the Israelites cure: not touching, but looking: So here
the condition of the Covenant of Grace is, not Doing, but Believing: Not Fac
hoc and vive, D this and live; but Creed and vive, Believe and live. Even as
there it was, Vide and vive, See and live; so here Creed and vive, Believe and
live: This is the condition of this New Covenant, that which God requires at
our hands in order to our Justification and Salvation. Even as the Apostles,
Peter and John (in the place forenamed) bade that Cripple look upon them in
order to his cure, Act. 3.5.
not that there was any virtue in that act of his; but they required it as a
condition, whereupon they would freely cure him. Thus are we cured and saved by
looking up unto Christ, by believing on him; who upon our so doing, does freely
justify and save us.

2. Faith heals and saves Instrumentally, 2. An instrument.
viz. as it apprehends and applies Christ by whom we are healed and saved.
Thus faith justifies and saves, not considered simply in it self, as having
any virtue in it self more then other graces have. Other graces there are,
which in their own nature are as excellent, and in some respects more excellent
then faith: Now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.
last:
) but the chiefest of these is Charity. But it justifies and saves, as it is
considered Relatively, with its Object: As it is an Instrument, an Eye, a Hand,
to look up unto, and take hold of Jesus Christ, the meritorious cause of our
Justification and Salvation. Thus did the Israelites looking heal them, not
simply in or by it self, but as directed to, and fixed upon the Brazen
Serpent; that sanative virtue was in the Object, not in the faculty: In the
Serpent that was seen, not in the eye which looked upon it Thus that healing
and saving virtue whereby we are justified and saved, it is properly in Christ,
not in our faith that looks up unto him. All that faith herein does, is as an
instrument to apply Christ, and so to convey that virtue from him unto the
soul. Divines usually illustrate this by a familiar similitude of a Ring, Faith
and Christ as the Ring and the Boodstone.
which has in it a precious stone of some excellent quality, suppose a
Boodstone or the like: Such a Ring, we say, is good for such a purpose, of
sovereign use in such and such cases, as to stanch bleeding, etc. Now to speak
properly, it is not the Ring, but the Stone in the Ring which does this; there
lies all the virtue: All that the Ring does, is only to apply the stone to the
body, or part affected. Thus stands the case here, Faith is the Ring, Christ
is the Precious Stone: All that faith does, or can do, is to apply Christ, to
bring him home with all his merits, and benefits to the soul; In the mean time
all the virtue is in Christ; it is he that heals, that justifies, that
saves. Even as the Story tells us of the woman in the Gospel, who came and
touched the hem of our Saviors garment, Mark 5.25.
(touched it as with her finger, so with her faith) thereupon she was presently
cured of her bloody issue. But was the virtue in her finger, or in her Faith?
No, the Text tells us expressly whence that healing virtue came; ver. 30. Luke
8.46.
I perceive that virtue is gone out of me (says our Savior to his Disciples.)
Her Faith in the mean time was only the instrument in drawing that virtue from
Christ: And in that respect, our Savior tells her, ver. 48.
that her Faith had made her whole. And even so are we to understand those
Texts of Scripture where it is said, that we are justified by faith, and saved
by faith; viz. not Meritoriously, but Instrumentally; By grace ye are saved
(says the Apostle) through faith (...), not (...); Ephesians. 2.8.
Not Propter fidem; but Per fidem; Not [for] faith as the Meritorious cause,
(which is only Christ) but [by] or [through] faith, as the Instrument conveying
virtue from Christ unto our Justification and Salvation. You see the second
Question resolved, and therein a resolution prepared, and in part given to the
third, which is,

Quest. Why this should be the only way and means to convey this benefit from
Christ, Quest. 3. Why faith the only means.
viz. to believe on him?

Answ. Answ. 1. So God has appointed it.
To this I might return a sudden and yet satisfactory answer. It is enough, God
has appointed it so to be; even as he appointed looking to be the means of
conveying that sanative virtue to the Israelites from that Brazen Serpent; not
but that he could (if he had pleased) have directed them to some other way,
either to touch it, or to fall down before it, or the like: or else he could
have made it effectual to them only by the bare presence of it in the Camp:
But this is the way which he pitcheth upon, requiring them only to look up unto
it. Thus God could (had he pleased) have appointed other ways and means of
conveying life and salvation to us: but he has been pleased in infinite
wisdom and mercy to pitch upon this, requiring no more from us as the
condition of the Covenant of Grace, but only this, Believe on the Lord Jesus.

2. Faith only applies Christ.
2. But secondly, take a reason of this appointment. Faith is the Instrument of
conveying this benefit from Christ, because Faith only applies Christ,
brings home Christ: This is the proper work of faith; Every grace has its
own proper work which is peculiar to it: Even as every member of the body has
its proper office and work; the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Hand to take
or receive a thing; so has every grace its proper work; Remembering your work
of faith, 1 These. 1.3.
and labor of love, and patience of hope (says the Apostle to his
Thessalonians.) Now what is the proper work of faith? Why, to Receive Christ,
(To as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to
as many as believe on his name, Joh. 1.12.) To apply Christ, to bring Christ
home with his merits unto the soul: This does faith; It brings home Christ,
and bringing him home, it brings home his benefits, drawing from him that
virtue that is in him; And this is proper unto faith. And therefore is it that
God has appointed this to be the only way to convey benefit from Christ unto
poor sinners for their Justification and Salvation. You see this third Question
resolved: and so you have this third Conclusion opened: That which now remains
hereof is the Application.

Which shall be only a word of Direction and Exhortation to all penitent
brokenhearted sinners, such as feel the sting of sin, Applic. Seek cure in
this way.
and desire to be healed, cured; for for such only is this Brazen Serpent
erected, this means of cure provided. Being such, now be you advised and
excited to put your souls upon this way of cure to look up unto this Brazen
Serpent, by faith to look up unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Let it not be enough,
that you have heard tidings of a Savior, to hear that God has given his Son,
that Christ has given himself for lost mankind; or yet to know who, and what
this Christ was, what he has done, what he has suffered, and the like. Alas,
what would this have availed a poor Israelite, to have heard of the Brazen
Serpent, that it was erected in the Camp, and that all that came to it were
healed by it, whilst in the mean time himself lay close in his Tent, never
looking out for any benefit by it? And what will this profit a poor sinner, to
hear what God has done for others, in giving a Christ a Savior for them, and
to them, whilst in the mean time himself lies still sleeping in his sins,
not looking out for cure, for justification, and salvation by and through him?
Better such a one had never heard these Gospel tidings: His contempt or
neglect of so great a mercy will be no small aggravation to his sin and
punishment. And therefore, as many of us as God has in any measure made
sensible of our miserable state and condition by reason of sin; as we desire
deliverance out of that estate, apply we our selves to the right use of this
remedy. Look we up unto Jesus Christ.

Looking up unto this Brazen Serpent.
Look up (I say.) Not looking too much downwards upon our selves, not poring
too much upon our sins, the multitude, magnitude; number, nature; quantity,
quality of them, how many, how great and grievous they are. But look upwards,
look up unto Jesus Christ, who is able to heal us, to save us. The Israelites
which were stung with those fiery Serpents, if they only looked upon their
soars, and complained of their smart, and anguish, in the mean time neglecting
or refusing to look up to the Brazen Serpent, they died for it. Such is the
condition of a poor despairing soul, whose eye is all upon his sore, upon his
sin and punishment, as Cain's and Judas's were; Genesis 4.13.
My sin is greater then can be forgiven; or, my punishment is greater then I
can bare; Mat. 27.3, 4.
says the one: I have sinned in betraying innocent blood, says the other,
complaining of the grievousnesse thereof: in the mean time never looking up to
Christ for cure; by this means he perishes, and dies in his sins. To all such
then, and all others; who desire to have any benefit by Jesus Christ, let it be
spoken, Look up to this Brazen Serpent, look you up to the Lord Jesus, obeying
and dying for your sakes; and look you up unto him as with desire, so with
hope, with affiance and confidence of receiving benefit by him.

To set on this Exhortation, what Arguments shall I take up? Strange, Motives.
there should be need of any! I suppose it was argument enough to an Israelite
being stung, and feeling himself so, to here that there was a Brazen Serpent
lift up for a present remedy to all that should look up unto it; other motive
he should need none to persuade him to fix his eye upon it. And certainly, so
would it be with poor sinners, did they but feel themselves stung by sin, were
they but thoroughly convinced and made sensible of their wretched state and
condition by reason of sin, it would be motive sufficient to them to hear of a
Savior, whom God has set forth with promise that upon their looking to him,
believing on him, they shall be saved; they should need no other argument to
persuade them to look up unto him. Yet to quicken our dull and dead hearts, do
but consider these four or five particulars.

1. This is God's Ordinance, 1. This is Gods Ordinance.
the way and means which God himself in infinite wisdom and mercy has
appointed to bring his Elect to life and salvation by; viz. by faith in Christ;
and therefore submit unto it.

2. His Commandment.
2. As God himself has laid out this way; so he requires and commands us to
put our selves upon this way. God having ordered the Brazen Serpent to be
erected, he did not leave it as a thing arbitrary to the Israelites, whether
they would make use of it or no, but he requires them to do it. So that passage
may be read which we meet with, Number. 21.8. It shall come to pass, that every one
that is bitten, when he looks upon it, shall live. So our Translation reads
it; Ainsworth, Annot. ad loc.
but the Original has it, (...), videbit and vivet, He shall see, (or look upon
it) and he shall live. So implying both a Commandment, and a Promise, (as Mr
Ainsworth well notes upon it.) Thus God having given his Son to be crucified,
he does not leave it to our choice whether we will believe on him, or no; but
this he requires, this he commands. This is his Commandment, that we should
believe on the Name of his Son, 1 John 3.23. The great Commandment, the
Commandment of the Gospel. In obedience to this Command, put our souls upon
this way.

3. This God commands, and that under a penalty, 3. A command under a penalty.
no less a penalty, then of eternal condemnation. The Israelite not looking
up to the Brazen Serpent, died for it. The soul that looks not up unto
Christ, shall perish for it. John 3.18.
He that believes not, says our Savior, is condemned already: viz. by
virtue of that ancient sentence, Genesis 2.17. Under that sentence does every
unbeleever lie; being at the present in a state of death, and continuing in
that state of unbelief, bound over unto eternal condemnation.

4. This God commands, and this is all he commands: 4. All that he
commands.
Only believe. Even as the Lord required no more from the Israelites, but
only Vide and vive; See, and live; so he requires no more from us but only
Creed and vive, Believe and live. This is, as I said, the condition of the new
Covenant, upon which the promise of life and salvation is made. And does the
Lord require no more but this? and shall we not herein hearken to his Command?
we know what Naamans servants said to their Master; 2 King. 5.13.
If the Prophet had commanded thee some great matter, would thou not have
done it? How much more when he says, Only wash and be clean? Thus, had the
Lord commanded us some great matter, had he required from us some hard or
costly services, should we not have yielded to it for the saving of our souls?
How much more then, when he says unto us, as our Savior did to the Ruler of
the Synagogue, Mark. 5.36. Only believe. Should the Lord have prescribed the
Israelites some chargeable receipts for the curing of their bodies, would they
not have taken them? How much more, when he says unto them, Only look up to
the Brazen Serpent, and live? We see what idolatrous and superstitious persons
will do in a way of Will Worship; They will refuse no labor, grudge no cost:
And shall not we obey so easy a command, as this command of the Gospel, to
believe on the Lord Jesus.

To these I might add two more; viz: the Necessity of our believing on Christ,
and the Utility of it. What need we have of it, what benefit we shall
receive by it.

5. Nothing else can cure us
5. For the former; consider that nothing else can cure us, can save us. Nothing
but Christ, and nothing but faith in Christ: both excellently shadowed out in
the Type.

1. Nothing but Christ: 1. Nothing but Christ.
The Israelites had many other things which were of great worth in themselves,
and of great use to them; Not to speak of their earthly treasures, their silver
and their gold, they had Mannah from Heaven, they had Water out of the Rock,
two extraordinay Sacraments, supplying the present want of those which were
ordinary; they had the Ark of the Covenant, wherein was the preciousest relick
that ever the world was owner of, the Tables written with Gods own finger: But
alas, none of these could cure them, help them! only the Brazen Serpent could
do this. Thus Christians may have many other things, besides what they have
common with Heathens (Riches and Honor. etc.) they may have the Word and
Sacraments, with other Ordinances of God, in themselves precious, and to them
useful: But alas, none of these can heal them, can save them: That which the
Prophet says concerning the first of these, Zeph. 1. last.
Your silver and your gold shall not be able to deliver you in the day of the
Lords fierce wrath; we may say of all the rest; It is not our hearing,
receiving; hearing the word, receiving the Sacraments, nor yet our prayers or
any other ordinance of God that can deliver us, save us; only the Brazen
Serpent can do this; only Christ.

2. And secondly, Christ looked upon. As nothing but Christ 2. Nothing but
faith in Christ
can heal and save, so nothing but faith in Christ; The Brazen Serpent, how
sufficient a remedy soever, yet not looked upon, it cured not, though never so
near to the person that was stung, yet not beheld by him it was of no virtue to
him, Christ is in himself an All-sufficient Savior, yet none shall have benefit
by him, but those who believe on him; It pleased God (says the Apostle) by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 1.21.
Foolishness of preaching, that is, the preaching of the Word; so called
principally in regard of the subject matter of it, viz. Christ crucified, whom
the Gospel holds forth as the means of our salvation, then which nothing can
be more absurd and foolish to carnal wisdom; ver. 23.
We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Grecians
foolishness. Now by this means (says the Apostle) it pleased God to save,
whom? Them which believe. To them is Christ himself, and this Ordinance
holding forth Christ, effectual. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ
(says the same Apostle) Romans 1.16.
for it is the power of God to salvation, What to all? No, only them that
believe, To every on that believes; This it is that makes every Ordinance of
God to be effectual to a man for good. The Brazen Serpent, an Ordinance of God
of sovereign use; yet a Blind Israelite received no benefit by it; no more can
a Faithless Heart from any Ordinance of God. The Word in it self an excellent
Ordinance, yet meeting with such a heart, where it neither finds faith, nor
works faith, it loses the efficacy: So did it in the Israelites; To them was
the Gospel preached (says the Apostle) as well as to us, Heb. 4.2.
the same Gospel, as truly, though not so clearly; but (...), it profited them
not; Why? Because it was not mixed with faith in them which heard it. The same
may we say of the Sacraments, God's Sealing Ordinances; so they are to the
Believer, sealing up unto him his Interest in Christ and all his Benefits: but
meeting with a Faithless heart, they are but like Seals to the Blank, assuring
nothing, conveying nothing. And what we say of Word and Sacraments holding
forth Christ, we may say it of Christ himself: Him has God the Father set
forth to be a Prince and a Savior, enduring him with virtue enough to heal
and save the world of mankind; yet without Faith this virtue cannot reach,
cannot extend to us: The virtue of the Brazen Serpent extended only to those
who having eyes, made use of them in looking upon it; as for those who either
could not, or would not look upon it, they had no Benefit by it. There is in
Jesus Christ an All Sufficiency of Merit and Virtue for the healing and saving
of all poor lost sinners; but as for those who either cannot, or will not
believe on him; that cannot as Pagans and Paynims, who never so much as heard
of the name of Christ; Romans 10.
(How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard?) that will not, as
profane and secure Christians, how should they have any benefit by him? How
should that Virtue extend to them? this is the Office of Faith, to apply
Christ. Now a Plaster, be it never so sovereign and sanative, yet if not
applied to the sore, it will do a man no good. No more will the Blood of Jesus
Christ, if not applied to the soul by faith. And therefore (to draw to a close
of this Conclusion) whatever other graces we have or want, seek after Faith.
Faith will do that to us which no other grace either will or can. Were it
possible that all other Graces could be severed from Faith, yet could they not
advantage us in the great business of Justification and Salvation: In this
case a weak faith will be of more use to us then any, then all other Graces.
Even as a dim weak eye was of more use to an Israelite being stung, then any,
then all the other members of his body: It was not a quick ear, an eloquent
tongue, a strong arm, an active hand, a nimble foot, that could stand him in
any stead. It was his eye, (which next to the Brazen Serpent) healed him. It is
not knowledge, though Angelical; it is not repentance, sorrow for sin, though
never so deep; aversion from sin, though never so serious; it is not patience,
humility, not any inward qualification, or outward performance, that can
justify, can save us. Only Faith, Faith looking up unto Jesus Christ: Here is
the necessity of our believing.

6. To this (in the last place.) Add the great utility, the great benefit
accruing from 6. The Benefit accruing from it.
this our believing on Christ. Faith, though in it self it may be weak, yet
great matters depend upon it; even as great estates are sometimes held by small
acknowledgements; hundreds a year by a pepper kernel. Upon this depends our
eternal happiness and salvation. Believing, we shall not perish: Believing,
we shall have eternal life. So runs the insurance in the Text. The Son of man
must be lift up, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
eternal life. And so I am fallen upon the fourth and last Conclusion, which I
shall dispatch with all convenient brevity.

Whosoever believes on Jesus Christ, shall have full and perfect salvation by
him; Conclus. 4. Whosoever believes on Christ, shall have perfect salvation by
him: where consider,
he shall not perish, but have eternal life. For the opening and prosecuting
of this Conclusion, two things here may be taken notice of. 1. The benefit
insured. And 2. The Extent of that benefit. The benefit it self is partly
Privative, partly Positive; Privative, deliverance from death; He shall not
perish.] Positive, fruition of life, and that eternal life; He shall have
eternal life.] The Extent of it, is Indefinite, Universal, to all that
perform the condition. Whosoever believes, etc.] Of each of these severally
and briefly by way of Explication, Illustration, jointly by way of Application.

The Benefit it self accruing to the true believer, is, He shall not perish.
1. The Benefit it self: which is 1. Privative, They shall not perish.
There is the privative part of it. (...), Non pereat, May not perish. The
phrase alludeth to the Israelites, who being stung by the fiery Serpents in the
wilderness, before the Brazen Serpent was set up, in an ordinary course, they
perished. They were destroyed of the Serpents, 1 Cor. 10.9.
(says the Apostle) (...), The word is the same with that in the Text: They
perished by those Serpents: that is, they died upon their stinging. So the
story makes it out, Numb. 21.6. Much people of Israel died.]

Quest. But what? do men then perish in death? Whether men do perish in death.


Ans. I answer, properly they do not. To perish, properly it imports a
cessation of being; when a thing cease to be what it was, so as never to
return to that state again. Thus the bruit creature perishes: Psalm. 49.12.20.
The bruit beast that perishes, (says the Psalmist.) Being resolved into its
principles, it cease to be what it was, so as never to live, never to be
again. This is properly to perish; but thus men do not perish, no not wicked
men; they die indeed, but they perish not, well were it for them that they
might do so; that death might put an end as to their Life, so to their Being;
but this it shall not do. Their souls being immortal, they cannot die, and
their Bodies though they die, and be turned to the dust from whence they came,
yet they shall be raised up again at the last day; Joh. 5.28, 29.
All that are in the graves shall come forth. Properly men do not perish in
death. I, but they seem so to do: though they do not perish as the bruit
Beasts, yet they seem so to perish; Man is become like the beast that
perishes; Like it, as in other things, Psalm. 49.
so in his perishing: That which befalls the sons of men (says the Preacher)
befalls beasts: Eccl. 3.19.
even one thing befalls them, as the one dies, so dies the other, Eccles.
3.19. In the outward appearance there is no difference between the one and the
other; Ibid.
They have all one breath, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast;
much less a wicked man: as the bruit beast dies, so dies he; both dying
without hope, without hope of a better life: Thus dies the bruit beast, and
thus dies the Wicked man. As he lived without hope, so he dies without hope;
Having no hope, Ephesians. 2.12. and so he perishes, his Hopes perish; When a wicked
man dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes,
Pro. 11.7. I, and himself perishes: He so dies as never to live again.
True indeed, his dead body shall be raised up again, but not to the
Resurrection of Life. This is the portion of Gods Saints; John. 5.29.
They that have done good (says our Savior), shall come forth to the
Resurrection of life; that is to a Resurrection that has an eternal life
following it; this is peculiar to them, Luke 14.14.
thence called the Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14. As for wicked men, they
have no share in it; they shall also come forth of the Graves, But how? Why,
even as condemned malefactors are brought out of their Prisons and Dungeons to
the place of Execution: So shall they come forth of their graves, not to the
Resurrection of life, but of Condemnation (as it there follows) They shall be
raised up, not unto that blessed life, but unto death, even to that eternal
death, which shall be to them a dying life, and a living death: And here is
their perishing.

But thus shall not the Believer perish, The Believer shall not perish
Die he may, and die he must, and that as other men die, so seeming to perish;
whence even righteous men are said to perish; The righteous perishes, and no
man lays it to heart, Isai. 57.1. that is, he dies, and that seemingly as
others do: How dies the wise man? even as the fool (says the Preacher) Eccl.
2.16. in the outward appearance no difference; as it is said of our Savior, He
made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, Isai. 53.9. So
fares it with Gods Saints, they make their graves, lie down in the dust with
wicked men; dying as they die; their souls both separated from their bodies and
their bodies to dust, and who shall distinguish betwixt their ashes? in the
outward appearance no difference between the one and the other; yet a grand
difference there is; the one perishes, not so the other. The one dying, dies
to die, dies Temporally, to die Eternally; The other dying, dies to live,
dies a Temporal death, that he may live an eternal life: so it follows in
the next words, He shall not perish, but have Eternal life.

2. Possitive; Eternal life.
Eternal life.] Here is the Positive part of the Benefit, wherein our Savior
explains what he meant by not perishing; viz. he shall not die, but live
eternally. Behold here the Prerogative of Gods Saints, even of all true
Believers, wherein they differ from all others: Not only from the Bruit
creature; the bruit Creature perishes in death, so shall not they; But even
from wicked men; Wicked men they do not properly perish in death, but they die
to die, so as they shall never see life, this true life; They shall never see
the face of God, never enjoy his presence, in whose presence is life: Being
Separated from the presence of his grace here, they shall be separated from the
presence of his glory hereafter; and to this punishment of loss shall be added
the punishment of sense, They shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9.
Being confined to that place of horror and darkness, they shall be subjected
both in souls and bodies to endless and easelesse, unsufferable, unspeakable,
unconceivable torments; and so shall for ever be in a perishing condition. But
as for God's Saints and faithful ones; even all true Believers, they shall not
only not perish as the bruit Creature does, but they shall be possessed of that
life which all unbelevers shall be excluded from, even Eternal life.

Eternal Life.] Eternal life, what.
Under these two words the Spirit of God in Scripture frequently sets forth
unto us the state and condition of Gods Saints in Heaven; which being a most
blessed state, full of Glory and Happiness, is therefore called by the name of
Life, because of all things upon earth life is the most precious, most set by.
And in as much as that state is immutable, unchangeable, therefore it is called
Eternal Life, (...): continuing the same to all ages, to all Eternity. This
blessed life the Believer enters into upon earth when he first begins to
believe on Christ, then is he translated from death to life; then is this
blessed life estated upon him, and begun in him; thence says our Savior, This
is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent,
Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. To know God and Christ, to know God in Christ, this is
life eternal. It is so, as in regard of assurance, so in regard of Inchoation;
being the beginning of that blessed life, which Gods Saints entering upon here
in the kingdom of Grace, shall have the full fruition of hereafter in the
kingdom of glory; He shall not perish, but have eternal life.

The Type falling short of the Truth.
Eternal life.] Behold here the Truth in the Text advanced above, and beyond
the Type. Those whom the Brazen Serpent cured, they afterward died. Not so
they who are cured and healed by Christ: If a man keep my saying (says our
Savior) he shall not see death, Joh. 8.51.
Joh. 8. They shall live Eternally, never seeing, tasting of that second death;
so laith our Savior expressly unto Martha, Joh. 11. He that believes on me,
John 11.25.
though he were dead, yet he shall live; and he that lives and beleveth on
me shall never die. Though he were dead: Dead Spiritually (says Calvin) Dead
in trespasses and sins (as all men naturally are) yet upon this believing he
shall live; viz. live the life of grace here: and so living and believing, he
shall never die, never die Eternally. Or if we take it (as Arctius and others
expound it) of a Natural, Temporal death; [Whosoever believes, though he be
dead,] that is, dead as Lazarus was; yet dying in the faith, he shall [live] he
shall be raised up again to life. [ And he that lives and believes on me,
that is (say some) such as shall be found alive at the coming of Christ, they
shall never die, only be changed: Or, He that lives and believes shall never
die, that is eternally, so the words in the Original may be construed, (...);
Non morietur in aeternum; though he die Temporally, yet not eternally. And here
is the Benefit it self which Believers have by believing on Christ.

The Extent of this Benefit follows: 2. The Exte. of the Benefit
which is, (as I said) as large as may be, indefinite, universal, reaching to
all those who perform the condition. So you have it in the first word,
[Whosoever,] Of which but a word.

The Benefit of Christ's death extends to all true believers. Doct. To all
believers.
As only to them, so to all, and every of them. Whether Christ died
intentionally for all men, as Arminians would have it, I shall not stand now to
discuss it. Sure we are, he died for all those that believe on him: and to
them, all and every of them, shall his death be made effectual. Even as the
Brazen Serpent was lift up for all those Israelites, which feeling themselves
stung, looked up unto it; and to those who did so look upon it, it was
effectual and availeable for their cure; and that to all of them: Even thus
was the Lord Jesus, lift up upon the cross, for all those that shall believe
on him: For them Christ prayed, I pray not for those alone, (says our Savior)
that is, for his Apostles and Disciples only, but for them also which shall
believe on me, John 17.20. And for them he died: I lay down my life for my
sheep, John 10.15. Such as being elected before time, are in time called to
believe on him. And to all, and every of these, shall his death be made
effectual. Whosoever, etc.]

Whosoever, (...), Omnis credens, Whosoever,] the term explained.
all, and every one that believes. Be they what they will, what for Nation;
what for Sex; what for Condition, outward, or inward, etc. For Nation: whether
Jew, or Gentile. Herein again, the Type falls short of the truth, The Type
falling short of the Truth.
and is out-stripped by it. The Brazen Serpent was lift up for the benefit of
the Israelites, one Nation only; but Christ the true Brazen Serpent is lift up
as well for the Gentile as for the Jew, as well for all Nations, as for one
Nation. In that day (says the Prophet Esaias) there shall be a root of Jesse,
which shall stand for an Ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seek,
Isai. 11. Isai. 11.10.
This Root of Jesse is Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Jesse. (So
the Apostle himself expounds it, Romans 15.12.) He being lift up upon the Cross,
is made an Ensign, a Standard to the people, and that not only to Jews, but to
Gentiles: In him shall the Gentiles trust, says the Apostle. And so doing,
both Jews and Gentiles, having a like interest in him, shall have a like
benefit by him; So says the same Apostle expressly, Romans 1.16. where speaking
of the Gospel, he tells us, that it is the power of God to salvation to every
one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian. To Jews and
Gentiles, no difference betwixt Nation and Nation, no nor yet betwixt Condition
and Condition, or Sex and Sex, Bond and free, rich and poor, noble, ignoble,
male, female, all alike in Christ Jesus. Gal 3.28.
So Paul tells his Galatians, There is neither Jew, nor Greek, neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
Upon their coming to him, and believing on him, all alike justified, and saved
by him. Even as the Israelites coming and looking to the Brazen Serpent, they
were all a like cured. Young and old, Masters and servants, Princes and
Peasants; no difference betwixt the one and the other. Even so is it with all
that come unto Jesus Christ. Romans 3.27.
The righteousness of God which is by the faith of Jesus Christ is unto all,
and upon all that believe, says the same Apostle, for there is no difference.]
Whosoever believes on him, shall have alike benefit by him. But I must not
dwell upon illustration. That which now remains for the closing up of this
point, and this Text, is a word of Application: which I shall direct only two
ways. By way of Consolation, Exhortation.

1. By way of Comfort and Encouragement to Use 1. Comfort to penitent sinners.
all poor penitent sinners, such as feeling the sting of sin in their souls,
and being made sensible of the need they have of Jesus Christ, desire to come
and look up unto him, to believe on him. Let them know, and know it to their
everlasting comfort, that for their sakes was this Brazen Serpent lift up; for
their sakes was the Lord Jesus by his Fathers Ordination and appointment lift
up upon the Cross, so as they coming unto him, shall not miss of benefit by
him. It matters not what you have been, what you are; Only believe. God who
required no more at the Israelites hands, but to look up to the Brazen Serpent,
requires no more from penitent sinners, but to look up unto Jesus Christ by
faith. So doing, whoever thou art, thou shall not perish. And what a sweet
encouragement is this? take it to your selves, you to whom it belongs. Are
you in the number of those whose eyes God has opened, and whose hearts he has
inclined thus to look up unto the Lord Jesus, thus to believe on him? To you be
it spoken, to all, and every of you; you shall not perish, but have everlasting
life: Whosoever.] Gaude, hic meum, and tuum, and omnium credentium nomen
scriptum est: Scultetus
Now, rejoice and be glad, (says one writing upon it) Here is my name, and thy
name, and the name of every believer written. All written in this promise, and
so in the Book of life. So says Paul of his fellow laborers, naming some of
them by name; Whose names are in the book of life, Phil. 4.3. And who is there
but would be glad to read his name written there; no such ground of rejoicing
as this? Luke 10.20.
In this rejoice not (says our Savior to his Disciples) that the spirits are
subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven.
Now this may all true believers do. Do but evidence to thine own soul the
truth of thy faith, and then here read thy name written, whosoever!] what is
this general, this universal, but as if God had said to every man and woman
in particular, and by name, Believe thou, and thou shall not perish; Believe
thou, and thou shall have everlasting life. Do we but see to the condition, he
that has made it, will make good the promise.

Only believe. Let that be the word of Exhortation, Use 2. Exhortation: Only
believe.
which let me press upon every soul which is in measure prepared for the
receiving of it; I mean such as do feel the sting of sin, and desire to be
cured; let them look up, let them raise up their hearts to believe on the Lord
Jesus: And let nothing discourage or dismay them from, or in so doing. I know,
discouragements there are many, which poor doubting souls will be ready to
take up, and make use of against themselves, Discouragements answered from the
Type.
either to keep them from believing on Christ, or at least from apprehending
the comfort which belongs to them upon their believing. Give me leave to meet
with some of them, some of the most obvious: And therein I shall still have
recourse to the Type, which (methinks) gives a very apt and full resolution to
the most of the scruples and objections which a sin-stung soul can take up,
and make use of against it self in this way.

Object. 1. O (in the first place) I am a Object 1. Unworthiness of the person.
sinner, a great sinner, one that lies under a great deal of guilt; one that
has, provoked God to pour out the vials of his everlasting wrath upon me, to
make me a spectacle of vengeance to Eternity. And is there any hope that God
should exercise his grace and mercy upon so vile, Answ. None but sinners can
receive benefit by Christ.
so wretched and unworthy a creature?

Answ. A sinner? a great sinner? Alas, were thou not such a one, what
should thou do with a Christ? what should a hayle Israelite do with the
Brazen Serpent? Such might look upon it, but they could expect to receive no
benefit by it: Only they which were stung, they were they for whom the Brazen
Serpent was set up: Only sinners are such as shall be the better for Jesus
Christ; This is a true saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.
Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. Let not the apprehension of
thine omn sinfulness discourage: Only art thou sensible of it? and do thou
desire to be freed from it, as from the guilt, so from the power and dominion
of it? If so, now know, and know it to thy comfort, it is not this that can
hinder thee from benefit by Christ. Nay, on the other hand, it is this that
disposes thee for Christ, and makes thee capable of benefit by him. Matthew.
9.12.
The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. Only sick souls, such as are
sick of sin, such as feel the distemper of sin in their souls, are fit
patients for this heavenly Physician.

Object. 2. Hainousness of sins.
Object. 2. I, but my sins are sins of a heinous nature, not common or ordinary
sins, but crying sins, bloody sins, such as I am ashamed to name, and afraid to
look upon. The very thought of them strikes terror and horror into my soul.

An. Answ. The chief of sinners saved by Christ.
Yet despair not: Only believe. It mattered not how dangerously, how
desperately, in what part of the body any of the Israelites were stung or
bitten by those fiery Serpents, or how far their stings or teeth had pierced
into their bodies, only looking up to the Brazen Serpent, they were cured as
well as those who had received but a sleighter touch. It matters not what thy
sins are for the nature of them, how heinous, how horrid soever, only believe,
and thou shall find it by comfortable experience that there is virtue enough in
Jesus Christ to work a perfect cure upon thy soul. Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, whereof I am chief.

Object. 3. Object. 3. Multitude of sins.
I, but my sins are many as well as great; were it only some one sin that I had
fallen into, there might be some hope; but the multitude of my sins makes a
dreadful addition to the magnitude of them: one sin being enough to sink my
soul into the lowest hell, how shall I look up with any hopes of mercy from
under the weight and burden of so many sins as lie upon me?

Answ. Answ. Where sin abounds, grace super-aboundeth. Romans 5.20.
Yet let not this discourage neither: as it is not the magnitude, so neither
shall it be the multitude of sins that can stop the course and current of Gods
superabundant grace and mercy; Where sin abounded, there grace superabounded:
Only believe on the Lord Jesus, by and through whom this grace is conveyed. To
have recourse to the Type still; The Israelites in the wilderness they were
infested with many Serpents, and that not only with one kind, but with diverse,
as viz. with Fiery Serpents, and with Scorpions (so you may read it Deuteronomy.
8.15.) some stinging, others biting: Yet see a true Catholicon, the Brazen
Serpent was an effectual Antidote against all of them: It mattered not how
many of those Serpents had seized upon any of the Israelites, or in how many
parts of the body they were stung by them, only looking up to the Brazen
Serpent, they found a present remedy against all. Even such a Catholicon is the
Lord Jesus: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. John
1.29.
It matters not how many, nor or how many kinds thy sins be; Original,
Actual, in thought, word, deed, of omission, of commission, of ignorance, of
presumption, against the first or second Table, put them all together, yet here
is a cure for all. Our Blessed Savior when he was upon earth, Matthew. 4.24.
he cured all Deseases; being now in Heaven he cures all sins, Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, Psalm. 103. Psalm. 103.3.
Suppose it, that not only many, but all the Serpents in the Wilderness, had
fastened their stings and teeth upon the body of one man; however his pain must
needs have been great, and condition dangerous, yet looking up to the Brazen
Serpent, he should have found cure as well as any other. Suppose it, that all
the sins of the world were charged upon the head of one man (as all the sins of
Gods Elect were upon the man Christ) yet looking up to the Lord Jesus, he
should find there were merit and virtue enough in him to heal and save him. Let
neither magnitude nor multitude of sins discourage.

Object. 4. Object. 4. Inveterate sins
I, but my sins are grown inveterate, of long continuance. They are not of
yesterday, but sins which I have lived in, lien in, gone on in, and that
against light and checks of conscience; notwithstanding I have been clearly
convinced out of the word of the sinfulness of these ways, yet I have walked
in them; so as through continuance in sin and long custom, I fear my case is
desperate and past cure.

Answ. Answ. Not desperate.
Not so neither: Only believe. The Israelites coming to the Brazen Serpent, it
mattered not how long before they had been stung, though through continuance
the venom had spread it self over the whole body, infecting the blood and
spirits, though their case was never so desperate, yet if they could lift up
their eyes to the Brazen Serpent, they were cured. It matters not of what
standing, of what continuance thy sins are, though now through long custom
grown habitual unto thee, yet come unto Jesus Christ, and look up to him, and
thou shall find it is not too late: Sero Medicina paratur, etc. says the
Physician; It is too late to look out for Medicines when the Disease through
long continuance is grown inveterate: Not so, says the Divine. In soul
Diseases, be they never so inveterate, only come unto Jesus Christ, and believe
on him. John 11.39.
He that raised up Lazarus after he had lien four days in the grave putting
life into that putrefying body is able to do as much for a dead putrified soul.
The very touch of the hem of his grrment wrought a present cure upon that
Haemorroisse, Mat. 9.20.
the woman which had had a flux of blood for twelve years.

Object. 5. Object. 5. Relapses.
I, but my case is yet more dangerous, I am relapsed; I have fallen again and
again into the same sin, and that not only after conviction, but after
repentance, and after that my soul in my apprehension was cured and healed. Is
there yet any hope for me?

Answ. Answ. The cure more difficult, not desperate.
This I confess makes the case more dangerous, and the cure more difficult (I
mean in our apprehensions) but yet not desperate. The Israelites, I suppose
some of them, after they had been cured, might be stung again and again, yet
coming to the Brazen Serpent, they still found the same virtue in it. It is
possible (though not ordinary) that a Child of God after full conviction, after
repentance, and after pardon sued out and obtained, may fall again and again
into the same gross sin; the work of Mortification being here but imperfect
and defective; yet in this case let none despair of mercy. He that caused the
Brazen Serpent to be set up for a Toties Quoties, that as often as the
Israelites repaired to it, they should be cured by it; he has given his Son,
that as often as poor sinners come unto him, they should be cured and healed by
him; Caveat against presumptuous adventures.
A comfortable Doctrine! But let none abuse it to their own perdition, taking
advantage from hence to indulge themselves in adventuring upon, or continuing
in any known evils. What shall we say then? Romans 6.1.2.
(says the Apostle) shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? (...),
God forbid. Shall we therefore dare to reiterate the same sin, that Gods mercy
may be renewed in the pardon of it? Far be it from any of us to draw so
damnable a conclusion from such sweet and comfortable premises. True it was,
the Israelites had a Brazen Serpent to cure them as often as they were stung; but
shall we therefore think that any of them were so mad as to run amongst the
Serpents on purpose to be stung by them, because there was a present remedy at
hand? True it is, we have an All-sufficient Savior to look up unto upon all
occasions, who is able to cure and heal all our relapses: But what, shall we
therefore take liberty to run again and again into the same sin? Of all
evidences of a man that shall never find any benefit by Christ, I do not know a
more dangerous, a more dreadful one then this, when men shall thus make him,
as it were, a pandar to their base lusts; so turning the grace of God into
wantonness. Let not any dare to make such use of what I have said, which I
intend only for the staying and comforting of drooping and dejected souls, such
as languish under the sad apprehension of some renewed sins, which they have
again fallen into through the weakness and infirmity of the flesh; not
wittingly, not wilfully; If we sin wilfully (that is, with full consent of
will) after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sins. But through weakness and infirmity; To them I say,
not I, but the Lord: Let them renew their repentance and faith, looking up unto
Jesus Christ, and they shall find there is yet cure for them. Return ye
backsliding children, Matthew. 18.22. Luke 17.3, 4.
and I will heal your backslidings, Jer. 3.22. He that requires us, if our
brother offend us seventy seven times, yet upon his acknowledgement to forgive
him; will not he do the like by his people upon their returning unto him? Have
we relapsed then? yet return by renewed repentance and faith, looking up to
this Brazen Serpent, we shall live and not die.

Object. 6. Object. 6. Want of strength against corruption.
I, but I cannot find strength against my corruption: Could I but feel that
weakened in me, then I should have some hope. But alas, I find that still
strong and prevalent; notwithstanding all my praying, and watching, and
striving against it, yet I get little or no ground of it, or power against it.

Answ. Answ. Virtue in Christ for subduing it.
Yet despair not. Only come unto Jesus Christ. The Israelites looking upon
the Brazen Serpent, they were thereby freed not only from the smart and anguish
of their wounds, but also from the prevalency of the poison, so as it spread no
further. The poor sinner looking up to Jesus Christ shall there find a
sufficiency, as of merit, so of virtue, for the taking away not only the guilt
and terror, but the power and dominion of sin; And therefore do not say, if I
could find my corruption weakened, then I would go unto Christ; but therefore
go unto him, that by faith thou may fetch virtue from him for the subduing
of it.

Object. 7. Object. 7. Weakness of faith.
I, but in the last place, my faith is a weak faith: my wretched heart being
full, (as of other lusts, so) of unbeliife. I cannot glorify God, as I desire
to do, by resting upon his mercy in Christ with such a firm affiance, steadfast
confidence, full persuasion, as some others do.

Answ. Answ. Not the Degree, but the truth of faith, heals and saves.
Let not this discourage neither; knowing that it is not the degree and
measure, but the truth of faith which heals and saves. The reason whereof I
have given you already, because faith does not save by any virtue of it own;
but only instrumentally, by looking up unto Jesus Christ. Now this a weak
faith may do, and that as truly as a strong; and so doing, it shall heal. The
Type illustrates it well, An Israelite looking up to the Brazen Serpent, it
mattered not how weak, how dim, how tender his eye was, yet he was cured. Be
thy faith never so weak, but as the grain of mustard seed; but as the smoking
flax, rather a desire to believe, then any strength of faith? yet even this
weak faith, being a true faith, shall save thee, shall heal thee. So says the
promise here in the Text; That whosoever believes on him (though weakly, yet
truly) should not perish, etc.

And what is there now that shall stand betwixt Christ and a poor penitent
sinner, to keep him from believing on him; or upon his believing, from
receiving benefit by him? Not his sins, though great, though many, though of
long continuance, though often repeated, and that after repentance; not the
strength of corruption, or the weakness of faith.

Only believe. Only believe.
That is the sum of the Exhortation, which let me press again, and again; Upon
this depends our eternal happiness and welfare. And therefore every of us be
excited, above all graces to seek after this Mother-grace of Faith; Hab. 2 4.
Gal. 2.20.
And having it, set it awork, exercise it, live by it: daily stirring up our
dead souls thus to look up unto Jesus Christ. Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Christ as
the Israelites unto the Brazen Serpent.
Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. So looking up unto
him as the wounded Israelites did to their Brazen Serpent. And to that end,

1. Labor to feel the sting of sin; 1. Feel the sting of sin.
to feel our souls wounded, and mortally wounded by reason of sin, that so we
may be made sensible of the need we have of Jesus Christ. Till the soul be
brought to some sense, and apprehension hereof, it will never have recourse
unto Christ for cure. This being done, then

2. Get an eye rightly affected.
2. In the second place; Labor to get an eye rightly affected and disposed; as
viz. 1. A discerning eye. 2. A mournful eye. 3. A longing eye. 4. A steadfast
eye.

1. A Discerning Eye. 1. A Discerning eye.
Such must the Israelites eye be, an eye that was able to behold and discern
the Brazen Serpent. And such an eye must they have who would have any benefit
by Christ; they must be able to behold Christ, to behold him as he is revealed
in the word, they must have some degree and measure of distinct knowledge
concerning Christ; as to know what he was, what he has done, what he has
suffered, etc. withal taking notice both of his ability and readiness to cure
all that come unto him. His ability, how mighty a Savior, Heb. 7.25.
how able perfectly (or for ever) to save those that come unto God by him. His
willingness; how tender and compassionate a Savior, being himself stung to
death, that he might know how to have compassion on them that are stung: Heb.
4.15.
We have not an high Priest (says the Apostle) which cannot be touched with
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are.
How ready he is to receive all that come to him for cure. Come unto me ye that
labor, etc. Matthew. 11.28. John 6.37.
I will give you rest, Matthew. 11. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out, John 6. All these truths being clearly revealed in the word
concerning Jesus Christ, they must be distinctly apprehended, known and
believed. Here is the first requisite to the right disposing of the eye: It
must be a discerning eye.

2. And (secondly) a mournful eye. 2. A mournful eye.
With such eyes (I suppose) did many of the Israelites look up unto their
Brazen Serpent, not without tears in them. And with such eyes look we up unto
ours. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, John 19.37.
(says the Prophet) and they shall mourn, Zach. 12.10. So did Mary Magdalene
look upon her Savior, Luke 7.38.
looking, and weeping. And so look we upon him, mourning; And that both for our
selves, and him: In as much as by our sins we have pierced through both;
pierced our selves, as Paul says of covetous persons, They pierce themselves
through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. So does every sin more or less pierce
the soul of the sinner. And piercing our selves, we have also pierced Christ,
crucifying him by our sins. It is that which the Apostle says of Apostates,
They crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6.6. By them he is
twice crucified, by others, once. None of us but have had hands in bringing him
to the Cross, who died for our sins. Great cause to look up unto him with a
mournful eye.

3. And (thirdly) with a longing eye: 3. A Longing Eye.
With such eyes did the Israelites look up to their Brazen Serpent, earnestly
desiring to receive benefit by it. And with such eyes look we up unto ours;
longing after Jesus Christ, that we may be made partakers of his saving
benefits. I have longed for thy salvation, (says David) Psalm. 119.174. And
thus let the soul of every poor penitent sinner go out after Jesus Christ, in
longing desires after him, after union and communion with him, desiring nothing
so much as this. This is the height of Paul's desire, that he might know Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3.10.
and the virtue of his Resurrection; know him, not only Contemplatively, but
Experimentally, and Practically, feeling the power of his Resurection in
raising him first from the Death of sin, to the Life of Grace; and after from
the Death of Nature, to the Life of Glory: And let it be so with us; let there
be nothing so dear and precious in our eye as Christ; desire we nothing so much
as an Interest in him, and Communion with him. Look up unto him with a Longing
eye.

4. And in the fourth place, 4. A steadfast eye.
with a Steadfast eye; so did the Israelites look up to their Brazen Serpent,
fixing their eyes upon it till they were cured. And so look we up unto ours,
fixing our eyes upon the Lord Jesus, steadfastly looking upon him until we have
obtained what we look for. Psalm. 123.2.
As the eyes of Servants look up unto the hands of their Masters, etc. So do
our eyes wait upon the Lord until he have mercy upon us: So do we look up to
our Lord and Savior, by faith resting and waiting upon him until he have
mercy upon us, until our souls, be cured, perfectly cured.

Quest. But when will that be?

Answ. Why not in this life, and therefore let us still be looking up unto him;
Heb. 12.2.
Let us run the Race set before us (says the Apostle) looking unto Jesus, Heb.
12. Whilst a Christian is running his race, he must throughout his whole course
fix his eye upon Christ. The Israelites, as long as they were in the
Wilderness, being continually subject to the stinging of those fiery Serpents,
they had a continued use of the Brazen Serpent; and therefore was it carried
along with them, and still lift up amongst them, that upon all occasions they
might look up unto it. Thus fares it with us, as long as we are in this
wilderness here upon earth, we are still subject to daily infirmities and sins,
and consequently have still need of a Savior, who by the daily application of
his merit, and communication of his Spirit may work daily cures for us. And
therefore in the sense of this continued need we have of Jesus Christ, let our
eyes be still toward him, whom God in infinite goodness and mercy is pleased
still to hold forth unto us in the Word and Sacraments, there to be represented
to us, and lift up before our eyes. Thus fixing our eyes upon him, we shall
find him to us a perfect Savior, saving us from the guilt of sin, that it
shall not be imputed to us; and delivering us from the power of sin, so as
though it abide in us, yet it shall not rule and reign in us, but daily grow
weaker and weaker, until we come in the end to have a perfect cure wrought in
us and upon us, in a perfect deliverance from sin and death, with the full
fruition of that blessed and glorious life, which shall be the portion of all
those who thus look up unto this true Brazen Serpent, who thus believe on the
Lord Jesus. So was the Son of Man lift up, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish but, have Everlasting Life.

The Magneticall Virtue OF THE CROSS OF JESUS CHRIST.
JOHN 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me.


I Have already spent some time in opening unto you the manner and end of our
Saviors Death, both laid down in those two verses, ver. 14, 15 of the third
Chapter of this Gospel, As Moses lift up the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness,
so must the Son of Man be lift up; That whosoever believes on him should not
perish but have Eternal Life. Now taking hold of that phrase there redoubled
(viz. Lifting up) I have singled out this portion of Scripture, wherein our
Savior sets forth as the Manner, so the Fruit and Consequent of his Death. The
former fore-prophesied, the later fore-promised, both by our Savior himself.
The Manner of his death fore-prophesied [If I shall be lifted up] The Fruit of
his Death fore-promised, [I will draw all men unto me.]

Upon the former of these I have insisted already, viz. the Manner The manner
of Christ's death.
of our Saviors death, set forth here again (as you see) by the same
Periphrasis, the same expression, If I be lifted up;] Lifted up? how? Why, in
his Passion upon the Cross, where he was lifted up from the earth; So the
Evangelist explains the phrase in the verse following; This spoke he, ver. 33.
signifying what death he should die, viz. the death of the Cross, where he
was to be lifted up, Quest. The d ath of Christ not dubious.
as the Brazen Serpent was in the wilderness.

If I be lift up.] If? What, does our Savior make a doubt, a question of his
Death? was it a thing contingent and uncertain.

Answ. Answ. Carthus. ad loc. Si exaltatus, etc. Hoc refertur ad illud quod
superius ait; Si autem mortuum fuerit granum, etc. August ad loc.
Not so: The Particle [If] here must be understood and taken, non dubitative,
sed assertive, and certitudinaliter (as Carthusian well notes upon it) not by
way of doubting or questioning, but by way of asserting and supposing: even as
in the 24 verse of this Chapter, our Savior speaking of the grain of wheat, or
other Corn being cast into the ground; ver. 24.
If it die (says he) it brings forth much fruit: (...). If it dye, that is,
Dying: being cast into the ground it dies (seems so to do) and so dying, it
fructifieth. So here; If I be lift up, (...), that is, being lift up, or when I
shall be lift up, or after that I am lift up: so the Evangelist St. John
elsewhere uses the word, Epist. 3. v. 10. writing to Gaius concerning
Diotrephes, he tells him, If I come, I will remember his deeds, that is, when I
come: so here, If I be lift up (says our Savior) that is, when I shall be
lift up; so the Syriack here renders it. Si exaltatus, h. e. Cum exaltatus
fuero. Non enim dubitat futurum esse quod venit implere. August.
As for our Saviors death, it was not a thing contingent and uncertain,
whether in it self, or to him; His Father had determined it, himself had
submitted to it, the Prophets had foretold it, his peoples necessities required
it; in all which respects our Savior himself lays it down in the Text last
insisted upon, as a thing necessary, So must the Son of Man be lifted up. Not
may, but must: Joh. 3.14.
And afterward he inculcates the same upon his Disciples, Mat. 16.21. where he
shows them how he must go up to Jerusalem, and suffer many things, and be
killed, etc. Neither his death, nor the manner of his death was a thing dubious
and uncertain. The Son of Man must be lift up, and so lift up as the Brazen
Serpent was in the Wilderness. That our Savior says here, If I be lifted up,
he speaks it not as doubting, but supposing what ere long was to come to pass.
That being cleared

The fruit of Christ's death.
Come we now to that which the Text chiefly looks upon, viz. the Fruit of our
Saviors death. A Blessed Fruit; never did tree bear better, viz. the drawing
of the world to himself: When I shall be lift up from the earth, I will draw
all men unto me.] Thus did the Brazen Serpent being lift up, it drew the eyes
of the whole Camp to it self, specially such as felt themselves stung by those
fiery Serpents. And thus says our Savior, being lift up upon the Cross, he
would draw the world to himself, to look unto him, to believe on him Even as
the Sun being risen above the earth, it attracteth and draws up from it those
foggy vapors, which before were in or upon it; draws them up toward it
self: Even thus does Christ the Son of Righteousness, being lift up from the
earth, he attracts and draws up the world of mankind, those terrae filios, sons
of the earth, who being cleaved to the earth, minding nothing but earthly
things, he draws up their Eyes, and Hearts to himself: this he fore promised
that he would do; And we shall see it accordingly accomplished.

But before we come to close with the words themselves, looking upon them afar
off, take we notice of one thing in the general, and that from the connection
of the parts of the Text, the Prophecy and the Promise; the putting them
together. If I be lifted up, I will draw all men, etc.

See here how wonderfully the Scribes and Pharisees, A General Observation.
and other enemies of Christ who plotted his death, were disappointed and
deceived in their intendments and expectations. Wherefore was it that they
contrived this evil against him, to bring him to the Cross, The Enemies of
Christ disappointed.
that shameful and accursed death? Why, this they did that they might thereby
not only take him out of the way, but withal render him odious and infamous
unto the world; so as from thenceforth none should ever look after him any
more. This it was which galled and vexed the Scribes and Pharisees, viz. the
success of his Ministry, that so many were taken with him, believed on him,
followed after him; and that notwithstanding whatever they could do to the
contrary. So much we may learn from their own mouths in the 19th verse of this
Chapter, The Pharisees said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing? Behold the world is gone after him. Many there were who hearing of the
great miracles which he had wrought, (specially that recorded in the fore
going Chapter, the raising of Lazarus from the dead,) thereupon (as the 18th
verse of this Chapter informs us) they flocked after him, and became his
Disciples. Now this, to the Pharisees (who could not endure that any should be
preferred before themselves) it was no small corrosive, it went to the heart of
them, they could not brook it: and therefore they plot against him. And (as it
is the nature of envy, where once it is grown to an height) nothing will now
content them but his blood. They resolve never to leave till they had brought
him to the Cross, taken him out of the way, hoping thereby to turn the stream
of men's affections, either to deter, or discourage any for ever looking after
him more. This was their design; but see how the success falls out clean
contrary to their expectation. By this means Christ comes to draw more then
ever. Even as Samson slew more at his death, Judge. 16.30.
then in his life. Thus the Son of man (of whom Samson was a Type) he draws
more by, and after his death, then ever he did in his life; more, being lift up
from the earth, then ever he did being upon the earth. In his life he drew
some, and many; which the Pharisees looking upon through the spectacle of
envy, (a true multiplying or magnifying glass, making things seem more, or
greater then they are,) take for a world: The world is gone after him.] But in,
and after his death, he draws not only some, and many, but all: If I be
lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.]

Observe. The Counsels of the Enemies of Christ wonderfully frustrated. 2 Samuel
15.31.
Even thus does God often elude and frustrate the counsel of his, and his
Churches enemies, turning them into folly, as he did the counsel of
Achitophel. Oft-times bringing out of them clean contrary successes to what
they intended. The Patriarchs, moved with envy, sell their brother Joseph into
Egypt. Acts 7.9.
But God turns that foul fact of theirs into great good both to him and them;
making it the means of his preferment, and their preservation: All the ways
and means they could have used, could not have procured so great advancement
unto him; but no thanks to them. As for you (says he to them) ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good, Genesis 50.20.
even to save much people alive.] Judas in betraying, the chief Priests in
condemning, the Jews in crucifying the Lord of life; they all thought evil
against him, intending to take him out of the way; that his very name might
either be blotted out, or rendered infamous to all posterity. But God meant it
unto great good, even to save much people alive; making use of this as the
means to effect and bring to pass the Redemption and salvation of his Elect.
Thus does God make use of the wicked counsels and designs of his, and his
Churches enemies, to bring about his own gracious purposes; still
overreaching, being above his enemies, how potent, or politic soever. So it
is said of the Egyptians, Exodus 18. Exodus 18.11.
In the thing wherein they dealt proudly God was above them.] And what was that
thing? why, that design of theirs against the Israelites, (of which you may
read Chap. 1. Cap. 1. ver. 10.16.22.
) Come, let us deal wisely, say they: They thought what by policy, and what by
power, to have suppressed, and kept under the Israelites: But herein God was
above them; frustrating their counsels, nay, bringing out of them a clean
contrary success. Not only judging them in the very thing wherein they thought
to judge Israel, Vid. Ainsworth, in Exodus 18.11.
(as the Chaldee paraphrase glosseth upon that place,) drowning them in the
sea, who had designed to drown all the males of the children of Israel in the
rivers; but making use of that bloody design, as a means to bring about the
deliverance of his oppressed people, as you may read it in the second Chapter
of that Book. Exodus 2.3, 5. etc.
Instances of like nature are obvious; Proud Haman designs the ruin not only
of Mordecai, (that was too slight a revenge) but of the whole Nation of the
Jews. But see how God was above him, turning it as to his ruin, and Mordecai's
advancement, hanging him up upon the Gallows which he had prepared for
Mordecai, Hester 7.10. chap. 10. v. 3. chap. 8. v. 17.
and setting up Mordecai in his place; so to their comfort and enlargement,
causing light, and joy, and gladness to break forth unto his people out of
that black cloud which threatened them with ruin and destruction.

Reason. The power, wisdom, goodness of God therein manifested.
This God has done, and this he daily does; therein manifesting his power,
wisdom, goodness; viz. in bringing one contrary out of another, light out of
darkness. It is the skill of the Physician to turn the rankest poisons into
sovereign medicines, vipers into treacles. And it is the power, wisdom,
goodness of our God, thus to turn the counsels and intendments of his, and
his Churches enemies to great good, making use of them for his own glory, and
the good of his Church.

Applic. Let the meditation be useful, Applic.
and that both to the Churches Enemies, and Friends.

1. For her Enemies, 1. To the Enemies of Christ. Let them cease to meditate
vain things.
such as plot and conspire, and take counsel against God, against his truth,
religion, cause, people, let them be advised to desist, and break off their
vain undertakings. Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing? Psalm. 2.1, 2.
The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed.] To plot, and conspire, and take
counsel against God, and his Christ, against his truth, his people; it is but
a vain thing, they do herein but meditate vanity, (as the Original there has
it.) It matters not how promising the design be, how cunningly contrived, how
closely carried, how potently prosecuted, yet all is in vain. ver. 4.
He that sits in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn: being able to
confound or overruled all adverse counsels, so as either to bring them to
naught, or else to bring good out of them. And this he will do; not but that
for a time the Churches enemies may seem to prevail. So did the Jews against
our Savior; they brought him to the Cross: I, but yet they shall miss of
their end. So did the Jews, in stead of blotting out the Name of Christ, they
make it glorious. In stead of turning back a few from him, they draw the world
after him. And what happened to the head, shall also happen to the body. What
ever wicked men, open or secret enemies, plot and contrive against the Church,
shall tend to the good of it in the end: He that has promised that All things
shall work together for good, Romans 8.28.
etc. both can and will make the counsels and endeavors, the plots and
practices of his enemies turn to the good of his people: Let wicked men then be
persuaded to break off these vain undertakings. Had the Scribes and Pharisees,
and the rest of that malignant crew, ever dreamed that this should have been
the issue of their counsels, in crucifying the Lord of life, viz. that thereby
the world should be drawn unto him, certainly they would never have done what
they did.

2. For Gods own people, 2. To God's own people. Comfort against Adversaries.
such as are friends to Christ, friends to his truth, his Church and Religion,
let them make use of this Meditation for the staying and comforting of their
hearts against all the plottings and conspirings of the many and potent enemies
of the Church: Many and Potent, so they are, some open, others close and
secret, all setting themselves against the truth, the Religion of God, by all
means seeking the suppression of it. To which end they deal with Christ's
Religion and the Professors of it, even as the Jows dealt with Christ himself;
they crucify both, laboring by all means to make it and them as odious and
infamous in the eye of the world as possibly they can; and thence it is that
they spit upon the face of Religion, casting those terms of infamy and reproach
upon the good ways of God, and those that endeavor to walk closely in them;
(I shall not need to name them, they are but too well known) all which are but
as so many nails whereby they fasten the true Religion of Christ, the power of
godliness, to the Cross, wounding and piercing it through; that so having
rendered it infamous, they may deter or discourage any from looking that way
which lies under such a cloud of reproach and disgrace. But let not all this
dishearten: It was not the crucifiing of Christ in his Natural body that could
turn the eyes of men from looking toward him, or their hearts from believing
on him: It is not the crucifying of Christ in his Mystical body, the
crucifying of his Religion, or the Professors of it, that shall deter men from
owning Christ and his ways. The experience of all ages has made it good, that
the malice, rage, and violence of the bitterest and bloodiest enemies of the
Church, has been but as bellows to this fire, blowing up, spreading and
dispersing that Religion, that truth of God, which they have sought and thought
too have suppressed and extinguished. Such was the issue of the rage of those.
Heathenish Tyrants in the infancy of the Church, the ten Primitive
Persecutions, Sanguis Martyrum, The blood of those Martyrs proved the seed of
the Chruch; This Vine having ever since been the more fruitful for that blood
which was powered at the root of it. And the same we may say of that
Antichristian Tyranny which has been excercised in suceeding ages, upon the
true professors of the Gospel of Christ. Bloody Persecutours have thought by
their Dracoes Laws, laws written in Blood, and the severe execution thereof,
utterly to have suppressed the truth of the Gospel, that none should have dared
to own it. But see how it has fallen out contrary to their expectation, every
Martyr proving like a Phoenix, out of whose ashes not one, but many more have
sprung up. Thus Jesus Christ where ever he has been crucified in himself or
members, still he has drawn many to himself. No fear therefore that by this
means by, crucifying of Christ, the enemies of the Church should prevail
against it. Hereby they do but lift up Jesus Christ, that he may draw the more
unto him, Quam non sint formidanda impiorum consilia? (says Musculus upon it.)
Such little cause have we to fear the plots and counsels of wicked and ungodly
men; being against Christ, they shall not prevail, their counsels shall be
brought to naught and return upon their own heads; Psalm. 7.16.
This is one of the privileges and Prerogatives given unto Christ by his
Father, Psalm. 110.2.
That he shall rule in the midst of his enemies; This he does, he sits at the
stern of their counsels, turning them this way or that way, making them, whilst
they go about to do their own wills, to effect his; as to clear his truth
whilst they go about to darken and obscure it, to promote and further the cause
of his Gospel, whilst they go about to hinder it; so getting glory to himself,
and good to his Church out of their most malicious and dangerous intendments.
Such was this of the Scribes and Pharisees, and Chief Priests against our
Savior; They plot his death, hoping that when they had brought him to the
Cross, not only his person, but his cause should have for ever been buried in
silence and oblivion; but behold the success clean contrary; by this means the
Son of Man being lift up, he comes to have a more vigorous influence upon the
world then ever before: now he comes to draw not a few, but many, not many,
but all; If I be lift up, I will draw ll men unto me.

Having taken up this in the general, come we now to deal with the words more
particularly. Four particulars.
And therein for the more clear opening and distinct prosecuting of them, take
we notice of these four particulars. 1. Who draws: 2. Whom he draws: 3.
Whether he draws them: 4. How he draws them. In the first we have the
Agent, the person drawing. In the second the Object, the things or persons
drawn. In the third the Term of the Action, whither they are drawn. In the
fourth, the Manner; how they are drawn; we shall find a resolution to each in
the Text. Touch upon them severally and briefly by way of Explication.

Q. 1. Who draws? An. Christ himself; 1. The person drawing.
He it was that was lifted up, and being so, he draws; I will draw.

Obj. But is not this the Act of God the Father, How God the Father draws.
Joh. 6.14.
to draw, to bring men home unto Christ? So says our Savior himself
elsewhere, No man comes unto me, except the Father draw him, how then says he
here, that when he should be lift up, he would draw all men to himself?

An. To this the Answer is obvious. The Father draws, Filio trahente pater
trahit. Aquin. ex Chrysostom. ad loc.
and the Son draws; having one and the same essence, they have also the same
will, and the same work; that which the one wills, the other wills, and
that which the one works, Joh. 5.17.
the other works; [My Father works hitherto, and I work,] both joining
together, and cooperating in every work that is wrought in, for, or upon the
creature; Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. So was it in the first
Creation, the Father created, and the Son created; the Father working by the
Son. And so is it in the New Creation, the work of Regeneration, and
Conversion, in bringing men home unto Christ; the Father draws, and the Son
draws, the Father working by the Son through the Spirit. The Father draws
men to his Son, the Son draws them to the Father, and to himself. I will draw
all men.]

Qu. 2. The second Inquiry is about the Object 2. The object, or things drawn.
upon which this attractive power and virtue is exercised, whom Christ draws.

An. All men (says the Text.) The Latin Translation has it, All things, All
things.
Omnia. A reading which Augustine retains, and contendeth for. And Beza tells
us, that he finds one Greek copy, and that an ancient one, Non dixit [omnes]
sed [omnia.] Hoc utique non ad universitatem hominum retulit, sed ad creatura
integritatem, i. e. spiritum and animam, and corpus, etc. August. Totos corpore
and animo faciam mihi servire. Aretius ad Text. Utrumque ad se trahit, ut
salivt utrumque. Ferus ad loc. Phil. 2.6. All men. 1 Timothy 2.5. The word [All]
explained.
allowing it, reading the word (...), all things: Shall we so take it? how
shall we understand it? Why, Christ draws all things, that is, (say some) not
only the souls, but the bodies of men, the one here, the other hereafter;
drawing both to himself, the one in his Kingdom of Grace, the other in his
Kingdom of Glory. Others more fully; Christ draws all things to himself,
not only men, but other creatures. How? why in respect of that universal
Authority and Sovereignty which he has over them, being lift up, viz. from the
Cross to the Crown, he has all Power given unto him, and not only over all
Men, but over Angels, Devils, and all other creatures, all which how the knee
to him, yielding to him either a voluntary or involuntary subjection and
obedience. But to let that pass.

The Greek Copies generally read the word as our Translation renders it, not
(...), but (...); not All things, but All men, for their sakes it was that
Christ took upon him the Office of Mediatorship, he is the Mediator betwixt God
and Men, and upon them he excerciseth a spiritual government in drawing them
to himself; and this power he exercises upon all, he draws all men.

Qu. What? are all men drawn by Christ unto Christ?

An. For Answer. I find the word [All] here diversely expounded. Some (in the
first place) taking it universally for all men whatever, All drawn to Christ,
how. Potest hic tractus non solum de gratia qua Electi trahuntur, sed etiam de
potestate, qua reprobi quoque velint nolint, coguntur Christo subesse. Omnes
enim five boni, sive mali, ab ipso secundum merita sua judicandi sunt, etc.
Ferus ad loc.
whether Elect or Reprobate, good or bad; both these are drawn by Christ unto
Christ. The one by the cords of his grace and mercy, the other of his power and
justice; the one drawn to him as to a Savior, to believe on him, to be saved
by him, the other drawn before him as a Judge, brought to his Tribunal, there
to receive according to their demerits. Thus shall all wicked men be drawn by
Christ, and to him. A truth, but I suppose, not here intended. The drawing here
spoken of, is by way of grace and mercy; But how does Christ thus draw all men?

2. Why this he does (say others in the second place) by offering himself to
all, offering grace and mercy, life and salvation to all upon the condition of
believing. 2. Christ offered to all. Omnes vocat, and omnibus salutem offert.
Ferus. Mat. 23.
True, such an offer Christ makes unto all, all those whom he sends the
Gospel to. And so he may be said to draw all men, calling, inviting them to
come unto him; so did he draw Jerusalem in the days of his flesh, O Jerusalem,
how often would I have gathered thee? And thus he draws all those that are
within the pale of the Church, the sound of the Gospel. Muscul. ad loc. Ferus.
ad loc.
I dare not say with some, Quantum in se est, trahit, that as much as in him
lies, he draws all men; no, I know that if Christ put forth his power, he
can overpower the soul of the most obstinate and rebellious sinner, and cause
him to come in, and that willingly: Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy powers, Psalm. 110. Psa. 110.3.
When Christ puts forth the arm of his power, accompanying his Word with his
Spirit, (for that is the day of Christ's power) then shall his call be
effectual, all that are so called shall come to him, and that willingly. Isa.
65.2. Pro omnibus in cruce pependit, and omnes quantum in se est, expansis ad
se brachiis veluti trahit. Musc ad loc. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15.
Thus Christ does not draw all men; yet outwardly he does, offering himself
alike to all. So he did upon the Cross, where his arms were extended and spread
abroad, as inviting all, willing and ready to receive and embrace all that
should come to him. There behold the Son of man lift up, and drawing all men
unto him; this he does more clearly in the preaching of the Gospel, which he
requires to be published to all Nations, to every creature under heaven. There
he makes known himself, offers himself to all that will receive him,
inviting, persuading them to come to him to believe on him. Thus he draws all
in respect of an outward call; that this drawing proves ineffectuall to some,
to many, to the most, the fault is their own, in that they do not hearken to
this call, they will not follow him drawing, but draw back; Mat. 23.37.
I would have gathered you, but ye would not, says our Savior to Jerusalem.
In the mean time, Christ draws them outwardly.

Thus he draws all; not that he intends to save all, but that by this means
he may draw forth his Elect out of all, and bring them home to himself; even as
the Fisherman (the similitude illustrates it well) in drawing of his net, his
drag, he draws all that comes within the compass of it, not only good fish,
but weeds, and stones, and mud; and wherefore does he this? why, it is for the
good fishes sake; that what is good he may save. Mat. 13.47.
Even thus is it with Christ's Drag-net, the preaching of the Gospel; The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a net (says our Savior) It draws all that
come within the reach and compass of it, Christ offering grace and mercy alike
to all. But wherefore this? why, it is for the Elects sake: that Christ may
save those which are his, by that means singling and drawing them out of the
world, and bringing them effectually home to himself. He draws all, that he
may save some; draws all outwardly by his word, that by his Spirit accompanying
his word, he may draw his Elect out of all, making that his drawing effectual
to them, to all of them. Thus Christ draws all men, A truth, but not the whole
truth here intended. The drawing which our Savior here speaks of, I look
upon it as an inward and effectual work, a drawing and bringing of men home
unto himself, to believe on him. Enquire yet further then: How may Christ be
said thus to draw all men?

Why. (in the third place) thus Christ draws All the Elect.
all his Elect. So the the word [ Quod omnes dicit, referendum est ad Dei
filios, qui ex grege sunt. Calvin ad loc. 1 Timothy 2.6.
All] is frequently to be understood and taken in Scripture: Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all men, (says the Apostle,) that is, for his Elect.
And so very properly and fitly may the word here be restrained in the Text: I
will draw all men. Siper [omnia] ipsi homines intelligendi sunt, omnis
praedestinata ad salutem pessumus dicere: August, ad loc.
Praedestinatos scilicet ad salutem. Such as God has predestined unto
salvation, them Christ draws: Those whom God his Father has given unto him,
them Christ brings home to himself, drawing them, and that effectually, as I
shall show you hereafter. And thus he draws, not some, but all of them: This
is the Fathers will, John 6.39.
that of all that be has given me, I should lose nothing.

4. Or if you will (in the fourth place) by all men, here understand we all
sorts of men, 4. All sorts of men. August. ad loc.
Omnia hominum genera; All kinds, and sorts of men, some out of all. So the
word All is frequently used in Scripture. God will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 2.4.
God will have all men to come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 2 Pet. 3.9.
that is, all sorts of men, some of all Nations, conditions. Even as it is said
that our Savior he cured all diseases and sicknesses, Mat. 4. Matthew. 4.23.
(...), that is, (as our Translation renders it.) All manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease. So all men, that is, all sorts and kinds of men. Omnes,
intellige non Judaeos tantum, sed and alienigenas. Grotius ad loc. In hoc
Chrysostomo assentior, qui particula universali Christum usum esse tradit, quia
Gentibus pariter and Judais colligenda est Ecclesia. Calv. ad loc.
And so very congruously and fitly may we understand the word here in the Text;
I will draw all men: that is, all sorts of men; of all Ages, Sexes, Degrees,
Conditions, Nations, Jews and Gentiles, etc. So Chrysostom, and diverse others
here give the sense of the word; and that (as I conceive) very genuinely.
Christ before his death he had drawn only one Nation, the Nation of the Jews,
to whom in an ordinary way the offer of grace and mercy was confined; but being
lift up, lift up upon the Cross in his passion, now henceforth he draws not
only Jews, but Gentiles; the Gospel being from thenceforth to be published to
both; and the Church to be gathered, and made up out of both; according to what
our Savior had foretold a little before, Cap. 10. ver. 16. There shall be one
Fold, and one Shepherd. And therefore says he here, When I am lift up, I will
draw all men unto me.

Of these two later acceptions it matters not which we embrace. Or if you will,
put them both together. Christ being lifted up, he promises to draw all men:
that is, all his Elect people, being some of all sorts and conditions of men.
Such are the Elect of God, a selected company, gathered out of all Nations, all
ranks, ages, etc. and so specialis quadam universitas, Appellatur etiam mundus
in bonis, qui fimiliter toto terrarum orb diffusi sunt. Aug. in John 12.31.
a kind of special universality, a world in the world, and so called here all
men. Here then are the persons drawn; all Gods elect, being some of all
Nations, etc.

Quest. 3. But whither 3. Whither Christ draws men, viz. to himself.
are they drawn? That is the third Enquiry.

Answ: To which the Text makes answer, they are drawn unto Christ, (...); I
will draw them to my self.] So Christ draws his elect. Even as magneticall,
or Electricall bodies, as the Loadstone, Jet, and Amber, etc. attract iron and
strawes, etc. unto themselves. So does Christ draw his elect unto himself, viz.
to have union and communion with him; to believe on him, to be saved by him.
And thus he draws all of them, effectually bringing them home to himself: All
that the Father gives to me shall come unto me, John 6.37. being given unto
Christ before time, they shall be brought home to him in time; being given to
him in election, they shall be brought to him by effectual vocation; they
shall come unto him, that is, believe on him. So our Savior expounds his own
meaning, ver. 35. of that Chapter. He that comes to me, shall never hunger,
and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. The later explains the former.
Non enim ad Christum ambulando currimus, sed credendo: nec motu corporis, sed
voluntate cordis accedimus: August. in John 6.44.
To come unto Christ, is to believe on him. And thus all his Elect being given
to him, they shall come unto him, Christ will draw them, bring them home to
himself, to have union and communion with him in his Kingdom of grace here,
and glory hereafter. This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day, John 6.39.

Quest: 4. The fourth and main question is yet behind; And that is how Christ
draws them? 4. How Christ draws.


Ans. For answer to this at present, I shall only look upon the word in the
Text, The word [Drawing] explained.
and the proper signification thereof, reserving the way and means, and manner
of Christ's drawing till afterward. The word here is (...), traham, I will
draw. Now to draw properly, we know what it is: viz. to force a a thing this
way or that way contrary to its nature, or will. As to draw water, is to force
it upwards contrary to the ponderous nature of it. To draw a man, is to force
him this way, or that way, contrary to his own inclination and will; herein
drawing differs from leading. In leading, one goes before, and directs the way,
the other follows of his own accord: In drawing, a man is forced, or
overpowered, made to do what otherwise he would not. And even thus does
Christ draw his Elect to himself; he not only leads them, but draws them,
propounds himself to them, and not only shows them the way to come, but
over-powereth them: which he does non violenter, sed amorose, (as Carthusian
Carthus. ad loc. Trahitur animus and amore. Aug. in Joh. 6.44.
glosseth upon it) not violently, but sweetly; not bringing men to him against
their wills, or yet forcing their wills, (which cannot be done) but sweetly
over-powering them by the effectual working of his Grace and Spirit, making
them both willing, and able to come, who of themselves were neither.

Drawing imports two things.
The word and phrase being thus opened, it gives us to take notice of two
things: 1. Man's natural indisposition; and 2. Christ's effectual working: The
indisposition of man to come unto Christ, the effectual working of Christ in
bringing man home to himself; the one necessarily employed, the other clearly
expressed, both in this phrase of drawing, both useful Observations. I shall
insist upon them severally, beginning with man's natural indisposition.

Obs.
Doct. Men come not unto Christ unless they be drawn. [I will draw them.] He
does not say, Men come not to Christ without drawing.
(says Musculus upon it) Current ad me, when I am lifted up, all men shall run
unto me; no, there is no such principle in Nature to carry men unto Christ; but
I will draw them, men must be drawn before they can come ununto Christ,
otherwise they come not.

Qu. And why do they not come of themselves?

An. Take a double reason for it; Reason.
they cannot, they will not; They cannot if they would; they will not if they
could; both these keep them from coming, impotency, reluctance; They are unable
to come of themselves, and not more unable then unwilling; see both made good.

1. Their impotency, 1. Their impotency.
they cannot come, (...), says our Savior, No man can come to me, except my
Father draw him. Joh. 6.44.

Q. And why cannot men of themselves come unto Christ?

A. See a double impediment, A double impediment.
the one inward, the other outward; the one in and from themselves, the other
from Satan.

1. In themselves they are both blind and lame: 1. Inward in themselves, being
Blind in their understandings, lame in their wills; both hindering them from
coming unto Christ, from believing on him.

1. They are blind: 1. Blind. Act. 26.18. Isai. 42.7.
Paul was sent to the Gentiles to open their eyes, their blind eyes; so it is
said of Christ, that he was given for a light of the Gentiles, to open the
blind eyes: Such is the condition of all men by nature, they are born blind,
Ephesians. 4.18.
having their understandings darkened through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart, as Paul says of the Gentiles, 1 Samuel
11.2.
having their right eye put out, (as Nahash would have dealt with the men of
Jabesh Gilead) so as they do not, cannot see and know the things that belong to
their peace: Natural men know little of God, (only so much as may serve to
convince and condemn them) but nothing of Christ. Nature can tell a man
somewhat of the one, but nothing of the other; now how shall any one come unto
him, believe on him whom he knows not? How shall they believe on him, Rom:
10.14.
of whom they have not heard? (says the Apostle.) Men are naturally blind.

2. And not only so, but lame; 2. Lame.
being born blind, they cannot come unto Christ whom they know not; but suppose
their eyes were opened, so as they did know Christ, yet can they not come to
him, they cannot incline their own wills to receive him, to believe on him.
Faith in Christ, it is a supernatural work, a gift of God, Ephesians. 2.10.
By grace ye are saved through faith, It is the gift of God. It, as salvation
it self, so that faith whereby we are saved, it is the gift of God. To believe
is a thing which a man cannot do of himself, no, though Christ be revealed, and
made known to him: So he is in the preaching of the Gospel not only revealed,
but offered and tendered to all that will receive him; but this men of
themselves cannot do. He that gives Christ himself to us, must also give us
the hand to receive that gift. He that offers Christ to us and requires us
to believe on him, he must also work that in us which he requires from us; No
man can come unto me (says our Savior) except it be given him of my Father,
Joh. 6.65. Man cannot believe of himself.

Time was indeed, when man had power to have done what his Creator required of
him: In state of innocence he could have performed the condition of the Law,
much more of the Gospel, had it been propounded to him. He could then by
himself have fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, much more could he have
believed on another for righteousness, if God had required it of him. But now
through the fall of Adam, Man lamed by the fall of Adam.
we are all become like Mephibosheth, who by a fall from his Nurses arms,
became lame of his feet. Such is our condition by nature; how ever at first
created sound and perfect, yet falling in the arms of our first parent, we are
become lame and impotent, so as now we cannot of our selves come unto God,
either by the way of the Law, or Gospel; either by doing, or believing: We
cannot believe of our selves. This is the work of the Spirit of Christ, which
as it must enlighten the understanding to the beholding of Christ, so it must
bow and incline the will to receive him, rest upon him, believe on him: Thence
it is called the Sp rit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. Neither the eye, nor hand,
whereby we behold Christ, and take hold of him, are our own. Of our selves, we
are both blind and lame. And here is the impediment from within.

2. Outward impediment. Satan.
2. Besides this, there is another from without. Satan hinders men from coming
unto Christ; even as Paul tells his Thessalonians concerning his own coming to
them; We would (says he) have come unto you once and again, but Satan hindered
us, 1 These. 1.18. So does Satan hinder men from coming unto Christ; how Satan
hindered Paul in his journey is uncertain; probably by raising up against him
some storms of trouble and persecution, at land, or else some tempest at sea,
so stopping his passage to them: And by such ways and means Satan often
hinders men from coming to Christ; when they begin to look toward him, he
raises up storms and tempests of persecution and trouble, casts some
stumbling blocks or other in their way, whereby he disheartens and discourageth
them from coming unto him; besides he holds them captive; so says Paul of
such as oppose themselves against the truth of the Gospel, They are in the
snare of the devil, taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 2 Timothy 2. last.
(...); Taken alive; as Captives taken in the wars, or as Beasts and Birds
taken by Hunters and Fowlers in nets and snares, which are carried whither they
please. Even so are wicked men taken by Satan; I, so are all men naturally, all
taken captive, and held captive, and led captive by him; some captivated in
their understandings by Erroneous and Heretical Doctrines; some in their Wills
and affections, by vicious provocations and enticements; and hereby he keeps
them off from coming to Christ. The Parable in the Gospel holds forth this
truth; the Guests which were invited to the Marriage Supper, Luke 15.18.
every one had something to keep him away, one a Wife, another a Farm, etc.
Thus it is with poor sinners when they are invited to come unto Christ, to
believe on him, to have communion with him, every one has something or other
to detain and keep him back, either the pleasures, or profits, or honors of
the world, etc. and these are Satan's snares wherein he takes and holds poor
captivated souls, so as they cannot come unto Christ. Exodus 5.4, 5.
Even as Pharaoh held the Israelites under their burdens, that they could not
go forth to serve the Lord their God; So does Satan hold men under some burdens
or others, so as they cannot be brought unto Christ, unless they be brought to
him by a strong hand; so were the Israelites brought out of Egypt; Exodus 6.1.
and so must poor sinners be brought unto Christ, they must be drawn to him,
and that by a power greater then Satan's: Luke 11.21.
Where the strong man keeps the house, he cannot be dispossessed but by a
stronger: where Satan keeps his hold (as he does in every mere natural man)
he is not easily ejected; neither are his captives easily taken out of his
hand: There must be an overpowring power to rescue them, even the power of
Jesus Christ, who unless he draw men, they can never come to him of
themselves: As themselves are both blind and lame, so Satan hinders them. They
cannot come though they would.

2. Reluctance. Men will not come unto Christ, either as,
2. Nay (in the second place) that which makes the case the more desperate,
they will not though they could: There is in them naturally not only an
Impotency, but a Reluctance: They will not come; so our Savior charge it
upon the Jews, Ye will not come unto me, Joh. 5.40. Such a reluctance there
is naturally in the heart of man, not only an indisposition but an Opposition;
so as though Christ be offered and tendered unto men, yet they will not come to
him: They will not come to him as to a Lord, no nor yet as a Savior.

1. Not as unto a Lord. 1. A Lord.
Nolumus regnare, say those Rebellious ones, Luk 19.14. We will not have this
man to reign over us; Such rebellion there is in the heart of every man
naturally; men will not have Christ to reign in them, over them. A Truth,
whereof we have but too sad experience at this day, in regard of the outward
Government of Christ in his Church; How many are there who cannot endure to
hear of it? no not of any Government at all. It is much more true of his Inward
Government; men naturally are averse hereunto; and why? because they are wedded
to their own wills, to their own lust, which they are loah to part with:
Hereupon they will not yield up themselves to Christ, to be governed by him.
They will not come to him as to a Lord.

2. No nor yet as a Savior. 2. A Savior.
True it is, those that hear of Christ, happily they could be content to be saved
by him; I, but they will not come to him that they may be saved; Ye will not
come to me that ye might have life: Men will not come to Christ as to a
Savior; they will not believe on him for life and salvation.

Qu. And why will they not? The reason of this Reluctance.


An. Because they will not go out of themselves: neither do they feel the need
they have of him.

1. Men are not willing to go out of themselves. 1. Men will not go out of
themselves.
Quisque sibi proximus. Naturally men are wedded to themselves, and so are
loath to be divorced Self Denial is a hard lesson, specially for a man to deny
and renounce his own goodness, his own righteousness: now this a man must do
before he come unto Christ: They who come unto him must come not like Peter,
Joh. 21.7. Mark 10.50.
who girt his coat about him to swim to Christ; but like Bartimaeus, who cast
off his cloak to come to him; so must men cast away the garment of their own
righteousness in respect of any affiance or confidence in it, before they can
come to Christ. Now this flesh and blood is loath to do: A little of a man's own
is better then a great deal of another bodies: A man's own righteousness is a
pearl which nature is loath to part with; men are loath to go out of
themselves.

2. Neither (in the second place) do they apprehend the need they have of
Christ. 2. They feel not the need of Christ.
Naturally men, though sick in their souls, sick unto the death, yet like men
in an Apoplexy or Frenzy, they feel not their grief, they apprehend not
their danger: Now what hope that they should look out for a Physician? much
more that they should go unto him? A very difficult thing it is thoroughly to
convince men of the misery and danger of their natural estate, and so of the
need they have of Christ. And hence is it that they will not come unto him,
though pressed and urged. They will not go upon a needless errand (as they
suppose) nor yet go seek for that abroad, which they presume either they have,
or may have at home; hence it is that men though invited, they will not come
unto Christ unless he draw them, by inlightning their minds, and inclining
their wills, of unwilling making them willing, And thus you see this first
Observation cleared and made good, viz. That men come not unto Christ of
themselves: What use shall we now make of it?

Use. 1. Man's natural power and liberty of will in the work of Conversion,
decayed.
Applic. Not to spend time in Controversy, which yet the Text gives just
occasion to, viz. touching the power of nature, and the liberty of man's will in
the work of conversion, which is so much cried up by Pelagians, Papists,
Arminians, and other Sectaries of the times: A Doctrine how directly contrary
to the sense and meaning of this expression here used by our Savior in the
Text? where he tells us, that being lift up, he will [Draw] all men unto
himself. Now surely, were men of themselves able to come, and had they such a
command over their own wills (as they dream of) there should not need any such
drawing, over-powring: there should not need any such sweet violence to be
offered to the soul. Certainly drawing presupposes either Impotency or
Reluctance, one or both. As for that gloss upon this word which some would
father upon Chrysostom (whose soever it is) it is justly by Illiricus
renounced as corrupt and erroneous, (...); Philosopho. The ologi proferun
Oraculum ex suo Chrysostomo etc. Glossahaec e diametro pugnat cum voce, Traham.
Flac. Iilic. Clavis. voc. Traham.
Qui trahit, volentem trahit; He that draws, draws him that is willing to
follow; not so, but the clean contrary; it is the difference (as I have told
you) betwixt Drawing and Leading; a man that is willing is led, a man unwilling
is drawn. And such are all men, before Christ comes to overpower their wills.
So as Grotius might well have spared his gloss upon the Text: I will draw all
men, Sed eos intellige qui non reluctantur, Grot. Annot. in Text.
that is (says he) Eos qui non reluctantur, Such as are willing to follow; But
where are they? I shall not dwell upon that.

More usefully for our selves. Use. 2. The glory of Conversion to be given to
Christ.
As many of us as have tasted of this grace of God in the great work of our
Conversion, in bringing us home unto Christ, learn we hence whither to give the
praise and glory of it: Not unto our selves, but unto Jesus Christ; not unto
our willing, or running, but unto his drawing; It is not of him that wills,
Romans 9.16.
nor of him that runs (says the Apostle). Alas, of our selves we could
neither run, nor yet will to run: before conversion, being dead in trespasses
and sins, we could not so much as move toward Heaven, no nor yet will to move,
no more then a dead man can will his own resurrection; even this will is of
God. It is God that works in you both to will, and to do, Phil. 2.13. Had not
Christ drawn us, we had never come unto him. And therefore not unto us, not to
the goodness of our natures, not to the tractablenesse of our tempers, the
ingenuity and sequaciousnesse of our dispositions, nor yet to the benefit of
our education, or what ever else, but only to the free grace of God in Christ,
be all the praise and glory of this work.

Use. 3. Be convinced of natural Impotency and Reluctance.
For others who are as yet strangers to this work, who never yet felt this
attractive power working upon their souls, let them be convinced of the truth
of what has been now delivered; viz. that they cannot come unto Christ of
themselves; they cannot come except Christ himself draw them. Whence is it
that many neglect seeking after Christ, and after faith in Christ? and put off
the work of their conversion from day to day? why, there is a false principle
in their hearts; They think that to believe is the easiest thing in the world;
that they can come unto Christ when they list: Not so, except Christ himself
draw thee, there is no coming unto him; It is not in man to bring himself; nay,
it is not in all the Men and Angels in the world that can draw a soul to
Christ; Except Christ himself put to his hand, it neither can nor will come to
him. Be convinced of this.

And being convinced hereof, now take heed of drawing back Use 4. Take heed of
drawing back.
when we feel Christ beginning to draw. Our coming unto Christ depends upon his
drawing. And therefore, does he begin to draw? take heed how we hold off: How
know we whether ever he will draw again? which if he do not, we are men
without hope: But of this more hereafter in the next point, to which I now come.

The second thing held forth to us in the Text, is, The effectual working of
Jesus Christ in bringing his Elect home to himself: Observe. 2. The effectual
work of Christ in bringing men home to himself.
[I will draw them to me.] Those who in themselves are both unable and
unwilling to come, Christ over-powreth, and causes to come to himself. A
truth excellently shadowed out in that known parable of the lost sheep, Luke
15.5.
which the shepherd having found, he lays it upon his shoulders, and brings
it home. This Shepherd is Christ, the chief Shepherd, the Shepherd and Bishop
of souls, 1 Pet. 5.4. 1 Pet. 2.25.
(as Saint Peter calls him.) The lost sheep are his Elect before conversion; who
in regard of Gods Election are sheep; Matthew. 15.24.
in regard of their natural condition are lost sheep, wandering in the paths
of sin and death, having no disposition of themselves to return to the fold.
These sheep this great Shepherd seeks. Luke 19.10.
[The Son of man is come to seek that which was lost:] And seeking, he finds
them; and finding them, he brings them home, causing them to return to the
Shepherd and Bishop of their souls. 1 Pet. 2.25.


For the opening and illustrating Illustrat.
of this useful truth, viz. Christ's drawing of poor sinners to himself, give
me leave to propound and resolve these two or three Questions: 1. Whence they
are drawn: 2. Whither they are drawn: 3. By what means Christ draws them. For
the two former more briefly, Whence, and Whither they are drawn. In drawing (as
in every motion) there are two terms; A quo, and Ad quem; Whence and Whither;
whatever is drawn, is drawn from one place, or thing, to another.

Quest. Whence Christ draws men.
Qu 1. First then, Whence does Christ draw his Elect?

Answ. In general, Out of the state of nature.
An. To this we might answer in the general, He draws them out of the state
of nature, which is a state of sin and death: In this estate do all men
naturally lie, in a state of sin; The whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John
5.19. And consequently in a state of death, Death passed upon all, for that all
have sinned, Romans 5.12. Now out of this estate Christ draws his Elect; as so
many Lots out of Sodom, so many Lazaruses out of the grave; Bringing them out
of that state of sin and death, into a state opposite to it, a state of
righteousness and life.

More particularly, More particularly,
Christ draws men,

1. Out of Darkness. 1. Out of darkness. Jer. 38.9, 12, 13
Even as Jeremy was drawn by Ebedmelech out of the Dungeon where he was like to
perish: So are poor sinners drawn by Christ out of the Dungeon of ignorance. In
this Dungeon do all men naturally ly. They all sit in darkness, Luke 1.19.
and in the shadow of death: being by nature no better then darkness it self:
Ye were sometimes darkness, Ephesians. 5.8.
destitute of heavenly light, wholly ignorant of what belongs to their eternal
peace and happiness. Now out of this dungeon does Christ draw his Elect,
calling them out of darkness. That you should show forth the virtues of him who
has called you out of darkness, 1 Pet. 2.9. And this he does by causing a
light to shine forth unto them; Luke 1.79. Matthew. 11.25.
Giving light to them that sit in darkness, revealing unto them those
supernatural mysteries, which are hid from the wise and prudent of the world.

2. He draws them from under the power of Satan. 2. From the power of Satan.
Acts 26.18.
Under this power do all men naturally lie, possessed, and held captive by
Satan. Now from under this power Christ draws his Elect; even as Moses a
temporal Savior, he brought the Israel of God from under the power and
tyranny of that Egyptian Pharaoh; So does the Lord Jesus, the eternal Savior
of his people; he brings his Elect out from under the power of this spiritual
Pharaoh, challenging and vindicating his own right. His own right: So they are,
both by a right of Donation and Purchase; being given to him by God his Father,
and purchased by his own blood. And thus being his, now he rescues them from
the hands of his enemy, and theirs; even as David rescued his Lamb, (or Kid),
1 Samuel 17.34, 35.
taking it out of the mouth of the Lion and Bear: So does Christ rescue his
Elect, delivering them from the power of Satan; which cannot be done without
great force and power. And therefore he may well be said to draw them: Satan
will not willingly yield up his hold. He that contended so earnestly with
Michael the Archangel, Jude 9.
about the body of Moses, will much more contend about the souls of men. The
stories in the Gospel inform us how unwillingly Satan was ejected out of the
one, how being compelled to leave them, he rent and tare them. Certainly, he
will not willingly leave what possession he has in the other. Here is the
power of Christ in drawing men from the power of Satan.

3. He draws them out of the world: 3. Out of the world. John 15.19.
having chosen them out of the world, he draws them out of it. To this end
Christ gave himself; He gave himself for our sins, (says the Apostle) that
he might deliver us from this present evil world. Gal. 1.4.
And this he does, when he makes an actual application of the merit of his
death unto his Elect people, he delivers, draws, (...), Erip^ret.
plucketh them out, (as the word in the Original properly signifies) of this
present world. But how does he do it? not in respect of place, but in respect
of quality. I pray not (says our Savior, speaking of his Disciples) that thou
should take them out of the world, John 17.15.
but that thou should keep them from the evil. (...), from that evil one,
viz. Satan; or from the evil that is in the world. And thus Christ delivers
his people, viz. from the evil world; 2 Pet. 2.20.
severing them from the corruptions and pollutions which are in the world. In
this mire the world generally sticks and lies. Now in this respect Christ
draws his people out of the world, causing them to steer a new course, no
longer, to walk according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.2.
as sometimes they did: but teaching them now to deny ungodliness, and worldly
lusts. Tit. 2.12.
What these worldly lusts are, I shall not need to tell you: Saint John has
reduced them to three heads, The lusts of the flesh; voluptuousness, 1 John
2.16.
sensuality: The lusts of the eyes, covetousness: The pride of life, ambition:
These, and the like lusts the men of the world are given over to, so as they
rule and reign in them. But these Christ teaches, and causes his people to
deny, renounce, abandon: which he does by putting a new spirit into them, even
a Spirit of sanctification; changing them in the inward, and outward man, so as
they are no longer conformed unto this world, viz. Romans 12.2.
in the corrupt manners and customs of it. Thus are they severed from the
world, and drawn out of it. And that not only in regard of a renunciation of
the sinful lusts of it, but also a holy sequestration from it, Thus also does
Christ draw his people out of the world, so as though they live in it, yet they
live like men of another world; not minding only the things of this present
world, but seeking after, and setting their affections upon the things that are
above; where their chief treasure is.

4. Thus drawing them out of the world, he draws them also out of themselves.
4. Out of themselves.
This is a lesson which all Christ's disciples must learn. If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, Mark 8.34. And this lesson Christ teaches all
that come to him; to deny themselves; viz. their own carnal reason, perverse
wills, corrupt affections: and not only so, but he teaches them to deny, to
renounce their own righteousness; viz. in respect of any affiance and
confidence in it. Not having mine own righteousness, Phil. 3 9.
(says Paul of himself.) And so he draws them out of themselves. The case
is ordinary, men when they are drawn out of the mire of this world, brought to
renounce and abandon the gross evils therein, and to walk, in regard of their
outward conversation, regularly, and blamelesly, yet now they stick in
themselves, setting up their own righteousness, (as the Pharisee did) as if
that were sufficient to justify and save them, by which means they are kept
off from coming unto Christ. Now Christ drawing his Elect, he draws them out
of themselves, causes them to renounce all, to make loss of all, (as Paul
says of himself) What ever they have, have done, can do, merits, privileges,
virtues, performances; whatever is, or may be supposed to be theirs, Christ
causes them to relinquish all, so coming naked unto him. Thus does he take
them off from their own bottoms, and draw them out of themselves. And here are
the things from whence Christ draws them.

Qu. 2. But whither does he then draw them? Qu. 2. Whither he draws them.


An. An. To himself.
Here is the second Inquiry, to which the Text it self returns a general
answer; He draws them to himself: even as the Loadstone draws the iron to it
self, so does Christ draw his Elect people to himself, viz. to have union and
communion with him, in grace here, and glory hereafter.

More particularly, Christ draws his Elect to himself, as being under a
double relation: 1. As to a Savior. 2. As to a Lord. Both these Christ (being
lift up) is made. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, Act. 5.31.
and under both these relations does Christ draw his people to himself.

1. As to a Savior. 1. As a Savior.
My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, (says Mary) Luke 1.47. even as the
Brazen Serpent drew the eyes of the Israelites to it self, as the only means
of their temporal cure; so does Christ draw the eyes and hearts of his Elect
to himself, as to a Savior, their Savior, the only means of their eternal
salvation. Thus do poor sinners come unto Christ, even as those woundrd
Israelites did to their Brazen Serpent, fixing their eyes upon him, looking up
to him, and resting upon him for Justification and Salvation. Thus was the
blessed Apostle drawn unto Christ, Christ being effectually revealed to him,
Phil. 3.9.
now he lets go all, makes loss of all, renouncing whatever he had formerly
put any confidence in, wholly betaking himself unto Christ, desiring only
that he might win him, and be found in him, not having his own righteousness,
but that which is through the faith of Christ: Thus did the desires of his
soul go out after Jesus Christ, seeking justification and salvation only in,
by, and through him; and thus does Christ draw all his Elect unto himself,
drawing off their eyes from all other things, he draws them to himself,
inclining their hearts to believe on him, to rest and rely upon him, as an
alone alsufficient Savior.

2. He draws them to him as to a Lord: 2. As a Lord.
under this relation do all true Believers come unto Christ as unto a Savior,
so unto a Lord, every one taking and acknowledging him for their Lord: Job.
20.28.
My Lord, and my God, (says Thomas. Hos. 8.5.
) As their King; They shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King,
(says the Prophet;) that is, the Messiah, Christ the Son of David, whom all
true Believers seek as their King, willingly submitting themselves to his
government, yielding up themselves to be ordered by him; Act. 9.6.
Lord, what will thou have me to do, (says Paul;) even so do all believers
come unto Christ, willingly putting their necks under his yoke, giving up
themselves unto him, as Paul says of his Corinthians, They gave themseves to
the Lord; 2 Cor. 8.5.
that is, they wholly dedicated and consecrated themselves to the service of
Christ: So do all true believers, being brought home to Christ, they now look
upon themselves as no longer their own, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
neither do they any longer desire to live to themselves, but unto Christ, Romans
14.8.
whom they acknowledge as their Sovereign Lord: And thus are they drawn by
Christ unto Christ, effectually persuaded to receive him in both these
Relations; as a Savior, as a Lord; as a Savior believing on him, as a Lord
submitting to him.

Quest. 3. The third Question is yet behind, and that is, By what means Christ
thus draws men, Quest. 3. By what means Christ thus draws men.
and brings them home unto himself, who of themselves are so unable and
unwilling to come?

Ans. Answ.
To this we answer: The ordinary means whereby Christ effects this great work
are his Word and Spirit. His Word being the Instrument, his Spirit the
Principal Agent: By the one he draws outwardly, by the other inwardly, by
both together effectually.

1. Christ draws men by his word, 1. By his word, the Gospel.
This is the ordinary Instrument, which Christ makes use of in effecting this
great work, his word: what word? The word of the Gospel, the Gospel preached
and published. By this means Christ when he was upon earth he drew many to
himself. He went about preaching, Luke 8.1.
showing the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God. And being lifted up from the
earth, he still draws his Elect by the same means, viz. by his word, his word
in the mouths of his messengers, his Ministers: They are the servants whom the
great King sends forth to bring in guess to the marriage of his Son, bidding
them compel them to come in; Luke 14.23.
the Ministers of Christ, sent forth to bring men to have union and communion
with Christ: which they are to do, not by any outward violence, but by
preaching the Gospel to them. Their office is to draw men to Christ. And hence
is it that sometimes they are called fishers: I will make you fishers of men,
(says Christ to Peter and Andrew.) Mat. 4.19. Fishers. But with what tew, what
nets, what hooks, what baits are they furnished? why, only Christ puts his
word, his Gospel into their mouths, Mark 16.15.
Go preach the Gospel to every creature. Matthew. 13.47.
This is the Net, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea,
(says the Parable.) The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which is sometimes called the Kingdom of Heaven, because it is the means
to bring men thither: This is Christ's net, which he by his Ministers casts into
the sea of this world; thereby drawing men to himself. The Baits which he
makes use of, are the sweet and gracious promises held forth in the Gospel;
the chiefest of all which is Christ himself; Him the Gospel propounds,
lifts up, offering him with all his benefits; viz. life and salvation to all
that will receive him. And hereby does Christ draw men to himself. Ista
Revelatio ipsa (...) Attractio, (says Augustine. Augustinus in John 6.44.
) This very Revelation of Christ is an Attraction: Ramun viridem ostendis ovi,
etc. Ramum viridem ostendis ovi, and trahis illam. Nuces puero demonstrantur,
and trahitur, etc. Ibid.
(So he goes on.) Even as by the holding forth of a green bough to a sheep, it
is drawn to and after it. Thus by holding forth of Christ in the Gospel, poor
sinners are drawn to him, and after him.

And thus (as I have in part already shown you) Christ being lifted up, he
draws all men, Thus Christ being lifted up, he draws all men.
viz. by causing his Gospel to be preached, and published unto all, all
Nations, not only Jews, but Gentiles. Before his lifting up, in an ordinary
way the Gospel was preached only to the Jew: John 4.22.
Salvation was of the Jews, Christ was not sent save only to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, Matthew. 15.24.
(so he tells the Cananitish woman.) And his Apostles are interdicted for
preaching the Gospel to any but them. Go not into the way of the Gentiles,
etc. Matthew. 10.5, 6.
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But being lifted up,
now the partition wall is broken down: Now the net which before was cast only
into a pond, as I may say, is cast into the sea. The Apostles have their
Commission enlarged, Matthew. 28. Mark 16.
Go teach all Nations, preach the Gospel to every creature; that is, not only
to Jews, but Gentiles. Christ is now offered alike to all. Acts 2.39.
The promise is unto you, and to your children, and to them which are afar off,
etc. i. e. to the Gentiles as well as Jews, Ephesians. 2.14. ver. 121
who before the death of Christ were afar off, strangers to the Covenant of
grace. To them is the promise now tendered, Christ being without any difference
held forth and offered alike to all, so drawing all men.

Christ draws by a weak Instrument.
And here is the Instrument which Christ makes use of for the drawing of his
Elect to himself, the preaching, plain and simple preaching of the Gospel;
Seemingly a weak and unlikely instrument, thence called the foolishness of
preaching; 1 Cor. 1.21.
Yet by this weak means does Christ effect this great work: Hereby drawing men
out of Darkness, from under the Power of Satan. Paul was sent to the Gentiles,
Act. 26.18.
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God: But
how was he to do it? Why, by preaching of the Gospel, by bearing the name of
Christ before them; Act. 9.15.
Hereby drawing them out of the World, as fishes out of the sea; Hereby drawing
them out of themselves, convincing them of their insufficiency, and Christ's
all sufficiency; and so drawing them to himself; first as to a Savior to
believe on him, working faith in them by this means, Faith comes by hearing,
Romans 10.
hearing the word, the word of the Gospel: Then as to a Lord, to be governed by
him, which is also wrought by the same Instrument. 2 Cor. 12.4, 5.


Here is the outward means, but this often proves ineffectuall. Many there are
who hear the word, and hear it powerfully dispensed, who yet, are never the
better for it; so says the Apostle of the Jews, The word preached did not
profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. And so
ineffectuall it often proves to many that sit under the sound of it: They are
not thereby brought home to Christ. Even as many of the Jews saw Christ lift
up, beheld him crucified, who yet believed not on him, nay thereby they were
hardned-against him. Even so it is now in the preaching of the Gospel:. Many
there are before whose eyes Christ is lift up, crucified in the Word and
Sacraments, who yet are not brought to believe on him, or submit unto him.

2. To this therefore (in the second place) is joined the Spirit; 2. The Spirit.
The Spirit of Christ which he sends forth to accompany his word, and to make
it effectual in the hearts of his Elect; and by this means he draws men
effectually; even as the Lodestone draws Iron by a secret efflux and
emission of subtle and insensible spirits, thereby attracting that which of it
self was unapt to move: So does Christ draw men to himself by sending forth
his Spirit; Act. 2.
By this means did he draw so many at the day of Pentecost, viz. by sending
down his Spirit upon his Apostles, which accompanying the word preached by
them, made it effectual in them that heard it: There might we have seen the
accomplishment of what our Savior here in the Text foretells, and
forepromiseth, When I am lift up, I will draw all men unto me; this he did at
the day of Pentecost: Being lift up first upon the Cross in his Passion, and
then upon his Throne in his Exaltation, see how he draws all men, all sorts
of men, some of all nations to himself; this he did by pouring out his Spirit
according as he had promised: Act. 2.17. Joel 2.23.
I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, hereby multitudes were brought to
believe on him; and hereby it is that Christ draws poor sinners unto himself
at this day, viz. by sending his Spirit along with his word: The word in it
self is but a dead letter, 2 Cor. 3.6.
it is the Spirit that quickneth it, that puteth life into it: The words which
I speak are Spirit and Life (says our Savior to the Jews; John 6.63.
) What ever efficacy the word has, it has it from the Spirit.

Qu, Qu. 2. What the Spirit herein does.
Why, what does the Spirit in this work?

Answ. An.
I answer. The work of the Spirit lies principally in two things, in
Enlightening the Understanding, and Inclining the Will.

1. It Enlightneth the Understanding, 1. It inlightneth the understanding. Gal.
1.16.
letting in a supernatural light into the soul, a light of knowledge, revealing
Christ to it, and in it, discovering to it what need it has of him, what an
all sufficiency it may find in him; convincing it of it own unrighteousness,
and of a perfect righteousness to be found in Christ. This is the work of the
Spirit: it is that which out Savior makes promise of to his Disciples, Joh.
16. that when he was departed from them, Joh. 16.7, 8.
he would send the Comforter (the Spirit), And when he is come (says he) he
shall convince the world of sin, and of Righteousness, etc. And this the
Spirit does; the Spirit accompanying the word, it convinces men of sin, of
their own sinfulness, the sinfulness of their natures, hearts, lives; and as
of sin, so of righteousness; as of sin in themselves, so of a righteousness,
which is to be sought, and may be found out of themselves, viz. in Christ, who
is made Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and Righteousness to all those who in the sense of their own righteousness
go out of themselves unto him. This the Spirit with clear and convincing
evidence reveals unto the soul. And hereby Christ prepares the hearts of his
Elect whom he intends to draw unto himself.

2. Having thus enlightened the Understanding, now (in the second place) he
comes to incline the Will, 2. Inclines the will.
causing the soul to come unto himself.

Quest. But how does Christ bring off the soul hereunto? what, does he compel
the Will?

Answ. Not so: The will being in it own nature free, it cannot be compelled;
being compelled, it should cease to be a will. How then? Why by a sweet and
gentle overpowring of it, working upon it in a way suitable and agreeable to it
own nature, effectually persuading, bowing and inclining it to yield to what
with such clear and strong evidence is held forth unto it; Phil. 2.13.
so drawing forth a consent from it, working in it a will, of unwilling making
it willing to close with Christ offered and tendered to it. to receive him as
Savior and Lord: Thus does the Spirit work upon the spirit; the Spirit of God
upon the spirit of man: And by this means Christ draws men to himself:
sending forth his Spirit together with his Word, he works effectually in the
hearts of his chosen, causing them to come unto him, to believe on him, submit
unto him. And thus have you the Doctrinal part of this useful Truth briefly
opened unto you. Now bring we it home to our selves by way of Application.

Applica. Examine whether we have been thus drawn to Christ.
Use 1. And that first by way of Examination and Trial, whether we have been
thus drawn unto Christ or no: Drawn we have been outwardly all of us. None of
us but have had Christ propounded, offered, held forth unto us in the Ministry
of the Word, there crucified, lift up before our eyes. Happily some, and many of
us have also felt an inward drawing, felt our hearts at sometimes somewhat
moved and inclined to look toward Christ. We have at sometime found the Word
exciting and stirring up some motions and breathings that way: But, are we
drawn home unto Christ? Many there are who through a common work of the Spirit
accompanying of the Word, are brought to look toward Christ, who never yet
come at him. Acts 26.28.
It was the case of Agrippa, whom (as himself acknowledges) Paul had almost
persuaded to become a Christian. Let our enquiry be for this through work;
whether we have felt the effectual power of Jesus Christ in drawing our hearts
and souls, not only toward, but to himself. This is the saving work, without
which we can have no benefit by Christ. No Communion without Union. A man must
first be brought home unto Christ, before he can be justified, and saved by
him. Are we then thus drawn unto Christ? O that every of us here present could
but make this good to our selves! But (alas!) how many are there who are mere
strangers to this work? Evidences of persons not drawn.
never felt any such power put forth in their souls, know not what it means, To
find out some of them, I beseech you go along with me, and deal impartially
with your own souls, see whether you be not in the number.

1. Such (in the first place) are all ignorant persons; 1. Ignorant persons.
such as are not yet drawn out of the dungeon of spiritual darkness. Persons
grossly ignorant: Such as live without the knowledge of Christ: Though living
under the means of knowledge, where Christ is preached and published to them,
yet they are wholly ignorant of the mystery of Christ, not knowing so much as
what Christ was, what he has done, what he has suffered, what he has
merited, by what way or means they should have any benefit by him. Such there
are, and that too many every where to be found. Now (alas,) against such the
evidence is too clear; They are not yet drawn, and brought home unto CHRIST.
Christ never draws men blindfold to himself. But that he may draw them, Acts
26.18.
he first opens their eyes. Paul was sent to the Gentiles, first to open their
eyes. to turn them from darkness to light. And this Christ in measure does in
every soul which he intends to draw to himself, he causes a light to shine
into it, revealing himself to it. By this means was Paul drawn to Christ, by
an effectual revelation of Christ to him. Gal. 1.16.
When it pleased God to reveal his Son to me, (or in me,) etc. Till Christ be
thus revealed to the soul, the soul neither will, nor can come to him. Still
in drawing, Christ works first upon the understanding, then upon the will;
first inlightning the one, before he bow and incline the other. They who never
yet found a work of illumination, and conviction in themselves, certainly it
cannot be that as yet they should be drawn unto Christ.

2. A second sort against whom the evidence is clear, that they are not drawn
unto Christ, are all profane, 2. Profane persons.
wicked, and ungodly persons, such as are yet under the power of Satan, having
him ruling and reigning in them. Such as are not yet drawn out of the world,
not having escaped the gross pollutions of it. 2 Pet. 2.20.
Such as stick, and lie, and wallow in the mire of sinful lusts, Ephesians. 2.2.
walking after the course of this world, according to the Prince that rules in
the air, (as Paul says of his Ephesians before conversion,) giving over
themselves to known and scandalous evils, Swearers, drunkards, unclean,
profane, licentious, unrighteous persons, etc. Let not such deceive themselves;
they are far from being drawn unto Christ. 2 Cor. 6.15.
What agreement has Christ with Belial? (says the Apostle,) that is, with
Satan that wicked one, or with wicked men, in whom Satan dwells and rules.
Christ drawing men to himself, he draws them from under the power of Satan,
and he severeth them from the world, teaching them to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts. Certainly, that soul that so imbraceth any one sinful lust, as
being convinced of the sinfulness of it, yet lives and lies in it, being
resolved not to part with it; it never yet knew what this effectual work of
Christ meant in drawing men to himfelfe.

3. A third sort are all mere carnal men; 3. Carnal persons. Phil. 3.9.
such whose hearts and affections are wholly set upon earth, and earthly
things, minding earthly things. The profits, and pleasures, and honors of the
world, with such other sensual and carnal contentments, these are the things
which they are wholly taken up with, In the mean time, as for heaven, and
heavenly things, Grace and Glory, these are things which they do not trouble
themselves about, neither have they any affection to them. These also we must
conclude to be in the number of them who are not yet drawn unto Christ. Christ
in drawing men to himself, he draws them from the earth, in measure weaning
them from the world; draws them above the earth, causing them to seek the
things which are above, Col. 3.1, 2.
and to seek them in the first place. Certainly, they whose hearts and
affections are all upon earth, they cannot yet be drawn to Christ, who is in
Heaven.

4. A fourth and last sort are mere Civil, or Pharisaicall Justiciaries: 4.
Pharisaicall Justiciaries.
Such as are not drawn out of themselves; such as rest in their own
righteousness, not feeling the need they have of Christ: such as bear
themselves upon the innocence and harmlesnesse of their lives and
conversations; they are no swearers, drunkards, unclean, unrighteous persons,
but they are regular and orderly in their course; they (as near as they can)
give both God and man their due; and here they rest, hoping and trusting to be
justified and saved by their own righteousness. As for such, the evidence is
also clear against them, notwithstanding they may seem to be drawn out of the
world, severed from it in respect of any scandalous evils, yet they stick in
themselves, and consequently cannot be drawn unto Christ. Christ in drawing men
unto himself, he draws them out of the dungeon of ignorance, he draws them
from under the power of Satan, he draws them out of the world, and he
draws them out of themselves. Whoever they are that stick in any of these,
they are not yet drawn unto Christ.

Quest. Quest.
But how shall we know, and be assured that we are in the number of those that
are truly drawn unto Christ? Evidences of men, drawn to Christ.


Ans. For answer. 1. Reflect upon what has been spoken: Ans. 1. Such as are
drawn out of all the aforsaid particulars.
Enquire we whether we find our selves drawn out of all these. Are we drawn out
of our natural darkness, the darkness of ignorance? Can we say that a
supernatural light has shined into our hearts, revealing unto us the mystery
of Christ? Are we freed and delivered from the power of Satan? so as we are not
led captive by him, as sometime we were. Are we drawn out of the world? Have we
received another spirit, then the spirit of the world? a spirit teaching us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to mind the things which are above?
Are we drawn out of our selves, taught to deny our selves, and to renounce our
own righteousness in respect of any affiance, and confidence in it? If so,
here are comfortable evidences that Christ has begun to put forth an
effectual power in, and upon our souls.

2. But (secondly) Enquire how our hearts stand affected toward Jesus Christ.
2. Enquire touching the affections of the heart toward Jesus Christ.
This is Christ's drawing of men to himself; viz. the drawing of their hearts
and affections to him: These are the feet of the soul? whereby a man comes
unto Christ, Non pedibus, sed affectibus. Now, are these drawn to Christ? How
stand our hearts affected toward him? Make this enquiry in three or four
particulars.

1. In respect of our affiance 1. Affiance.
in him. Can we say that we rest upon him, and him alone? Have we cast our
souls upon him, as upon an alone all-sufficient Savior? Have we committed
them to him? 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed (or trusted, says Paul) and I am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him: Thus stood Paul
affected toward Jesus Christ, so as he durst trust him; nay he had trusted
him, and that with his best Jewel, with his precious soul (or with his Crown)
which he had committed to him deposited with him: And thus does the soul that
is truly drawn to Christ; it lets go all other things, and betakes it self
wholly and alonely unto Jesus Christ as unto an alone Savior, leaning upon
him; that is the Churches posture, Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes up from
the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? Embracing and resting upon him: Now
are we thus drawn to Christ? Do we find our souls thus coming out of the
wilderness of this world, and clasping and embracing Jesus Christ? leaning and
resting upon him, fixing all our affiance and confidence upon him, so as we can
say that we have none other in heaven or earth but him? if so, certainly the
heart which thus leans upon Christ is drawn to him.

2. In respect of Love. 2. Love. Ephesians. 6. last.
Can we say that we do unfainedly love the Lord Jesus? Love him in sincerity;
so as our souls do cleave unto him: Thus will it be with the soul that if truly
drawn unto Christ, it will close with him, and be exceedingly affected with
him: Thus was it with Peter; Peter, love thou me? Lord, Joh. 21.15. Luke 7.47.
thou know that I love thee: Thus was it with Mary Magdalene; She loved
much, because much was forgiven her. Cant. 5.8.
The Church in the Canticles, is sick of love. And thus will it be with the
soul that is truly brought to Christ, it will be inamored with him.
Apprehending the entire and infinite love of Christ toward it, it cannot but
be inflamed with love toward him again; and this love it expresses by a high
prising of him.

3. Which may serve for a third enquiry, 3. Appretiation
What price do we set upon Jesus Christ. The soul that is truly drawn to
Christ, is drawn to an high estimation of him, so as it prefers him before all
other things, accounting meanly and basely of all other things in comparison of
him: I account all things loss and dung (says Paul) so that I may win Christ,
etc. Phil. 3.9


4. 4. Willingness to part with all for Christ.
And this estimation it expresses by a willingness and readiness to part
with all for Christ, which may be a fourth Enquiry. Are we so taken with Jesus
Christ, as rather then part with him, we are resolved to part with all? So was
Paul affected toward him, he accounts all dung, and he willingly makes loss
of all for Christ; and so will the soul do that is truly drawn to Christ, it
will let go all, what ever it is that stands betwixt Christ and it, Riches, and
Honors, and Pleasures, and Ease, and Credit, and Life; Even as Peter and
Andrew when Christ had called them, They straightway left their nets and
followed him. Mat. 4.20.
Thus, where Christ draws the soul effectually, it leaves all, parts with all,
viz. in purpose and resolution. In case any thing comes to stand in competition
with Christ, the resolution of such a soul is, rather to part with it, then
Christ.

5. And hereby it expresses an earnest and Longing Desire after Christ, 5.
Longing desires after Christ.
which may yet be another Enquiry. Can we say, that our souls do go out in
earnest desires after Jesus Christ? after nearer union and more full communion
with him? Such affection the Spouse in the Canticles frequently expresses
toward her Well beloved; complaining of his estranging and withdrawing
himself from her, how does she seek after him? earnestly desiring to enjoy
him and to be enjoyed of him: And truly so will it be with the soul that is
truly drawn unto Christ, it will affectionately long after him, earnestly
desiring to be more nearly united to him, to have a more full communion with
him, to enjoy the presence of his grace here, and glory hereafter; The Spirit
and the Bride say, Rev. 22.17, 20
Come; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

6. To name but one more; in the sixth place, as touching our Submission to
Jesus Christ. Can we say, that we have taken him as our Lord? that we have
given up our souls unto him? and that we are not only contented, but desirous
to be ruled, and governed by him? that we are as willing to be ruled, as to be
saved by him?

If so, finding our hearts standing thus affected toward Jesus Christ, in
respect of our affiance in him, love to him, High-prizing of him, readiness to
part withal for him, earnest desires after him, willingness to be governed by
him, now may we conclude it to our comfort, that we are in the number of those
who have felt the effectual power of Jesus Christ put forth and exercised in
and upon us, in drawing us to himself.

Otherwise, having no such affections toward him, our hearts not resting upon
him, not closing with him, preferring other, things (it may be every base lust)
before him, not willing to part with any thing, much less with all for him,
having no desires after him, not submitting unto him; certainly, we never yet
knew what this effectual work meant.

Upon this Trial thus made, two sorts of Use, 2.
persons come now to be dealt with.

1. To such as are thus drawn.
Such as shall find themselves thus in measure wrought upon. Let them,

1. 1. Comfort from their interest in Christ.
Take unto themselves the comfort of this blessed work: Having by experience
felt in themselves this fruit of Christ's death, let them be assured that all
the merits and benefits of his death belong unto them. Those whom Christ thus
draws, he draws not only to union, but communion with himself: being thus
drawn to Christ, to receive him, believe on him, submit unto him; now all that
is Christ's, is theirs. The merit of his death is theirs, for their
Justification: The virtue of his death and resurrection is theirs for their
vivification, resurrection, first, and second. The benefit of his Intercession
is theirs for their perseverance and continuance in grace, and for bringing
them through grace to glory. Being drawn to Christ in his Kingdom of grace,
they shall be drawn up to him in his Kingdom of glory, where they shall
participate of that happiness and blessedness, which himself as their
Redeemer has merited for them, and as their Head has already in their names
taken and keeps possession of.

2. Exhortation to seek to feel more of this attractive power.
2. In the second place: Being thus drawn unto Christ, let them labor to find
this effectual working in them more and more. This let every of us do who have
had any experience of this attractive power in our selves. Let our desire still
be that we may be drawn nearer unto Christ. Whilst we are here below, still
there will be a distance betwixt us and him. And therefore finding our hearts
in measure drawn unto him, still seek after a nearer union; that we may be
every day drawn more and more out of darkness, from under the power of Satan,
and the dominion of all sinful lusts, as also out of our selves, and so may be
more incorporated into him. And being thus drawn unto him, let our desires be
that we may also be drawn after him. Draw me, and I will run after thee, Cant.
1.3.
says the Church. That we may follow him; which we are not able to do without
his continued drawing. Even as it is the same strength and force, which at the
first sets a bowl, and after continues it in its course. It runs not further
then the force of the Arm which threw it carries it: Even so fares it in the
course of new obedience: The same power and strength which at the first puts a
man into that way, must still carry him on in it; viz. the strength of Christ.
I am able to do all things, Phil. 4.13.
says Paul; But how? Through Christ that strengthens me. A regenerate
person, who has a principle of new life put into his soul, he is made willing,
and in some measure able, as to come unto Christ by faith, so to follow him in
a way of obedience: but all by the power and strength of Christ. Gal. 2.20.
It is Christ that lives in him, and moves in him; It is Christ that draws
the soul to him, and after him. Both are wrought by the same power; and
therefore having felt the first grace in bringing us unto Christ; now seek we
after a second grace, even the continuance of the same grace. Having felt a
Prevenient, now seek for a subsequent grace; that being still drawn nearer,
and nearer unto Christ, we may follow him throughout the whole course of our
active and passive obedience, until we shall be drawn up unto him to
partake with him in his Glory. This for those who do find themselves in measure
thus drawn unto Christ.

2. Such as are strangers to this work; let them not rest till they find Christ
thus drawing them to himself.
2. In the next place a word or two to those who are as yet strangers to this
work, who never yet felt this effectual working in themselves. Let them be
exhorted never to give rest unto their souls, until they find and feel Jesus
Christ thus drawing them to himself. Beloved, upon this depends our comfort
here, and salvation hereafter; viz. upon our union with Christ. By this may we
be assured that we are within the compass of Gods Election of grace; that we
are in the number of those whom God has not ordained unto wrath, but to obtain
salvation by Jesus Christ. By this may we know and be assured, that we are
given to Christ; John 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me. Those whom God the Father
gives to his Son before time in his Decree of Election, the Son draws them to
himself in time by an effectual vocation; causing them to come unto him as
unto a Savior, as unto a Lord; to believe on him, to submit unto him. Let not
any of us give rest to our souls till we find this blessed work begun in them.

And here take heed of that common deceit, of resting our selves contented with
an outward drawing; Rest not in an outward drawing.
viz. that Christ has been revealed and offered to us in the word, that we
have been invited to come unto him. The parable in the Gospel tells us of many
guests that were invited to the Marriage Supper, Matthew. 22.
who yet never tasted of it. So fares it with many, whom Christ by his
Ministers invites to come, and partake in his merits, his benefits, offering
himself to them, who yet shall never be the better for him. Nay, better for
them they had never known what any such offer or invitation meant: And
therefore rest we not here; nor yet in that common work of the Spirit, Nor yet
in a common work of the Spirit.
in stirring up some velleities, some good motions and inclinations, drawing
the soul toward Christ; but seek after a through work, to find our hearts
effectually persuaded to come out of the world, to come out of our selves, to
come unto Jesus Christ, to receive him as Savior and Lord.

To this end for the furthering of this work, Means to further this drawing. 1.
Submit to the drawing Ordinance.


1. Submit our selves to a conscionable attendance upon the Ordinance of
Christ, that Ordinance wherein, and whereby Christ ordinarily puts forth
this power for the effectual drawing of men to himself, viz. the public
Ministry of the Word. Ever begging a blessing from God upon it, that through
the secret work of his Spirit accompanying it, it may be made effectual to us
for this blessed end and purpose.

2. Submitting to this Ordinance (in the second place) take heed of making
resistance against Christ. When Christ begins to draw, take we heed of drawing
back: 2. Take heed of drawing back.
Take heed of opposing, resisting, quenching any good motions kindled in our
hearts by the Spirit through the Word. Such motions at sometime or other such
as constantly sit under the Ministry of the Word shall feel in themselves. And
now, does Christ begin to draw? Take we heed in this case of withdrawing,
drawing back, which is a thing of dangerous consequence. Heb. 10.38.
If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. There is a (...)
in the phrase, where less is said, but more intended. My soul shall have no
pleasure in such a one; that is, I will hate, I will abhor him, set my self
against him. Take we heed of all such rebellious and disloyal refusing to
follow Christ beginning to draw.

Obj. Why, but (you may say,) what is our Resistance in this case? Is not
Christ able by his Grace to overpower the soul, though never so rebellious,
never so obstinate?

Christ will not draw men against their wills. Matthew. 23.37.
Answ. True, he is able to do it, but he will not; where the offers of Grace
are rejected, and slighted, Christ will not put forth this his effectual power:
See the truth of it in Jerusalem; Christ could have gathered them, and brought
them under the wings of his Grace and Mercy, but they would not: therefore he
leaves off to draw them, gives over the work. The soul that rejects the
offers of Grace, and stands it out against Christ, what can it expect but
that Christ should desist from drawing it? Certainly, as Christ will never
bring a man to himself against his will, Genesis 6.3.
so his Spirit shall not ever strive with men: for a time it may, (which yet is
wonderful mercy; wonderful mercy it should knock at all, but much more that
being repelled and resisted, it should continue knocking,) but it will not ever
do it. To draw back is the next way to provoke Christ to give over drawing,
then which, what can be more pernicious and destructive to the soul? They who
draw back, draw back to perdition. O take we heed that none of us be found in
that number; Heb. 10. ult.
We are not of them (says the Apostle) who draw back unto perdition, but of
them that believe to the saving of the soul. Happy, thrice happy we, may we be
found such, such as are drawn by Christ to believe on him, submit unto him.
Being thus drawn to him, we shall communicate with him in all his merits, all
his benefits, in Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

FINIS.
THE SAINTS Joint-Membership, WITH The mutual Respects and Offices, which upon
the account thereof they owe each to other. A Subject generally useful for all
Christians, in special for such as are under a particular, and more Regular
Church-Relation. As it was lately presented unto the Church of God at Great
Yarmouth. By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

1 John 3.18. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue,
but in deed and in truth. LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith. 1653.

TO THE CHURCH, AND CHURCHES of CHRIST in Old ENGLAND; With all the Living
Members of the same. Especially, Those in the Town of GREAT YARMOUTH, Grace and
Peace.
CHRISTIANS,
LET not the first word in this Inscription offend any of you: They who
familiarly denominate the Ocean from that Coast, which it lies upon, and
passes by, calling it the British or Irish Sea, etc. shall not need to
stumble at the like language being applied to the Church: Nor yet that word,
which you shall frequently meet with in the body of the Treatise, where I call
the Church, under whatever consideration looked upon, a Mystical Body. I am
not ignorant that that Phrase is commonly and properly given to the Church as
Invisible; but in as much as that Division of Visible and Invisible is but of
several Affections and Modes belonging to the same Subject, and that the one
of these is so involved and inwrapped within the other, as that they cannot be
actually severed, I have therefore indifferently (I hope without any just
offense) applied it to either.

This Apology being premised, let me now crave acceptance of what I here
present to you; all of you, every of you; whom from my soul I wish, I could as
easily join together in real Affection, as here I have done in a verbal
compellation and Dedication; this it hitherto has been, now is, and so long as
I am, shall be my desire and endeavor: in order thereunto it is that I have
heretofore adventured abroad some small Tracts, tending to the prevention or
removal of what might impede or obstruct such a conjunction. And upon the same
errand I now send this after them; wherein I have endeavored to mind all the
Members of the Mystical Body of such respects, Affections, and Offices, as by
virtue of their Joint-Membership they owe each to other; a Subject generally
useful to all, who profess and would approve themselves Christians; more
specially to such as are under a particular and more regular Church Relation. A
privilege which I cordially wish for all in this nation that want it: Truth is
(what cannot be denied, or excused) the stones in our Ecclesiastical
buildings, as they have done, so yet generally they lie too loose, not cemented
as they ought to be; Not that I look upon the formality of an explicit
Covenant as essential to a constituted Church: I shall not dare upon so slight
a ground to unchurch the Churches which have been and are in this Nation, and
elsewhere; yet somewhat I conceive should be done for the distinguishing of the
Members of one Congregation from another, besides their bare habitation within
the compass of a perambulation line; or yet then an ordinary attendance upon
Ordinances in such a place: Surely, besides duties of Piety toward God, there
are also duties of Charity, which Christians are bound to perform, as to all
their Brethren wherever, so in special to those of the same particular
Society with them. What these, and those are, and how to be discharged, I have
endeavored here to set forth: Herein beginning (so Providence has ordered it)
where my Reverend Brother in a Sermon Mr. Marshal's Sermon at the Spittle, on
Easter Monday, April 1652.
lately preached and published upon the same Subject and Text, (which came to
my hand the day before I finished this) left. What I here hold forth, I desire
may not only be read, but regarded, and practiced. And that as by others, so
in special by you, among whom Providence has cast my lot: and to whom (under
God) I have devoted and dedicated my self, and labors. To you (it cannot
without great ingratitude be either denied, or concealed.) God has been good
and gracious in the midst of all those late Changes, which have passed over the
heads of this, and the Neighbor Nations: Not suffering the sword to enter
within your walls, (as it has done many others) in an Hostile way: not giving
you wholly for a spoil, whether to Domestic plunderers, or foreign Robbers;
but yet reserving to you some competent remainder of a Temporal Subsistence:
And whilst he has remembered the outward man, he has not been unmindfull of
the inward; having vouchsafed to you the liberty and enjoyment of some
Ordinances requisite to the well being of a Church, and comfortable subsistence
of a Christian, which many other Congregations in this Nation desire, but want.
What remains then, but that you should now make some returns, answerable to
these receipts; stirring up your selves to go before others, as in duties of
Piety toward that God who has thus put a difference betwixt you and them, so
in all offices of true Christian Love each to other. Of this later I have
lately minded you by word; and now do it again by writing, that so you may
be able after my decease, (which how nigh it may be, he above knows, in
whose hand my times are) to have these things always in remembrance. Which
that you may do, I shall second my Counsels with my Prayers, resting

Yours under God, ready to serve you in the Gospel of his Son, JOHN BRINSLEY.
July 1. 1652.
THE SAINTS Joint-Membership.
ROMANS 12.4, 5. For as we have many members in one Body, and all members have
not the same Office;

So we being many, are one Body in Christ, and [Every one Members of another.]


IN the verse foregoing we have a Charge; A general charge propounded.
a charge directed by this our Apostle to these his believing Romans, and in
them to all other Christians: The sum whereof is, that they abandoning of
Arrogance and curiosity, not overweening themselves, or intermedling with
other folks businesses, they would quietly content themselves in the Stations
wherein God had set them, wisely improving the several gifts bestowed upon
them to common and mutual Edification in all Christian Humility and Charity:
For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not
to think of himself more highly then he ought to think (or, to be overwise
above what he ought to be wise) but to think soberly (or, to be wise unto
sobriety) according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

This Charge, in the words I have now read, he prosecuteth and presses; which
he does by an Argument taken a Comparatis, from a Comparison, Prosecuted by a
comparison.
a Comparison betwixt the Natural and Mystical body; in which (as in every
Comparison) we may take notice of two things, two parts, the Protasis and
Apodasis; the Proposition, and the Reddition: The former we have in the fourth
verse, For as we have many members in one Body, The parts of the comparison.
etc. The later in the fifth verse, So we we being many, are one body, etc.

In the former of these (the Proposition 1. The Proposition.
) the Apostle makes observation of three paticulars: 1. The Unity of the body;
[one body:] 2. The Plurality of members; [We have many members in one body:] 3.
The Diversity of Offices [And all member, have not the same Office.] So is it
in the Natural body, the body of Man, or other living creature; The body is
one, one Totum integrale, one Integrall whole, made up of many members, which
are distinct and differing the one from the other; Differing in site and place,
some higher, others lower, as the head and the feet: Differing in external
form and fashion; some of one fashion, others of another: Differing in Order
and Dignity, some more noble and principal, others more ignoble: Differing in
their Offices and Operations; All have not the same Office (says the Text)
(...), the same Action, the same Operatoon: the eye has one Office, the ear a
second, the tongue a third, and so in the rest; Thus it is in the Natural
body. There is the Proposition.

But that is but the shell or paring: The kernel and meat which our souls are
to feed upon, we shall find it in the later part, the Reddition; 2. The
Reddition.
which follows: [So we being many, are one body in Christ.

Wee] Meaning the Church; in special that particular Church to which he
directs this Epistle, the Church at Rome; in general the whole Catholic
Church, whereof that Church was a part, and Paul himself a member, which he was
not properly of the Church at Rome, no more then of Corinth or Ephesus, or (for
ought I know) of any other.

And this Church he here calls a Body, The Church called a Body.
a term usually and familiarly given to any society, or combination of men;
Thus in the Camp; as the whole Army, so every Brigade, every Company being
ordered in a martial way in ranks and files, they are called a Body; the Body
of the Army, a body of Horse, a body of Pikes, etc. A Military Body; thus in
the Civil State; as a whole Kingdom or Commonwealth, so every particular
Society, every Corporation is a Body, a Political Body; and such is the
Church. As the Church Catholic, so every particular Congregation is a Body; an
Ecclesiastical Body, so our Apostle here calls it, as often elsewhere, 2 Cor.
12.12. Ephesians. 4.4, 16. Colos. 3.15. Hebr. 13.3.

And not unfitly may the Church be so called; and that in regard of those
Resemblances which are betwixt it and the Natural body: Resemblances betwixt
the natural and Mystical body
The chief and principle whereof our Apostle here in this verse sets before us.
I shall take them up in their order as I fall with them in the words.

1. The first which we meet with is the Plurality of members Resembl. 1.
Plurality of members, which are diverse, in
[We being many] So is it in the natural body, which is a compages of many
members meeting and joined together. And so it is in this Mystical body of the
Church [We being many] (...); so the members of the Church may be said to be,
and that in a double respect.

1. In regard of their Persons; 1. Their Persons.
they are many: Such is the Church catholic, a Body made up of many Members.
The Church Catholic Invisible, of the whole company of true Believers in all
Ages and Places of the world. The Church catholic visible, of the whole
company of Professors; which under the Gospel, may well be called many: and
such is a particular Church, a congregation, a body made up of a plurality, of
many members. How many there must be, or may be in such a Church, the Spirit of
God in Scripture has not precisely determined it; I know some others have done
it, making the least number in a particular church to be seven, without which
number it cannot be a constituted organicall church: And the greater to be so
many as may conveniently meet together in the same place to partake in all the
ordinances of Christ. But for my part I shall not vouch either of these;
contenting my self with what the Text holds forth; that a church is a Company,
a Plurality, a Body made up of many members; Many for their Persons.

2. Many in regard of their Offices 2. Offices.
and gifts, which are various and diverse: So is it in the Natural body (as
the former verse tells us;) Many members, many offices [All members have not the
same office.] And so it is in the Church; as the persons are many, so are their
Offices and gifts diverse: So it follows in the next verse, ver. 6. Having
then gifts differing, etc. Here is a first Resemblance.

2. A second is in the unity of this Body. Resembl. 2. Unity of the body.
Many members, but one body; so is it in the natural body, We have many
members in one body (says the Proposition;) So we being many are one Body
(says the Reddition): Such is every particular Church; where there is a
company of visible Saints joined together in the fellowship of the Gospel;
united in the profession of the same faith and love; attending upon and
submitting to the Ordinances of Christ; and performing mutual offices each to
other, this is one Body.

And such is the Church catholic: consider it as we will, whether in the
Invisible or visible state of it, it is on Body.

The Church catholic invisible, The Church catholic invisible, one Body
Being made up of all true Believers, such as having a real union with Christ,
have also union and communion one with another: These make up one Body; As the
Body is one, etc. so also is Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.12. Christ
mystical, the Church, whereof Christ is the Head.) For by one Spirit we are
all baptized into one Body, ver. 13. A mystery represented to our eye in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; where the Sacramental Bread being made of many
grains meeting together and making one loaf: and the Sacramental Wine being
the juice of many grapes meeting together in the same Cup, do excellently
represent unto the receiver, the unity of the Church catholic; wherein all
true believers being knit together by Faith unto Christ, and by love one to
another, make up one mystical Body; So our Apostle unvailes this mystery, 1
Cor. 10.17. For we being many, are one bread, and one body. Such is the Church
catholic invisible.

And such is the Church catholibk visible; The Church catholic visible one
Body.
Consisting of the whole company of visible Saints, such as profess the true
faith of Christ with subjection to his Ordinances; profess Faith and
Obedience. This also (as it is one Church, so called by the Apostle in that 1
Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers etc. meaning thereby the Church catholic visible,
to which those extrordinary and catholic officers were properly, and to which
the other ordinary officers are primarily given; so it) is one body, so called
by the same Apostle, Ephesians. 4.4. There is one body; meaning thereby the church
catholic, to which belongs that one baptism, ver. 5. and to which those
officers were given by Christ, spoken of ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, etc. These Christ gave to his Church catholic, as
considered in the visible state of it: And so may we understand the Apostle
here in the Text; We being many, are one body; not only that particular Church
at Rome; but the church catholic visible, whereof Paul himself was a member;
(as I before expounded it) This is One Body.

Whether one Organicall body (as they call it) or no, is made a matter of great
dispute in the present times; but I shall not trouble you with that notion; It
is enough for my present purpose (that which I suppose in a morderate sense
will be granted at all intelligent hands) that there is such a Church catholic
visible, and that Church also is one body, one essential and integrall body,
made up of many members, combined and knit together in the profession of the
same faith. Thus the church, take, it as we will, still we find a unity in it
(I mean in the notion; O that it were so also in the practice!) It is one body.

And that under one head. There is a third Resemblance. Resembl. 3. Unity of
the head, which is
So is it in the Natural body, there is one body under one head: A head there
must be, and but one head; otherwise it would be a monstrous body, should it be
either (...), without a head, or (...), having more heads then one. And so is
it in this Mystical body; it is also one body, under one head, which head is
Christ; so it follows in the Text.

We are one body in Christ. Christ. Sumus unum corpus in Christo, id est, per
Christum, qui corporis istius compactor fuit. Grot. ad Text.
] (...), that is not only per Christum (as Grotius dilutely expounds it) By
Christ, as being the Author of this union, the gatherer and compacter of his
Elect people into one: True it is, this Christ does; he being the great
Shepherd, gathers all his sheep into one fold; so much we may learn from that
Suffragan High Priest, who spoke more then himself understood (as too many at
this day do) though not more the^ the Spirit of God intended to speak by him,
Joh. 11.51. where he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation: And not
for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered abroad; This Christ in part has done, and
further will do to the end of the world; gather together his Elect of Jews and
Gentiles, so making them one Body. This is a Truth; but not the whole truth.
There is somewhat more in this phrase, [In Christ.] viz. as being the Common
head of his Church. So Grotius himself rightly expounds that other place of
the same Apostle, Ephesians. 1.10. Grotius Com. ad Ephesians. 1.10.
where he sets forth the mystery of Gods will and purpose, now revealed in
the Gospel, viz. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one all things in Christ.] Per Christum, tanquam caput, by
Christ, as a Head. And so much the word there translated, [Gather together] may
be conceived to import, (...), or (...), to bring under one Head.

Such is Christ to his Church: Not only a Head over all things to it, (as he
is said to be, Ephesians. 1.22.) but the Head of it. Often times we find him expressly
so called; The Head of the Body, the Church, Col. 1.18. Ephesians. 5.23. Such a
relation there is betwixt Christ and his Church, as betwixt the Head and the
Body. And thence it is that as he is called the Head of his Church, so the
Church is called his Body, Ephesians. 1. last. 1 Cor. 12.27.

And well may they be so called: Christ the Head of the church, the Body.
Christ the Head, the Church, the Body.
It The Head participates in the same nature wih the Body. So does Christ with
his church. 2. The Head is above the Body, set over it, to rule and guide it;
so is Christ over his Church. 3. The Head looks out for the Body, providing
for it; and so does Christ for his Church. 4. The Head gives influence,
communicates animal spirits, gives sense and motion to all the members of
the Body; so does Christ communicate his Spirit to all the members of this
mystical Body, whereby he gives spiritual sense and motion to them. 5. The
Members of the Body are all united to the Head by some common bands and
ligaments, nerves and sinews, whereby they come to have union and communion
with it. And so are all true believers unto Christ; united to him by his Spirit
on his part, by Faith and Love on their part; whence they come to have union
and communion with him. And hence is it that they are said to be one Body in
Christ.] Being united unto him, as unto one common Head; all having interest in
him: all having union and communion with him; viz. all true livingmembers. Here
is the Head to this Body.

And this Head is but one. So is it in the natural; and so is it in the
mystical Body. The Head of the mystical Body, but one.
The Church has but one Head; not one Principal Head, and another
Ministerial. So they of the Church of Rome would have it; who cry up their
Pope to be Head of the Church, viz. subordinate under Christ. But what were
this but to make the Church a monstrous Body; having a Head and a Head, one
Head under another? Many other Arguments I find here taken up by Pareus and
some others writing upon this Text, to refute and nullify this claim of the
Popes Headship. But I shall pass them by as needless; This being an Argument
so trite and worn, as every one may see the thread of it. As for the Pope,
well were it if he might once approve himself a sound member of this Body; as
for Head, he neither is, nor can be. This is Christ's peculiar, not communicable
either to Man, or Angel. The Church is one Body, under one Head. [Wee are one
Body in Christ.] There is a third Resemblance.

The fourth and last follows: viz. The mutual Relation betwixt these
members: Resembl. 4. Mutual Relation betwixt the members.
which we fall within the last clause, [And every one members of another.]
(...), (or (...)) singulatim, severally every one. [Members one of another.]
(...), One another members. Invicem membra; mutual Members, Commembres (a
word sometimes used by Augustine, as Estius Estius ad Text.
notes it) Com-members, Joint-Fellow-members; so is it in the natural Body.
The Members thereof are Joint-members, having all a common relation to the same
Head, they have a mutual relation each to other. So is it in a Military Body;
where all the soldiers are Commilitones, Fellow Soldiers. And so is it in
Political Bodies: Those who are of the same Corporation, are Concives,
Fellow-citizens, Fellow-burgers, Fellow Members, as it were members one of
another. And so is it in the church; not only in a particular congregation,
the members whereof have, or ought to have, a special relation each to other.
But in the Chuch catholic; all the true members of the Church, are
fellow-citizens. So called Ephesians. 2.19. (...), Fellow-citizens with the Saints.
And Fellow-heirs: So you have it Ephesians. 3.6. where the Apostle speaking of the
believing Gentiles, he calls them Fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and
joint-partakers of the promise.] Three words very emphaticall in expressing and
setting forth this mystical union and communion among Christians. They are
(...), Joint-heirs, (...), Joint-members of the same body; (...),
Joint-partners in the same promise. Among all expressions looking that way, we
shall find none more full then this in the Text, where the Apostle speaking of
church members, says, they are (...), one another members.

Thus have I, with what brevity and perspicuity I could, passed through the
severals in the Text; wherein I have given you a succinct and short account of
five Doctrinall Propositions. 1. That the church is a body. 2. That in this
Body there are many members. 3. That these many members make one Body. 4. That
these many members are one Body in Christ. 5. That these members are members
one of another.

That which now remains is the Application; Application.
where we shall find never a one of these Branches but is fruitful. I shall
only give you a taste of the four first, intending to make a full meal of the
fifth, and last.

1. Is the Church a Body, a spiritual Society, a mystical Corporation? Why
then let all the members thereof seek the good of the whole: Use 1. All the
members of the Church ought to seek the good of the whole Body.
not only of that particular Society, that congregation whereof they are
members in particular, (as our Translation renders that Text, 1 Cor. 12.27.)
This indeed they ought to have a particular regard unto, but not so as to
impropriate their respects unto it. Let them all seek the good of the whole,
the Church catholic. Thus do the members of the natural Body; they all seek
to maintain not only that part of the Body to which they have a proximate
adherence, but the whole Body. And thus is it in a military Body; every
soldier seeks the safety, not only of his own company or Regiment, but of
the whole Army. And thus it either is, or ought to be, in civil Societies,
in Bodies politic, the members thereof should seek the welfare, not only of
their own families, but of the whole Incorporation. And so let it be in this
spiritual Incorporation of the church: Let all that profess themselves
members thereof, seriously seek the good of the whole: Seek the peace of it,
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.6. Seek the prosperity of it, Peace
be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, v. 7. Do good in thy
good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem, Ps. 51.18. Seek to
maintain the outward privileges of it. This the members of civil
Incorporations, upon their first admission into those Societies are sworn to do
(an Oath too little regarded, as many other of like nature are) to maintain the
Privileges, Immmunities, Lawful usages, and Customs thereof. Let all
Christians do the like in the behalf of the Church, the Church catholic,
whereof they are made or acknowledged to be members by their Baptism: Let them
seek to maintain the Spiritual privileges thereof; to hold up all the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, that they may be dispensed with Liberty, Purity,
Power. Every ways seeking the good of this body.

Use 2. Every member ought to keep his place, and look to his office.
Are there many members belonging to this Body, and these having several
offices, functions, and gifts? why, then let every one rest himself contented
with that degree, that station wherein God has set him in the Church, not
thrusting himself upon the offices and employments of others. This is one
thing (as I told you, and a principal one, which the Apostle here aims and
drives at; This I say, (says he) that no man think of himself above what he
ought to think, but think soberly, according as God has given to every man the
measure of faith; He requires every one to know his own place and his own
gifts, and so move within his own sphere, containing himself within the bounds
and limits of his Calling, not affecting to put his oar into other men's boats,
his Plough into other men's fields, his sickle into other men's harvests, busily
intermedling with what belonged not to him: And this lesson he would have
churchmembers to learn from the members of the natural body; where the
several members have several Offices, and several faculties; the eye to see,
the ear to hear, the tongue to speak, etc. And having so, each one holds to
its particular function, no one member incroaching upon the office of another:
even so would he have it for to be in the Mystical Body of the church, and so
let it be; There being therein a like plurality of members, and diversity of
Offices, parallel and answerable to the former; the Ruler as the eye, the
Teacher as the tongue; the Hearer as the ear; the Distributer as the hand, etc.
some having one function, others another; let every one look to his own. Thus
is it in the Military body, where there are Colonels, and Majors, and Captains,
and Leiutenants, Sergeants, Officers and private Soldiers, every one intends
his own employment. And so is it in Politic Bodies, where there are Mayor,
Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Justices, Constables, etc. every one looks to his own
office, not interrupting, not disturbing one another: the inferior by no means
intruding upon the place of the Supeior: And so let it be in the Church. But I
hasten,

Is the church one Body? Then let all who profess themselves members thereof,
seek to maintain the unity of it; Use 3. Seek to maintain the Churches unity.
not rending and tearing it asunder by factions and schimes, unwarrantable
Separations and Divisions; but labor to keep the oneness, the unity of this
body: The unity, not only of those particular congregations whereof they are
Members (which Christians ought have a special regard unto, not withdrawing
themselves upon every slight occasion, or making breaches in them) but also of
the church catholic. So as though it be divided into several congregations,
yet all they may keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; as so many
lines meeting in the same center; by their Associations and Combinations
helping and strengthening each other: all endeavoring (as much as may be) a
Religious uniformity, that they may all walk by the same Rule, as of Faith and
Manners, so (if it might be) of Discipline; a thing much to be desired by all
those who pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and without which they are not like
to see what they long for. But I pass to the fourth.

Is the church one body in Christ? Then let all the members thereof know and
acknowledge him for their Head: Use 4. Know and acknowledge our head.
Holding fast to him; It is that which our Apostle charge upon some in his
time, Colos. 2.19. They did not (...), Hold fast the head; They did not hold
themselves to Christ alone, but they would be setting up other Mediators, other
Intercessours with him and besides him (even as Romanists at this day do). For
us, take we heed of the like; remember we that Christ is our Head, our
Mediator, our Advocate; and therefore hold we to him, and him alone; not
admitting any other to any participation with him in his Headship: Submitting
our selves unto him to be governed by his laws: leaving him to the regulating
and ordering of his Church; seeking after a nearer union, and a more free and
full communion with him. The members of the natural body, the more free
communion they have with the head, the more active and vigorous they are;
whereas if that be intercepted and obstructed (as in some cases it is, as viz.
in Palsies and Apoplexies, etc.) they prove useless and dead. The Christians
life is bound up in Christ (whence it is that he is called their life, Col.
3.4.) And therefore holding fast this head, seek nearer union and further
communion with him.

But I promised to give you but a taste of these. Come we now to the fifth and
last, upon which I have a special design, as conceiving it to be a branch,
Use 5. A fruitful Branch. The Saints Joint-membership,
which may afford us a great deal of good fruit, such as will be well worth my
shaking and your gathering; much matter which will be very useful unto you,
and to all Christians in reference to their church state.

Where let me only premise one general caveat; what I shall speak of Church
members, A Caveat concerning the word [Church-members.]
and their mutual respects and duties, let it not be construed in too strict a
sense, as intended only to the members of particular congregations, in
reference unto that particular body whereof they are members. True it is, I
will not deny (what I have already yealded) that the Apostle here in my Text,
in laying down the Doctrine, has a special eye to such a particular Relation:
And so shall I have in the Application. But, as he does not, so neither shall I
impale and confine what I am to say within so narrow a room. As for a
particular Church, (as I said before) it is but a part, a member of the Church
catholic visible; so much is by some collected from that Text forecited, 1
Cor. 12.27. where out Apostle tells his Corinthians, that they were the Body
of Christ, and members in particular,] The Original has it word for word,
Members of a part, (...). So the vulgar Latin (as also Ambrose) there renders
it; Membra de (or ex) membro, (possibly, by the change of a letter, (...) etc.
Chrysostom. ad loc. Aliquatenus. Nam omnes Ecclesiae per orbem dispersae diversa
sunt unius corporis membra. Beza Annot. Vide Calvin. Con. ad locum.
(as Beza conjectures, and Heinsius approves it,) reading it, (...).) members
of a member: that is, (as Chrysostom and Beza gives the sense of it) members
of that Church of Corinth, which was but a part, a member of the catholic
christian Church: but that I will not stand upon, conceiving that it may admit
of another construction, more apposite and agreeable to the scope of that
place, (to which Calvine directs me.) Neither need I, seeing it is a truth
clearly held forth by the Spirit of God in the very language of the Scripture:
which speaking of the church catholic, calls it [the church,] without any
other addition, or modification; As in the ver. there foregoing, ver. 28. God
has set some in the church, etc.] so often elsewhere. But speaking of
particular Congregations, calls them churches: [Here what the Spirit says to
the churches, Revel. 2, 3. etc.] Or the church at such a place, and such a
place, clearly importing that the one is a totum Integrale, the whole Body, the
other parts and members of it. And being so, parts of an Homogeneall Body; what
I say of, or concerning the one, let it be conceived as intended also to the
other. This general caution being premised, (which as my self shall, so I
shall desire you to carry a long with you) now come we to particulars.

Are the members of the Church Joint-members, Useful Instructions from the
consideration of the Saints Joint-Membership. 1. Negative Instructions.
members one of another? from hence we may take up many useful Instructions:
useful to all the members of this mystical Body; which I shall divide into
two ranks: Negative, and Positive. The former showing what Christians should
not do; the other what they ought to do. Begin with the former. What
church members should not do.

Let them not envy one another; 1. Church Members not to envy one another.
an evil which all men by nature are prone and subject to. The spirit that
dwells in us, lusts to envy, (says Saint James,) Jam. 4.5. The spirit of
Satan, or the spirit of a man, so far forth as he is unregenerate, being
depraved and corrupted, among other lusts, it enclines and puts him on to envy.
Thus we read of the Patriarchs, that being moved with envy, they sold their
brother Joseph into Egypt, Acts 7.9. Thus even christians are too apt to envy
their Brethren. But thus let it not be: Let not Inferiors in the Church envy
their Superiors. Those who have lesser either gifts or estates, envy those
that have greater. Let not private christians envy public officers: Those who
are under Government envy those who are set over them in the Lord. To that end
let them remember (what they should never forget) that they are members one of
another; so as what the one receives, is for the benefit and advantage of the
other. Livius Hist. Lib. 2o.
It was the argument which Menenius Agrippa in the Roman story is said to have
made use of (a story taken up and made use of by diverse Expositors writing upon
the Text) for the quieting of a mutiny among the Plebeians, P. Martyr Pareus
Grotius ad Text.
the common people in Rome, who envying the wealth, honor, and pomp of their
Senators, were ready to have made a defection from them. Thereupon he tells the
fable of the Members and the Belly; how that they fell foul with it,
complaining that they were feign to labor and take pains to maintain that,
whilst that only spent what they got; whereupon they withdrew their wonted
allowance; which having done, in conclusion by pining it, they starved
themselves. And by this argument taken from the communion betwixt the members
of the natural Body, he appeased that tumult, and reduced them to due
subjection; let the like argument be useful unto Christians in a like way. Is
it so, that others have gifts and offices in the Church, (for that I have now
properly to deal with) above themselves, let them not envy them, repine and
murmr at them. So did the Israelites at Moses and Aaron; of whom the Psalmist
tells us, Psalm 116.16. They envied Moses in the camp, and Aaron the Saint of the
Lord. This did Corah and his confederates, (as you may read it, Numb. 16.2.)
They envied Moses as a Magistrate, and Aaron as a Minister, one set apart for
the Priesthood: And how many are there, who (as if they had taken a pattern by
them) do the very like at this day? They envy Moses and Aaron, the Magistrate,
and the Minister. And why? because they are, the one in the commonwealth, the
other in the church, advanced above themselves.

But this let not any of you do: no reason you should. What they have is for
your good. He is the Minister of God to thee for good, (says Paul of the
Magistrate) Romans 13 4. And it is no less true of the Minister, you and they
are members of the same Body; and being so, ye are members one of another: and
therefore no reason you should envy one another. So the Apostle himself makes
use of this very Argument in that Text, which I have, and shall have the
frequenter recourse unto, in as much as (as Pareus says of it) it may serve as
a commentary upon this I have now in hand, 1 Cor. 12. where having to deal
with some, who envying the Offices or Gifts of some others, were ready
thereupon through discontent to fall off, and separate from the Church; he
tells them, ver. 14, The Body is not one member, but many. If the foot shall
say, because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of
the body? And if the ear shall say, because I am not the eye, therefore I am
not of the body, is it therefore not of the Body? etc. And so he goes on;
willing every one to content himself in the station wherein God had set him;
not being discontent with others who were preferred before themselves: This
being a thing not only of convenience, but of necessity, that there should be
such a disparity and difference among the members (as of the natural, so) of
the mystical Body. So it follows, ver. 17, 18, 19. For if the whole Body
were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the
smelling? But now has God set the members, every one of them in the Body, as
it pleased him. And if they were all one member, where were the Body? Let the
consideration hereof for ever lay this evil Spirit of envy. Church Members
being members of the same Body, they are members one of another. And being so,
what any one has, is useful to the rest: and therefore let them not envy one
another. There is a first Instruction.

2. Whilst they do not envy, let them not disdain one another. 2. Not
disdain one another.
A useful and needful lesson for Superiors; such as God has preferred and
advanced above their brethren, betrusting them with offices, honoring them
with gifts, or with success in their labors, or in any other way above their
brethren, let not them disdain Inferiors, despising them, insulting over
them, thinking meanly of them, looking overly upon them. Thus (as the History
tells us) that matchless Philistine looked upon David, when he saw him, being
but a youth, a stripling, a child in comparison of him, he disdained him,
says the Text, 1 Samuel 17.42. And truly thus Superiors, both in Church and
State, are subject to look upon their Inferiors: men of greater estates, are
subject to despise their poor brethren, (though richer in faith then
themselves.) So Saint James charge it upon some in his time, Jam. 2.6. Ye
have despised the poor. Thus aged persons are sometimes apt to despise young
ones (though it may be their seniours in grace.) Thereupon was Paul's advice to
Timothy, that he should carry himself the more warily, That no man might
despise his youth, 1 Timothy 4.12. And writing to his Corinthians concerning him,
he gives them charge that no man should despise him, 1 Cor. 16.11. And thus
the strong Christian is apt to despise the weak: whereupon the Apostle gives
that caveat to these his Romans, Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats despise him
that eats not: He that knows his liberty, despise his weaker brother. This
take you heed of.

This is a thing which the members of the natural Body will not do. The more
principal and noble parts will not despise the less principal or ignoble;
the eye or hand will not disdain the foot; but own it as a member, an useful
and needful member; I, and as one of their members. The like let the members
of the mystical Body do, and that upon this ground. So the Apostle presses it
in the sequel of that Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.20, 21. etc. Now are they many
members, yet but one body: And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor again, the head to the feet, I have no need of you: nay, much more
those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary, etc.
So is it in the natural, and so is it in the mystical Body. The most noble
members in this body, they are but (...), (as the Apostle has it in that verse
forecited, Membra ex part sunt, ficut cuique attributa est sua portio, and
fiuitum officium, Calvin. ad loc.
ver. 27.) Membra ex part, that is, members each one for his part, and in his
place, (as Calvine most genuinely expounds it.) And the meanest members are
needful to the whole, and may be useful to any other member. They are members
one of another, And therefore let them not disdain or despise one another.
There is a second.

Thirdly, Let them not offend one another: 3. The third Negative Instruction.
Not offend one another.
This will not the members of the natural Body do, being members one of
another, they will not willingly offend, or any ways hurt one another: let not
the members of the mystical Body do it. This Paul tells his Corinthians,
that for his own part, he was very shie of, Giving none offense, says he of
himself, 2 Cor. 6.3. And he would have them to be the like, to be (...),
Inoffensive; and that toward all. So runs his charge, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.]
Three words under which he comprehends all sorts of persons then in being; who
were either Jews, or Pagans, or Christians. Christians should not willingly
offend any of these, especially the last. Church Members being their members,
let them not offend them.

Which may be done diverse ways; Which is done three ways.
1. By example. 2. By word. 3. By deed. By example, scandalizing of them; by
word, defaming them; by deed, wronging and injuring of them. Let Church Members
take heed of each.

1. Of offending one another by example, 1. By Example, scandalizing one
another.
scandalizing their Fellow Members; this will not the members of the natural
Body willingly do. The hand will not put a mote into the eye, or lay a
stumbling block before the foot. Let not the members of this mystical Body do
it: let them take heed of being either causes or occasions of stumbling to
others: Let no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way, Romans 14.13. (...).

1. Whether it be by the abuse of their christian liberty. 1. By abusing
Christian Liberty.
Concerning this speaks the Apostle there, It is not good neither to eat
flesh, nor to drink wine, or any thing, whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or made weak, ver. 21. Three words (the two later whereof, are not
to be found in the Syriack, nor yer in all Greek copies, as Grotius notes it,
importing for substance one and the same thing. Some indeed have indeavonred to
distinguish them, and put different senses upon them. But they may rather seem
to be Synonymaes, a Congeries, an heap of diverse words signifying one and the
same thing: which yet is not without an observable Emphasis: Thereby the
Apostle insinuates the great heed, care, and circumspection that Christians
should take, lest any ways, by the use of things indifferent, they should be
so much as in occasion of offense in any degree to their weak brethren. The
like care the same Apostle presses upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8. where, in
the 12th verse he tells them, When ye so sin against the brethren, (viz.
offending them by the abuse of your Christian liberty, which he had spoken of
before) and wound their conscience, ye sin against Christ.] This do they who
willingly, or heedlesly offend their weak brethren; they sin against Christ,
whose members they are, and whose work is thereby interrupted, and hindered in
them. Upon this account Paul wills them to take heed of it.

Neither does he therein ( Pharisee like) lay a burden upon other men's
shoulders, put a yoke upon their necks, which himself was not willing to touch
or bear. No, in the very next verse he tells them what his own Resolution was:
Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend (or offend my brother, (...),) I
will eat no flesh while the world stands, ver. 13. A truly Heroical and
imitable resolution; for Christians, rather then be occasions of scandalizing,
hindering the salvation of any, to abridge themselves in the use of their
christian liberty: not to do what otherwise they lawfully might do.

2. Much less (in the second place) to do what they ought not to do: and so
to offend, whether grieving or indangering others by their scandalous examples,
by their inordinate walking. 2. Scandalous and inordinate walking.
Thus did the Sons of Eli, by their lewd and debauched carriage, they made the
people to abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17. This did the Priests in
Malachies time, By their departing out of the way, they caused many to stumble
at the Law, Mal. 2.8. By their evil examples, they seduced some, and gave
occasion to others to disdain the worship and service of God. O christians!
take heed that the like never may be charged upon any of you, that by your
examples you should cause any of your brethren to stumble and fall: That by
your walking unanswerably to your profession, you should make any of those who
begin to look Sion-ward, and Heavenward to turn aside, and to be out of love
and liking with the good ways, and Ordinances of God; and so to fall off from
their following after him: that your unchristian courses should be as a nipping
frost to these hopeful buds and blossoms, and cause them to fall off from the
tree. O this is a matter which will turn to a sad account another day. So our
Savior himself has cast it up, Matthew. 18 6. Who so shall offend one of these
little ones that believes in me, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the bottom of the sea.] Of
such high consequence is it for a man by his evil example, or otherwise, so to
scandalize a weak brother, as to be an occasion of his halting, or falling off
from his profession; better that such a one should suffer the greatest
punishment in his body, then that he should thus ruin, or endanger the soul
of his brother. Take heed of thus offending your fellow members by your example.

Or (in the second and third place) by word or deed. Concerning both these (as
Grotius looks upon it) our Apostle gives a jointcaveat to his Galatians,
Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another; take heed ye be not consumed
one of another.] Bite one another in words, Devour one another by deeds. Both
these let Christians take heed of.

Of Biting one another, offending one another in words. 2. By Word, defaming
one another.
This will not the members of the natural Body do. The teeth will not bite the
hand, nor the hand scratch the face: Let not the members of the mystical Body
do it, by speaking evil one of another. It is one of those lessons which Paul
wills Titus to teach the Christians of his time, that they should speak evil
of no man, Tit. 3.2. (...) And I wish that Christians in these times, would
have a greater regard to it; To blaspheme no man, speak evil of no man; by
backbiting, slandering, defaming of them. Every of which is a kind of
blasphemy, (...), q. (...).
a hurting the good name of another, (which the word properly signifies;) an
evil speaking, not only censured by the Spirit of God in Scripture, but
condemned by the very light of nature. Let Christians take heed of it, of thus
speaking evil of any; specially of their brethren, fellow members, members of
the same mystical Body.

Quest. But may not men speak the evil which they know by others?

Ans. I answer, not always; no, Christians may not always speak the evil
which they know by their Brethren.
though it be a truth, and a truth which they are assured of. Doeg, when he
spoke unto Saul concerning David and Abimeleck, he spoke nothing but what was
the truth, and what himself was an eyewitness of (as he tells Saul's, 1 Samuel
22.9.10.) yet David calls him a false tongue, in that Psalm, which the Contents
in your Bibles will tell you is to be understood of him, Psalm. 120.3. True
things may be spoken evilly and falsely; viz. when they are spoken out of
rancour or malice, or without any just call or reason; and so tend only to the
defamation of the person of whom they are spoken; this is an evil which I
shall desire you to take heed of. And the rather, because it is now grown so
Epidemicall, more rife then ever. Is it so that you know any commendable good
concerning your Brethren, as occasion is offered, speak it, and speak it
freely. I know no danger in it, where there can be no suspicion of flattery.
But for evil, look about you; Examine it, before you utter it. Quid de quoque
viro, etc. Examine not only whether it be true which is spoken, but whether it
be fit to be spoken to such a person, at such a time, in such a place, and to
what end it is spoken; and what good may come of it. If it tend only to the
defaming of another, now suppress it. It is an ill Principle, which makes men
tongue-tied in the deserved praises of others, whilst they are open-mouthed in
what may tend to their disgrace. Such measure let not Christians offer to any,
least of all to their Brethren, their Fellow Members.

Christians not to blaze the infirmities of Brethren.
Not blazing their weaknesses, their infirmities. It is Chams brand, which no
time will ever wear out the infamy of, that espying his Fathers nakedness, he
went and told his two brethren without, calling them in to see it, and laugh at
it, Genesis 9.22. Let not Christians do the like to their brethren. Is it so that
they occasionally espy the nakedness, the failings, the infirmities one of
another, let them not presently tell it to others. To themselves they may, and
ought in a Christian way; advising, admonishing, reproving them, that so what
is out of joint, may be set again, what is amiss, may be healed, reformed. But
now to others, specially such as are without: Tell it not in Gath, publish it
not in the streets of Askelon, 1 Samuel 1.20. As for Fellow Members in
Church-society, our Saviors rule and direction is, that, where private
admonition takes not place with an offending brother, they should take one or
two more with them, Matthew. 18.16. And if that avail not, then (as it follows
ver. 17.) Tell it to the Church, not to the whole Congregation, (that, to make
the best of it, were but a preposterous course); but to the Church Officers,
the Church Representative. All which ought to be done with all christian
tenderness and wisdom. But for others, who are strangers, if not enemies to
the Church, let them (as much as may be) be strangers to the infirmities of the
members thereof.

A Lesson which the members of the mystical may learn from the members of the
natural body, where if one member have a secret ailment, a soar, the tongue
will not presently blab it, speak of it, or the hand open it to every passenger
But if it do open it, or speak of it, it shall be to a friend, or to a Surgeon,
some that may probably contribute somewhat toward the cure of it. Thus let
Christians deal by the infirmities of their brethren, not in opening them, but
in order to a cure. Thus take heed of offending by word, by speaking evil one
of another.

And (thirdly) of evil doing one to another, of wronging, injuring one
another: 3. By Deed, wronging and injuring one another.
not biting, let them much less devour one another. This will not the members
of the natural body do. The hand will not buffet the head, or wound the foot.
Let not the members of the mystical Body offer such measure one to another, to
hurt one another, as not in their Reputations, so in their Bodies, or Estates,
or any other way. Receive us, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man,
we have defrauded no man, (it is Paul's Apology for himself, and his
Fellow-Ministers, to his Corinthians,) 2 Cor. 7.2. All these had the false
Apostles, his Competitours, done to them, (as he there secretly insinuates.)
They had wronged, corrupted, defrauded them; wronged them by their examples,
corrupted them by their doctrines, defrauded them by their wiles, their
covetousness. But this had not Paul done, nor any of his Colleagues. This let
not any Christian do. Do it not to any, no not to Heathens; much less to
Brethren. This is that which Paul charge as no small aggravation upon some of
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.8. Ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren.
To do injury to any is a crime, much more to a brother. For one member to
wrong another is unnatural; and for Christians to wrong one another is
unchristian. Here is the third negative Instruction, which I take up from the
Joint-membership of Christians: Being members one of another, let them not
offend one another, by Example, by Word, by Deed.

To which let me subjoyne a fourth: Not offending one another, let them not be
offended one with another. 4. The fourth negative Instruction. Be not offended
one with another.
Scandals are of two sorts; Data, and Accepta: Active and Passive: Given and
taken. Now Christians should equally decline both: As not giving offense to, so
not taking it from their brethren. A thing which corrupt nature is very prone
to do (being like tindar, or gunpowder, which is ready to fire upon every
spark that falls upon it,) to take offense; and that oft-times before it is
given: not unlike a shie horse, which is ready to start at every shadow. So did
the Pharisees at our Saviors warrantable practices. Now this, (being rather
the making then the taking of an offense) let all Christians beware of it,
remembering that they are mutual members; members one of another. Members of
the natural body are not apt to be offended one with another: let not the
members of the mystical Body be so. To which end let them not be too
quick-sighted in espying one another faults. Why beholdest thou the mote that
is in thy brothers eye? (says our Savior) Matthew. 7.3. meaning that Christians
should not be too sharp-sighted in espying their brethrens infirmities,
(especially when they indulge the like, or greater evils in themselves.) It is
observed, that the most ravenous birds, birds of prey, (as Eagles and Hawks)
are most quick-sighted. And so is it among men; They which are most wicked
themselves, are most ready to find faults with others; especially to espy the
infirmities of Saints. Again, I say, let Christians beware of it; not looking
through false glasses, not readily giving entertainment to flying reports, not
harboring of groundless suspicions: But rather judging the best, expounding
doubtful matters in the better part, where there may be any probability of a
candid construction; as the story tells us Jacob did the dreams and death of his
son Joseph; Genesis 37.11.33. It is one property of true Christian charity, it
thinks not evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. and another, it hops all things, ver. 7.
still making the best Construction of what is dubious.

Christians should not readily take offenses, though really given.
But suppose it be an offense really given, yet let not Christians be ready to
take it. Be it

1. An offense offered to themselves. It is the wisdom of a man, (much more of
a Christian) to pass by many such offenses; either not taking notice of them,
or not being over affected with them. However, not meditating revenge for them.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, (says our Apostle,) ver. 19. of this
Chapter, Romans 12. And Recompense to no man evil for evil, ver. 17. much less
to Brethren. If the one foot by interfering, hurt the other, the other will not
do the like to it again. Let not the members of the mystical Body return
such unkind, and unchristian requitalls each to other.

But (secondly) suppose it be an offense against God, yet let not Christians be
offended; I mean so as to stumble at it. It is that which David says of godly
men, Psalm 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them. (...).
] There is no stumbling block to them, (says the Original,) Nothing so
offends them, as to make them out of love and liking with the good ways of
God, so as to recede, or turn aside from the path of his Commandments; but
still they go on: Whatever stumbling blocks are cast in their way, they step
over them, holding on their course. Thus do we; whatever offenses, scandalls,
stumbling blocks, we meet with (among which, it cannot be denied, the
scandalous courses of Professors are none of the least) yet be we not so
offended at them, as to think ever the worse of the ways by God, or the
Ordinances of God, or the people of God; but still hold on our way. If the one
foot chance to tread awry, trip or stumble, yet the other holds on its way.
And so let it be with the members of this mystical Body: Let them not be
offended one with, or by another.

To this I shall add one more, and but one. Are the members of the Church
members one of another, then let them not lie one to another. 5. The fifth
Negative Instruction. Lie not one to another.
This I take from the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.25. where he requires from his Ephesians
that they should put away lying, and that upon this account, For we are members
one of another, (...). Laying aside deceit, falsehood, lying. Whether it be, 1.
In speech. Or 2. In opinion. Or 3. In fact. Or 4. In life and conversation. All
these ways may Christians, Church Members, deceive and lie one to another. Let
each be taken heed of:

1. Lying in speech. 1. In speech, deceiving one another.
That is one of the Laws which God gives to his people, Levit. 19.11. Ye shall
not steal, neither deal falsely, nor lie one to another: This God requires
from the Jews. And the same our Apostle requires from Christians, Col. 3.9.
Lie not one to another.] This Christians may not do to any. It is one of the
Characters of those that are without (without the Kingdom of Grace here, and
Glory hereafter; and such as ought to be, and shall be shut out of the Church,
when Discipline comes to be duly executed; as in the last and purest Church
it shall be,) [Whosoever loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22.15. and 21.27. least
of all to their Brethren: Being all children of that God, who is the God of
truth, and truth it self, let them not deceive one another by lying in speech.

2. Or (secondly) in opinion: Seducing one another. 2. In opinion, seducing one
another.
It is an ill office when the eye seduceth, mis-guideth the hand or foot: which
willingly it will not do. And it is an ill office when the members of the
mystical Body shall seduce one another: as Ahabs Prophets did him, whom by
their persuasions they seduced, that he might go and fall at Ramoth Gilead, 1
King. 22.22. So did those lying Prophets, whom the Lord complains of, Ezekiel.
13.10. They seduced his people, saying, Peace, when there was no peace. So did
that New Testament Jezabel, of whom we read, Revel. 2.20. (some wicked woman,
either Jezabel by name, or Jezabel by condition, resembling that former
Beldame, one or both,) being a member of the Church of Thyatira, and calling
her self a Prophetess, (boasting of some divine and special Revelations) she
taught and seduced the servants of God. Such seducers there have been some or
other in all ages of the Church, (surely never more then in this Nation at this
day,) who taking upon them to teach, and pretending to some more then ordinary
Inspiration, seduce others, drawing them into dangerous and pernicious errors.
And no wonder; Should the foot usurp the office of the eye, and take upon it to
direct and lead the rest of the members, what could be expected but that which
our Savior tells us is to be looked for when the blind lead the blind, Matthew.
15.14. (a blind teacher, a blind people) that both should fall into the ditch?
The worst office that one member can do to another. And therefore let
Christians beware of it; and upon that account taking heed of usurping that
office which belongs not to them.

3. There is a lying in fact, 3. In fact, defrauding one another.
when the members of the Church shall hide themselves one from another. A thing
expressly prohibited, Isai. 58.7. Thou shall not hide thy self from thine own
flesh.] i. e. turn away thy face from thy brother in his need, as taking no
notice of him, and his condition; This should not Christians do from any, they
being of one flesh with themselves: much less from their Brethren, such as are
knit unto them in spiritual Relations; such was Peter's denial of his Master,
whom at his Arraignment first he would not own, and afterward for-sware,
Matthew. 26.70, 72, 74. And such was the dealing of Paul's friends and companions
with him, of whom he complains, that at his appearing before Nero, None stood
by him, all forsook him, 2 Timothy 4.16. Even as David's friends dealt by him, of
whom he complains, Psalm 38.11. My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my
sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off. This is a deceiving, a kind of lying one
to another.

Church-Benevolence not to be withheld.
And so is it when Christians shall defraud one another, by withholding one
from another that which is their due. Thus Paul would not have Husband and wife
to defraud one another, 1 Cor. 7.5. viz. by withholding one from another a due
Conjugall Benevolence. Let not Christians do the like, by withholding one from
another a due Church-Benevolence. Thus did Ananias and Sapphira lie unto God,
and man, (as Peter charge it upon them, Acts 5.4.) when they kept back part
of the price of their possession, which they pretended to come and lay down at
the Apostles feet for the Churches use. And truly little better do they, to
whom God having given a larger portion of this worlds goods, yet do not
communicate unto their poor brethren in some measure proportionably. It was
Paul's order to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.2. that upon the first day of the
week (the Lords Day,) every one should lay by somewhat in store (for the poor)
as God has prospered them. Now should any herein have dissembled, either
laying by nothing, or nothing proportionable to what God had blessed them with,
this had been a kind of lying both to God, and to their Brethren. And so is it
when men pretending to contribute to the necessities of the poor in a public
Congregation, shall choose out the worst of their Coin, ( clipped or
counterfeit,) not regarding what it be for quantity or quality, so it will but
ring in the Basin. What is this but for Christians to lie one to another? Now
surely, were it to give an alms to Prisoners in the Grate, or Dungeon (the
worst of malefactors,) either give what is good and sweet, or give not at all.
How much more to Fellow Members. Surely the members of the natural Body would
not so deal one by another. Should a portion of bread or meat be put into the
hand, it would not withold it from the craving mouth, and hungry belly. And
why? because they are members one of another. And so are Christians; being
Church Members, they are members one of another. And therefore let them not
defraud one another of what in this way is their due, a due Church-Benevolence.

Nor yet deceiving the trust reposed each in other: Like false friends, Trust,
not to be deceived.
which prove like staves of Reed to those that trust in them, (as the Prophet
compares Egypt, Isai. 36.6.) Or as Brooks in the Summer. It is Jobs comparison,
Job 6.15. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of
Brooks they pass away. Job hoped to have had some comfort from his kindred and
friends, (whom there he calls his Brethren,) in the time of his adversity, (
a brother is born for adversity, Prove. 17.17.) but then they failed him, (like
brooks in the Summer) when he had most need of them; so deceiving whatever
trust or confidence he had reposed in them: let not Christians so deal one by
another. The members of the natural Body will not do it. The legs will not
willingly deceive the body which rests upon them. But I hasten.

4. And Lastly, There is a lying in life and conversation, 4. In life and
conversation; Hypocritical Dissembling.
which in one word, is Hypocrisy. When men shall only act a part in the
Church; seeming to others to be what they are not. This will not Gods people
do, They are children that will not lie, Isai. 63.8. They will not play the
gross hypocrites. But so do many in the visible Church, who are no better then
as glassen eyes, and wooden legs and arms to the natural Body; which are
only tied on by some outward bonds and ligaments, having no life in them. Such
are there many, who out of some by and sinister respects cleave unto the body,
hold communion with the people of God; but they are nothing less in truth,
then in appearance. They are among them, but not of them, (as Saint John makes
the distinction, 1 John 2.19.) Such were the Scribes and Pharisees in the
Jewish Church: and such ever have been, and will be in the Christian Church.
Though persons openly profane, may be, and shall be shut out, Rev. 21.27. yet
Hypocrites, some or other, will keep in. Such as have a form of Godliness, but
no power, no life, no truth of piety in them; such as deceive themselves; nay
such as knowing themselves, yet deceive others, gross Hypocrites; such as join
themselves to the Church, putting on a vizard of public Profession, merely for
private advantage. Now what is this but for the members of this Body to lie one
to another? which, being members one of another, their reciprocal Relation
forbids them to do.

Thus have you seen some few (of many) negative Instructions, which may be by
way of inference deduced from this consideration of the Saints
Joint-membership: wherein you have seen what Christians should not do. Come we
now to the later sort, to positive Instructions, to see what they ought to do.

Are Church Members thus members one of another? Positive Instructions.
Then let them be admonished and exhorted to give such mutual respects Mutual
respects to be given by Church Members each to other.
one to another as are due upon the account of this Reciprocal Relation. These
I shall refer to two heads. They are Inward, or outward; Affections, or
Offices expressing those affections. Let Christians bear the one, and perform
the other, and that in a mutual way, as being members one of another.

Begin we with the former, Inward respects, 1. Inward Respects.
Affections, which ought to be mutual and reciprocal betwixt these
joynt-members. This is that which the Apostle means, where he presses it
upon his Philippians, that they should stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
Phil. 1.27. And again in the next Chapter, ver. 2. Fulfill ye my joy (says he)
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.
(...) (the same with (...), before) Concordes, of one heart, one soul. Thus
was it anciently said of two entire friends, (...), There was one soul in two
bodies. Thus should it be with Believers; though they be distinct persons, and
divided into several societies, yet they should have but one soul, be all of
one heart. Sois it in the natural Body, there are many members, but one heart.
Thus should it be with the members of the mystical Body, (O that it were so!)
they should have but one heart. So is it promised to the Church under the
Gospel in those known Texts, Jer. 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one
heart.] And accordingly it was performed in the Proto-primitive times, as you
shall find it, Acts 4.32. The multitude of them that believed, were of one
heart, and of one soul.] Unanimous in their judgments, and united in their
affections. O that it were so in these, and might be so in all times. All of us
pray for it, strive after it.

1. That we may be of the same mind, the same judgment. 1. Oneness of
judgment to be desired.
This our Apostle begs for; and from his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. (A Text
which I have heretofore handled in this place, and given a public account to
the world.) And this let all of us beg for our selves, and for all the Churches
of Christ, in this Nation, and elsewhere, that we and they may all be in this
sense like-minded, thinking and speaking the same thing. Thus is it with the
members of the natural body; many members, but one Tongue. Thus should it be
with the members of the mystical Body, they should all speak the same thing:
all looking the same way. In the natural body there are two eyes, and two
legs, but they both look and go one and the same way. Cross eyes, and
splay-feet, where the one looks one way, and another another, are no small
blemish and deformity to the natural body. And so are Crosse-Christians to the
mystical Body, such as are cross in their judgments, singular in their
opinions, and affect to be so.

2. Much more they who are cross in affections. It is that which I now more
directly and principally aim at, and I wish I may hit the mark. Christians, 2.
Christians should be of one heart, like affected toward each other.
though they cannot always be of the same mind, yet should they be of the same
heart. Though they cannot be like minded toward some controverted points of
lesser concernment, yet they should be like minded one toward another. So our
Apostle presses it upon these Romans, ver. 16. of this chapter, Be of the
same mind one toward another; (...): Be like affectioned one toward another;
A consectary fitly following upon this conclusion in the Text, Christians being
members one of another, let them be like affected one toward another,

1 Loving one another: 1. Loving one another.
Be ye like minded, having the same love (says the Apostle in that place
forenamed) Phi. 2.2. Love, as it is the bond of all Christian virtues, so it is
the bond of all Christian Societies; In both which respects it is called the
bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14. (...): The most perfect bond, tying hearts
together, which no other bond can do: And being so, it must in the first place,
be put on by all those who would join themselves to the mystical body: (...)
(says the Apostle there) Above all, put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness. This our Savior lays down for a character whereby his
Disciples may be known; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye love one another; Joh. 13 35. As malice is Satan's brand which he sets upon
his Goats, so Love, true Christian love, brotherly love (as the Apostle calls
it Heb. 13.1. (...)) it is the mark of Christ's sheep: All of us then who
profess such a Relation to Christ and his Mystical body, see that this
affection dwell in us; that we do unfainedly love all out fellow members: So
our Apostle presses it in the 9. verse after the Text; Let love be without
dissimulation; (...); a useful and needful qualification. There is a great
deal of seeming, but little sincere love in the world. Scarce is there a man
but makes some show of love, or friendship to his neighbor; yet how many in
the mean time have their hearts brim full of rancour and malice? Let Christians
seek after sincerity, as in all graces, so in this of love; that they may
embrace each other with mutual and cordial affection. So the Apostle there
prosecutes his Charge in the verse following, ver. 10. Be kindly affectioned
one toward another with brotherly-love,] (or in the love of the Brethren.) A
very emphaticall expression; Christians must not only be (...), lovers of the
brethren; but they must also be (...), kindly affectioned in that love. The
word properly signifies a Parentall love, such as is betwixt Parents and their
children; a natural love. Such should the love of Christans be toward their
brethren: wherein they ought to abound each to other. That is Paul's prayer for
his Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in
love one toward another, and toward all men. Thus was Paul affected toward
them, as it there follows; [Even as we do toward you.] And thus would he
have them affected toward their brethren, with an exundant love, so as it
might overflow even to others also, to all that came in the way of it. And it
shall be my prayer for you, all of you of this Congregation, and particularly
for you who have given up your names and selves anew unto Christ, to wait upon
him, and submit unto him in all his holy ordinances. And not for you only, but
for all the true Churches of Christ, and all the members thereof, (as
elsewhere, so specially) in this Nation; Now the Lord make you to abound in
love one toward another.

A low Ebb of Brotherly-Love in this Nation.
A Prayer (I think) never more needful since Christ had a Church upon earth,
then it is at this day amongst us in this Nation: wherein what a sad and low
ebb of this affection may we see every where. Divided heads have made divided
hearts; Division in judgment has bred division in affection: so as the love
of many is now waxed cold. So it was foretold by our Savior, Matthew. 24.11, 12.
Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. And because iniquity
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.] And surely, never was it more
truly and sadly verified, then in this Age, this Nation; wherein through the
seduction of false teachers, every where sowing the tares of their erroneous
doctrines, and the abounding of all kind of iniquity; the love of many, (many
professors) their love to God, and love to their Brethren, is now grown cold,
not showing it self as heretofore in the offices and exercises of true piety,
and charity. O that that God who causes the sea, when it is at the lowest
ebb, to flow again, would also cause a return of this Affection unto his
Church and people in this Nation! That those, who being members of the
mystical Body, are also members one of another, might be truly and cordially
affected each to other. which, were there no other argument to persuade, yet
(me thinks) this alone which I have now in hand, being duly considered, should
be abundantly sufficient. What? members of the same Body, and mutual members,
members one of another? and shall we not own one another? shall we not embrace
one another? be cordially affected each to other? Now the good Lord, who can,
and will make dry bones to live, revive this affection where it is dead, or
dying; and confirm it where it yet continues; that being thus members one of
another, we may fulfill the great and everlasting Commandment, which as it
has been taught from the beginning of the world, (as Saint John tells us, 1
John 3.11.) so is it to be practiced to the end of it, yea, to eternity. That
we love one another.

And that not impaling and confining this Affection within the narrow bounds of
that particular Society, to which we have a special Relation, ( love so
appropriated may well be suspected,) but extending it to all the true Churches
of Christ, and all the true members of those Churches, as being all members of
the same Body.

To this grand and primary respect, I may now subjoyne some other, which are
but as off-sets to this maine Root, daughters and handmaids to this Mother,
and Mistresse-Affection; as viz.

2. In the second place: 2. Sympathizing one with another.
Christians upon the account of their Joint-membership, thus loving one
another, let them also sympathize one with another. This do the members of the
natural Body; being joint-members, they sympathize, have a fellow-feeling
each with other. So much (did we not know it by experience) we might learn from
our Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.26. And whether one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. So
should it be with the members of the mystical Body; being fellow members, let
them thus sympathize one with another. So Saint Peter presses it, 1 Pet. 3.8.
Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another: (...),
Sympathizing, having a fellow-feeling of each others condition. Thus should
Christians be like affected with their Brethren, rejoicing with them, sorrowing
with them. So our Apostle here presses it upon these his Romans, bringing it
in upon the account of this their Joint-membership, ver. 15. of this Chapter,
Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. H. Grotius.
Drusius ex Rabbi Jud. ad loc.
An allusion (as some conceive of it) to the two Gates in Solomon's Temple; the
one of which was the marrying door, the other the Penitents door; and so those
who entered in at the one were merry and joyful; those who came in, or went
out at the other, were sad and sorrowful; to both which the Levites applied
themselves in their speech and demeanor suitable to their conditions, speaking
cheerfully to the one, mournfully to the other. Thus ought Christians to
sympathize with their brethren, being like affected with them both in regard of
joy and sorrow.

1. Rejoicing with them that rejoice; 1. Having mutual joys.
Rejoicing in the welfare of their brethren. In their Temporal welfare, not
envying it nor repining at it, but rejoicing in it: So did Elizabeth's
Neighbors and Friends (as the story tells us Luke 1.58.) When they heard that
the Lord had showed great mercy unto her (viz. in giving her a son) they
rejoiced with her. But specially in their Spiritual welfare; Are there any
entered or entering in at the Marrying door, coming in, giving up themselves to
be married to Jesus Christ, here is a matter of rejoicing; It is so with the
Angels in Heaven; There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one
sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. And so let it be to the Saints upon earth:
Do we see any who were before alienated, brought home unto God, either in their
first conversion, of returning after their defection and departing from him,
herein rejoice. It was meet that we should make merry and be glad (says the
father of the Prodigal to his malecontented son) for this thy brother was
dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found, Luke 15.32. And so where we
see any standing fast in the faith, walking in the truth, herein rejoice: So
did John on the behalf of the children of that Elect (honored) Lady (as he
calls her, and tells her, 2 John v. 1, 4.) I rejoice greatly that I found of thy
children walking in the truth. The like he tells Gaius in the following Epistle,
ver. 3, 4. And so was this our Apostle affected for these his Romans; Hearing
of the fame of their obedience, I am glad therefore (says he) on your behalf,
Romans 16.19. Thus should mystical fellow members rejoice one with another.

2. 2. Mutual sorrows.
And so mourn one with another; having a fellow feeling of each others sorrows
and sufferings. Such a Sympathy there is betwixt the Head and members of this
mystical Body; We have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, (says the Apostle, Hebr. 4.15.) (...). Christ
being the head of his Church, is sensible of the ailements of his meanest
members, Sympathizing with them; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (says
the voice from heaven, Act. 9.) The foot was trodden on upon earth, and the
Head feels it in heaven; And such a Sympathy there should be betwixt the
members of this body; and that both in their Spiritual distempers, and
Temporal Sufferings.

An Instance of the former we have in the Apostle himself, 2 Cor. 11 29. Who
is weak (says he) and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Thus did
he take to heart the Distempers, In Spiritual distempers.
Infirmities, Scandals of any weak member of the Church. The like should all
Christians do; not insult over the falls of their Brethren, but mourn over
them. Is it, so, that any are coming in at the Penitents door, being fallen
under the censures of the Church, of Suspension or Excommunication, or by any
scandal giving just cause for them? here is matter of Humiliation and Grief to
their fellow members who take notice of it: Paul charge it as no small crime
upon his Corinthians, that taking notice of a scandalous member, the Incestuous
person, They were puffed up, and did not rather mourn, 1 Cor. 5.2.

And so in Temporal Sufferings. In temporal sufferings:
Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13.3. Thus did the
Primitive Christians sympathize with their brethren in their bonds: so they did
with the Apostle, Heb. 10.34. Ye had compassion of me in my bonds, (...); They
sympathized, were as fellow sufferers with him; and as with him, so with other
of their brethren, as he tells them in the verse foregoing; Ye became
companions of them that were so used (meaning the Martyrs of those times): And
as in sufferings for Christ, so in any other losses or crosses, or ailements,
Christians should have a fellow-feeling with their fellow members, condoling
with them; not rejoicing at them; no, such an (...), rejoicing over the
miseries of others, is not only unchristian, but inhumane and unnatural; but
lamenting over them: Thus did David sympathize even with his enemies (as
himself tells us Psalm. 35.12, 13. Such as rewarded him evil for good, to the
spoiling of his soul (as he says, even to the taking away of his life, had it
lien in their power) Yet (says he) as for me, when they were sick, my
clothing was sackcloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, etc. And did he this
for his enemies? how much more should Christians do it for their Brethren,
their fellow members? Truly, not to be affected with the sufferings of Saints,
is a shrewd evidence of one that is no true member of the body; or if he be, he
is under some sad and dangerous obstruction.

To this let me add: As these mutual members should have mutual joys and
sorrows, so mutual Desires, and mutual Cares, and mutual Fears; I will but
touch upon each.

Mutual Desires or Well-wishes 3 Mutual wel-wishes.
each to other. Well-wishes for their Temporal, much more for their Spiritual
welfare: Such were the wishes of the beloved Disciple to his well-beloved
Gaius, 3 John ver. 2. Beloved, I wish above all things that thou may prosper
and be in health, even as thy soul prospers: Be in health in his body, and
prosper in his soul. These were the two things which the Heathens (according to
the light which they had) were wont above all things to wish to their friends,
(Orandum est ut sit men's sana, in corpore sano) that they might have sound
minds in hail bodies; Juvenal.
and I know not what Christians can better wish one for another, then sound
bodies, and sanctified souls: Thus the members of the natural body, by a
secret instinct they do, as it were, seek and desire the welfare each of other;
let the members of the mystical Body do the like; Let no man seek his own, but
every man another wealth (so our Apostle instructs his Corinthians 1 Cor.
10.24.) Not but that Christians both may, and ought to seek their own wealth,
their own Spiritual and Temporal welfare, and that in the first place, therein
preferring themselves before others: So runs the rule, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, Mat. 19.19. Now, Regula est prior Regulato, The rule
must be in order before that which is regulated by it: Christians must first
love themselves, otherwise they cannot love their neighbors as themselves: But
they may not impropriate these well wishes to themselves, but extend them to
others, to their neighbors, brethren, as being a part of themselves: So the
same Apostle expounds his own meaning, Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others; (...). Also: The desires
and well wishes of Christians, being fellow members, must be mutual.

And so should their Cares be: 4. Mutual c res.
So the Apostle presses it, 1 Cor. 12.25. The members should have the same
care one of another: So have the members of the natural body, they have a
mutual care for the preservation and welfare each of other. And so should the
members of the Mystical body; they should have such a mutual care specially
for the Spiritual welfare each of other. It is the commendation which Paul
gives of Timothy, that he did (...), naturally care for the state of his
Philippians, Philip. 2.20. Those things which concerned the salvation of their
souls, and the welfare of their Church. Such is the care of the natural, and
such should be the care of the mystical members; a natural, cordial,
sincere, affectionate care each for other.

And so again for their fears; they should also be mutual. 5. Mutual fears
and jealousies.
Christians should be afraid of each other, where there is just cause of
fear. So was Paul of his Galathians, when he took notice of their haltings; I
am afraid of you (says he) lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. Thus
Christians may and ought in some cases to have a kind of an holy jealousy one
over another: Jealousy is an affection which flows from love. And however,
being inordinate, it grows to great and sinful inconvenience betwixt the
nearest Relations, ( Jealousy is the rage of a man, Prove. 6.34) yet being well
ordered, it is an useful passion. Thus was Paul affected toward his
Corinthians, (as he tells them) 2 Cor. 11.2. I am jealous over you with a godly
jealousy. And thus Christians both may, and ought to be affected each to
other. When they shall see their brethren begin to warp, and turn aside from
any of their principles, and to suck in any dangerous errors, (which was the
case of those Corinthians,) or to fall from their first love, to abate of their
zeal and forwardness in the practice of Piety, now they not only may, but
ought to be jealous over them.

Only let it be with a Godly jealousy, A Godly Jealousy.
(...), (says the Apostle) with the jealousy of God: not out of any light and
ungrounded suspicion and surmise; not out of any by and sinister respect; but
with an eye to God, to his glory, and their brethrens good. And that Christians
both may and ought to be jealous over one another. As it is with the members of
the Body, if one of them have a tumor, a sore breeding, the rest are jealous
of it, fearing what it may come to. The like Christians may and ought to be
over one another in a like case; that so they may perform those offices each
to other, which their mutual relation in that case calls for. Which what
they are, I shall now come (in the second place) to show you.

Christians being Fellow Members, 2. Outward Respects.
and so bearing mutual Affections one to another, they are also to express
their affections by performing mutual offices each to other. So do the members
of the natural Body, (...) Manus fricat, manum lavat. Adag.
Manus manum, one hand rubbeth and washes the other. All the members of the
body are officious, ready to serve one another: the like should the members of
the mystical Body be. So the Apostle requires it from them, Gal. 5.13. By
love serve one another. This let Christians do; and not in word only (as the
mode of the times is, which has turned this to a complement, (and for the most
part it is no more,) Your Servant, Sir; Thus we hear men speaking sometimes,
whose hearts yet in the mean time would disdain and scorn to perform what
their mouth professes, and promises,) but in truth; being ready to approve
themselves servants to their fellow servants, by performing all Christian
offices of love to them.

Of these offices there are many, very many. I shall only single out some
chief and principal and such as are most obvious: which I shall desire you,
all of you, and in special you who are joined in Sacramental Communion in
this place, to take notice of, and make use of respectively.

A first shall be that which our Apostle himself does here in this place
properly and principally aim and drive at, viz. that Christians should make
improvement of their offices or gifts to mutual Edification. 1. Make
improvement of offices and to mutual Edification, whether
Thus do the members of the natural Body; having their several offices and
faculties, they improve and exercise them for the mutual good and benefit each
of other. The eye sees, the ear hears, the tongue speaks, the hand
works, the foot walks, all for the good one of another; being mutually
helpful each to other. And so let it be with Church Members. Let them make the
like improvement of their offices and gifts.

1. This are Public Officers 1. Public officers.
to do (in the first place.) Of them, and to them properly speaks Saint
Peter, 1 Pet. 4.11. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God. If any man minister, (viz. in any
other Church administration) let him do it as of the ability which God gives,
etc.] And of them speaks our Apostle in the verses after the Text. Having then
gifts differing one from another, according to the grace that is given us;
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith; Or
ministry, let us wait on our ministering, etc. And so he goes on, reckoning
up such gifts and offices as were then usual in the Church: All which he
requires those on whom they were conferred, to exercise and make use of
accordingly, to the common edification and benefit of the Church. This are
public Officers to do; Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, being as Eyes,
Tongues, Ears, Hands to the Ecclesiastical Body, they are to discharge these
offices carefully and faithfully for the good and benefit of their
fellow members.

And as Public Officers, so also private Christians. 2. Private Christians.
They being also members of the Body, they ought also in their places and
stations to do the like to their Fellow Members, Edifying one another. So the
Apostle presses it upon these his Romans, Chap. 14.9. Let us follow after the
things which make for peace, and wherewith one may edify another.] And the
like upon his Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.11. Wherefore edify one another, even
as ye do. Thus are private Christians, not only to build up themselves; which
Saint Jude requires they should do: Edify (or build up) your selves in your
most holy faith, Jude ver. 20. This are they to look to in the first place;
having laid a right foundation, they are in the use of all holy means to
confirm and advance themselves in their spiritual estate. But not only to
this: Building up themselves, they are also to help to build up others. It was
our Saviors direction unto Peter, Luke 22.32. When thou are converted, (viz.
from his approaching miscarriage) strengthen thy brethren. And the like are all
private Christians to do, having tasted of the mercy and goodness of God, in
bringing them home unto himself, they are now in their places to be helpful
unto others, in confirming and building up their brethren.

Q. Why, what shall private Christians do in this way?

Private Christians to edify one another in a private way.
Ans. To this I answer in the general, that what they do in this way, being
private persons, they are ordinarily to do it in a private way. As for the
public and ordinary teaching of private persons, unless it be in a case of
necessity, I know no ground, no warrant for it. What private persons do to
their brethren, must be in a way suitable to that state and degree wherein God
has set them. Otherwise they cannot in an ordinary way be freed from that
which the Apostle in the verse foregoing prohibits, of thinking of themselves
above what they ought to think. What they do regularly, must be in a private
way. And thus they both may and ought.

1. Teach and instruct one another. 1. Teaching one another.
So runs the Apostles direction to his Colossians, chap. 3.16. Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching one another.] Which is to
be understood not of public teaching, (which belongs to the Pastoral
Function,) but of private Instruction. Thus are more knowing Christians to lend
and communicate their light to their weaker and more ignorant brethren. So did
Aquila, (and possibly Priscilla too, who is joined with her husband, but
whether as a partner in the work, or only a wel-willer to it, is uncertain,)
teach and instruct that eloquent Apollos, Acts 18.26. Having heard him
preaching in the Synagogue, being then but a novice in Christianity, they took
him home unto them, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly. Mark
it; They took him home to them: not indoctrinating him in the Synagogue; not
disputing or reasoning with him in that open and public Assembly. No, that was
not for Priscilla to do, being a woman, and so not allowed to speak in the
Church; neither did her husband do it: but they take him home, being private
persons, they instruct him in a private way. A commendable office for one
Christian to perform to another, thus to teach and instruct one another, by
communicating their own knowledge, or experience; or by reading of good books,
or repeating of Sermons, or the like. Thus edify one another by way of
Instruction.

1. Admonishing one another.
2. And so (in the second place) by way of Admonition. So it there follows.
Col. 3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another, etc.] As Christians are (as
God offers them opportunity,) to teach the ignorant, so to admonish their
remiss and careless brethren. Where they see any thing amiss in them, in a
gentle and Christian way to reprove them. That is one of the Laws which God of
old gave unto his people, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. A Law
which is obliging to us Christians, no less then it was to the Jews; the
ground of it being piety toward God, and charity toward our neighbor. And
being so, be we not wanting in it: it being an office of greatest and truest
love. So David looked upon it. Let the righteous smite me, (says he) and it
shall be a kindness: And let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil,
which shall not break my head. As precious oil is to the head, so is
seasonable, wise, gentle, faithful reproof, to the heart; soaking into it, it
may do much good, no hurt. Let Christians look upon this, not only as their
liberty, but as their duty; I mean to their Brethren. As for others, persons
openly profane, Pearls are not to be heedlesly cast before such swine. Reprove
not a scorner, (says the wise man) lest he hate thee, Prove. 9 8. But mark what
follows; Reprove a wise man, and he will love you. This Christians may do;
this they must do to their brethren, that so they may not be accessory to their
sins, which by their silent connivence they may make themselves. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them,
(says the Apostle) Ephesians. 5.11. (...), Convince them, as by a Godly and
exemplary life, so by seasonable admonitions, and reprehensions.

3. Admonishing, they are also to exhort one another. 3. Exhorting one another.
Exhort one another while it is called to day, (says the Apostle to his
Hebrews) Heb. 3.18. And again, Cap. 10.25. Exhorting one another, This are
Christians to do, taking all advantages to put one another on to duty. So the
former ver. there explains it, v. 24. Let us consider one another to provoke
unto love, and good works. Thus are Christians to keep an holy watch over each
other; prudently observing one another dispositions and demeanours, graces and
infirmities, that so they may take all advantage to excite and quicken each
other to all duties of piety and charity. (...), (says the Original,) to the
sharpening of love. A metaphor taken from edge-tooles, which are sharpened by
whetting one against another. Thus are Christians to whet and sharpen each
other. So the Wiseman explaines the Metaphor, Prove. 27.17. Iron sharpeneth
iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. Iron sharpeneth iron
by mutual attrition; and thus Christians may and ought to sharpen one another
by mutual Exhortation; whetting one another spirits, exciting and quickening
each other to holy duties. Thus when the hands are cold or benumbed, by rubbing
each other they come to their natural warmth and vigor. And thus Christians
come to recover and keep their spiritual warmth, their zeal and fervor by
mutual incitations, exhortations.

4. Comforting one another.
4. Exhorting one another, they are to comfort one another. Comfort your selves
together; so our Translation rendereth that (and the word will bear it) 1 These.
5.11. (...), Comfort one another. Thus are Christians to do each to other in
times of public calamity: In public calamities.
Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, (says the Prophet
Malachy) Mal. 3.16. In those calamitous times, when the Church say under many
sad temptations, [When the proud were called happy,] (as you have it in the
verse foregoing) proud and presumptuous sinners prospered and flourished; they
carried the flag in the main-top, they were the only men: [They which wrought
wickedness were set up; yea, they which tempted God, were even delivered.]
Daring and desperate sinners, they were preserved, and protected, and delivered
from eminent dangers, as if they had been Gods special Favorites; whilst in
the mean time, it went sadly with those which feared God: A sad temptation! So
it was to David; When he saw the prosperity of the wicked, how they were not in
trouble like other men, but their eyes stood out with fatness; whilst in the
mean time, waters of a full cup, (a cup of affliction) were wrung out to Gods
own people; the one drank wine, and the other water; and that of the waters of
Marah, bitter waters; This when David saw, he tells us, his feet were almost
gone, his steps had well nigh slipped, Psalm. 73. ver. 2.3 5, 7, 10. And surely so
it was with the Church at that time. When they saw such crosse-providences,
Gods own people brought low, his and their enemies raised to the height of
temporal prosperity. Now, in this time, They that feared the Lord, spoke one
to another, and that often. As they were much in speaking to God in prayer,
(calamitous times are praying times) so they were frequent in speaking each to
other, for the animating and encouraging each of other to faith, patience,
constancy in obedience. The like are Christians to do each to other in the like
times.

And as in public calamities, so in private afflictions. In private
afflictions.
Herein Christians should be comfortable each to other. Thus if there be a
tumor in the leg or other part, the hand is ready to anoint it, to assuage the
pain of it. Thus should Christians in their painful sufferings, supple each
other with seasonable consolations. Which they are to do both in outward
crosses, and inward conflicts, in the sufferings both of the outward and inward
man. Of both these may we understand the Apostle, 1 These. 5.14. Where among
other Offices of love which brethren should perform one to another, he wills
them to comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak; i. e. comfort such as
were ready to sink under their crosses, and support such as were ready to faint
under their Tentations. Let Christians have a regard to both.

1. Outward crosses: wherein they are to comfort each other;
1. For comforting their fellow members in their outward crosses: In the loss
of Husband, Wives, Children, Friends, Estate, in sickness, and the like. In
these cases Christians are to comfort one another: Which they are to do,

1. By words, 1. By words.
speaking comfort; Wherefore comfort one another with these words (says the
Apostle to his Thessalonians, 1 These. 4.18. speaking of such as were in
heaviness for their deceased friends, whom he would have their brethren to
comfort by minding them of what he had said touching the Doctrine of the
Resurrection.) Such comfort Job expected from his friends when they came to him
in his distress, that they should have spoke comfortably to him, whom being
deceived in his expectation, he calls miserable comforters, Job 16.2. And
such Comforters David in his distress looked for (as he tells us) but he found
none, Psalm. 69.20. Christians! let not your brethren take up the like complaint
against any of you: This is one of Gods Attributes; He is a God that comfort
those which are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. And it is one of the best Offices that
one man can perform unto another. Job speaking of himself in the time of his
prosperity, and what respect he then had from the people, he says, he was as
one that comfort the mourners, Job 29. last. Let not Christians herein,
according to their power, be wanting to their brethren. Blessed be God (says
the Apostle) who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1.4. Thus do God's Patients receive heavenly
Cordials from the hand of their great Physician, not only for their own sakes,
but that they may be able (as occasion is offered) to minister to others of
their brethren; comforting them by words.

2. But not by words only; 2 In deed.
When need requires; they are to minister unto them real comforts: Such a
Comforter was Job in the time of his prosperity to the afflicted and
distressed: The blessing of them which were ready to perish came upon me (says
he, ver. 13. of that 29. chapter) and I caused the widows heart to sing for
joy: And such comforters God expects Christians should be to their brethren in
their distresses and wants: Not only giving them a few good words and nothing
else; there is but cold comfort in such an alms; If a Brother or Sister be
naked and destitute of daily bread (says Saint James to such comforters) and
one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled,
notwithstanding ye give him not those things which are needful for the body,
what does it profit? James 2.15, 16. For the hand only to stroke the foot being
in pain, is to little purpose, unless it also apply somewhat to assuage the
pain. Words being but wind, though they may refresh the spirit, yet they will
not cloth the back, or fill the belly. Christians, where God gives them
ability, must be real as well as verbal comforters to their brethren in their
outward distresses.

2. And so in their inward conflicts, 2. Inward conflicts.
Soul-Afflictions: When the spirits of brethren are dejected and cast down in
the apprehension of sin or wrath, How to deal with penitent offenders. (...),
etc. Castigario illa quae a Presbyterio fieri solet, more Judaico. Grot. ad
loc. A pluribus] Sic distinguitur haec in Presbyterio facta increpatio, tum a
privata, tum a publica coram universae Ecclesiae coetu, quod factum fuisset
necessario, si fuisset Satanae traditus.
now is a time to minister comfort to them. Thus the Apostle wills his
Corinthians to deal by that their scandalous brother, the incestuous person,
who being for a time under an Ecclesiastical censure, was brought to deep
humiliation and sorrow for his sin, he wills them not to deal too rigorously
with him, but rather to comfort him. Sufficient to such a man (says he, 2 Cor.
2.6, 7 is this punishment (or censure, (...)) which was inflicted by many.
(viz. by the Presbytery of that Church, as Beza and Grotius, and many other
rightly expound it): So that contrariwise you ought rather to forgive him and
comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow. So it was (as Beza Gr. Ann. ad loc.
Beza most probably conceives of it) that this brother having been sharply
reproved by the Church Officers, and being under a suspension or abstension
from communion with the Church, some there were, who having been before taxed
by the Apostle for their too great remissness and carelessnesse, now they
would have him further proceeded against, to be delivered up unto Satan by the
sentence of a more full and formal Excommunication, which was to be done in
the presence, and with the consent of the whole Congregation. But Paul
understanding of his deep humiliation and repentance, wills them to forbear
that rigor, not to proceed any further against him (which had he been already
excommunicated, they could not have done) but rather to forgive (to gratify
him, as the word (...) properly signifies, viz. by granting some indulgence to
him, remitting somewhat of that summum jus, that extremity of the highest
censure which he had deserved) and to comfort him, receiving him into communion
with them again, that so he might not be swallowed up in the gulf of despair.

A notable and famous president, Locus diligenter observandus: Donec enim qua
aequitate and clementia temperanda sit disciplina Ecclesiae, ne rigor modum
excedat. Calv. ad loc.
teaching Christians, such as are under a regular Church relation, how they are
to deal with their lapsed brethren, in whom they see tokens of humiliation and
repentance: In this case they ought not to be rigorous in seeking extremities
against them, for casting, or keeping them out of Church communion; but receive
them comfort them, renewing and confirming their love toward them (as it there
follows, ver. 8) So tenderly should Christians handle their fellow members,
as the members of the natural body would do theirs: So the Apostle directs his
Galatians, chapt. 6. ver. 1, 2. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are spiritual, restore such a one ((...), set him in joint again) in
the spirit of meekness, etc. Bear ye one another burdens, etc. Thus are
Christians to deal by their penitent brethren; not overloading burdened souls,
but supporting, comforting them. But I see the thread of my discourse is
already drawn forth beyond the staple which at the first I intended it. I shall
be brief in that which remains.

2. Forbear one another.
Thus edifying one another, let them also forbear one another, and forgive one
another: I put them together, because I find the Apostle so doing, Col. 3.31.
Forbearing one another; (...). A duty pressed by our Apostle upon his
Ephesians, chapter 4.2. With all lowliness and meekness, with long suffering
forbearing one another in love. Christians must make account sometimes to meet
with provocations, and that from brethren: So it is among natural brethren;
differences sometimes happen among them, and those not easily reconciled: A
brother offended (says Solomon, Prove. 18.19) is harder to be won then a strong
city; and their contentions are like the bars of a castle (which being strong
will neither bow nor yield.) And thus it sometimes happen to mystical brethren:
Differences fall in betwixt them (as did betwixt Paul and Barnabas, Act.
15.39.) which rise to some height. But thus it should not be, and thus it would
not be, had Christians but learned this lesson, to bear with one another
infirmities, to forbear one another; the strong Christian to bear with the
weak, etc.

And forbearing, 3. Forgive one another.
let them also forgive one another: So the same Apostle presses it in the last
verse of the same chapter. Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to another, tender
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you:
In which one verse there are three words worth the taking notice of, being of
great concernment unto Christians; I wish they were engraven upon every heart
that hears them, Christians should be, 1. Kind, (...), ready to gratify one
another, yielding each to other, wherein they may, as Abraham did to Lot, Genesis
13.8. 2. Tenderhearted, (...), a word peculiar to the Scriptures; and it
signifies to be pitiful: (so you have it rendered, 1 Pet. 3.8.) to be inwardly
and intimately moved with pity and compassion; to have the bowels easily and
affectionately stirred and moved at the misery of another. The 3d. is
Forgiving, (...), freely pardoning and passing by the offenses each of other;
thus does God forgive us (as it there follows in the next words) freely for
his Son Christ's sake; and thus do we forgive our brethren; both forgiving and
forgetting wrongs and injuries done to our selves.

4. Defend one another.
And thus forgiving, in the next place defend one another. This will the members
of the natural body do; if a blow be made at the head, or a thrust at the
body, the hand is ready to ward it off, to put it by: The like Office are
Christians to do one to another; Defending (as the lives, and estates, and
liberties one of another, so far as they are able and lawfully may (for which
they have Abraham for a Precedent, who made an adventurous attempt in the
rescue of his kinsman Lot, when he was taken and carried away prisoner by the
five Kings, Genesis 14.14.) so also of their good names; this is a thing which
Christians should be very tender of; as of their own good names, so of their
brethren (inasmuch as the Gospel whereof they make profession, and the Church
whereof they are members are interested in it) vindicating and maintaining of
their reputations against unjust slanders and calumnies, giving (as occasion is
offered) a free and just testimony each to other. So did John to our Savior,
Joh. 1.34. and so did our Savior to him again, Mat. 11.11 But I hasten.

5. Communicate each with other.
Again, thus defending each other, let them also communicate each with other: So
do the members of the natural body; and so let the members of the mystical
body.

Quest. But wherein communicate?

Not in what is evil.
Answ. I answer, first Negatively; not in any thing that is evil, Simeon and
Levi were brethren in evil, Genesis 49.5. That was their brand, let it not be
ours.

1. Here (in the first place) abandoned and abominated be that unclean and
beasticall communion, Abandoning, 1. Unclean and beastiall communion.
which upon this very ground was maintained and practiced by that impure
primitive sect of the Nicolaitans, of whose Doctrine and deeds you may read,
Rev. 2.6, 15. and is said (I fear with too much truth) to be both maintained
and practiced by some, and many of their followers, Familists and Ranters at
this day, viz. communion of bodies; which being a sin not to be named among
Christians (not being so much as named among moralized Heathens, as the Apostle
says of it, 1 Cor. 5.1.) I shall pass it by.

2. Abandoned be all uncivil and sensual communion, 2. Uncivil and sensual
communion.
such as that which the world calls good fellowship. Herein let not
Christians bear a part: As not in chambering and wantonness, so not in rioting
and drunkenness: So the Apostle puts them together, giving a joint inhibition
concerning them to these his Romans Romans 13.13. and S. Peter the like, 1 Pet.
4.3. These are among those unfruitful works of darkness, wherewith Christians
may have no fellowship, Ephesians. 5.11.

But they both may and ought to have a Christian Communion and fellowship,
Embrace Christian communion.
and that both Sacred and Civil: I will begin with the later, because I
principally intend the former.

1. Civil communion Christians both may and ought to have, and that in
Counsels, Purses, 1. Civil.
Tables.

1. In Counsels
1. In Counsels; Such a communion there was betwixt David and his friends
(probably Achitophel, as the Chaldee names him (being one of his Peers, his
equals (as he calls him) his guide and acquaintance, they took sweet counsel
together (as he tells us) Psalm. 55.13.14. Thus are Christians in their straits
and doubts to ask counsel of, to give counsel to, to take counsel each from
other. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart (says the Wise man): so does the
sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel, Prove. 27.9.

2. Purses.
2. Where need is they are to communicate Purses, Estates: So did some of the
Primitive Christians in an extraordinary way, suitable to the exigencies of
those times; Act. 2.44.45. All that believed were together, and had all things
common; And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as
every man had need: Thus did they at Jerusalem; which being peculiar to that
time and that place (for in other Churches we read not of the like) is not to
be made a standing precedent for after times; Paul writing to his Corinthians,
he orders them touching a Collection for the poor, that every one should lay
by somewhat, as God had prospered him, 1 Cor. 16.1: But this he needed not have
done, had there been such an absolute community amongst Christians (as
Anabaptists dream of.) No, Christians have a propriety in their Estates, and
that both by a civil and divine right. It is Paul's order concerning some
Church Members, who thinking to live upon the Churches alms, were negligent in
their callings, Them that are such (says he) we command and exhort by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work and eat their own bread, 2 These.
3.12. (...), their own bread, not other men's; clearly importing that Christians
have a propriety in their estates: And having a propriety in them, they are in
the first place to have a regard to themselves and families: If any provide not
for his own, (says our Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8.) (his near Kindred) and
especially for those of his own house (Parents, Wife, Children) he has denied
the faith, (though not in word, yet in deed) and is worse then an Infidel,
having cast away not only religion, but humanity. Thus Christians in the first
place both may and ought to have a regard to themselves and theirs.

But so in the mean time they forget not others of their brethren, to whose
necessities they are to communicate according as God has given to them: a duty
not to be forgotten: To do good and to communicate forget not for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. A lesson generally for all to whom
God has given any competent portion of this worlds goods; they who of their
superfluity cannot, yet even out of their penury are to cast in their Mite
into the Churches Treasury. But more especially for rich men: Charge them that
be rich in this world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate, (so Paul directs Timothy,) 1 Timothy
6.17, 18. Thus are Christians to be communicative to all; whose pressing
necessities call for it, as God inables them, reaching forth somewhat to their
relief. This the Preacher calls casting of bread upon the waters. Eccles. 11.1.

But specially to Saints. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
specially to them who are of the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. Such as through
the communion of faith, are made true members of the mystical Body, and so
joint-members with their brethren; these challenge a larger share in the
Christians liberality.

And I might add, amongst them, such as under a practical Church-Relation ought
to be looked upon by the members of that Society in the first place. It is in
Churches, as in Families, where the (...), the Domestics are first to be
provided for. But I am drawing to a conclusion.

3. Communicate Tables. 3. Tables.
So did the Primitive Christians, of whom we read, Acts 2.46. That they brake
bread from house to house,] which I understand not of a Sacramental, (for that
was mentioned before, as I shall show you anon) but a Civil Communion. So the
Syriack explaines it, (as our new Annotation takes notice,) Domi frangebant
portionem, they invited each other home, and eat together. The like is not only
lawful, but laudable for Christians to do, so as it be in a sober, and
moderate way, suitable to their condition. As for profuse and lavish feasting, I
have no warrant for it. In such ways men's tables become snares, both to
themselves, and others; and that more ways then one; snares to their estates,
snares to their bodies, and snares to their souls; exhausting the first,
surfeiting and distempering the second, destroying the third. And therefore, if
Christians upon special occasions do make more liberal and bountiful
provisions, (which I dare not in some cases prohibit) let them do it with fear.
St Jude sets it as a brand upon some in his time, These are spots in your
feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear,
Jude 11. Even those sacred feasts, those love feasts, which were annexed to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and intended for maintaining the Communion of
Saints, even they became a snare to some; they became occasions of sinful
inconveniences, whereupon they were justly left off in after times. How much
more may other feasting do the like, where there is no such bridle upon the
appetites of men as there was. But sober, moderate feasting, this becomes
Christians. Such were those Primitive meetings, (which the Greek Scholiaes,
(how solidly, I will not say) collect from that phrase, of breaking of bread,)
they were frugall and sober: such feasts best become Christians. To which,
according to our Saviors direction, they are to invite not only their richer
friends, but also their poorer brethren, (as you have it) Luke 14 12, 13, 14.
Here is the Christians civil Communion.

2. Religious Communion.
But there is another Communion, which is of an higher import. And that is
sacred, Religious Communion; which may be divided into Public, and Private.

1. Public.
1. Public: Christians as joynt-members of the same Body, are to have communion
and fellowship in public Ordinances, as viz. in the Word, Sacrament, and
Prayer. You meet them altogether in that one verse, Acts 2.42. where the
Apostle speaking of the primitive believers, members of the Church at
Jerusalem, he says, They continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. So he describes their
Church Communion; which was,

1. In hearing the word; 1. In hearing the word.
They continued in the Apostles doctrine, that is, in hearing them preach. To
which end they frequently repaired to the Temple, (as you have it, ver. 46.)
They continued with one accord daily in the Temple; viz. to hear the word, as
occasion was offered.

And hearing the word together, they had fellowship and communion in those two
other Ordinances, wherein Church Communion may be conceived more properly and
immediately to consist; viz. the Sacrament, and Prayer. Which are there brought
in, (as some not amiss look upon them, Vide Bezam. Gr. Annot.
) as two species of that Genus. So the vulgar Latin following the Syriack, and
some other copies expresses it, reading the words. Et communicatione
fractionis panis, and orationibus. V. L.
[They continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in the fellowship of breaking
bread, and in prayers.

2. 2. Receiving the Sacrament. Vide Bez. ad loc. Gr. Annot.
By the former of which I there understand the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
(so the Syriack there explains it, rendering it fractione Eucharistiae, the
breaking of the Eucharist.) Which is there, as also elsewhere (though not
often) called Breaking of bread: So called, not properly from the Sacramental
action of breaking the bread in the Sacrament (as I suppose it is vulgarly
looked upon) but rather with reference to their Love Feasts, whereof the
Sacrament was one and the principal part (as Beza and Grotius observe): Bez.
and Grot. in Act. 2.42. and 20.7.
Thus did they, (having a respect to the language of the Hebrews, who were wont
to call their whole Diet by the name of bread) they called those (as other
feasts) by the name of breaking of bread: And from thence it was translated to
the Sacrament, as being the chief part of those chiefest feasts; upon which
account (by the way) I conceive that that phrase (being used in a civil as well
as in a sacred sense, and primarily in the former) is not to be affected by us
above others which we meet with in Scripture; which as they are more common, so
do they more properly express and set forth the nature of that Sacrament.

Now herein (to return from whence I have a little occasionally deviated) those
Primitive Christians had frequent Communion; and so ought their successors to
have; frequently meeting together at the Lords Table, participating in that
Sacrament of the Supper; which as it represents and seals up their union and
communion with Christ, so it minds them of that union and communion, which
they have and ought to have one with another. In both which respects it is
called by the Apostle (in a language which I am sure cannot mis-become a
Christians mouth,) The Communion, 1 Cor. 10.16.

3. And so (thirdly) in Prayer. 3. Prayer.
Herein Christians are to join together in the public Congregation; Coimus ad
Deum, quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus. Tertul. Apolog.
surrounding, and as it were, beseeching the Throne of Grace, by their
Joint-supplications, (as the Father says the Christians in his time did.) Haec
vis Deo grata, (says he.) Nothing more acceptable unto God then such a sacred
and humble violence, wherein they are to join not only hands, and eyes in
lifting up them; or yet tongues, in saying Amen to the public prayers, (which
was wont to be practiced in the ancient Church, where the whole Congregation
was wont to sound out Amen, Hieron. in Prolog. in Epist. ad Galat. In veteri
Ecclesia Episcopo aut alio quovis Deum precante vel laudante, plebs accinebat,
Ame^; unde illud, Et resonaturis fecit aethera vocibus, Amen. Grot. in 1 Cor.
14.16. Calvin. Beza, etc.
with so loud a voice, as that it did instar tonitrui reboare, (as Jerome
speaks of it,) made the Church to ring again; and a practice not altogether
without precedent and warrant from the Apostolical Churches, where the manner
was, for every one to say Amen to the public prayers, as is not improbably
collected from that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4 16. But withal, and above all, to
join hearts together, Come let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in
the Heavens, (says the Church) Lam. 3.41.

To which let me subjoyne (what ought not to be severed, it being a part of
prayer,) the joint-praysing of God by singing of Psalms. Which being a divine
Institution, so much cried up in the Old Testament; and once and again
recommended by the Apostle under the New, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. ought not to be
abrogated, or laid aside; but conscienciously practiced, as being an Ordinance
tending (as to the Glory of God, which it does directly and immediately, so) to
the mutual edification and comfort of Christians. But I hasten. Here is the
Christians public Church Communion.

2. Besides which, there is also a private Communion, 2. Private, religious
Communion.
which being of great use, is not to be neglected: and that both in
conferences, and prayers.

1. In Conference. 1. In Conference.
Thus did Saint Paul upon his coming to Jerusalem communicate with the rest of
the Apostles, and others, whom he found there, as himself sets it down,
Galat. 2.2. The like are Christians to do, as occasion is offered;
communicating their knowledge, opening their doubts, and seeking resolution
from such as are able and faithful; being ready to give a reason of the hope
that is in them to every one that shall ask it, (as Saint Peter requires it) 1
Pet. 3.15.

2. And lastly, in their Prayers. 2. Prayers, praying for one another.
In private praying for, and as occasion is offered, one with another. So did
our blessed Savior for, and with his Apostles: I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith fail not, says he to Peter, Luke 22.32. And being to leave the
world, he commands him, and the rest unto God by prayer, as you may see it in
that most effectual prayer of his, Joh. 17. Where first praying for himself,
then he prays for his Apostles, and then for all other that should believe on
him to the end of the world: Therein setting a pattern for us, teaching us in
our prayers not to be mindful of our selves alone, but of others; as of those
who are more nearly related unto us, (as the Apostles were unto Christ) so of
all other Believers: So Paul directs his Ephesians, chap. 6.18, 19. Praying
always with all prayer and supplication for all Saints, and for me: This did
Paul for them, and for the rest of the Churches; in his private devotions he
still made mention of them: So he tells these his Romans, Romans 1.9. so his
Ephesians, chap. 1.16. his Colossians, chap. 1.3. and 4.3. his Thessalonians, 1
These. 1.2. and 5.25. And the like he requires them to do for him and the rest
of the brethren; Col. 4 3. 1 These. 5.25. A mutual office which Christians
should not be unmindfull of, thus to pray one for another.

Which as they are to do at all times, so specially when their necessities call
for it after any special manner. Thus when Peter was in prison, many of the
Saints went to prayer for him, Act. 12.12. Thus are Christians to remember them
that are in bonds, praying for them.

With one another.
And as they are to pray one for another, so one with another; as in Public (of
which I have spoken already) so, as occasion is offered in private. Thus did
Paul, being to take his leave of the Elders at Miletum, his last act was to
pray with them: When he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them
all, Acts 20.36. The like parting had he, and the Disciples at Tire, when they
had accompanied him to the sea side, where he was to take shipping, they
kneeled down on the shore, and prayed, Acts 21.5. The like are Christians to do
as they have occasion. And that not only to get their Ministers to pray with
them, which occasionally they are to do. It is Saint James his direction to
sick persons, that as they should pray for themselves, ( Is any among you
afflicted, let him pray, Jam. 5.13.) so they should send for the Elders of the
Church, (the Ministers) that they might pray over them, ver. 14. An office
which Paul performed to the father of Publius; being sick, Paul entered in, and
prayed with him, Acts 28.8. And the Ministers of the Gospel are still
occasionally to do the like, However they cannot lay hands on the sick, and so
heal them as Paul there did him, (that miraculous power, together with the
sign of it, (Anointing) being now ceased, having been peculiar to those
primitive times) yet they are to lift up their hands for them; which they are
to do ex officio speciali, as a duty belonging to them after a special manner,
by virtue of their office: but not only to them. This are other private
Christians also to do ex officio charitatis, as an office of charity. So it
there follows in that place of Saint James, ver. 16. Confess your sins one
to another, and pray one for another, that ye may he healed.

Thus have I briefly pointed at some amongst many of those respects and
offices, which Christians upon the account of their Joint-membership owe each
to other. Now what remains, but that (by way of conclusion) as a Minister of
Christ, in his Name I beseech, and require you, all of you, and in special you
who are joined in Sacramental Communion in this place; that you would have a
regard to every of these; that knowing what is your duty, you would seriously
apply your selves to a careful and conscientious discharge of it. Truly
Christians! shall you and I examine our selves for the time past, none of us
but shall find just cause of humbling for our failings in some, in many of
these. In the sense thereof, begging pardon for what is past, stir we up the
grace of God for the future; that whilst we perform duties of piety toward
God, we may not be wanting in duties of charity toward our Brethren. Now
consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

