A PARLIE WITH THE SWORD ABOUT A CESSATION, As it was delivered in a SERMON at
a Public Fast in the Church of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, December. 28. 1642.

By John Brinsley, Minister of the Word, and Pastor of an adjacent
Congregation.

Published for common use.

2 SAMUEL 2. 26. Shall the Sword devour for ever? know thou not, that it will
be bitter in the latter end? LONDON. Printed by G. M. for John Burroughes, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Golden Dragon near the Inner Temple gate in
Fleet street, 1643.

TO MY WORTHY FRIENDS, The well Affected Inhabitants of the Town of Great
Yarmouth.
Much esteemed in the Lord,
WHat you lately received from the Pulpit, take here from the Press, that what
was then Transient in the Ear, may be now Permanent to the Eye. Weak bodies
which are subject to Heart-tremblings and faintings, use to have their
Cordials, or Strong Water by them. To like purpose serves this Extract,
intended for an Aqua Coelestis, for the fortifying of your Spirits (in these
times of Common Danger) against what ever fears or dangers you may happily
encounter with. If you shall have need, make use of it; otherwise let it
remain by you; I dare assure you, it will be no ill store. However, I shall
leave it with you, and rest

Your servant in our Lord John Brinsley.

IT is Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning Printing, the seventh day of January, 1642 That this Book Entitled
A parley with the Sword about a cessation, be Printed.

JOHN WHITE.

A PARLIE WITH THE SWORD about a CESSATION.
JER. 47. VER, 6, 7. VER. 6. O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy scabberd, rest, and be still.
VER. 7. How can it be quiet? seeing the Lord has given it a charge against
Ashkelon, and against the Sea shore; there has he appointed it.

THis whole Chapter, Coherence.
upon perusal, we shall find it a Prophecy against those old enemies of God,
and his people, the Philistines: So much the first verse thereof acquaints us
with. The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the Prophet against the
Philistines, etc. The word of the Lord. And what Word was this? A word of
threatening, denouncing against them a judgment, a terrible judgment, the
Sword, the sword of a foreign enemy; so you have it, verse 2. Thus says the
Lord, behold waters rise up out of the North, and shall be an overflowing
flood, and shall overflow the Land, etc. What Waters were these? Why, the Army
of the Caldeans or Babilonians, which coming out of the North should
overrunne, overflow, and drown that whole Land with a sanguinarie deluge, a
deluge of blood: so the third verse explaines it. At the noise of the stamping
of the hoofes of the strong Horses, at the rushing of his Chariots, etc. the
Fathers shall not look back unto their Children for feebleness of hands.
Such should be the fear and terror that should surprise them, that it should
even take away all natural affections. So ofttimes in war it comes to
pass, where every one is put to shift for himself, the Father forgets the
Child, and the Husband the Wife. So sharp is this Sword, that it cuts in
sunder even the straitest bonds, and nearest relations.

This is the judgment here threatened against this Nation, this people. For the
further confirmation whereof, that the Jews, (for whose sake this Prophecy
was penned, and to whom it was directed) might not make any doubt of it, the
Prophet here in the close of the Chapter, the verses I have now singled out,
breaks forth into a most emphaticall Apostrophe, turning his speech to the
Sword it self, parlying with it (as it were) about a cessation.

In this Parlie two particulars are to be taken notice of; Division.
An Expostulation, and a Revocation. An Expostulation, verse 6. O thou Sword of
the Lord, how long, etc.] A Revoctaion correcting and answering that
Expostulation, ver. 7. How can it be quiet etc.]

In each of these, take we notice again of two particulars: In the former, the
Thing expostulated with, and the matter of the expostulation. The thing
expostulated with: the Sword; the Sword of the Lord.] The matter touching which
he expostulates with that Sword, is a Cessation. O thou Sword of the Lord, how
long will it be ere thou be quiet? In the latter, a Resolution, and a Reason. A
Resolution by way of answer to his former Expostulation, How can it be quiet?]
A Reason of that Resolution, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against
Ashkelon, etc.

You see the Particulars; I shall touch upon them as briefly as I may,
beginning with the first, which shall serve as a key to let us in to all the
rest: The thing which the Prophet here parlies, and expostulates with, The
Sword, the Sword of the Lord. O thou Sword of the Lord.]

The Sword, Explication.
what properly and literally it is, I shall not need to tell you. It were much
to be wished that it were not so well known amongst us as at this day it is.
Improperly the Sword still points out some Judgment: Generally, any notable
judgment. In this sense understand we the word, Psalm. 7. 12. where the
Psalmist speaking of the wicked man, he tells us that if he turn not, God will
whet his sword.] i. e. prepare for him, and execute upon him some terrible
judgment: In the same sense the Plague of Pestilence is sometime called the
Sword, So you have it, 1 Chronicles. 21. 27. where, speaking of the cessation of the
Pestilence, it is said that The Lord commanded the Angel, and he put up his
sword again into the sheath.] Every notable, terrible judgment is a Sword.
More rastrainedly, and peculiarly, the judgment of War. This in phrase of
Scripture is most commonly known by the name of the Sword. And will you know
the reason of it? Illiricus gives it fitly. The Sword it is Precipium organum
belli: It is one of the chiefest instruments of use and service in the wars.
In this sense understand the word in the Text. O thou Sword.] the Sword of a
foreign Enemy, the Army of the Caldeans or Babilonians, that should come up
against the Philistines.

And this Sword the Prophet here calls the Sword of the Lord, Doct.
O thou Sword of the Lord.] Such is the Sword, the judgment of war, it is Gods
Sword. So we find it in Scripture not unfrequently called. Ezekiel. 21. 3. Behold
J am against thee, and I will draw forth my Sword out of his sheath, says the
Lord.] Isa. 34. 5. My Sword shall be bathed.] Again v. 6. The Sword of the
Lord is filled with blood.] Jer. 12. 12. The Sword of the Lord shall devour
from one end of the Land to the other.] The Sword of the Lord, though in the
hand of Man. The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, say they, Judge. 7. 20. mark
it, though in Gideons hand, yet Gods Sword. Such was the Sword in the Text, The
Sword of the Lord, though put into the hand of the Babylonians. So the Prophet
Ezekiel explaines it, Ezekiel. 30. 25. When I shall put my Sword into the hand of
the King of Babell.] In whose hands soever, it is Gods Sword. Even as the Sword
of Magistracy, in whose hands soever it be found, yet still it is the Kings
Sword: In acknowledgement whereof, it uses where he comes in Person, to be
delivered into his hand. Thus this Sword, in whose hand soever, still it is
Gods Sword. The Sword of the Lord.]

A truth which I might make good (if need were) upon these two Swords, the
Foreign Sword, and the Civil or Domesticke Sword. Ecce duo gladij, Lo here
are two Swords, as the Disciples once said to our Savior, Luke 22. 38. The
Foreign Sword, the Sword of a Foreign Enemy: The Civil or Homebred Sword
(of the two the sharper, being like the Sword of Goliath, which cut off his own
head) the Sword of a Civil war. Each of these, the Sword of the Lord. For
the former, the Text is express. O thou Sword of the Lord, says the Prophet,
speaking of the Sword of a Foreign Enemy. And it is no less true of the
latter. It is that which the Story tells us of the Midianites, who being amazed
by Gideons frightfull stratagem, they fell foul one upon another, not without
a divine overruling providence. The Lord (says the Text) set every man's Sword
against his fellow, Judge. 7. 22. The Sword whether Foreign or Civil, still
it is the Sword of the Lord.

And well may it be so called, Reas.
it is both of his choosing and of his using.

1. 1
Of his Choosing, his appointing. So are generally all Rods, Hear the Rod and
who has appointed it, Mic. 6. v. 9. God does not leave it unto men to choose
their own Rods. True it is, once he did it, and but once that I remember.
David having provoked God by numbering of the people, the Lord sends him his
choice of three Rods (a hard choice) Famine, Sword, Pestilence. J offer thee
three things (says the Lord) choose thou one of them, that I may do it unto
thee.] 2 Samuel 24. 12. But this is not ordinary. Ordinarily God himself makes
choice of the Rod, the judgment wherewith he strikes. And choosing it, he
calls for it. So he does for mercies before they come. J will call for the
Corn, Ezekiel. 36. 29. And the like he does for judgments; this amongst the
rest, the Sword; it never comes before he calls for it. Lo I will call for a
Sword upon all the inhabitants of the Earth, says the Lord of Hoastes, Jer.
25. 29. It is he that calls for the Foreign Sword. In that day the Lord
shall hiss for the Fly that is at the uttermost part of the floods of Egypt,
and for the Be that is in the Land of Ashur, (says the Prophet, speaking of
the Egiptians and Assyrians, which God intended to bring against his people)
Is. 7 18. And it is he which calls for the Civil or Homebred Sword. I will
call for a Sword against him (says the Lord, speaking of Gog and Magog the
principal enemies of the Church) and every man's Sword shall be against his
Brother, Ezekiel. 38. 21. The Sword, whether Foreign or Civil it is a Rod of
Gods choosing, and in that respect may well be called his Sword.

2. 2.
As of his Choosing so of his Using; as of his calling so of his sending, which
he does not without a Charge: so you have it in the Text. The Lord has given
it a Charge against Ashkelon, etc.] wherein the Prophet gives a Reason why he
calls this Sword, The Sword of the Lord; because the Lord had given it a
Charge. So he does wherever the Sword comes, he gives it a Charge, a
Commission: not only a Permission, but a Commission, and that under Seal. It
is that which Job says of all Afflictions and Judgments, Job 33. 16. The Lord
opens the Ears of men even by their cor^ections, which he had sealed. i. e.
determined; so the Geneva both reads and interprets that place. God never
sends a judgment, but he seals it, giving it a Charge, a Commission, and
that, as it were, under Seal. So he does by the Sword, which never comes
without a Commission, a Charge, and that from God, who charge and orders
it: 1. Whither it shall go. 2. How far it shall advance. 3. How long it
shall stay. 4. And lastly, What execution it shall do. In all which respects it
may be well called, The Sword of the Lord.

1. It has a Charge from God whither it shall go; to what place, to what
Kingdom, what part of that Kingdom: so much we may read in the Text. The
Lord (says the Prophet) had given the Sword a charge against Palestina, the
land of the Philistines; and that not only against the Country in general, but
against some particular places in it. The Lord has given it a charge against
Ashkelon, and against the Sea coasts.] Ashkelon, one particular City of the
Philistines, an inland City, paulo remotior (as Calvin notes upon it) a little
more remote from the Sea Coasts, viz. Tire and Sidon, of which the Prophet
speaks, v 4. Maritine Towns bordering upon the Sea. Now the Sword had a
Commission against each of these. Not only a general, but a particular Charge:
so has it where ever it comes, a Charge not only to go to such a Country,
but such a part of that Country. A charge given it by God.

2. As a Charge whither it shall go, so How far it shall advance: Whether it
shall go to one part of the Land, or through it: so much we may pick out of
that threatening. Ezekiel. 14. 17. If I bring a Sword upon that Land (says the
Lord) and say, Sword go through the Land. This Sword, how well backed soever,
it can advance no further then it has a charge, a command to do, and so far
it shall go. This also we may read in the Text. The Sword of the Lord had a
charge against Ashkelon, and against the Sea coasts,] it should not only touch
the skirts of the Kingdom, but the inland part also.

3. How long it shall stay where it comes; whether it shall be only Transiens
gladius, a transient Sword, passing through the Land, or else Permanent,
staying and abiding, making it the Seat of a war. So much again we may
learn from the Text, where the Prophet treating and Parlying with the Sword
about a Cessation, How long will it be ere thou cease? etc.] In the next verse
he corrects and answers himself, How can it cease seeing the Lord has given
it a charge?] a Charge, viz. how long it shall continue, and abide wasting and
spoiling in that Land.

4. What Execution it shall do. This also the Sword has in charge from God:
whether it shall sip and taste of blood, or else be bathed and made drunk with
blood. Express and emphaticall is that of the Prophet Isai, Isa. 34. 5. My
Sword (says the Lord) shall be bathed or made drunk in Heaven.] A notable
expression. The Sword is never made drunk upon Earth, but it is first made
drunk in Heaven. First made drunk in Heaven in the Decree and Purpose of God,
before it be made drunk upon Earth in doing Execution, which is but the
Execution of that Decree. When God sends a Sword against a Nation, he gives it
a particular Commission, and that not only against such or such a place, but
against such and such particular persons. So much is intimated in that full
expression, Isa. 65. 12. where the Lord denouncing vengeance against those
rebellious ones, which had stopped their ears against his Call, he tells them
he would number them to the Sword. Therefore will I number you to the Sword]
mark it: where God gives over a people to the Sword, he does it not by the
gross, but by number and tale. Such as are appointed to the Sword go to the
Sword, as the Prophet Jeremy has it, Ier. 15. 2. They, and none but they. God
giving over whom he pleases, and exempting whom he pleases. The one shall not
escape, the other shall not be touched. It is the Lords promise to King
Zedekiah, that notwithstanding he should fall into the hand of his Enemies,
yet he should not perish by the Sword, Thou shall not die by the Sword, Jer.
34. 4. The like protection he gives to Ebedmelech the Black-moore, Jer. 39. v.
last. Thou shall not fall by the Sword.] The Sword when it is sent against a
people, it is not left to the casualty of Chance or Fortune, nor yet to the
will of him that uses it. God himself gives it a Commission, a Charge; a
charge, as whither it shall go, and how far it shall go, and how long it shall
stay, so what blood it shall draw. And in all these respects well may it be
called, The Sword of the Lord.

To these let me add yet one thing more. The Sword where ever it goes, it
goes upon Gods errand, to avenge his quarrel. This is that which the Lord
tells his people, Lev. 26. 25. I will bring a Sword upon you that shall
avenge the quarrel of my Covenant.] Mark it; The Sword is never unsheathed,
it never goes forth upon any service, but it is in Gods quarrel; to take
vengeance for some wrong, some affront, some indignity offered to him, or to
his people. To such a purpose the Sword in the Text served. It was to go forth
to avenge the quarrel of God against the Philistines, those inveterate enemies
to him and his people, to take vengeance upon them for all the wrongs and
injuries that they had done to the Ark of God, and to the people of God. Never
does the Sword go forth but upon some such quarrel. God has first a
Controversy with a Land, (as the Prophet Hosea speaks, Hos, 4. 1.) before he
send the sword to decide it. The Quarrel is his, and therefore the Sword may
well be called, His Sword. [O thou Sword of the Lord.]

A useful Point; Application.
and so let it be to every of us. That is the business I mainly intend at the
present, it being most suitable to the day, and occasion, which calls rather for
Application, then Doctrine. That it may be so unto us.

In the first place bring we home this general Truth to the particular case of
this Kingdom, Use 1.
in the bowels whereof there is a Sword, Information.
a sharp Sword, wandering and forraging, wasting and spoiling; It may be at
this very instant eating of Flesh, and drinking of blood. A Sword not unlike
that in the Text, which begins at Ashkelon, reaches to Tire and Sidon,
beginning in the inland parts of the Kingdom, extends to the Sea Coasts,
some whereof have already felt of it, and the rest being in daily expectation
of it. Now this Sword know we it to be, as it is, The Sword of the Lord, and so
look we upon it; which till we do, we are not capable of making a right use
of it. It is so in all judgments, all corrections; till we come to see God in
them, we shall never make a sanctified, a Christian use of them. It is so in
this great, and soar judgment, (for so indeed it is, no judgment piercing
deeper, The Sword reaches: unto the soul, says the Prophet Jeremie, Jer. 4.
10.) Now that we may make a right use of it, that use which God would have us
to make, give way to this conviction, acknowledging this to be Gods Sword.

True, it is in the hands of men, managed (as we think) by them, but alas what
are they? Instruments. At the most, (...), Living and Rational, (I dare not
say Reasonable; Paul tells us of Wicked and Unreasonable men (so our
Translation renders it, 2 These. 3. 2.) but Rational) Instruments, as the
Philosopher says of Servants. A Living Sword as the Father says of a Dog,
Greg. Nyss.
that he is Vivus hominis gladius, A living Sword to his Master. Such are men,
specially wicked and ungodly men, to God. The wicked which is thy Sword,] says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 17. 13.

And so look we upon this Sword which is abroad, and at work in some parts of
this Kingdom already, know we it to be Gods Sword; A Sword which he has both
called for, and sent; having given it a Warrant, a Charge whither to go. He
that here gave the Sword a charge against Palestina, against Ashkelon, and the
Sea Coasts, has now given it a charge against England, and against the
several places where either it has come, or shall come. Look we not then too
much at secondary causes, at the Malignancie of what ever spirits we conceive
to have been Incendiaries in the State. Alas what are they? Instruments,
Bellows, which may blow up, but cannot kindle a fire. Nor yet attribute we too
much to those imaginary observations of fatal Revolutions, or Ominous
Conjunctions of those heavenly Bodies. So far the Astrologer goes (upon what
ground I know not.) A Christian must go further, not staying his thoughts upon
earth, nor yet terminating his sight in the visible Heavens, but looking
through all, let him behold this Sword, furbished and bathed in the highest
Heavens, the Heaven of Heavens. So much God taught the people of the Jews by a
sign from Heaven, by that prodigious Comes, that flaming Sword hanging
perpendicularly, with the point downwards, over the City Jerusalem for a year
together before the destruction of it; thereby showing them from whence the
Sword should come against them. I am not over-credulous of a flying report
which informs us of a like prodigy in this Nation, a like Sword, hanging
after a like manner not many years since over the head of that place, that
City, which at this present is made the seat of the War. Sure I am, from
thence it is, that the Sword drops upon the head of a place, a City, a
Kingdom. It is that which Eliphaz in Job says of all affliction, all trouble,
It comes not forth of the Dust, neither does it spring out of the ground, Job
5. 6. Apply we it to this great Affliction, this great Trouble, The Sword
comes not out of the dust, neither does it spring out of the ground.
Certainly the Original of it is from Heaven. However in the hand of Man, yet
it is the Sword of the Lord.

And is it so? Use 2. Terror.
And do we so apprehend and believe it to be? Oh then stand we in awe, and
tremble before this Sword. The Lion has roared who will not fear? says the
Prophet Amos, Amos 3. 8. The Lord God, the Lord of Hoastes has drawn his
Sword, who shall not tremble at it? The Sword of the Lord. And what a Sword is
his? Why a fore and great, and strong Sword, so you have it described, Isa. 27.
1. And being so, who or what shall oppose this Sword? How shall it be diverted?
how shall it be stayed, quieted? This it is which the Prophet here chiefly
drives at in the Text, where (as I told you) he seems to Parlie with the Sword
which was coming against the Philistims, treating with it about a cessation. O
thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self
into thy scabbard, etc,] (Here give me leave to return a little to the Text,
interweaving Explication with Application, that the one may be as the Woofe,
the other as the Warpe.) This the Prophet speaks not in his own person, out
of any commiseration, or special affection that he bare toward this people,
being enemies to God and his people, but rather (as Mr. Calvin notes upon it)
personating the Philistines themselves, who, when they saw the Sword coming
toward them, or busy amongst them, they would then begin (to use his words)
mulcere blanditijs, to flatter it, using all carnal politic ways, and means
of Treaties and Pacifications, seeking and endeavoring either the diverting,
or quieting of it. But the Prophet tells them, all their attempts and
endeavors in this case should be bootlesse: This Sword being the Sword of the
Lord, and having a charge from him, it would not be bribed, it would not be
persuaded, nor yet opposed, or by any means taken off, or quieted, till it had
done the Execution for which it was sent. How can it be quiet seeing the Lord
has given it a charge against Ashkelon, etc. There has he appointed it.]
Appointed it. In this word Calvin finds a special emphasis, and therefore
renders it not precepit ei, but Contestatus est ei. Not only, he commanded, or
appointed the Sword unto that service, but he bound it to it by a kind of
solemn Contestation, laying a solemn Charge upon it, binding it as it were by
a Military Oath, or before witness, as the word ( Tegnatha) may seem
properly to signify, viz. to go thither, and not to return or be quiet, till
it had done the work for which it was sent; until it had over-runne, and
utterly overthrown that whole Kingdom.

And O who knows whether the Lord has given such a Charge to this Sword of
his which is now come amongst us? The Sword it self, that is unsheathed, and
drawn; I, but the Charge, the Commission which it brings with it, that is as
yet in part sealed. The Lambs Book in the Revelation, it was sealed with six
seals, Rev. 6. which were not to be opened all together, but one after
another, some of them not yet opened. We may say the like of this Commission
which the Sword has brought with it, God has sealed it with diverse seals,
some whereof are opened already, in those sad effects and consequences which it
has already produced; but who knows what is yet behind? How far the Sword
has already gone, and what it has done, we see or hear of; but how far it
may yet go, how long it shall continue amongst us, what execution it shall
do, who can tell? Certainly the Charge which God has given it, it will
observe, and who shall say unto it, be quiet? how shall it be opposed? how
shall it be stayed?

Alas, in this case, all carnal ways and means, whether Power, or Policy,
will be to little, to no purpose. If God have given the Sword a charge against
Ashkelon, it is not all their Land forces, their Rampires and fortifications,
that shall keep it from entering. If he has given it a charge against the
Seacoasts, it is not all their Navall strength, their wooden-walles, their Sea
Forces, shall be able to keep it off. If he has given it a charge to go
through a Land, it is not an Army of Anakims, or Zanzummims, suppose every one
a Goliath, that shall be able to stop the course of it.

This I speak, not to dishearten, or discourage any, in these times of common
danger, from using any lawful ways and means, for the securing of
themselves, or the places where they live from foreign, or homebred
outrages. This we may do, this we ought to do. But withal know we, that when
we have done what we can do, yet, if the Sword come backed with this charge,
if the Lord have given it a charge against a place (suppose this place) as it
will not be bribed, so neither will it be opposed, or hindered from doing that
service, that execution, for which it is sent.

In the fear of God then, let us no longer delude or flatter our selves,
suffer not vain thoughts to lodge within us, bear not our selves upon any
possible or probable hopes, or carnal confidences whatever. Think not to say,
the Sword is yet a far off, in the remote parts of the Kingdom; Alas, we
see, or hear what progress it has already made; how like lightning it has
run from one corner of the Land to the other; how it has visited parts as
distant from the first breaking of it forth, as those wherein we at the present
are. And who knows whether God has given it a Commission to go through the
Land? If so, be we assured it will find a time to visit us also. If the Sword
come to Ashkelon, it can soon visit the Sea coast. Feed not our selves with
possibilities;

Nor yet with the supposall of any special security in the place where we are.
Alas were it never so populous, never so strong by nature and art, never so
well fortified, yet, if the Sword have a charge against it, all will be
nothing. The Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon, says the Text.
Ashkelon, one of the chief Cities of the Philistines, if not the Metropolis,
the head City, yet one of the chief, an Imperial City, the seat of their
Kings, where they were wont to keep their ordinary residence. So much we may
collect from that of the Prophet Amos, Amos 1. 8. where the Lord threatening
vengeance against diverse Cities in that Kingdom, amongst other he tells them,
that he would Cut off him that held the Scepter from Ashkelon. There was the
Kings Court; A Royal City, a populous and strong City, yet the Sword has a
Charge against it. It is not the multitude of people, nor yet the strength
whether of Natural or Artificial Fortifications, that shall be able to keep
out the Sword, if the Lord give it a charge to enter. This is the lesson which
the Prophet Nahum reads to the inhabitants of Nineveh, Nah. 3 8. Ninoveh the
Imperial City of the Assyrian Monarch, for Circuit, People, Walls, Towers,
Fortifications, all incredible; yet, (what says the Lord?) Art thou better
then populous Noe, that was situate amongst the Rivers, that had the waters
round about it, whose rampart was the Sea, and her wall was from the Sea, etc.]
Mark it, Noe, the City of Alexandria, (as it is generally conceived,) a famous
Port Town in Egypt, for situation, (by the Prophets description of it) not
much unlike that wherein we now are; strongly fortified both by Sea and Land;
withal at that time secured, and strengthened by the Confederacies, and
Associations of potent Neighbors: so it follows, ver. 9. Ethiopia and Egypt
were her strength, it was infinite, Put and Lubim, (Africa and Lybia) were thy
helpers;] Yet all this could not secure her. Yet was she carried away, she went
into captivity, etc. v. 10. I shall not need to make the Application: It
applies it self, teaching us not to repose any confidence in any Local
Advantages, or Neighboring Associations.

Nor yet in any Personal Protections, which men in such cases are very ready
to forge unto themselves, promising to themselves a Personal security in the
midst of Common Calamity. This the great men of the world are very ready to
do. But alas upon what ground? If God once give the Sword a charge against
them, it is not Greatness, it is not Honor, it is not Estate shall buy, or
bear off the blow. I remember what the Lord says to Job concerning Behemoth,
the Elephant (as it is thought,) Job 40. 19. He is the chief of the ways of
God, (the chiefest amongst the Bruit Creatures) yet, He that made him can make
his Sword approach unto him.] Though man dares not come nigh him, yet God has
the same command over him, that he has over the meanest of his Creatures. Let
it be applied to the Behemoths of the world, the great men, the mighty men, who
are oft-times a terror to their underlings; let them know, that He which made
them, can make his Sword approa^h unto them; which if it do, it will put no
di^ference betwixt them, and others. It is that which David bids the Messengers
say unto Joab upon the death of valiant and worthy Vriah. The Sword devoureth
one as well as an other. 2 Samuel 11. 25 In this like him that sends it, (...),
No respecter of persons; not regarding Age, Sex, Condition. A truth which the
Prophet sets forth most fully in that elegant Allegory, Isa. 34. 6, 7. The
Sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with the blood of the
Lambs, and the Goats, with the fat of the kidneys of the Rams, etc] Mark
it, Lambs, Goats, Rams, denoting persons of all ages, all conditions: Young
as well as Old, Rich as well as Poor. I, the Unicorns shall come down with
them, and the Heighfers, (so the Geneva re^des it, though I confess not so
properly, the word being there Masculine, not Feminine, Parim, not Paroth, not
Heighfers, but Bullocks) the Bullocks with the Bulls, as the new Translation
has it, meaning thereby the mighty, and rich men of the Times, which should
fall by the Sword as well, and as soon as any other. But what then? shall
Women be exempted? Not so. The Prophet Amos, Cap. 4. v. 1. insisting in the
same allegory, he threatens the very same judgment against Kine, as the
Prophet Esai had done against Bullocks, and Bulls Hear this word ye Kine of
Bashan,] where the word (as Pagnine observes) is Feminine, not Parim, but
Paroth, not Bulls or Bullocks, but Kine or Heighfers; meaning thereby (as he
interprets it) Pingues and Potentes foeminae, the high fed, pampered Dames of
Samaria', who gave themselves over unto sensual, and voluptuous courses; And
them he threatens there with a share in that common judgment, they should
feel of the Sword, or fly before it as well as others; So it follows, ver.
3. Ye^ sha'l go out at the breaches, every Cow at that which is before her,
i. e. The women should be put to a confuted flight, to shift for themselves, as
well as any other. So impartial an Officer will the Sword show it self, when
it comes to do execution, it shall observe the Charge given it against
whomsoever, proceeding according to the warrant which it has received, not
sparing any which by divine appointment are destinated to it, be they what
they will. The fourbished Sword in Ezekiel. ca. 21. 10. It despises the rod of my
Son, as every Tree (says the Lord) the Scepter, as well as the Coulter,
putting no d^fference betwixt Prince and Peasant. And no wonder. It is the
Sword of the Lord* O then, let us fear and tremble before this Sword; knowing
that it is no carnal way or means, w^^ther Power or Policy, that shall
divert, or hinder this Sword from doing that execution, which God has given it
in charge.

But yet in the 3d. Use 3.
place, whilst we fear and tremble, Let not our hearts melt before it; Comfort.
be we not wholly dismayed or disheartened at it; still remembering, it is the
Sword of the Lord. Not the Sword of Man. True, it is put into his hand, but yet
not his Sword. Remember, Man is but the Instrument, the Executioner in this
service. Which yet makes this judgment the more terrible, because Man has so
much an hand in it, as he has. It was David's reason, why of those three great
evils, he chose the Pestilence, as the least; Pestilence rather then the Sword,
in the one he had to deal only with God, in the other with Man. Let us fall
into the hands of the Lord (says he) for his mercies are great, and let me not
fall into the hands of man, 2 Samuel 24. 14. Pestilence is Gods own more
Immediate streake: In war (though that be his work also, yet) he makes use
of Man as his Instrument. Now with God there are mercies, I great mercies, but
with man oftimes there are none, Homo homini Lupus, nay Demon. Man is
sometimes to man little better then a Woolfe, a Devil, a merciless Enemy. We
know what the Wise man says of the wicked man, Prove. 12. 10. The mercies (the
tender mercies, the bowels) of the wicked are cruel. And if their Mercies be
cruel, how great is their Cruelty? As our Savior says of the Eye which is
the light of the Body; If that be dark how great is that darkness? Mat. 6 23.
So, if the very bowels (the proper seat of tenderness and compassion) be
cruel, o how great is that cruelty? In this regard it must be acknowledged,
war is the more dreadful judgment, more terrible then either Famine or
Pestilence, both which ordinarily are attendants upon the Sword. Man has an
hand in the one, not so in the other. Yet know we, and know it to our comfort,
man has not so an hand, but that God has an hand in it too, I, the chiefest
hand. God does not so put the Sword into the hand of man, as to leave the
managing and handling of it wholly unto him. No, should it be so, Gods people
must look but for little mercy, no favor, nothing but the height and
quintessence of Cruelty. But here is the Comfort: man is but the Instrument,
God himself the principal agent, ruling, overruling, handling that Sword
which he puts into the hand of another. So the Geneva Translation reads that
of the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 21. 11. Where the Prophet speaking of that sharp
Sword, which the Lord would put into the hand of the Babylonians, arming them
against his people; He has given it (says he) to be furbished that he may
handle it. ^ Mark it. God in giving the Sword into the hand of man, does not
give it out of his own hand. He gives it to him, ad tenendum in vola (as
Montanus renders the words according to the Original) to hold in his hand;]
but not to use as he pleases. Even as a writing-Master puts a pen into the
hand of his young Scholar, which yet himself guides: Thus God puts the Sword
into the hand of man, which yet himself handles. Man holds it, God handles
it: Man being but (as I said) Gods Instrument, his Sword. As the Sword is to
man, so is man to God. The wicked who is thy Sword, in the place forenamed,
Psalm. 17. 13. Now the Sword, though a sharp and dangerous weapon, yet it
wounds not, it hurts not, unless he which wears it strike with it. Wicked
men suppose them never so sharp set against the Church, and people of God,
though Swords, nay Razours (so the Prophet calls that Assyrian Monarch,
Novacula mercenaria, or conductitia, a Razour which God had hired to shave his
people with, Isa. 7. 20. In that day shall the LORD shave with a razour that is
hired, etc.] yet cannot they draw the least drop of blood, or take off the
least hair from any, unless God himself make use of them to that end. He it
is that handles this Sword, that shaveth with this Razour.

A sovereign Consolation and Cordial, against the terrors of the Sword
(terrors; which Gods people may be subject too. Terrors by reason of the
Sword shall be upon my people (says the Lord) Eze. 21. 12.) to keep the heart
from fainting, melting. Let it be taken down and digested by every of us.
There is a Sword, a sharp Sword abroad, and at work at this day in this and
the Neighbor Kingdom. Many parts in both it has already visited, and it
threatens the rest. Some blood it has already drawn, and it seems yet to
thirst after more; doing terrible executions where it comes: A Razour indeed,
shaving to the quick. Yet let not the hearts of the Lords people melt before
it. Remember we whose Sword it is, The Sword of the Lord.] And what? Our
Fathers Sword? and in the hand of our Father? Bear we up our spirits. A Ch^d,
how ever at the first sight of a glittering Sword coming high him, he startles
and runs away, yet if it be in the hand of his Father, that quiets him, and
makes him the more confident, that that Sword shall not hurt him. The Sword
which is drawn amongst us, it is a glittering and a terrible Sword, I cannot
blame nature for startling at it. Yet consider we in whose hands it is; even in
the hand of our heavenly Father. And if (...), this Sword, though never so
greedy of flesh and thirsty of blood, yet it shall neither go, nor do, (...)
hither, and what he will have it. This Sword has received his Charge from God,
and that Charge it shall observe, and that exactly. It was Balaams speech (I
remember) to the servants of Balack, Numb. 22. 18. If Bal^ck would give me his
house full of silver and gold (a tempt^ng Bribe) J cannot go beyond the word
of the Lord my God, to do less or more. And why could he not? Why, God had
put a bridle into his mouth. The same God has in like manner put a Bridle into
the mouth of the Sword, so as it cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, to do
less or more then he has given it in Charge; To do less, it will not be
bribed; and to do more, it will not be hired. The Charge which it has
received from the Lord, it will, it shall, it must observe.

1. Going to no place but where he sends it. It is not without a divine
Providence that it is come into this Kingdom. What places in the Kingdom it
has hitherto visited, it has had a Charge against every one. It neither has
nor shall visit any, without a divine, both Permission, and Commission. The
Sword makes a Progress, rides Circuit upon Earth; I, but the Gests are set
down in Heaven. To this place it shall come, not to that. He that has said
unto that masterlesse element, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and
here shall thou stay thy proud waves, Job 38. 11. He has said as much to the
Sword, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thou stay thy
proud rage. To this place, this Country, this City, not to that. For an
instance hereof, read but that 19. Chap. 2 Kings. You shall there see the
Assyrian Monarch with (...) puissant Army in the Field, marching against
Jerusalem, with a full purpose, and reasolution to sack it, to destroy it; but
what says the Lord? See it, ver. 32, 33. Thus says the Lord* the King of
Ashu^ he shall not enter into this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with a shield, nor cast a Bank against it: By the way that he came,
by the same shall he return, etc.] The Sword though never so strongly backed
or put on, yet it shall neither enter, nor come to any place, but where that
God, whose Sword it is, has given it a charge to go.

2. Where it does come it shall abide no longer then according to the
Commission, and Charge which it has received. That God who has set down a
course and order for the rising and setting of that Martial Planet in the
Heavens; at such an hour it shall rise, so many hours it shall be above the
Horizon, at such an hour it shall set; he has also by a like providence
ordered the rising and setting, the coming and going of the Sword, which
wandereth upon Earth. And this Order and Command the Sword shall observe. If
Joab blow the Trumpet and sound a Retreat, the whole Army retires, Every man to
his Tent, 2 Samuel 20. 22. If God the great General shall say to the Sword, Put
up thy self into thy scabbard, it shall Rest and be still.

Thirdly, As it is ordered for the stay of it, so for the Execution, what it
shall do; what Persons it shall (...), what blood it shall draw, Even as a
Surgeon in letting of blood, he is ordered by his Physician, what vein he
shall strike, in what part of ^he body, and how many ounces of blood he shall
take: So the Sword, which God makes use of, as his Lancet to open a vein in a
Kingdom, in a Town, etc. it is ordered by him what persons it shall (...),
what incision it shall make, how deep it shall go, how many, not only ounces,
but dropps of blood it shall draw. In all which it is not left to the will of
him that strikes with it; much less to Chance and Fortune. True, the issu^s of
War to us they may be Casual, not so to God. Even those Bullets which in the
heat of service are let fly at random, yet every one has his Charge, his
Charge (as from man, so) from God, a Charge from Heaven, what mark it shall
strike, what Execution it shall do. In the battle at Ra^oth Gilead, a certain
man (a common Soldier) drew a Bow at a venture (says the Text) which smote
the King of Israel, 1 King. 22. 34. That act to him it was casual, not so to
God who directed the Arrow, to the white, to the fa^rest mark in the Field,
conducted that Messenger of death into the sides of Majesty it self. The Sword
cannot strike, but when and where God bids it; neither can it draw a drop of
blood more then it has a charge from Heaven to do.

And, if so; Let not then the hearts of the LORDS people (as I said) melt
within them; as Rahab tells the Spies that the hearts of the men of Jerico did,
when they heard of the Israelites coming against them; when we heard it, our
hearts did melt (says she) and there remained no more courage in us. Josh. 2.
11. Let them not be inordinately moved or shaken with the wind of
distrustful, distractfull fears and terrors: As it is said of Ahaz, and his
people, when they heard of the strong confederacies that were made and intended
against them, The heart of the King was moved (says the Text) and the hearts
of his people, as the trees of the Forest are moved with the wind, Isa. 7. 2.
No reason, why the hearts of Christians should be so moved, they being not
wholly left to the hazard of War. True it is, nothing more hazardous then
War. Belli alea (says the Proverb.) A pitched Battle is but like a game at
Tables, where though something be left to the skill of the Gamester, in the
playing and ordering of his Men, yet the success depends much upon the Lot: Or
like a Set at Tennis, a playing at the Hazard. But yet not wholly hazardous. He
who disposes of the Lot when it is cast into the lap, Prove. 16* 33. and by
his general providence directs every Ball that slieth into the Hazard, he
also disposes of all the events, and issues of war, though to us never so
casual, never so hazardous. Here is Comfort.

To which in the fourth and last place, Use 4.
let me add a word of Advise or Counsel, Counsel.
and so I shall draw toward a Conclusion. Is this Sword the Sword of the Lord?
Hence learn we then, whither to apply our selves. I suppose there is none of
us here present, but would be willing to do something for the quieting and
stilling of that Sword, which is now abroad in the Kingdom, at least for the
keeping of the dint from our selves. Love to our Country inforceth the former,
and self-love the latter. Now would we know what to do? why Apply we our
selves to God for both. The Sword is his: For the quieting of it, apply we our
selves unto him, seeking to make p^ace with him. So did the men of Tire and
Siaon when they heard that King Herod was displeased with them, so displeased,
as that he intended to make war upon them (so much the word signifies,
(...), He bare an Hostile mind toward them) they presently Came with one
accord to him, and having made a friend at Court, they desired Peace, Acts 12.
20. There is none of us, but must needs take notice of a like displeasure
conceived in Heaven against us of this Nation, God himself being (...),
hostily minded against us, making war upon us. (This he may do upon, and
against his own people; he did it against Israel. Israel rebelled and vexed
his holy Spirit, and therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and he fought
against them, Isa. 63. 9. The like he does against us at this day, having
drawn his Sword already, nay already Bathed it in blood.) Now in this case
what shall we do? why, apply we our selves unto him, whose Sword this is,
and seek to make peace with him.

Not but that we both may and ought in this case to apply our selves unto Men
also, seeking in humble wise to them, for the quieting of this Sword, that it
may upon honorable and comfortable terms be put into the Sheath again, by
those hands into which at the present GOD has put it. A motion (as we
understand) now on foot in diverse parts of the Kingdom, and accursed be he
that shall not be willing to lend his best endeavors to the furtherance of so
good a design. This we may do, this we ought to do. But alas all this will
be to little purpose, unless peace be made in Heaven first. This Sword, it
is the Sword of the LORD, and therefore unless he command it into the
Scabbard, all our Petitions and Supplications to men will be of little avail.
Unless he give the word, it is not all the Power or Policy in the world that
can put it up, or make it quiet. However, should it be persuaded into the
sheath for a time, yet, unless Peace be made in Heaven, and that a firm
Peace, it will not abide there, it will be like Joabs Sword, 2 Samuel 20. 8.
ready to fall out of the sheath alone. And therefore let it be the joint
design of every one of us to seek, and endeavor a Pacification in Heaven, to
make peace with God, and that for the whole Kingdom (if it may be;) however,
every of us for our selves.

1. Means.
To which purpose (in the first place) Humble we our selves before that GOD
whom we have provoked. If any thing will move GOD to put up his Sword, surely
it will be this. Man that has but any drop of mercy and compassion in his
bowels, if his enemy fall down at his feet, cast away his Arms and beg for
Quarter, so submitting himself wholly to his mercy, if he may show mercy, he
will not deny it. Surely, with the LORD our GOD there is mercy. It was David's
reason why he would rather fall into the hands of GOD then of Man, His mercies
are great: With him there are bottomless Bowels of unexpressable,
unconceivable mercy: All the Mercy that is to be found diffused through the
Bowels of all the merciful Men and Women in the world, is but a drop, not a
drop to that Ocean. And shall we fall down before him, humbling our selves at
his foote-stoole, and shall he not have compassion on us? O try, and see what
this course will do. If this will not save us, we are, in the outward
appearance, but lost men and women; Our condition being such as we may well
say with Jehoshaphat in that great strait, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We know not what
to do, but our eyes are toward thee O LORD. In this case, that we may
prevail with God, that his Bowels may be stirred with compassion toward us, O
let us fall down at his footstool Humbling our selves in the Confession of
our own sins and the sins of the Nation, acknowledging the Righteousness
of Gods judgments against us. This is the way which the LORD puts his own
people upon, promising them that by this means they should be able to divert,
and turn the edge of the Sword. See it, Levit. 26. 40. If they shall confess
the iniquity of their Fathers, with the Trespass which they trespassed against
me; And that also they have walked contrary unto me, and that I have also
walked contrary unto them, etc If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled,
and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity; What then? Then will
I remember my Covenant with Jocob, etc. and I will remember the Land. We here
see both the Counsel, and the promise. Take we the one, and rest upon the
other. Confess we our own sins, with the sins of our forefathers, (which
GOD by way of temporal judgments, both in Justice may, and often does visit
upon Posterity.) Withal Accept we the punishment of our iniquity,
acknowledging GOD to be Just and Righteous in what ever he has done or shall
do against us. So doing, doubt we not but GOD will yet Remember his Covenant
with his people, and we may hope he will yet remember the Land, returning and
Repenting, and leaving a Blessing behind him, Joel 2 14

Secondly, Thus Humbling our selves for those sins which have been the
provokers of this Wrath, the Causes of this Evil, Endeavor we (in the second
place) to put them away, to wash our hands of them. Wash ye, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. Isa. 1. 16. It is not
he that Confesses, but he that Confesses and Forsakes that shall have
Mercy, Prove. 28. 13. This do we for our selves; this endeavor we for the
Kingdom. Till Jonah be cast overboard, the storm will not cease, the Sea
will not be quiet. Till Sheba^s head be thrown over the walls, Joab will not
sound a Retreat. Till the crying ^^^es of the Land be taken away by a National
Reformation, we cannot expect that the storm of GODS wrath should cease, or
the grown Sea of the present distempers amongst us should be quieted. Every of
us then endeavor this great work; only observing our stations. Public
persons in their places, and private persons in theirs. Every one beginning at
home, at his own heart, own life. See what is to be found there that may be
charged with the maintenance of this present War; and finding it out,
discharge it: Which having done,

Thirdly, Then (in the next place) Strike we a New Covenant with our GOD.
Certainly, they have not been much mistaken who have both thought and said,
That it is a Covenant business which the Sword comes about. I mean not so
much the Formality, as the Reality of a Covenant. To avenge an Old Covenant
which has been broken, to Require a New Covenant which may be kept. And is it
this that the Sword comes about? Why let us, in the fear of GOD, give it what
it would have, that it may depart from us. Every of us in our particulars
bewail our frequent breaches of former Covenants, made in Baptism, renewed in
the Supper of the LORD: and this day strike we a New Covenant with and before
the LORD: Withal endeavoring (as much as in us lies) the renewing of a
National Covenant, that the whole Kingdom may be bound and engaged to a
Closer cleaving to the LORD, and walking with him, in an universal subjection
to all his Ordinances, an universal obedience to all his Commandments.

Surely this will be found the best, and only way to procure mercy (if it may
be) for the public. However, it will be a sure way to procure security, and
safety to our selves; either to keep off the Sword, that it shall not come
nigh us, not touch us. It is Eliphaz his speech in Job, Job 5. 15. The LORD
saves the Poor from the Sword.] The Poor; what the Worlds Poor, such as are
outwardly Poor? Not so, (alas, they are frequently made a forlorn hope,
sacrificed to the fury of the Sword, to dull, and blunt the edge of it:) But
GODS Poor, the Poor in Spirit, such as Humble themselves before the LORD, (as
the Geneva gloss explaines it.) Or if it do touch us, yet it shall not hurt
us. It shall be unto us but as our Heavenly Fathers Red Horse, (so it is called
in the Revelation, Chap. 6. ver. 4.) sent by him to bring us home to himself;
to convey us into his presence.

Fourthly, For which (in the fourth and last place, to close up all, time and
strength being spent) having done as aforesaid, then Let us make the LORD our
trust. Another means, and a special one, to secure us from the Sword, To
trust in GOD. Not in Man: not in Power, or Policy. These we may use, but
trust not in them; Which if we do, it will be the next way to betray us. It
is that which the LORD threatens against the Jews, Jer. 5. 15, 17. Lo I will
bring a Nation upon you from far, etc. And they shall impoverish (or Plunder)
thy fenced Cities wherein thou trustedst, with the Sword. The next way to have
a Kingdom, a City, a Town sacked, and plundered, is to trust in the strength
of it. But make we the LORD our strength, our trust. So doing (if good for us)
he will secure us, we shall not feel of the Sword, or not fall by it. It is
that which the LORD promises to Ebedmelech, Jerem. 39. 8. I will surely
deliver thee, and thou shall not fall by the Sword: Why? Because thou have put
thy trust in me, says the LORD. What he there promises to him in particular,
David upon the same ground in Gods Name promises to all Gods people, Psalm.
37. ver. ult. The LORD shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them,
because they trust in him. No such way to engage GOD to work deliverance for
us in any strait, as this, To trust in him. This will David do in his greatest
straites, when The foundations were destroyed, (as he speaks, Psalm. 11. 3.)
or out of course, all things out of course in the Kingdom, so as seemingly
there was little hope of safety left for David; his Enemies by way of
insulting, or his Friends by way of advising, they said unto his soul, Fly
ye as a Bird to your Mountain, ver. 1. willing him to betake himself, and
his Family, to some place of security, and no longer to rest upon the promise;
but what course does he resolve to run? Why, In the LORD put I my trust, ver.
1. The case at present is ours: The Foundations in this Kingdom are out of
course, the dreadful Commotions in it threatening ruin to it. In this case
Carnal reason will be dictating, and suggesting unto us, as they to him, Fly
we as a Bird to our Mountain, etc. Seek we out some places of Refuge and
Safety for our selves, and ours. But trust we not to this counsel. In the Lord
put we our trust: so doing, doubt not of security. It is David's speech, which
he spoke out of his own experience, and I shall conclude with it: The Lord is
a Buckler to all those which trust in him, Psalm. 18. 30.

FINIS.

