GODS STATUTE FOR GENERAL IVDGEMENT BY THE MAN CHRIST JESUS.

OPENED IN A SERMON AT THE Funeral of the most religious Lady, the Lady LVCIE
IERVOICE, Sometime wife TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR THOMAS IERVOICE AT
Herriot. Aug. 26. 1641.

By JOHN BROKETT Minister of ELSFEILD.

ECCLESIASTES 12.14. God shall bring every work to Judgment, with every secret
thing whether it be good or evil.

Expavesco multum Iudicis severi vultum,
Quem latebit nil occultum, Qui relinquet nil inultum.
LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Richard Thraule at the sign of the Crosse-Keyes,
at the entrance into Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR THOMAS IERVOICE my much honored friend.
SIR,
I Do here present to you that Sermon, which the Lord enabled me to deliver at
the funeral of your gracious Lady, now a glorified Saint in Heaven. Of right
it belongs to you; for your desire, which the receipt of many favors obliged
me to satisfy, brought it first to the Pulpit, now to the Press. The
consciousnesse of my insufficiency in the Work of the Ministry, and of the
weakness, and unworthiness of this Sermon, so suddenly conceived, made me for
a time most unwilling to expose it to the public sight, and censure of this
queasie, and distempered time. But your importunity has now drawn it from me,
and you have it in the same form, wherein it was deliverd, And though it be a
plain discourse (according to my country course of Preaching) yet, as it did
affect the Hearts, and Consciences of the Hearers, so I hope it will not be
unpleasing, or unprofitable to the Readers. And may it, by the good blessing of
God, afford any comfort to your self, or any other truly fearing God, I have
that, which I expect, and pray for. Sir, I am bold to inscribe it to your name,
as a testimony of my Gratitude for your undeserved respect to me; and a pledge
of my true desire to further you in your journey toward Heaven, by commending
this Sermon to your Meditation, this Saint to your Imitation. These, with all
other means of grace the Lord so bless to you, that you may be sanctified
throughout; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And with this Prayer I
end. resting

Your Worships to command, in the best of my poor service. JOHN BROKETT.

THE TESTIMONY GIVEN TO THE WORSHIPFUL AND and most Religious Lady, THE LADY
LVCIE IERVOICE AT HER FUNERAL Aug. 26. 1641.
WE are here assembled by the good providence of Almighty God, to celebrate
the Funeral of the right Worshipful and most religious Lady, the Lady Lucie
Iervoice. A duty which Affection, Reason, and Religion do impose upon us.
These three Heralds do enjoyne us, justa persolvere, so to give the dead
their due, that the memorial of the just may be blessed, and their names may
be had in everlasting remembrance.

Now to the right performance of Christian Funerals, two things have ever been
thought requisite.

1. That the bodies of the Saints be decently laid up in the dark chamber of
the grave; ut molliter essa cubent, there to sleep in peace with their fathers,
and to rest in hope of a joyful, and glorious resurrection at the last day.

2. That we tender to the deceased such honor, as the quality of their
persons deserved. For the graces, and virtues of the Saints must not be raked
up with their bodies in dust, and ashes; but receive their deserved
commendation to the due praise of the grace of God; then especially when the
lives of the deceased may be set forth as examples, and patterns of virtue to
the living.

And such I am sure, was the life, and death of this most gracious Lady. She
lived like a Saint; and she dyed like a Saint. Her life was full of grace; her
latter end was full of peace.

We find in Scripture many women much commended for some special virtues
wherein they excelled. Sarah is commended for obedience. Abigail for wisdom.
Mary for faith. Martha for hospitality. Anna for devotion. Dorcas for
charity. Eunice for the pious education of her son Timothy: but of this
Lady, whose dead body lies here before us, I may say without falsehood, or
flattery, in the words of Lemuels mother. Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou excellest them all, Prove. 31.39.

Her virtues were many, more by many then I am able to relate to you. If I
could, the whole time allotted for this exercise would fail me. And therefore
like a man in have, I will run over the garden of her life, and here, and there
crop a flower to make a Garland of praise to set upon her Hearse, and a
spiritual pofie for every one of you. And when you have it, part not with it,
carry it away in your bosoms with you, and it will perfume your words, and
actions, and make you, as she was, a sweet smelling sacrifice to God.

1. Observe, and imitate her Piety, which shined forth amongst us in the
constant practice of a godly life. It may be said of Men, as Saint Paul does of
the creatures for meat, they are sanctified by the word and prayer.

These are the principal means the Lord has sanctified, to sanctify us. And
to both these, this most pious Lady did give diligent attendance, both
privately, and publicly.

For her Private Devotion, she was a rare and most singular pattern for our
imitation. For it was her constant course, both Winter and Summer to rise very
early; from her Bed immediately she repaired to her Closet; and there for a time
she gave her self to devout prayer, and divine meditation: having offered up
this sacrifice to God, then, like Salomons virtuous woman, she gave meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens.

Having ordered the affairs of her Family, then she returned to her Closet
again, where for the most part she spent diverse hours in praying, and reading
the Scriptures, and other good books tending to godly instruction. Having thus
trimmed up her soul, then she dressed her body, which done, she addressed her
self to prayer again with her whole Family before dinner. And, if occasions
did permit, she spent much of the afternoon in prayer, study, and meditation;
never neglecting to pray with her Family in the Evening; and, before she lay
down to take her rest, her manner was in private prayer to recommend her self,
and all belonging to her to Gods gracious protection. Thus this pious Lady did
dress up her soul, like the lamp in the Tabernacle, every morning, and every
evening with the sweet oil Olive of pure Devotion.

Now touching her public Devotion, in this she was most exemplarie. With David
she rejoiced to go to the house of the Lord. With Mary, she delighted to sit
at the feet of Christ to hear him preaching to her in the Ministry of the
word. Her behavior in Gods house was so decent, so comely, and full of humble
reverence; her Amen to the prayers of the Church, and all her answers appointed
by the Liturgy were uttered so orderly, so audibly, so affectionately, and so
zealously, that I must confess I never observed in any more reverence,
attention, and zeal in the public service, and worship of God.

Another instance of her Piety, was her love to the Ministers of God. She
respected all for their callings sake; but did highly esteem such as she
observed to be faithful in the work of the Lord. An evident sign that she
took much comfort, and tasted much sweetness in the water of Life, who so
loved, and respected that Pipe, through which the Lord did conveigh the same
into her.

Many other evidences of her Piety, I might instance in. As her readiness to
offer, and entertain holy Conference. Her delight in such as did excel in
virtue. Her encouraging, and rewarding virtue in those that did belong to her.
Her hatred of vice in her self, in those that were near, and dear to her, and
in all that did attend upon her. She opposed nothing so much as sin. She was
never offended with children, or servants, for any thing so much as for sin.
She desired, and endeavored nothing so much, as to serve God with her whole
household. Now from these premises we must needs infer this Conclusion. That
she was a most Pious Lady.

2. Observe, and Imitate her Wisdom. She was a Lady of excellent
understanding. In Huswiferie, in Chirurgerie, in Physic, etc. But principally
in matters of Religion, which concerned Gods worship, and man's salvation. She
was wise to salvation. By continual study and meditation, the word of God
became so familiar to her, dwelt so plentifully in her, that she was able (as
occasion was offered) to rehearse pertinent places of Scripture, and much of
her ordinary language was in Scripture phrase.

3. Observe, and Imitate her Charity. She loved the poor as the members of
Christ, in word and deed, wishing well, and doing well to all, though enemies,
who stood in need of her relief, and comfort. She was a Surgeon to such as
were hurt, and maimed. And oftentimes dressed with her own hand such putrified
soars, that some, who waited on her. did loath to look upon. She was a
Physician to the sick, and diseased. And as her skill this way was more then
ordinary, so most ready, and willing she was to be at much charge, to bestow
any pains to further their recovery. She was also Christ's Almoner to the poor
and needy. While she lived, never did any hungry belly go from her door
unfed. As God had given plentifully to her, so she gave plentifully to God
again in the poor members of Christ: not only appointing food to be given
them by the hands of servants, but like Salomons virtuous woman. She stretched
forth her hand to the poor, and reached out both her hands to the needy,
Prove. 31.20.

4. Observe, and Imitate her Humility. Though many things, whereof others be
proud, were not wanting in her, as Birth, Riches, Reputation, excellent parts
of Art, and Nature, yet she always continued the Lords humble handmaid.
Through humility she made her self equal to those that be of a low degree;
and was even a companion of poor ones that feared the Lord. She despised the
ornaments of vanity, which other Ladies, and Gentlewomen too much delight in,
and dote upon: Her outward habit did show the inward modesty, lowliness, and
humility of her mind. She was ever humble in the sight of her sins; never in
sickness, or health flattering her self with any thing she had done; but ever
condemning her self, and complaining of her own sins, and unworthiness.

Now this, which has been said, is enough to prove her a most gracious Lady:
But nothing so much as may be spoken in the praise of her. Me thinks I hear
her sorrowful husband praise her, saying, that to him she was a wise, humble,
loving, loyal, and most obedient Wife. Me thinks I hear her children praise
her, saying, that to them she was a most loving, tender, prudent, provident,
and most pious Mother. Me thinks I hear her servants praise her, saying, that
to them she was a most meek, gentle, loving, and libetall Lady, a zealous
reprover of their vices, but a bountiful rewarder of their true, and faithful
service. Me thinks I hear all, both men and women praise her, and saying, that
she was the ornament of her sex, a great and light shining in a dark place.

Thus it pleased God to infuse into the heart of this Lady, a measure more then
ordinary of heavenly Grace, which was not hid in her, as a light under a
bushel; but it shined forth to all with whom she conversed; so that by the
shining of her light, and the sight of her good works, others were provoked and
directed to glorify God our heavenly father.

And as the Course of her Life was religious, So the Conclusion of her life was
most gracious; witness her most Saintlike behavior in her last sickness,
wherein these graces were visible to all about her.

1. Patience which was admirable. It pleased God to visit her with a long, and
sometimes most sharp, and painful sickness, which most piously she
acknowledged to be the Lords visitation, and apprehending the hand of the Lord
in it, most patiently she submitted her self to the Lords heavenly will and
pleasure, resting contented to live; but willing to die, yea so willing, that
ever and anon she was uttering Saint Paul's wish. I desire to be dissolved and
to be with Christ Jesus. To her patience add her

2. Repentance, which, I am confidently assured, was most sincere, and hearty,
testified oft-times by most penitential confessions, and most fervent
supplications for grace, and mercy. To her repentance add her

3. Piety. Wherein she profited much whilst she continued in the School of
affliction. Her sickness was to her as the waters of the flood were to the
Arc of Noah; the longer it continued, the more it increased, the higher it did
bear up her thoughts, and desires toward heaven. Her whole time she spent in
reading, or hearing of others read to her; in praying by her self, or with
others; in holy conference; in heavenly meditations; and ever and anon her soul
was sending up some short, and sweet ejaculations, with such zeal, and
fervencie of spirit, in words so full of divinity, and devotion, with such
elevation of hands, and eyes, that she afforded hereby much comfort, and
benefit to all that did visit her, or attend upon her. Add to these her

4. Faith. Which was firmly built upon the Rock Christ Jesus. Him she
acknowledged to be her only, and all-sufficient Redeemer; and steadfastly
relied upon his merits for salvation. And through him she made a sure peace
with God, and gained a full assurance of salvation; as appeared by those words
she spoke to a dear friend, one Mistress Reynolds. O daughter he is come, he is
come. To which she replying. Who is come Madam? she answered in words to this
purpose. The Spirit of comfort is come, and has testified to my spirit that
Christ Jesus is mine, and that through him heaven shall be mine hereafter. And
hereupon, like the blessed virgin, Her soul did magnify the Lord, and her
spirit rejoiced in God her Savior.

One thing more I desire to acquaint you with, which in my judgment was most
remarkable, an argument that her soul was Angelized in her body, and emparifed
there before it could get out to heaven. It was this.

Upon the Sunday before her departure, toward the Evening of the day, her
spirit fainted, and she fell into a swound (or it may be some heavenly rapture)
in which for some space she continued; but breath being perceived to be in her,
they who were about her did strive to revive her; and by Gods blessing upon the
means used by her learned Physician, she not only came to her self, but some
reasonable strength, and vigor was added to her. And having first praised God,
as her accustomed manner was upon every receipt of comfort from him, she
desired that all her children might be brought to her, which done, like a most
gracious Mother she blessed them all, saying. The God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, the God of Jacob bless you, and bestow upon you, not greatness but
goodness, not riches but righteousness, and the Graces of his holy Spirit,
that every one of you may live in the fear of God, in the faith of Christ, in
all duty and obedience to your father, and true love to one another all the
days of your life. These, and many other gracious Exhortations she uttered to
her children. And having given a holy and heavenly farewell to them, she
commanded that all her servants might come before her. And to every one of them
she uttered gracious words. Exhorting them to live godly, righteously, and
soberly, and warning them particularly, to beware of those sins which she had
observed them to be most addicted to. And having made an end of blessing her
children, and servants, and taught them how to live, she then in a most
gracious manner prepared her self to die. Spending the time that remained
behind in fervent prayer to God, to enable her to resist the assaults of the
Devil, and to endure the pangs of death, and that would send her a blessed
departure, and a merciful admission of her soul into his heavenly Kingdom. At
length feeling her self at the very gates of death, she desired a reverend
Minister then with her, once again to pray for her. His prayer being ended,
and her life almost ended too, she thus commended her self to God. The Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost
be with me to the end and in the end, Amen. And this prayer she repeated again
and again, till her breath grew so short, that she was not able to repeat it
any longer; and then she sealed up her prayer, and her life too with Amen.
Ingeminating of it till her soul departed.

A heavenly Conclusion of a holy life. Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori:
God grant my life, and my and my latter end may be like to hers. And he
persuade all your hearts to a gracious Imitation of her. And so leaving her in
happiness in Heaven, I desire you with fear, reverence, and attention to
hearken to those instructions which by Gods assistance I shall deliver to you
from the words of Saint Paul, written as you have heard, Act 17.31.

ACTS 17.31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, by the Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has
given assurance unto all men in that he has raised him from the dead.


IT is most pious, and profitable counsel which the son of Sirach gives,
Ecclesiasticus 7.36. Remember the last things, and thou shall never do amiss.
These last thus commended to our remembrance, and meditation are four.

Death which is most certain. Judgment which is most strict. Hell which is
most fearful. Heaven which is most delightful.
The daily meditation of these four last things, the Wise man presumes will
breed in every one of us a due care so to live, that we may be blessed in
Death, and after death may escape the severitie of Judgment, the torments of
Hell, and obtain the unspeakable joys and happiness of Heaven.

Now this portion of Scripture which I have read unto you, contains in it the
second of these four last things, namely, the day of Judgment. The serious
meditation whereof is a powerful means to provoke us to timely, and true
repentance. Sure I am, Saint Paul thought it so; and therefore he uses no
other argument to turn the superstitious Athenians from their Idolatry, and to
persuade them, and all men every where to repent, but only this.

Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by the Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance to all men in that he has raised him from the dead.

Which words being taken in the whole lump together may very fitly be called.
Gods Statute for general judgment by Christ the righteous Judge.

More particularly they offer to our consideration, these six points.

1. The certainty of the day of Judgment. [Because God has appointed it] and
what God has decreed shall certainly be accomplished.

2. Who shall judge? [he will Iudge] which has reference to God mentioned in
the verse immediately foregoing.

3. Who shall be judged? [the world] which comprehends Angels in Heaven, Devils
in Hell, Men, and unreasonable and Inanimate Creatures on earth.

4. How God will judge? [in righteousnesse] rewarding every man according to
his works.

5. By whom God will judge? [by the man whom he has ordained] that is by Jesus
Christ. He is the Man ordained to be Judge of quick, and dead. Acts 10.42.

6. The warrant to assure us that Christ shall judge the world. [whereof he
has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.]

Thus within the narrow Compass of this text we have a day for Judgment, a
God to judge, a World to be judged, a righteous Sentence to be pronounced,
Christ Jesus in Commission, and his Resurrection for our assurance. Of all
which particulars in that order as I have ranked them, and as the Text offers
them to our consideration.

1. The Certainty of the Day of Judgment.
That there shall be a Day of Judgment, is a truth of infallible certainty.

1. Scripture teaches it. 2. Conscience testifyeth it. 3. Reason concludes
it. 4. Particular judge ments premonstrate it.
1. Scripture plainly, and plentifully teaches it, in which we often meet with
these, and the like sayings. God will bring every work to Judgment, with
every secret thing whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Eccles. 12.14.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good, or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10. Add to these the Prophecy of Enoch, the seventh
from Adam, recorded, Judges 14.15. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands
of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all. And in this the last Apostle
agrees with the first Prophet. Behold (says Saint John) he comes with
clouds, and every eye shall see him, Revel. 1.7. Many more texts might be
alleged consonant to these, but your knowledge, and belief of this matter
assures me that this labor would be superfluous.

2. Conscience testifies it. Yea also the conscience of the the vilest Atheist,
it will be as a thousand witnesses to confirm it. How often are they filled
with unspeakable horror, especially in death? and wherefore it is thus with
them? because conscience tells that die they must, and after death must come to
judgment.

3. Humane Reason enlightened by holy Scripture conceives, and concludes that
there shall be a day of Judgment. Look abroad into the world and you shall
see a wonderful confusion of things, a strange inequality of Divine
dispensations. The wicked many times flourish, and enjoy great prosperity,
when the righteous are afflicted, and endure great adversity. Now though some
do from hence conclude, that there is no present providence, and shall be no
future judgment; yet this confusion of things, and inequality of Divine
dispensations is an argument sufficient in Saint Paul's Divinity, to prove a
judgment to come. Hear what Saint Paul writes from Athens to his persecuted
Thessalonians. Your persecutions and tribulations which you endure, is a
manifest token (or an evident demonstration) of the righteous Judgment of God,
2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. And Solomon before him in his survey of vanities says, I saw
under the Sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there, and the place
of righteousness that iniquity was there, And what does Solomon infer from
hence? therefore no providence? therefore no judgment to come? No, but the
plain contrary, I said in my heart God shall judge the righteous, and the
wicked, for a time there is for every purpose, and for every work, Eccles.
3.16, 17.

4. Particular judgments which God inflicteth upon men in this life, do prove
the universal. The drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodom, and
Gomorrah, the plaguing of Egypt, the desolation of Jerusalem, and more
particular judgments upon particular persons, all these are praeludia judicii
universalis, forerunners, and foretellers of a general judgment. Some sins
are punished here, that we might know that there is a Providence, and a Judge
that takes notice of every sin; and some sins pass here unpunished, that we
might expect a greater, and stricter judgment to come hereafter. Thus
Scripture teaches, Conscience testifyeth, Reason concludes, and present
Judgments do demonstrate the truth of my propounded Doctrine, that there
shall be a day of judgment. So I dismiss the first Point, and come to the
second.

2. Who shall Judge?
He shall Judge, says the Text, where the word (He) has relation to God
mentioned in the foregoing verse, where the Apostle says, God commands all
men every where to repent, Because he has appointed a day in which he will
judge.

So then you see. God shall Judge. God essentially meant, concluding all the
sacred Persons of the Deity. Father, Son, and holy Ghost. The whole Trinity
shall concur in this work, being as the Schools say, Opus ad extra, an
External work of the Godhead. And it is an Axiom in Divinity. Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa. The external works of the Godhead, admit
not of any division in the persons of the Deity. It is true, there be certain
Internal works, which are incommunicably proper to every Person. It is
incommunicably proper to the person of the Father, to have his being of
himself. It is incommunicably proper to the Person of the Son, to be begotten
of the Father. And it is incommunicably proper to the Person of the Holy Ghost,
to proceed from the Father and the Son. But those works by which the invisible
things of the Godhead are made manifest to the Creature, as Creation,
Preservation, Redemption, and this of Judgment are equally, and indifferently
to be ascribed to the sacred three in one, and to God in all.

Object. But it may be objected. That albeit in this place judgment be
attributed essentially to God; yet in other places it is attributed personally,
and respectively to Christ. The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. Again, sometimes this work of judging is
appropriated to the Saints. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world?
1 Cor. 6.2. How shall these places be reconciled which affirm that God, and
Christ, and the Saints shall Judge?

Answ. This threefold doubt is easily dissolved by a threefold distinction.

1. God is said to Judge, because the Power and Right of judging belongs to
God only.

2. Christ is said to Judge, because God has committed to him the
Administration of Judgment.

3. Saints are said to Judge, because they shall approve and give attestation
to the sentence which Christ shall pronounce of salvation to the godly; of
damnation to the wicked.

The Authority is Gods. The Execution is Christ's. The Approbation is the
Saints. This distinction is sufficient to free the Scripture from the least
contradiction, and the point from this objection. And now having cleared the
point, that Almighty God only shall judge the world. I will confirm it by
two reasons, drawn from two Attributes in God, proving him only fit to be the
Judge of all the world.

The first reason is drawn from Gods Omniscience; the knowledge of the Lord
like himself is Infinite, nothing can be hid from his sight: Heaven is not so
high but he can reach it: Hell is not so deep, but he can search it: The Earth
is not so wide, but he can span it: the Night is not so dark, but he can see
it: the Chamber, the Bed, the Closet is not so close, but he, whose eyes are as
flames of fire, can pierce it. Psalm. 94.9.
God planted the ear, needs therefore must he hear all our words. He formed
the eye, needs therefore must he see all our works. He made the Heart, Heb.
4.12.
needs therefore must he know the thoughts, Psalm. 94.11. and discern the
intents of the Hearts of the sons of men. The Scripture is plain and
plentiful in the proof of this. Lord thou know all things, says Saint
Peter, Ioh. 21.17. Again, Heb. 4.13. There is no creature that is not manifest
in his sight, but all things are naked, and open. Open as an Anatomized body
(for thence the Metaphor is drawn) where the bowels are laid open, and every
nerve, and Muscle, and ligament, every Atome discovered, so as we may take a
full view of it. Thus the most secret whispers, the most retired actions, the
deepest and darkest thoughts, and intentions of all men are open and naked unto
the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Rightly therefore is the Lord
conceived under the name of (...), derived either (...). to run, or (...). to
see. Because the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. to spy out all our ways, and to behold all our works.

The second Reason is drawn from Gods Omnipotence. As he is infinite in
knowledge, so also he is infinite in power, and authority. Our God (says
David) is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 111.3. Again,
Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven and in earth, and in the
Sea, Psalm. 135.6. God is supreme Head over all persons, and in all causes
through his Dominion which is universal, Zach. 9.10. and everlasting, Dan.
7.14. Kings themselves though Gods on earth, yet are subject to the regiment
and government of the King of heaven. He binds Kings in chains, and nobles
in links of iron, Psalm. 149.9. more plainly, Revel. 6.15, 16, 17. where Saint
John showing the terror of the Lord at the last day, against the persecutors
of the Saints, he says. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the
rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and
every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains.
And said to the rocks and to the mountains. Fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for
the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Nay, God is
not only over all the Kings of the earth, but he is Potentate of Heaven and
Hell too: He has a commanding power over all: the Angels fear, the Devils
tremble when they come to stand before God. Thus you have seen who shall
judge, Almighty God; and the reasons why. 1. Because he only has sufficient
Knowledge to discern all sins. 2. Because he only has sufficient Power to
punish all sinners. The consideration whereof, me thinks, should deter the
greatest persons from the least and most secret sins: because one day they must
be arraigned before the judgment seat of that God; Quem latebit nil occultum:
Qui relinquet nilinultum, from whom nothing can be concealed: by whom nothing
shall be left unpunished. So much for the second point. I proceed to the third.

3. Who shall be judged?
The world, says my Text. World is a word of a large extent, of an universal
signification. It comprehends (...), as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 8.22. every
creature. (...). Whatsoever is in the world as Saint John speaks, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
Angels in Heaven, Devils in Hell, Men on Earth, with all unreasonable, and
inanimate creatures whatsoever. All these, suo modo, after a sort, in some
respect shall be subject to the judgment of the last day.

1. The glorious and blessed Angels of Heaven, they shall not only summon
others, but they themselves shall be summoned by the voice of the Archangel
Christ Jesus; if not to be judged, which some doubt; yet at least to write upon
the Judge, for the declaration of his Majesty, the approbation of his
Judgment, and the execution of his sentence. The Judge himself says it.
Matthew. 25.31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, all the holy Angels
shall come with him.

2. The Devil, and all his Angels shall then be judged, as appears plainly,
Jude 6. The Angels also which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great Day. That is those reprobate Angels which did
voluntarily depart from that estate of holiness, and righteousness in which
they were created, proudly leaviing the place of Gods presence, and
rebelliously departing from that office and calling, in which they ought for
ever to be employed in glorifying God, are reserved by the everlasting Decree,
and Almighty power of God under the darkness of Gods implacable wrath, and
their own accusing, condemning, and tormenting consciences unto the Judgment
of the great Day, wherein they shall have their final doom; and the fullness,
and extremity of torment, to which they were of old adjudged; shall be powered
forth upon them.

3. All unreasonable, and inanimate creatures shall be after a sort judged at
the last day, as is evidently proved, 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens, and the earth,
and the things in them are reserved unto fire against the day of judgment. It
is most probable, that by this fire all these creatures which are appointed for
the necessities of this life, for the food, clothing, and other services of
men shall be consumed; and man's necessity ceasing, and with it their use, and
service, their being and substance shall for ever be abolished. But for the
Heavens, and the Earth, their substance shall not be consumed, nor their being
abolished; but only their fashion shall be changed, and their quality
renewed. They shall be freed from that vanity, corruption, and servitude which
the sin and service of Man has made them subject to; and in a sort they shall
be brought into the glorious, and immortal state of the sons of God. The
heavens shall be decked, and adorned with Stars. The Moon shall shine like the
Sun. The light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, Esaias 30.26. The earth shall be
replenished, and garnished with fruitful, and pleasant trees, plants, and
flowers. Such a new Heaven, and a new Earth the Scripture promises, in which
God will have a new Jerusalem, a glorious Church, and the time of their
renovation will be at this day of Judgment.

4. Men shall be judged at the last day. And to them this word World has
special reference in this place: teaching us that all men without exception of
any shall come to judgment. Though some escape man's judgment, yea Gods
judgment too here; yet none shall escape the last udgement of the Lord. The
Papists say that Christ's resurrection harrowed Hell. Limbus Patrum was then
emptied. Surely Christ's coming to judgment shall harrow Heaven, and Hell too,
for a while not a Saint shall be left in Heaven, nor a damned ghost be left in
Hell, all shall be assembled before the Judge of all the world. The Scripture
is not more plain or plentiful in any point than this. In which you shall
meet often with these three distributions of men. Just and unjust, Great and
small, Quick and dead. And these distinctions comprehend all men of all
Nations. Ages, Estates, Qualifications, and Periods. Now the Scripture speaks
expressly of these that they shall all be judged, Eccles. 3.17. Solomon says.
God shall judge the just, and the unjust, and Revel. 20.12. Saint John did see
(...), by Revelation. Great and small stand before God to be judged, and Acts
10.42. Saint Peter does preach and testify that Christ was ordained of God to
be judge of quick, and dead. This last distinction we find in the seventh
Article of our Creed, where we are taught to believe that Christ shall come
from Heaven to judge both the quick, and dead, that is all that shall be found
dead to be revived, and quick to be changed at the coming of Jesus Christ to
judgment. See further. Romans 14.10. 2. Cor. 5.10. where S. Paul says, We
shall, We must all appear before the Judgementseat of Christ. I shall not ned
to say more in the Confirmation of this Truth. Only I will add a word or two
to clear some few texts which at the first view seem to have a flat
contradiction.

One is, Psalm. 1.5. The ungodly shall not stand in judgment: The Septuagint
turn it (...), and so many Latin fathers read it, non resurgent, shall not
rise in judgment, a bad translation, it may be want of skill in the Hebrew
made them to follow the Septuagint, who were Jews, amongst whom many held an
heresy that the souls of sinners should perish with their bodies, which error
receives not the least strength from these words of the Prophet David, wherein
he means not that the wicked shall not come to be judged; but they shall not be
acquitted in judgment, they shall be found guilty, and shall fall into
eternal condemnation.

Another Place is, Ioh. 3.18 He that believes not is condemned already. Now if
all unbeleevers be condemned already, what need is there of any further
judgment?

To this I answer. It cannot be denied, that unbeleevers are already condemned.

1. In Gods eternal decree, who has appointed them to condemnation.

2. In Gods word which denounces damnation to to all that believe not.

3. In their own Consciences which serve as a thousand witnesses to accuse
them, as a Judge to condemn them, and as an executioner to torment them. But
all this hinders not, but that they must appear before the judgment seat of
the Lord that their sins may be openly manifested, their sentence publicly
pronounced, for the fuller manifestation of Gods justice to all the world.

Another place is, Ioh. 5.24. He that believes in God, shall not come into
judgment.

To this I answer; That in this place our Savior by a Trope, puts (...) for
(...). Judgment for condemnation. And in all our English Bibles, even in the
last, and best translation the word (...), though it properly signifies
judgment, yet it is rendered condemnation. Which though it be not a right
translation, yet it is a true and sound Exposition, for the meaning of our
Savior is, that the faithful though they shall come to judgment, yet they
shall never come into condemnation. They shall not come into the Judgment of
damnation, but they shall come into the Judgment of eternal Absolution from
their sins, and miseries. That which they have here in part, must then be
perfected: that which they have here by faith, shall then be revealed, a final
deliverance from the thraldom of this world, to the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. And so much for the third point. I proceed to the fourth.

4. How God will judge.
He will judge in righteousness, says the Text. That is the Lords judicial
proceeding at the last Day in judging some to the eternal and unutterable
joys and glory of Heaven; and in dooming others to the easelesse and
remediless torments of Hell shall be most just, and righteous. Hence the Day
of Judgment is called by Saint Paul, The day of the Revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5.

Now the justice, and righteousness of the Lords proceeding at the last Day,
shall be declared to all the world two ways.

1. God will have no respect of persons, as Saint Paul says, Romans 2.11. That
is, in the act of Judging, the Lord will not respect the outward quality, and
condition of any, as Country, Sex, Wealth, Poverty, Age, Youth, Beauty,
Deformity, Honor, Ignominy or any outward circumstance whatsoever; none of
these things shall in the least wise move the Lord to reward, or punish. Esaus
eldership shall not remove the Lords hate; nor Jacobs minority hinder the
Lords love: Saul's Scepter shall not shelter him from Gods wrath, nor David's
sheep-hooke hold him back from Gods blessing: Lazarus his poverty shall not
keep him out of Abraham's bosom, nor Dives his wealth free him from the place
of torment: It shall be no impeachment to Cornelius that he was a Gentile, nor
immunitie to any that he was a Jew: But whosoever he be, Jew or Gentile, bond
or free, poor or rich, male or female that fears God, and works
righteousness, he shall be accepted to salvation: and whosoever he be that
fears not God, and works unrighteousness, without partiality he shall be
rejected to damnation.

2. God will reward every man according to his works, as Saint Paul says, Romans
2.6. Evil works are most certain evidences of infidelity; and good works are
inseparable fruits, and infallible testimonies, and signs of saving faith: and
therefore God, to declare himself a righteous Judge, will make our works the
rule of his retribution. To every soul that does evil, God will render
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish for evermore: but to every soul
that works good, God will render Glory, honor, peace, and eternal life,
Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10. So just a retribution will the Lord at the last day render
to every person, that all the world shall say, Just art thou, O Lord, and true,
and righteous are thy Judgments, Revel. 6. verse. 7.

But here two Questions may very fitly be propounded.

Quest. Whether good works are meritorious causes of salvation? because the
Apostle says, God will reward every man according to his works, and he says
it to this end, to declare the just and righteous judgment of the Lord at the
last day.

Sol. To which I answer, that the usual collection of the Papists from this,
and the like places is; that therefore the good works of men justified, and in
grace are meritorious causes of eternal life. But the judgment of our Church,
and all other Reformed Churches is this; that however good works done in grace,
are acceptable to God in Jesus Christ; and shall by him be rewarded; yet that
acceptance, and reward is not deserved by our works, but is freely bestowed out
of the grace, and mercy of God. And this determination we prove thus.

1. By Scripture, which most expressly teaches every where, that eternal
life is a free gift of Gods mercy, not a reward due to man's merit. See these
places, Romans 6.23. and 11.5.6. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 2.11. and 3.7. I
might add more, but these are sufficient.

2. By Reason, which being enlightened by Scripture strongly argues, and
concludes that good works are not, cannot be meritorious. 1. Because we are
creatures, Psalm. 100.3. 2. We are sinful creatures, Iam. 3.2. 3. Our good
works are not ours, but Gods, Phil. 2.13. 4. They are a due debt, not
supererogated, Luc. 17.10. 5. They are stained with manifold and great
imperfections, Gal. 5.17. 6. They are no way profitable, and beneficial to
God, Psalm. 16.2. Romans 11.35.7. They are no way comparable to that glory, which
hereafter shall be revealed, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Now these things
considered, how shall we say that good works are, or can be meritorious, that
is, such as by any value, or worth in them should bind God to give a reward to
them? especially such a transcendent excellency, and weight of Glory, as is
that of the kingdom of heaven?

And who, but only they to whom the Lord has sent strong delusions that they
should believe a lie, does not discover the absurdity of that collection,
which the Papists do infer from our Apostles words? who says not, that God
will reward very man for his works, but according to his works: which phrase
does not intimate the cause why eternal life is given; but the qualification
of the persons to whom eternal life is given: that they are such as by faith
are united to Christ, and bring forth good works, the fruits and evidences of
that faith, whereunto in the Covenant of Grace, God has made the promise of
Salvation.

Wheresoever therefore in Scripture a reward is said to be rendered to good
works of justice, as 2 These. 1.7. 2 Timothy 4.8. the Scripture has relation to
the merit of Christ, not to any desert of our own.

Also, wheresoever mention is made of our worthiness, as 2 These. 1.5. Luc.
20.35. Apoc. 3.4. the Scripture means not that any are, or can be worthy by the
merit, and dignity of their own works: but that they are worthy in Gods
gracious acceptance through the worthiness of Jesus Christ imputed to them,
and made theirs by a true, and lively faith. And so much for the first question.

Quest. 2. If God reward every man according to his works, How can God be just
in punishing for ever, those that sinned for a short time?

To this I answer. 1. In the words of a learned, and judicious writer of our
own. Iustum est ut reprobi nunquam careant supplicio, quia nunquam voluerunt
carere peccato. Reprobates must justly suffer for ever, because they would
never have ceased to sin, if they had lived for ever. 2. The greatness of a
sin, must not be measured by the Time in which it was acted, but by the Person
against whom it was committed. Now men sin against God, who is infinite; and
therefore (justice requiring a portion between the offense, and the punishment)
though sin be temporary, yet it is most just with God to punish it with eternal
torments. And so much for the fourth point. I proceed to the fifth

By whom God will Judge?
By that Man whom he has ordained, says the Text. And this man can be no
other but the Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. So Saint Peter preached, and Christ
commanded him, and the rest of his Apostles to preach so, Act. 10.42. And he
commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is He which was
ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.

If respect be had to the power, and authority of Judging, then to judge us
does belong to the whole Trinity, and that equally, as I said before. But if
respect be had to the Administration of Judgment, and the visible act of
Judging, then to judge us does belong to Christ only. For he only shall be
seen to descend with a guard of Angels, to open the books of accounts, to
examine the several causes, to pronounce the final sentence, and to execute
the same by the happy admission of the Elect into the kingdom of Heaven
prepared by the Father, and purchased by Christ to be the glorious, and
eternal inheritance of the Saints; and by the heavy, and uncomfortable
dismission of reprobates, into that Lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
before the Throne of God for ever and ever.

Thus you see Christ shall be the immediate manager, and administrator of
judgment. The Scripture is plentiful in the proof of it. Wherein he is
called the Wise Husbandman, that severeth the corn from the chafe, the Wheat
from the Tares: the good Shepherd that divides the Sheep from the Goats: the
heavenly Bridegroom that separateth the Wise from the foolish virgins: the
great Lord that committed sundry talents to his servants at their going, and
called them to account how they had employed, and improved them at his return.
More plainly, Act. 10.42. where he is called the Judge of quick, and dead, and
1 Cor. 5.5. where the day of Judgment is called the day of the Lord Jesus,
and, 2 Cor. 5.10. where the seat of judgment is called the judgment seat of
Christ, and Matthew. 16.27. where Christ himself says. The Son of man shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his Angels: and then he shall reward every man
according to his works.

Now if you ask a reason, why the administration and Execution of Judgment is
committed to Christ. I refer you to Ioh. 5.27. He has given authority to
him, that is, the Father has given authority to Christ, to execute judgment,
because he is the Son of Man. Here you see Christ's commission, to execute
judgment, and the reason of it, because he is the Son of man. About these last
words, I find some difference amongst expositors.

Some will have these words read, with the words following, after this manner.
Because he is the Son of man marvel not at this, for the time shall come when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God and shall come forth, etc.
That is, if it seem wonderful or incredible to any that the Son of man, shall
have such power to judge, you must consider that he is the Son of God also; and
at the day of judgment he shall mightily declare his Godhead by the
resurrection of the dead.

Others read the words thus, in quantum, or secundum quod filius hominis est,
that is, in respect of his Humanity, or as he is the son of man. And so make
it a reason not of Christ's giving judgment, but of his receiving power to
judge. For as Christ was the Son of God, power could not be given to him, for
it was naturally, and essentially in himself; and as he was the Son of man he
could not have power to execute judgment, until it was given him of the
Father.

Others understand this reason to be of the same force, with that Phil. 2.8, 9.
He humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which
is above every name. So here because the Son of God humbled himself so low to
become the son of man, therefore God has recompensed his infinite humility,
with this infinite glory to be the Judge of all the world.

Others interpret the words thus. That God has given, to Christ power to
execute judgment, (...), by and according to his humanity. For the wisdom of
God thought it meet, that men should be judged by man, that whilst wicked men
tremble and are full of fear, horror and perplexity; the similitude of
nature might make the elect full of joy, comfort and confidence.

Now put all these readings together, they amount to this. That Christ Jesus,
as he is the son of man in honor, and reward of his great humility, has
received from the Father this great authority, this glorious power in his
humane Nature to execute judgment at the last Day. And so I come to the last
point.

The warrant to assure us that the World shall be judged by Christ.
There is nothing more remote from the common sense, and apprehension of men,
then the great works of Christ at the last Day, in raising the dead, and
bringing them with all those that then remain alive to judgment. To
Christians this is (...), a mystery; to Heathens it is (...), incredible. And
therefore to convince the infidelity of Heathens; and to confirm the faith of
Christians, Saint Paul sends us in the end of the text to the resurrection of
Christ. Whereby God has given to all sufficientissimam fidem says Cajetan, a
most sufficient, certain and infallible assurance of these three things.

1. That the Dead shall be raised. 2. That they shall rise to be judged. 3.
That they shall be judged by Christ.
1. That the Dead shall be raised. Christ's Resurrection is a pledge of ours.
For if Christ be risen, then is our nature risen; and if our nature be risen,
then our Persons may rise; nay shall rise at the last day, that is plain, 1
Cor. 15.52. The dead shall be raised incorruptible, and they shall be raised by
the Power of Christ, that is proved, Ioh. 5.28, 29. The hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth.
The same Power, by which Christ quickened his own dead body, shall quicken our
dead bodies at the day of Judgment.

2. That they shall rise to be judged. Judgment is the end of Resurrection. So
says our Savior, Ioh. 5.29. All that are in the graves shall come forth, they
that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. And what Christ here says, Saint
John saw, though a thing to come, yet he saw it (...) by Revelation, Apoc.
20.12. I saw the dead small and great stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened which was the book of life; and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in those books according to
their works.

3. That they shall be judged by Christ. His resurrection warrants that: for by
this powerful and glorious act the Son of man, did mightily declare himself to
be the Son of God. And being God and Man, the Holy Trinity ordained and
decreed by him to Judge the world in righteousness. And thus much for the
Exposition of my Text, and the Proof of those points which are contained in
it. I come now to

The Application of this Doctrine touching the last judgment, in a threefold
use.
1. Of Terror to some. 2. Of Comfort to others. 3. Of Admonition to all.
1. This Doctrine of the last Judgment, serves for the Terror of all
unbeleevers, and ungodly livers. To such the Preaching, and expectation of
Judgment is as the Hand which appeared to Belshazzar, writing upon the wall
the period of his life and kingdom: or as the Hand which was sent to Ezekiel,
which had a roll in it, written within and without full of lamentations,
mourning, and woe: Ezekiel. 2.9, 10. Aristotle calls death (...), the most
fearful of all things. He would not have said so, had he known that after
death comes judgment, Heb. 9.27. This exceeds that far. That's but timendum,
fearful; but this is tremendum, horrendum, terrible, dreadful, Dreadful in
many respects.

1. It Is dreadful in respect of the Preparation to Judgment; for the Trumpet
shall sound, the Archangell shall cry, Surgite mortui, venite ad Iudicium,
arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Then the graves shall open, the earth
tremble, the Sear oar, the Stars fall, the powers of Heaven shake, the world
burn, Hell smoke, and the Judge himself shall come in flames of fire to
render vengeance.

2. It Is dreadful, in respect of the strict and severe account the ungodly
shall be called unto. For they must give account for their bodies which they
have defiled; for their souls which they have neglected; for the creatures
which they have abused; for the Sabbaths which they have polluted; for the
Sacraments which they have profaned; for all the means of grace which they have
despised; for their secret thoughts, idle words, and all evil deeds which they
have ungodly committed. For all these they shall give account in so rigorous a
manner, that no eye shall pity them, no tongue shall plead for them, no
tears, no cries shall procure them the least mercy from their wrathful Judge.

3. But most dreadful it shall be, in respect of the direful sentence which
shall be denounced against them. For Christ the righteous Judge will say to
them. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his angels, Matthew. 29.41. A sentence full of woe and horror, what more
woeful, more horrible, then to see so many admitted into the kingdom of God;
and themselves separated from the place, and presence of God, and haled with
ugly fiends into Hell, where the pains of the damned are unsufferable, but
unavoydable; easelesse, but endless and remediless? Dolor si longus, levis;
si gravis, brevis, Pain is lightly, light, if long; short, if great; it is so
here; but this rule does not hold in Hell. There is Darkness that ends not,
gnashing of teeth that cease not, bonds that break not, worms that dye not,
fire that never shall be extinguished. Damned souls shall howl, but none shall
hear; roar but none shall help; look round about, but see no means of
comfort, nothing but that which helps to increase their torments, which shall
have neither ease nor end.

Oh the fearful case of all ungodly persons at the day of judgment! what
aching of Heart, what anguish of Mind, what horror of Conscience, what
wringing of hands, what knocking of breasts, what cries filling Heaven, Earth
and Hell shall be heard amongst the wicked upon this day of vengeance.

2. This Doctrine of the last Judgment, ministers matter of much comfort, and
rejoicing to all such as are true believers, and do lead a godly life. To them
the day of Judgment will be a joyful, comfortable, and most blessed day in
many respects. It will be a day

1. Of their restoration, and perfect freedom from all infirmities, and
imperfections.

2. Of full redemption from all miseries and calamities.

3. Of final deliverance from all sins and corruptions.

4. Of glorious Coronation, when Palms of victory shall be put into their
hands, and upon their heads shall be set a Crown of incorruptible glory.

Oh what a joy, and comfort will it be to see the holy Patriarchs, Priests,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and all the rest of the crowned, and
triumphant Saints gathered into one company, and standing at the right hand of
Christ!

How will the faithful be ravished to see Christ their Brother, their
Advocate, their Head, their Husband, their Redeemer to sit in the Seat of
Judgment. But especially, to hear him from thence to pronounce to them this
blissful sentence. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world, Matthew. 25.43. thus joyful,
comfortable, and glorious will the day of Judgment be, to all such as live in
the fear of God, and the faith of Jesus Christ. Which considered, I cannot but
think it a strange infirmity of the Church in the days of Tertullian, when
they usually prayed pro mora finis: For the protraction and delay of the last
end. Rather let all the godly pray with the Spouse in the end of the Canticles;
Make have my beloved, and as Saint John did in the close of his Revelation,
Come Lord Jesus. For when Christ comes, he comes to free us from all
infirmities, to redeem us from all miseries, to deliver us from all sins, and
in full and perfect manner to endow us with Heaven, and with all Happiness.

3. This Doctrine of the last Judgment, serves for the Admonition of us all.
To warn us while God does afford us time and means to take such a course that
we may gain the favor of the Judge, and escape the severity of the last
judgment. And to this end with diligence, and good conscience put in practice
these six duties.

1. Be thine own accuser, in the free confession of thy sins to God;
Considering what St. John says. If we confess our sins, God is just, and
faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness,
1 Ioh. 1.9.

2. Be thine own Judge, and that in the strictest censure and severest
condemnation of thy self. Considering what Saint Paul says. If we would judge
our selves we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11.31.

3. Pray earnestly unto God for pardon. Considering that so long as the day of
Grace lasts, mercy may be found if we will but seek it.

4. Beware of Judging the Persons, and Actions of thy brethren. When a man does
well, do not judge ill; when he does ill, do not make it worse; when his
speeches or actions are doubtful, take nothing in the worst sense, considering
what our Savior says, Judge not and ye shall not be judged, Matthew. 7.1.

5. Labor to get a lively faith in Christ Jesus, and rely wholly upon his
merits for salvation. Considering what Christ says. He that believes has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, John 5.24.

6. Endeavor to keep a good conscience in all things, void of offense before
God, and all men: considering what the Prophet David says. Mark the upright
man and behold the just, for the last end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37.

And now to wind up all in a word. If we be mindful of these important
directions. If we confess our sins freely, condemn our selves severely, pray
for pardon earnestly, judge our brethren charitably, believe in Jesus Christ
steadfastly, and sincerely desire and endeavor to lead a godly, righteous and
sober life, then we shall find Christ not a severe Judge to condemn us, but a
merciful Redeemer to absolve, and save us in that day on which God has
ordained him to Judge the world in righteousness. And now that our hearts may
be so full of graces, and our lives so full of good works, that we may have in
the end of our life, a comfortable death; and in the end of the World a
glorious resurrection to a blessed immortality, let us all join together in
faithful and servent Prayer.

O Most glorious, and most gracious Lord God, who have taught us to know, and
believe that there shall be a day of judgment, on which we and all the world
shall stand before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, to render an account of all
things done in the flesh, whether good or evil; and to receive a just reward
according to our works. We most humbly beseech thee to teach us to make a right
and religious use of this faith and knowledge. Oh let these last things be ever
in our Meditation, and so sanctify to us the remembrance thereof, that it may
be a Bridle to restrain us from all sin and wickedness; and a Spur to provoke
us powerfully, and effectually to unreined repentance for all our sins, to
constant patience in all our sufferings, to a steadfast faith in Jesus Christ,
and to a true fear of thee in all our thoughts, words and actions throughout
the whole course of our conversation* That so at whatsoever watch of the night,
or hour of the day Christ shall come to Judgment, he may find us watching
for him, walking with him, worthy to stand before him, and to enter with him
into that kingdom, wherein thou dwell, and the righteous only shall dwell
with thee in unutterable joy, and glory for evermore. This Grace here, this
Glory hereafter, Lord grant unto us all, for his sake who is the Son of thy
Love, the Mediator of thy chosen, Jesus Christ. To whom with thee O Father,
and the Spirit of Comfort, be ascribed by us, and all the world, Kingdom,
Power and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

