THE LIFE Of the Renowned Sr PHILIP SIDNEY. WITH The true Interest of England
as it then stood in relation to all Foreign Princes: And particularly for
suppressing the power of Spain Stated by Him. His principal Actions, Counsels,
Designs, and Death. Together with a short Account of the Maxims and Policies
used by Queen Elizabeth in her Government.

Written by Sir FULKE GREVIL Knight, Lord BROOK, a Servant to Queen Elizabeth,
and his Companion and Friend.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile over against St Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. MDCLII.

Most humbly, To the Right Honorable THE COUNTESS OF SVNDERLAND.
Since Madam,
BOth your Blood, and Virtues do so strongly Entitle you to this well-limb'd
Piece; it would be a stain upon the Publisher, to enshrine it to any other Name
but yours. Who can protect the story of a Sidney, but a Sidney's Name? Thus his
Matchless Poem, seemed providentially by him impatronag'd unto his Peerless
Sister. And this (Madam) being another of his meaner Monuments, disdains
Address to any other Alliance but his own. Here at your feet (by no despicable
Pen) the History of our Nations Wonder lies; Whose large spread Fame, your
noble Meene improves, and convinces the World of this Truth, That not only the
Endowments of Nature, but even the Enoblements of the Mind, and Genius, are
many times inherent in the Blood and Lineage. Some Families are privileged from
Heaven in Excellencies, which now and then in particular Branches, like new
Stars, appear and beautify the sphere they shine in. And doubtless if the
departed into Happiness, have any knowledge of our humane Vicissitudes, his
gallant Soul looks down with Contentment, to see the Honor of his House
continued in your unblemisht Merit. Which, taking all, may excuse the
presumption that I can be charged with, who not pretending to the Authorage,
have thought I could not do more right, either to him, or the subject of the
discourse, than to inscribe it to Her, who like day in this Eclipse of Honor,
enlightening our Western Orb, has ambition'd me to make this offering from,

Madam, The meanest of your most obedient Servants, P. B.

THE Life of the Renowned Sr PHILIP SIDNEY.
CHAP. I.
THe difference which I have found between times, and consequently the changes
of life into which their natural vicissitudes do violently carry men, as they
have made deep furrows of impressions into my heart, so the same heavy wheels
cause me to retire my thoughts from free traffic with the world, and rather
seek comfortable ease or employment in the safe memory of dead men, than
disquiet in a doubtful conversation amongst the living. Which I ingenuously
confess, to be one chief motive of dedicating these exercises of my youth to
that Worthy Sir Philip Sidney, so long since departed. For had I grounded my
ends upon active Wisdoms of the present, or sought Patronage out of hope, or
fear in the future; Who knows not, that there are some Noble friends of mine,
and many Honorable Magistrates yet living, unto whom both my Fortune, and
Reputation were, and are far more subject? But besides this self-respect of
Dedication, the debt I acknowledge to that Gentleman is far greater, as with
whom I shall ever account it honor to have been brought up: and in whom the
life it self of true worth, did (by way of example) far exceed the pictures of
it in any moral Precepts. So that (if my creation had been equal) it would have
proved as easy for me, to have followed his pattern, in the practice of real
virtue, as to engage my self into this Characteristicall kind of Poesy: in
defense whereof he has written so much, as I shall not need to say any thing.
For that this representing of virtues, vices, humors, counsels, and actions
of men unfeigned, and unscandalous Images, is an inabling of freeborn spirits
to the greatest affairs of States: he himself has left such an instance in
the too short scene of his life, as I fear many Ages will not draw a line out
of any other man's sphere to parallel with it.

For my own part, I observed, honored, and loved him so much; as with what
caution soever I have passed through my days hitherto aamong the living, yet
in him I challenge a kind of freedom even among the dead. So that although
with Socrates, I profess to know nothing for the present; yet with Nestor I am
delighted in repeating old news of the ages past; and will therefore stir up
my drooping memory touching this man's worth, powers, ways, and designs: to
the end that in the tribute I owe him, our nation may see a Sea-mark, raised
upon their native coast, above the level of any private Pharos abroad: and so
by a right Meridian line of their own, learn to sail through the straits of
true virtue, into a calm, and spacious Ocean of humane honor.

It is ordinary among men to observe the races of horses, and breeds of other
cattle. But few consider, that as diverse humors mixed in men's bodies make
different complexions; so every Family has, as it were, diverse predominant
qualities in it: which, as they are tempered together in Marriage, give a
certain tincture to all the descent. In my time, I have observed it in many
houses, especially in this. Sir Henry Sidney his Father was a man of excellent
natural wit, large heart, sweet conversation: and such a Governor, as sought
not to make an end of the State in himself, but to plant his own ends in the
prosperity of his Country. Witness his sound establishments both in Wales, and
Ireland, where his Memory is worthily grateful unto this day: how unequal, and
bitter soever the censure of Provincialls is usually, against sincere
Monarchall Governors, especially such, as though in worth and place superior,
are yet in their own degrees of heraldry, inferior to them.

On the other side, his Mother, as she was a woman by descent of great
Nobility, so was she by nature of a large ingenuous spirit. Whence, as it were
even racked with native strengths, she chose rather to hide her self from the
curious eyes of a delicate time, than come up on the stage of the world with
any manner of disparagement, the mischance of sickness having cast such a kind
of veil over her excellent beauty, as the modesty of that sex does many times
upon their native, and heroical spirits.

So that it may probably be gathetherd, that this clearness of his Fathers
judgment, and ingenious sensiblenesse of his Mothers, brought forth so happy a
temper in this wellmixt Offspring of theirs, as (without envy be it spoken) Sir
Philip deserves to be accounted amongst those eminent Plants of our soil, which
blast, or bite not, but rather st^tuminate, and refresh the Vines, Corn,
Fruits, or whatsoever grows under their shaddows. And as he was their
Firstborn, so was he not the contraction, but the extension of their strength,
and the very aim, and perfect type of it.

Of whose Youth I will report no other wonder, but this; That though I lived
with him, and knew him from a child, yet I never knew him other than a man:
with such staidness of mind, lovely, and familiar gravity, as carried grace,
and reverence above greater years. His talk ever of knowledge, and his very
play tending to enrich his mind: So as even his teachers found something in him
to observe, and learn, above that which they had usually read, or taught. Which
eminence, by nature, and industry, made his worthy Father style Sir Philip in
my hearing (though I unseen) Lumen familiae suae. But why do I mention this
relative harmony of worth between Father and Son? Did not his Country soon
after take knowledge of him as a Light, or leading Star to every degree within
her? Are not the Arts and Languages, which enabled him to Travail at fourteen
years old, and in his Travail to win reverence amongst the chief Learned men
abroad, Witnesses beyond exception that there was great inequality of worth and
goodness in him?

Instance that reverend Languet, mentioned for honors sake in Sir Philip's
Arcadia, learned usque ad miraculum; wise by the conjunction of practice in the
world, with that wellgrounded Theory of Books, and much valued at home; till
this great Worth (even in a Gentleman's fortune) being discovered for a
dangerous instrument against Rome and Spain, by some sparkles got light enough,
rather to seek employment elsewhere, than to tarry, and be driven out of his own
Country with disparagement. In Franckford he settles, is entertained Agent for
the Duke of Saxony, and an underhand Minister for his own King. Lodged he was
in Wechels house, the Printer of Franckford, where Sir Philip in travail
chancing likewise to become a guest, this ingenious old man's fullness of
knowledge, travailing as much to be delivered from abundance by teaching, as
Sir Philip's rich nature, and industry thirsted to be taught, and manured; this
harmony of an humble Hearer to an excellent Teacher, so equally fitted them
both, as out of a natural descent both in love, and plenty, the elder grew
taken with a net of his own thread, and the younger taught to lift up himself
by a thread of the same spinning; so as this reverend Languet, orderly
sequestered from his several Functions under a mighty King, and Saxony the
greatest Prince of Germany, became a Nurse of knowledge to this hopeful young
Gentleman, and without any other hire, or motive than this sympathy of
affections, accompanied him in the whole course of his three years travail. By
which example the judicious Reader may see, that Worth in every Nation finds
her Country, Parents, Neighbors, and Friends, yea, and often, with more
honor, dearnesse, and advancement in knowledges, than any pedigree of fleshly
kindred, will, or can at home raise, or enlarge them unto. Nay to go yet
farther in this private instance; It may please the Reader to observe, how the
same parallel of worth, in what age, or estate soever, as it has power to win,
so has it likewise absolute power to keep. Far unlike those creations of
chance, which has other birds eggs; and by advancing men out of chance or
complement, lose them again as fast by neglect. Contrary to which, even when
diversity of years, courses of life, and fortunes, enforced these dear Friends
to divide, there yet passed such a continual course of intelligence by Letters
from one of them to another, as in their loss (if they be lost) there be
buried many delicate images, and differences, between the real, and large
complexions of those active times, and the narrow salves of this effeminate
age: Because in this excellent mould of their friendship, the greatest
businesses of Estate were so mixed with the sweet remissions of ingenuous good
will, as men might easily discern in them (as unflattering glasses) that
wisdom, and love, in good spirits have great affinity together. For a farther
demonstration, behold even the same Languet (after he was sixty six years of
age) fashioning himself a journey into England, with the Duke Casimire, only
to see that excellent Plant of his own polishing. In which loving, and
unexpected meeting, I dare confidently affirm, neither side became loser. At
the sea they parted, and made many mutual tears omnious propheciers of their
never meeting again.

These little sparks of two large natures I make bold the longer to insist
upon, because the youth, life and fortune of this Gentleman were indeed but
sparks of extraordinary greatness in him: which for want of clear vent lay
concealed, and in a manner smothered up. And again to bring the children of
favor, and change, into an equal balance of comparison with birth, worth, and
education: and therein abruptly to conclude, that God creates those in his
certain, and eternal mouldes, out of which he elects for himself; where Kings
choose creatures out of Pandoras Tun, and so raise up worth, and no worth;
friends or enemies at adventure. Therefore what marvail can it be, if these
Jacobs, and Esaus strive ambitiously one with another, as well before as after
they come out of such erring, and unperfect wombes?

Now from these particular testimonies to go on with Sir Philips life: though
he purposed no monuments of books to the world, out of this great harvest of
knowledge; yet do not his Arcadian Romanties live after him, admired by our
foureeyd Critics? who, howsoever their common end upon common arts be to
affect reputation by depraving censure; yet where nature places excellency
above envy, there (it seems) she subjecteth these carping eyes to wander, and
shows the judicious reader, how he may be nourished in the delicacy of his own
judgment.

For instance; may not the most refined spirits, in the scope of these dead
images (even as they are now) find, that when Sovereign Princes, to play with
their own visions, will put off public action, which is the splendour of
Majesty, and unactively charge the managing of their greatest affairs upon
the second-hand faith, and diligence of Deputies, may they not (I say)
understand, that even then they bury themselves, and their Estates in a cloud
of contempt, and under it both encourage, and shadow the the conspiracies of
ambitious subalternes to their false ends. I mean the ruin of States and
Princes?

Again, where Kingly Parents will suffer, or rather force their wives and
daughters, to descend from the inequality and reservednesse of Princely
education, into the contemptible familiarity, and popular freedom of
Shepherds; may we not discern that even therein they give those Royal birthes
warrant, or opportunity, to break over all circles of honor, safe-guards to the
modesty of that sex; and withal make them fraily, apt to change the commanding
manners of Princely Birth, into the degrading images of servile baseness?
Lastly, where humor takes away this pomp, and apparatus from King, Crown, and
Scepter, to make fear a Counselor, and obscurity a wisdom; be that King at
home what the current, or credit of his former Government, for a a while, may
keep him: yet he is sure among foreign Princes to be justly censured as a
Princely Shepherd, or Shepherdish King: which creatures of scorn seldom fail
to become fit sacrifices for home-born discontentments, or ambitious foreign
spirits to undertake, and offer up.

Again, who sees not the chanceable arrival of Euarchus into Arcadia; his
unexpected election to the temporary Sovereignty of that State; his sitting in
a cloudy seat of judgment, to give sentence (under a mask of Shepherds)
against his Son, Nephew, Neeces, the immediate successors to that Scepter; and
all accused and condemned of rape, paricide, adulteries, or treasons, by their
own Laws: I say who sees not, that these dark webs of effeminate Princes be
dangerous forerunners of innovation, even in a quiet, and equally tempered
people? So that if Sir Philips had not made the integrity of this foreign King
an image of more constant, pure, and higher strain, than nature makes those
ordinary mouldes, wherein she fashioneth earthly Princes, even this
opportunity, and map of desolation prepared for Euarchus, wherein he saw all
the successors of this Province justly condemned under his own sentence, would
have raised up specious rights, or pretenses for new ambition in him; and upon
the never-failing pillars of occasion, amasednes of people, and sad offer of
glorious novelties, have tempted him to establish this Election for a time,
successively, to him and his for ever?

To be short, the like, and finer moralities offer themselves throughout that
various, and dainty work of his, for sounder judgments to exercise their
Spirits in; so that if the infancy of these Ideas, determining in the first
generation, yield the ingenuous Reader such pleasant and profitable diversity,
both of flowers, and fruits, let him conceive, if this excellent Image-maker
had lived to finish, and bring to perfection this extraordinary frame of his
own Commonwealth: I mean, the return of Basilius, from his dreams of humor,
to the honor of his former Estate; the marriage of the two sisters with the two
excellent Princes; their issue; the wars stirred up by Amphialus; his
marriage with Helena; their successions; together with the incident
Magnificences, pompes of state, providence of counsels in treaties of peace,
or aliance, summons of wars, and orderly execution of their disorders; I say,
what a large field an active able spirit should have had to walk in, let the
advised Reader conceive with grief. Especially if he please to take knowledge,
that in all these creatures of his making, his intent, and scope was, to turn
the barren Philosphy precepts into pregnant Images of life; and in them, first
on the Monarch's part, lively to represent the growth, state, and declination
of Princes, change of Government, and laws: vicissitudes of sedition, faction,
succession, confederacies, plantations, with all other errors, or alterations
in public affairs. Then again in the subjects case; the state of favor,
disfavor, prosperity, adversity, emulation, quarrel, undertaking, retiring,
hospitality, travail, and all other moodes of private fortunes, or misfortunes.
^n which traverses (I know) his purpose was to limn out such exact pictures, of
every posture in the mind, that any man being forced, in the strains of this
life, to pass through any straights, or latitudes of good, or ill fortune,
might (as in a glass) see how to set a good countenance upon all the
discountenances of adversity, and a stay upon the exorbitant smiling of chance.

Now, as I know this was the first project of these works, rich (like his
youth) in the freedom of affections, wit, learning, style, form, and
facility, to please others: so must I again (as ingenuously) confess, that
when his body declined, and his piercing inward powers were lifted up to a
purer Horizon, he then discovered, not only the imperfection, but vanity of
these shadows, how daintily soever limned: as seeing that even beauty it self,
in all earthly complexions, was more apt to allure men to evil, than to
fashion any goodness in them. And from this ground, in that memorable testament
of his, he bequeathed no other legacy, but the fire, to this unpolished
Embrio. From which fate it is only reserved, until the world has purged away
all her more gross corruptions.

Again, they that knew him well, will truly confess, this Arcadia of his to be,
both in form, and matter, as much inferior to that unbounded spirit of his, as
the industry and Images of other men's works, are many times raised above the
writers capacities: and besides acknowledge, that howsoever he could not choose
but give them many aspersions of spirit, and learning from the Father; yet that
they were scribled rather as pamphlets, for entertainment of time, and friends,
than any account of himself to the world. Because if his pupose had been to
leave his memory in books, I am confident, in the right use of Logic,
Philosophy, History, and Poesy, nay even in the most ingenuous of Mechanical
Arts, he would have showed such tracts of a searching, and judicious spirit; as
the professors of every faculty would have striven no less for him, than the
seven Cities did to have Homer of their Sept. But the truth is: his end was
not writing, even while he wrote; nor his knowledge molded for tables, or
schools; but both his wit, and understanding bent upon his heart, to make
himself, and others, not in words or opinion, but in life, and action, good and
great.

In which Architectonical art he was such a Master, with so commending, and yet
equal ways amongst men, that whersoever he went, he was beloved, and obeyed:
yea into what Action soever he came last at the first, he became first at the
last: the whole managing of the business, not by usurpation, or violence, but
(as it were) by right, and acknowledgment, falling into his hands, as into a
natural Center.

By which only commendable monopoly of alluring, and improving men, how the
same draws all winds after it in fair weather: so did the influence of this
spirit draw men's affections and undertakings to depend upon him.

CHAP. II.
HEre I am still enforced to bring pregnant evidence from the dead: amongst
whom I have found far more liberal contribution to the honor of true worth,
than among those which now live; and in the market of selfnesse, traffic new
interest by the discredit of old friends: that ancient wisdom of righting
enemies, being utterly worn out of date in our modern discipline.

My first instance must come from that worthy Prince of Orange, William of
Nassau, with whom this young Gentleman having long kept intelligence by word,
and letters, and in affairs of the higest nature that then passed current upon
the stages of England, France, Germany, Italy, the low Countries, or Spain, it
seems that this young Gentleman had, by his mutual freedom, so imprinted the
extraordinary merit of his young years into the large wisdom, and experience
of that excellent Ptince, as I passing out of Germany into England, and having
the unexpected honor to find this Prince in the Town Delph, cannot think it
unwelcome to describe the clothes of this Prince; his posture of body, and
mind, familiarity, and reservedness to ths ingenuous Reader, that he may see
with what diverse Characters Princes please, and Govern Cities, Towns, and
Peoples.

His uppermost garment was a gown, yet such as (I dare confidently affirm) a
mean-born student, in our Innes of Court, would not have been well-pleased to
walk the streets in. Unbuttoned his doubled was, and of like precious matter,
and form to the other. His wast-coat (which showed it self under it) not unlike
the best sort of those woollen knit ones, which our ordinary watermen row us in.
His Company about him, the Burgesses of that beerbrewing Town: and he so
fellowlike encompassed with them, as (had I not known his face) no exterior
sign of degree, or deservedness could have discovered the inequality of his
worth or Estate from that multitude Not withstanding I no sooner came to his
presence, but it pleased him to take knowledge of me And even upon that (as if
it had been a signal to make a change) his respect of a stranger instantly
begat respect to himself in all about him: An outward passage of inward
greatness, which in a popular Estate I thought worth the observing. Because
there, no pedigree but worth could possibly make a man Prince, and no Prince,
in a moment, at his own pleasure.

The businesses which he then vouchsafed to impart with me were, the dangerous
fate which the Crown of England, States of Germany, and the Low Countries did
stand threatened with, under an ambitious, and conquering Monarch's hand. The
main instance, a short descripon of the Spaniards curious affecting to keep the
Romans ways, and ends, in all his actions. On the other side, the clear
symptoms of the Hectique fever, universally then reigning among the Princes
of Christendom, ordained (as he thought) to behold this undermining disease
without fear, till it should prove dangerous, nay incurable to them. This
active King of Spain having put on a mask of conscience, to cover an invisible
conjunction between the temporal, and spiritual ambitions, of these two
sometimes creeping, sometimes commanding Romish and Spanish Conquerors. The
particulars were many, both excellent and enlightening.

As first, the fatal neutrality of France, jealous of the Spanish greatness,
as already both wronged, and threatened by it: and yet their Kings so full of
pleasures, and consequently so easily satisfied with the complements of words,
treaties, or alliances, and since the fall of the Sorbonists, their own
exempted Church so absolutely possessed, and governed by the Jesuits; as through
the bewithing liberties, and bondages of Auricular confession, they were rather
wrought to rest upon a vain security of reputed strength, than really to
hazard loss, and help themselves by diversion, or assailing.

Again, on the Queens part, by the way of question, he supposed a little
neglect in her Princely mildness, while she did suffer a Protestant party,
raised by God in that great Kingdom of France, to be a balance or
counterpease to that dangerous Heptarchy of Spain (then scarce visible, but
since multiplied by an unresistable greatness) I say, for suffering this
strong and faithful party (through want of employment) to sink into it self,
and so unactively (like a Meteor) to vanish, or smother out, in vain and idle
apparitions. Withal reverently he demurred, whether it were an omission in
that excellent Ladies Government, or no, by a remiss looking on, whilst the
Austrian aspiring family framed occasion to gain by begging peace, or buying
war from the Grand Signior; and both exceeding much to their own ends; In
respect that once in few years, this Emperor made himself General by it, over
all the forces of Christendom; and thereby gained the fame of action; trained
up his own Instruments Martially, and got credit with his fellow-bordering
Princes, through the common Council, or participation of fear. Besides that in
the conclusions of peace, he ever saved a mass of riches gathered by Diets,
Contributions, Devotions, and Levies for common defense, which out of the
ill-accompting hand of war, became (in his Exchequer) Treasure, to terrify
even those Christian neighbors that did contribute to it. And the more
especially he insisted upon this: because all those crafty Pageants of her
enemies were disguisedly acted, even whilst her Majesty had an Agent of
extraordinary diligence, worth, and credit with that vast Estate of Turkey,
into whose absolute and imperious spirit, without any further charge than
infusing the jealousies of competition, these practices among those Austrian
usurpers, might easily have been interrupted.

Lastly, it pleased him to question yet a greater oversight in both these
Kingdoms, England, and France: Because while their Princes stood at gaze, as
upon things far off, they still gave way for the Popish, and Spanish invisible
Arts, and Counsels, to undermine the greatness, and freedom both of Secular and
Ecclesiastical Princes: a mortal sickness in that vast body of Germany, and
by their insensible fall, a raising up of the house of Austria many steps
toward her long affected Monarchy over the West. The ground of which opinion
was (as he thought) in respect that even the Catholic Princes, and Bishops
themselves (had their eyes bin well wakened) would never have endured any
cloud, or color of Religion, to hape changed their Princely Soveraignties into
such a kind of low, and Chaplain tenure: as since they have sleepily fallen
into: but would rather have stirred them with many hands, to bind this
Miter-superstition, with the real cords of truth. And to that end perchance
have set Spain on work with her new, and ill digested Conquests: her dangerous
enemy Fess: her native Moors, and Jews (since craftily transported) and so
probably have troubled the usurpations both of the Pope, and Spain, over that
well-tempered, though over-zealous, and superstitions Region of It a'y. These,
and such other particulars, as I had in charge, and did faithfully deliver from
him to her Majesty, are since performed, or perished with time, or occasion.

The last branch was his free expressing of himself in the honor of Sir
Philip Sidney, after this manner: That I would first commend his own humble
service, with those forementioned Ideas to the Queen; and after crave leave of
her freely to open his knowledge, and opinion of a Fellow Servants of his, that
(as he heard) lived unimployed under her. With himself he began ab ovo, as
having been of Charles the fift's Privy Counsel, before he was one and twenty
years of age: and since (as the world knew) either an Actor, or at least
acquainted with the greatest actions, and affairs of Europe; and likewise with
her greatest men, and ministers of Estate. In all which series of time,
multitude of things, and persons, he protested unto me (and for her service)
that if he could judge, her Majesty had one of the ripest, and greatest
Counselors of Estate in Sir Philip Sidney, that at this day lived in Europe:
to the trial of which he was pleased to leave his own credit engaged, until
her Majesty might please to employ this Gentleman, either amongst her friends
or enemies.

At my return into England, I performed all his other co^mandments; this that
concerned Sir Philip (thinking to make the fine-spun threads of Friendship more
firm between them) I acquainted Sir Philip with: not as questioning, but fully
resolved to do it. Unto which he at the first sight opposing, discharged my
faith impawn'd to the Prince of Orange, for the delivery of it; as an act only
entending his good, and so to be performed, or dispensed with at his pleasure;
yet for my satisfaction freely added these words: first, that the Qu. had the
life it self daily attending her: and if she either did not, or would not value
it so highly, the commendation of that worthy Prince could be no more (at the
best) than a lively picture of that life, and so of far less credit, and
estimation with her. His next reason was, because Princes love not that foreign
Powers should have extraordinary in their Subjects; much less to be taught by
them how they should place their own: as arguments either upbraiding ignorance,
or lack of large rewarding goodness in them

This Narration I adventure of, to show the clearness, and readiness of this
Gentleman's judgment, in all degrees, and offices of life: with this farther
testimony of him; that after mature deliberation being once resolved, he never
brought any question of change to afflict himself with, or perplex the
business; but left the success to his will, that governs the blind
prosperities, and unprosperities of Chance; and so works out his own ends by
the erring frailties of humane reason and affection. Lastly, to manifest that
these were not complements, self ends, or use of each other, according to our
modern fashion* but mere ingenuities of spirit, to which the ancient greatness
of hearts ever frankly engaged their Fortunes, let Actions, the lawfully
begotten children, equal in spirit, shape, and complexion to their parents, be
testimonies ever sufficient.

My second instance comes from the Earl of Leicester his uncle, who told me
(after Sir Philips, and not long before his own death) that when he undertook
the government of the Low Countries, he carried his Nephew over with him, as
one amongst the rest, not only despising his youth for a Counselor, but
withal bearing a hand over him as a forward young man. Notwithstanding, in
short time he saw this Sun so risen above his Horizon, that both he and all his
Stars were glad to fetch light from him. And in the end acknowleged that he
held up the honor of his casual authority by him, whilst he lived, and found
reason to withdraw himself from that burden, after his death.

My third record is Sir Francis Walsingham his Father-in-law; that wise, and
active Secretary. This man (as the world knows) upheld both Religion and
State, by using a policy wisely mixed with reflections of either. He had
influence in all Countries, and a hand upon all affairs; Yet even this man has
often confessed to my self, that his Philip did so far over-shoot him in his
own Bow, as those friends which at first were Sir Philip's for this Secretaries
sake, within a while became so fully owned, and possessed by Sir Philip, as now
he held them at the second hand, by his Sonin-laws native courtesy.

This is that true remission of mind, whereof I would gladly have the world
take notice from these dead men's ashes: to the end that we might once again see
that ingenuity amongst men, which by liberal bearing witness to the merits of
others, shows they have some true worth of their own; and are not merely lovers
of themselves, without rivals.

CHAP. III.
TO continue this passage a little further: I must lift him above the censure
of Subjects, and give you an account what respect, and honor his worth wanne
him amongst the most eminent Monarchs of that time. As first with that chief,
and best of Princes, his most excellent Majesty, then King of Scotland, to whom
his service was affectionately devoted, and from whom he received many pledges
of love, and favor.

In like manner, with the late renowned Henry of France, then of Navarre, who
having measured, and mastered all the spirits in his own Nation, found out this
Master-spirit among us, and used him like an equal in nature, and so fit for
friendship with a King.

Again, that gallant Prince Don John de Austria, Viceroy in the Low Countries
for Spain, when this Gentleman in his Embassage to the Emperor came to kiss his
hand, though at the first, in his Spanish haughture, he gave him access as by
descent to a youth, of grace as to a stranger, and in particular competition
(as he conceived) to an enemy; yet after a while that he had taken his just
altitude, he found himself so stricken with this extraordinary Planet, that the
beholders wondered to see what ingenuous tribute that brave, and high minded
Prince paid to his worth; giving more honor and respect to this hopeful young
Gentleman, than to the Ambassadors of mighty Priuces.

But to climb yet a degree higher: In what due estimation his extraordinary
Worth was, even amongst enemies, will appear by his death. When Mendoza, a
Secretary of many Treasons against us, acknowledged openly; That howsoever he
was glad King Philip his Master had lost, in a private Gentleman, a dangerous
Enemy to his Estate; yet he could not but lament to see Christendom deprived
of so rare a Light in these cloudy times; and bewail poor Widow England (so he
termed her) that having been many years in breeding one eminent spirit, was in
a moment bereaved of him, by the hands of a villain.

Indeed he was a true model of Worth; A man fit for Conquest, Plantation,
Reformation, or what Action soever is greatest, and hardest amongst men:
Withal, such a lover of Mankind, and Goodness, that whosoever had any real
parts, in him found comfort, participation, and protection to the uttermost of
his power; like Zephyrus he giving life where he blew. The Universities abroad,
and at home, accounted him a general Mecaenas of Learning; Dedicated their
Books to him; and communicated every Invention, or Improvement of Knowledge
with him. Soldiers honored him, and were so honored by him, as no man
thought he marched under the true Banner of Mars, that had not obtained Sir
Philip Sidney's approbation. Men of Affairs in most parts of Christendom,
entertained correspondency with him. But what speak I of these, with whom his
own ways, and ends did concur? since (to descend) his heart, and capacity were
so large, that there was not a cunning Painter, a skillful Engenier, an
excellent Musician, or any other Artificer of extraordinary fame, that made not
himself known to this famous Spirit, and found him his true friend without
hire; and the common Reude-vous of Worth in his time.

Now let Princes vouchsafe to consider, of what importance it is to the honor
of themselves, and their Estates, to have one man of such eminence; not only
as a nourisher of virtue in their Courts, or service; but besides for a
reformed Standard, by which even the most humorous persons could not but have a
reverend ambition to be tried, and approved current. This I do the more
confidently affirm, because it will be confessed by all men, that this one man's
example, and personal respect, did not only encourage Learning, and Honor in
the Schools, but brought the affection, and true use thereof both into the
Court, and Camp. Nay more, even many Gentlemen excellently learned amongst us
will not deny, but that they affected to row, and steer their course in his
wake. Besides which honor of unequal nature, and education, his very ways in
the world, did generally add reputation to his Prince, and Country, by
restoring amongst us the ancient Majesty of noble, and true dealing: As a
manly wisdom, that can no more be weighed down, by any effeminate craft, than
Hercules could be overcome by that contemptible Army of Dwarfs. This was it
which, I profess, I loved dearly in him, and still shall be glad to honor in
the great men of this time: I mean, that his heart and tongue went both one
way, and so with every one that went with the Truth; as knowing no other
kindred, party, or end.

Above all, he made the Religion he professed, the firm Basis of his life: For
thls was his judgment (as he often told me) that our true-heartednesse to the
Reformed Religion in the beginning, brought Peace, Safety, and Freedom to us;
concluding, that the wisest, and best way, was that of the famous William
Prince of Orange, who never divided the consideration of Estate from the cause
of Religion, nor gave that sound party occasion to be jealous, or distracted,
upon any appearance of safety whatsoever; prudently resolving, that to temporize
with the Enemies of our Faith, was but (as among Sea-guls) a strife, not to
keep upright, but aloft upon the top of every billow: Which false-heartednesse
to God and man, would in the end find it self forsaken of both; as Sir Philip
conceived. For to this active spirit of his, all depths of the Devil proved
but shallow fords; he piercing into men's counsels, and ends, not by their
words, oaths, or complements, all barren in that age, but by fathoming their
hearts, and powers, by their deeds, and found no wisdom where he found no
courage, nor courage without wisdom nor either without honesty and truth. With
which solid, and active reaches of his, I am persuaded, he would have found, or
made a way through all the traverses, even of the most weak and irregular
times. But it pleased God in this decrepit age of the world, not to restore the
image of her ancient vigor in him, otherwise than as in a lightning before
death.

Neither am I (for my part) so much in love with this life, nor believe so
little in a better to come, as to complain of God for taking him, and such like
exorbitant worthyness from us: fit (as it were by an Ostracisme) to be divided,
and not incorporated with our corruptions: yet for the sincere affection I bear
to my Prince, and Country, my prayer to God is, that this Worth, and Way may
not fatally be buried with him; in respect, that both before his time, and
since, experience has published the usual discipline of greatness to have been
tender of it self only; making honor a triumph, or rather trophy of desire,
set up in the eyes of Mankind, either to be worshipped as Idols, or else as
Rebels to perish under her glorious oppressions. Notwithstanding, when the
pride of flesh, and power of favor shall cease in these by death, or disgrace;
what then has time to register, or fame to publish in these great men's names,
that will not be offensive, or infectious to others? What Pen without blotting
can write the story of their deeds? Or what Herald blaze their Arms without a
blemish? And as for their counsels and projects, when they come once to light,
shall they not live as noisome, and loathsomely above ground, as their Authors
carcasses lie in the grave? So as the return of such greatness to the world, and
themselves, can be but private reproach, public ill example, and a fatal
scorn to the Government they live in. Sir Philip Sidney is none of this number;
for the greatness which he affected was built upon true Worth; esteeming Fame
more than Riches, and Noble actions far above Nobility it self.

CHAP. IV.
ANd although he never was Magistrate, nor possessed of any fit stage for
eminence to act upon, whereby there is small latitude left for comparing him
with those deceased Worthies, that to this day live unenvied in story; Yet can
I probably say, that if any supreme Magistracy, or employment, might have
showed forth this Gentleman's Worth, the World should have found him neither a
mixed Lysander, with unactive goodness to have corrupted indifferent Citizens;
nor yet like that gallant Libertine Sylla, with a tyrannizing hand, and ill
example, to have ordered the dissolute people of Rome; much less with that
unexperienced Themistocles, to have refused, in the seat of Justice, to deal
equally between friends and strangers. So that as we say, the abstract name of
goodness is great, and generally current; her nature hard to imitate, and
diversely worshipped, according to Zones, complexions, or education; admired by
her enemies, yet ill followed by her friends: So I may well say, that this
Gentleman's large, yet uniform disposition was every where praised; greater in
himself than in the world; yet greater there in fame and honor than many of
his superiors; reverenced by foreign Nations in one form, of his own in
another; easily censured, hardly imitated; and therefore no received Standard
at home, because his industry, judgment, and affections, perchance seemed too
great for the cautious wisdoms of little Monarchies to be safe in.
Notwithstanding, whosoever will be pleased indifferently to weigh his life,
actions, intentions, and death, shall find he had so sweetly yoaked fame and
conscience together in a large heart; as inequality of worth, or place in him,
could not have been other than humble obedience, even to a petty Tyrant of
Sicily. Besides, this ingenuitie of his nature did spread it self so freely
abroad, as who lives that can say he ever did him harm; whereas there be many
living, that may thankfully acknowledge he did them good? Neither was this in
him a private, but a public affection; his chief ends being not Friends,
Wife, Children, or himself; but above all things the honor of his Maker, and
service of his Prince, or Country.

Now though his short life, and private fortune, were (as I said) no proper
stages to act any greatness of good, or evil upon; yet are there (even from
these little centers of his) lines to be drawn, not Astronomicall, or
imaginary, but real lineaments, but such as infancy is of mansestate; out of
which nature often sparkleth brighter rays in some, than ordinarily appear in
the ripeness of many others. For proof whereof, I will pass from the testimony
of brave men's words, to his own deeds. What lights of sounder wisdom can we
ascribe to our greatest men of affairs than he showed in his youth, and first
employment, when he was sent by the late Queen of famous memory, to condole the
death of Maximilian, and congratulate the succession of Rodolph to the Empire?
For under the shadow of this complement between Princes, which sorted better
with his youth than his spirit, Did he not, to improve that journey, and make
it a real service to the Empire? For under the shadow of this complement
between Princes, which sorted better with his youth than his spirit, did he
not, to improve that journey, and make it a real service to his Sovereign,
procure an Article to be added to his Instructions, which gave him scope (as he
passed) to salute such German Princes, as were interested in the cause of our
Religion, or their own native liberty?

And though to negotiate with that long-breathed Nation proves commonly a work
in steel, where many strokes hardly leave any print; yet did this Master Genius
quickly stir up their cautious, and slow judgments to be sensible of the
danger which threatened them hourly, by this fatal conjunction of Rome's
undermining superstitions, with the commanding forces of Spain. And when he had
once awaked that confident Nation to look up, he as easily made manifest unto
them, that neither their inland seat, vast multitude, confused strength,
wealth, nor hollow-sounding Fame could secure their Dominions from the ambition
of this brave aspiring Empire; howsoever by the like helps they had formerly
bounded the same Roman, and Austrian supremacies. The reasons he alleged were,
because the manner of their conjunction was not like the ancient undertakers,
who made open war by Proclamation; but craftily (from the infusion of Rome) to
enter first by invisible traffic of souls; filling peoples minds with
apparitions of holiness, specious Rites, Saints, Miracles, institutions of new
Orders, reformations of old, blessings of Catholics, cursings of Heretics,
Thunder bolts of Excommunication under the authority of their Mother Church.
And when by these shadows they had gotten possession of the weak, discouraged
the strong, divided the doubtful, and finely lulled inferior powers asleep; as
the ancient Romans were wont to tame foreign nations with the name Socij; then
to follow on with the Spanish, less spiritual, but more forcible Engines, viz.
practice, confederacy, faction, money, treaties, leagues of trassique, alliance
by marriages, charge of rebellion, war, and all other acts of advantageous
power.

Lastly he recalled to their memories, how by this brotherhood in evil (like
Simeon, and Levi) Rome and Spain had spilt so much blood, as they were justly
become the terror of all Governments; and could now be withstood, or balanced
by no other means, than a general league in Religion: Constantly and truly
affirming, that to associate by an uniform bond of conscience, for the
protection (as I said) of Religion, and Liberty, would prove a more solid
union, and symbolize far better against their Tyrannies, than any Factious
combination in policy, league of state, or other traffic of Civil, or
Martial humors possibly could do.

To this end did that undertaking spirit lay, or at least revive the foundation
of a league between us, and the German Princes, which continues firm to this
day: The defensive part whereof has hitherto helped to suport the ruins of
our Church abroad, and diverted her enemies from the ancient ways of hostility,
unto their Conclave, and modern undermining Arts. So, that if the offensive
part thereof had been as well prosecuted in that true path, which this young
Genius trod out to us; both the passage for other Princes over the Alps, would
have been by this time more easy than Hanibal's was; and besides, the first
sound of that Drum might happily have reconciled those petty dividing Schisms
which reign amongst us; not as sprung from any difference of religious Faith,
but misty Opinion; and accordingly molded first upon the Desks of busy idle
Lecturers, then blown abroad to our disadvantage by a swarm of Popish
Instruments, rather Jesuits than Christians; and to their ends most dangerously
overspreading the world, for want of a confident Moderator. This (I say) was
the first prize which did enfranchise this Master Spirit into the mysteries,
and affairs of State.

CHAP. V.
THe next doubtful Stage he had to act upon (howsoever it may seem private)
was grounded upon a public and specious proposition of marriage, between the
late famous Queen, and the Duke of Aniou, With which Current, although he saw
the great, and wise men of the time suddenly carried down, and every one
fishing to catch the Queens humor in it; yet when he considered the difference
of years, person, education, state, and religion between them; and then called
to mind the success of our former alliances with the French: he found many
reasons to make question whether it would prove Poetical, or real on their
part? And if real; yet whether the balance swayed not unequally, by adding
much to them, and little to his Sovereign? The Dukes greatness being only
name, and possibility; and both these either to wither, or be maintained at her
cost. Her state again in hand; and though Royally sufficient to satisfy that
Queens Princely and moderate desires, or expenses, yet perchance inferior to
bear out those mixed designs, into which his ambition, or necessities might
entise, or draw her.

Besides, the marriage of K. Philip, to Q. Mary her sister, was yet so fresh in
memory, with the many inconveniences of it, as by comparing and paralleling
these together, he found credible instances to conclude, neither of these
foreign alliances could prove safe for this Kingdom. Because in her marriage
with Spain, though both Princes continuing under the obedience of the Roman
Church neither their consciences, nor their peoples could suffer any fear of
tumult, or imputation by change of faith; Yet was the winning of St. Quintins,
with the loss of Calice, and the carrying away of our money to foreign ends,
odious universally; the Spanish pride incompatible; their advantageous delays
suspicious; and their short reign here felt to be a kind of exhausting tax
upon the whole Nation.

Besides, he discerned how this great Monarch countenanced with our Forces by
sea, and land, might, and did use this addition of her strength to transform
his Low Country Dukedomes, fallen to him by descent, into the nature of a
sovereign conquest; and so by conjoyning their Dominion, and Forces by Sea, to
his large Empires, and Armies upon the Mayn, would probably enforce all
absolute Princes to acknowledge subjection to him before their time. And for our
Kingdom, besides that this King then meant to use it as a forge, to fashion
all his sovereign designs in; had he not (except some belly him) a fore-running
hand in the change of Religion after King Edwards death? And had he not (even
in that change) so mastered us in our own Church, by his Chaplain and Conclave
of Rome, that both these carried all their courses byaced to his ends, as to an
elder brother, who had more abundant degrees of wealth, and honor to return
them? so as every body (that devoted Queen excepted) foresaw we must suddenly
have been compelled to wear his livery, and serve his ends; or else to live
like children neglected, or disfavoured by our holy Mother.

Again, for our temporal Government; was not his influence (except report
belie him) as well in passing many sharp laws, and heavy executions of them
with more strange Councels; as fashioning our leagues both of peace, and
traffic to his conquering ends? All these together, with that Master prize of
his playing, when under color of piety, he stirred up in that well-affected
Queen a purpose of restoring those temporalities to the Church, which by the
fall of Abbeys, were long before dispersed among the Nobility, Gentry, and
people of this Kingdom: all these (as he said) did clearly show, that this
ambitious King had an intent of moulding us to his use, even by distracting us
amongst our selves.

Nevertheless, to give him the honor of worldly wisdom, I dare aver, he had
no hope of bringing these curious assumptions to pass; but rather did cast them
out, as sounding lines, to fathom the depths of peoples minds; and with
particular fear, and distraction in the owners, to raise a general distaste in
all men against the Government. Now, if we may judge the future by what is
past, his scope in all these particulars could be no other, but when our inward
waters had been thoroughly troubled, then to possess this diversely diseased
Estate with certain poetical titles of his own, devised long before, and since
published by Dolman, to the end, that under the shadow of such clouds, he might
work upon the next heir; and so cast a chance for all our goods, lives, and
liberties with little interruption. These, and such like, were the grounds
which moved Sir Philip to compare the past, and present consequence of our
Marriage with either of these Crowns together.

And though in danger of subjection he did confess our aliance with the French
to be less unequal; yet even in that, he foresaw, diversity of Religion
would first give scandal to both; and in progress, prove fatal of necessity
to one side. Because the weaker sect here, being fortified by strong parties
abroad, and a husbands name at home, must necessarily have brought the native
Sovereign under a kind of Covert Baron, and thereby forced her Majesty, either
to lose the freedom, and conscience of a good Christian, the honor of an
excellent Prince, or the private reputation of obedient Wife. Neither could
that excellent Lady (as he, and that time conceived) with these, or any other
cautions, have countermined the mines of practice, whereby (it is probable)
this Prince would have endeavored to steal change of Religion into her Kingdom.

1. As first, by cavelling at the Authors, and Fathers that upheld her Church.

2. Then by disgracing her most zealous Ministers, through aspersions cast upon
their persons, and advancing indifferent spirits, whose God is this world, the
Court their heaven, and consequently their ends, to biace Gods immortal truth
to the fantasies of mortal Princes.

3. By the subtle latitude of schooldistinctions, publicly edging nearer the
holy mother Church; and therein first waving, then sounding the peoples minds;
if not with abrupt, and spirit-fall'n tolleration, yet with that invisible web
of connivencie, which is a snare to entangle great, or little flies, at the
will of power.

4. By a Princely licentiousness in behavior, and conference, fashioning
atheism among her Subjects: as knowing that in confusion of thoughts, he might
the more easily raise up superstitious idolatry: which crafty Image of his,
with all the nice lineaments belonging to it, was the more credible, in respect
the French have scornfully affirmed one chief branch of our Princes
prerogatives to be, the carrying of their peoples consciences which way they
list. An absoluteness the more dangerous to their subjects freedom, because
they bring these changes to pass (as the French say) under the safe conduct of
our earth-cy common law; and thereby make change legally safe, and constancy
in the truth exceeding dangerous.

5. By a public decrying of our ancient Customs, and Statutes; and from that
ground, giving Proclamations a Royal vigor in moulding of pleas, pulpits and
Parliaments, after the pattern of their own, and some other forain Nations;
which in our Government is a confusion, almost as fatal as the confusion of
tongues.

6. By employing no instruments among the people, but such as devise to sheer
them with taxes, ransom them with fines, draw in bondage under color of
obedience, and (like Frenchified Empsons, and Dudlies) bring the English people
to the poverty of the French Peasants, only to fill up a Danaus sive of
prodigality, and thereby to secure the old age of Tyranny from that which is
never old: I mean, danger of popular inundations.

7. To lift up Monarchy above her ancient legal Circles, by banishing all
free spirits, and faithful Patriots, with a kind of shaddowed Ostracisme,
till the Ideas of native freedom should be utterly forgotten; and then (by the
pattern of their own Duke of Guise) so to encourage a multitude of
impoverishing impositions upon the people, as he might become the head of all
discontentedness; and under the envy of that art, stir them up to depose their
natural anointed Sovereign,

8. When he had thus metamorphosed our moderate form of Monarchy into a
precipitate absoluteness; and therein shaken all Leagues offensive or defensive
between us, the Kings of Denmark, and Sweden, the free Princes of Garmany, the
poor oppressed souls of France, the steady subsisting Hanses; and lastly
weakened that league of Religion, suffique, which with prosperous success has
continued long between us, and the Netherlanders; then (I say) must his next
project have been, either abusively to entise, or through fear enforce this
excellent Lady, to countenance his overgrown party abroad, by suffering the
same sect to multiply here at home, till she should too late discover a
necessity, either of changing her faith, hazarding her Crown, or at least
holding it at the joint courtesy of that ambitious Roman Conclave, or
increasing Monarchy of Spain. A Scepter, and Miter, whose conjunction bringes
forth boundless freedom to themselves, and begets a narrow servitude upon all
other Nations, that by surprise of wit, or power become subject to them.

9 Besides, in the practice of this Marriage, he foresaw, and prophesied, that
the very first breach of Gods ordinance, in matching herself with a Prince of a
diverse faith, would infallibly carry with it some piece of the rending
destiny, which Solomon, and those other Princes justly felt, for having
ventured to weigh the immortal wisdom in even scales, with mortal convenience
or inconveniency.

10. The next step must infallibly have been (as he conceived) with our
shipping to disturb or beleaguer the Netherlanders by Sea, under color, or
pretense of honor unseasonably taken, even when the horse and foot of France
should threaten their subsistence by land; and thereby (in this period of
extremity) constrain that active people to run headlong into one of these three
desperate courses, viz. Either to fly for protection to the Flower-de-Luce,
with whom they join in continent; Or precipitately submit their necks to the
yoking Cittadells of Spain, against whose inquisitions, and usurpations upon
their Consciences, and Liberties, so much money, and blood had been shed, and
consumed already; Or else unnaturally to turn Pirates, and so become enemies to
that trade, by which they and their friends have reciprocally gotten, and given
so much prosperity. The choice or comparison of which mischiefs to them, and
us, he briefly laid before me, in this manner.

First, that if they should incorporate with France, the Netherlands
manufactures, industry, trade, and shipping, would add much to that Monarchy,
both in peace, and war: The natural riches of the French having been hitherto
either kept barrain at home, or barrainly transported abroad, for lack of the
true use of trade, shipping, exchange, and such other mysteries as multiply
native wealth; by improving their manhood at home, and giving forms both to
domestique, and foreign materials; which defect (as he said) being now
abundantly to be supplied, by this conjunction with the Netherlands, would in a
little time, not only puff up that active Commonwealth with unquiet pride,
but awake the stirring French to feel this addition to their own strengths; and
so make them become dangerous neighbors by incursion in invasion to the
Baltique Sea; many ways prejudice to the mutual traffic between Italy, the
Germans, and England; and consequently a terror to all others, that by land, or
Sea confine upon them, yea and apt enough once in a year, to try their fortune
with that growing Monarch of Spain, for his Indian treasure.

2. On the other side; if any stricter league should come to pass between those
adventurous French Spirits, and the solid counsels of Spain; and so through
fear, scorn, or any other desperate apparances force the Netherlands into a
precipitate, but steady subjection of that Spanish Monarchy; then he willed me
to observe, how this fearful union of Earth, and Sea, having escaped the petty
Monarchs of Europe, would in all probability, costrain them to play
after-games for their own Estates. Because these two potent Navies (his and the
Netherland's) being thus added to his invincible Armies by land, would soon (as
he thought) compel that head of holy mother Church, whose best use for many
years had been (by ballancing these two Imperial greatnesses one with
another) to secure inferior Princes: would (as I said) soon enforce that sacred
Mother-head to shelter her self under the wings of this Imperial Eagle, and so
absolutely quit her Miter-supremacie; or at least become Chaplain to this
suppressing, or supporting Conqueror.

Besides, in this fatal probability he discovered the great difference between
the wisdom of quiet Princes, in their moderate desires of subsistence, from the
large, and hazardous counsels of undertaking Monarchs; whose ends are only
to make force the umpier of right, and by that inequality become Sovereign
Lords (without any other title) over equals and inferiors.

3. Now for this third point, of constraining this oppressed, yet active
Netherland people to become Pirates: he willed me in the examples of time past
to observe, how much Scirpalus did among the Grecians; Sextus Pompeius the
Romans, even in their greatness; and in themodern, Flushiug, Dunkerk, Rochell
and Algiers. Inferring withal, that this people, which had so long prospered
upon the rich materials of all Nations, by the two large spreading arms of
manufacture, and traffic, could not possibly be forced at once to leave this
habit: but would rather desperately adventure to maintain these enriching
strengthes of mariners, soldiers, and shipping of their own, with becoming a
Rende-vous for the swarm of discontented subjects universally; inviting them
with hope of spoil, and by that inheritance, to try whether the world were
ready to examine her old foundations of freedom, in the specious, and
flattering regions of change, and Powers encrochments?

Lastly, besides this uneven balance of State; the very reflection of scorn
between age, and youth; her comeliness, his disadvantage that way; the
excessive charge by continual resort of the French hither; danger of change
for the worse; her real native States and riches made subject to foreign
humors; little hope of succession, and if any, then France assured to become
the seat, and England the Province; children, or no children, misfortune, or
uncertainty: These (I say) and such like threatening probabilities made him join
with the weaker party, and oppose this torrent; even while the French faction
reigning had cast aspersions upon his Uncle of Leicester, and made him, like a
wise man (under color of taking physic) voluntarily become prisoner in his
chamber.

CHAP. VI.
THus stood the state of things then: And if any judicious Reader shall ask,
Whether it were not an error, and a dangerous one, for Sir Philip being neither
Magistrate nor Counselor, to oppose himself against his Sovereigns pleasure in
things indifferent? I must answer, That his worth, truth, favor, and sincerity
of heart, together with his real manner of proceeding in it, were his
privileges. Because this Gentleman's course in this great business was, not by
murmur among equals, or inferiors, to detract from Princes; or by a mutinous
kind of bemoaning error, to stir up ill affections in their minds, whose best
thoughts could do him no good; but by a due address of his humble reasons to
the Queen her self, to whom the appeal was proper. So that although he found a
sweet stream of Sovereign humors in that well-tempered Lady, to run against
him, yet found he safety in her self, against that selfness which appeared to
threaten him in her: For this happily born and bred Princess was not
(subject-like) apt to construe things reverently done in the worst sense; but
rather with the spirit of anointed Greatness (as created to reign equally over
frail and strong) more desirous to find ways to fashion her people, than
colors, or causes to punish them.

Lastly, to prove nothing can be wise, that is not really honest; every man of
that time, and consequently of all times may know, that if he should have used
the same freedom among the Grandees of Court (their profession being not
commonly to dispute Princes purposes for truths sake, but second their humors
to govern their Kingdoms by them) he must infallibly have found Worth,
Justice, and Duty looked upon with no other eyes but Lamia's; and so have been
stained by that reigning faction, which in all Courts allows no faith current
to a Sovereign, that has not past the seal of their practicing corporation.

Thus stood the Court at that time; and thus stood this ingenuous spirit in it.
If dangerously in men's opinions who are curious of the present, and in it
rather to do craftily, than well: Yet, I say, that Princely heart of hers was
a Sanctuary unto him; And as for the people, in whom many times the lasting
images of Worth are preferred before the temporary visions of art, or favor,
he could not fear to suffer any thing there, which would not prove a kind of
Trophy to him. So that howsoever he seemed to stand alone, yet he stood
upright; kept his access to her Majesty as before; a liberal conversation with
the French, reverenced amongst the worthiest of them for himself, and born in
too strong a fortification of nature for the less worthy to abbord, either with
question, familiarity, or scorn.

In this freedom, even while the greatest spirits, and Estates seemed
hood-winkt, or blind; and the inferior sort of men made captive by hope, fear,
ignorance; did he enjoy the freedom of his thoughts, with all recreations
worthy of them.

And in this freedom of heart being one day at Tennis, a Peer of this Realm,
born great, greater by alliance, and superlative in the Princes favor,
abruptly came into the Tennis-Court; and speaking out of these three paramount
authorities, he forgot to entreat that, which he could not legally command.
When by the encounter of a steady object, finding unrespectiveness in himself
(though a great Lord) not respected by this Princely spirit, he grew to
expostulate more roughly. The returns of which style coming still from an
understanding heart, that knew what was due to it self, and what it ought to
others, seemed (through the mists of my Lords passions, swollen with the wind of
his faction then reigning) to provoke in yielding. Whereby, the less
amazement, or confusion of thoughts he stirred up in Sir Philip, the more
shadows this great Lords own mind was possessed with: till at last with rage
(which is ever ill-disciplin'd) he commands them to depart the Court. To this
Sir Philip temperately answers; that if his Lordship had been pleased to
express desire in milder Characters, perchance he might have led out those,
that he should now find would not be driven out with any scourge of fury. This
answer (like a Bellows) blowing up the sparks of excess already kindled, made
my Lord scornfully call Sir Philip by the name of Puppy. In which progress of
heat, as the tempest grew more and more vehement within, so did their hearts
breath out their perturbations in a more loud and shrill accent. The French
Commissioners unfortunately had that day audience, in those private Galleries,
whose windows looked into the Tennis-Court. They instantly drew all to this
tumult: every sort of quarrels sorting well with their humors, especially this.
Which Sir Philip perceiving, and rising with inward strength, by the prospect
of a mighty faction against him; asked my Lord, with a loud voice, that which
he heard clearly enough before. Who (like an Echo, that still multiplies by
reflections) repeated this Epithet of Puppy the second time. Sir Philip
resolving in one answer to conclude both the attentive hearers, and passionate
actor, gave my Lord a Lie, impossible (as he averred) to be retorted; in
respect all the world knows, Puppies are gotten by Dogs, and Children by men.

Hereupon those glorious inequalities of Fortune in his Lordship were put to a
kind of pause, by a precious inequality of nature in this Gentleman. So that
they both stood silent a while, like a dumb show in a Tragedy; till Sir Philip
sensible of his own wrong, the foreign, and factious spirits that attended; and
yet, even in this question between him, and his superior, tender to his
Countries honor; with some words of sharp accent, led the way abruptly out of
the Tennis-Court; as if so unexpected an accident were not fit to be decided
any farther in that place. Whereof the great Lord making another sense,
continues his play, without any advantage of reputation; as by the standard of
humors in those times it was conceived.

A day Sr Philip remains in suspense, when hearing nothing of, or from the
Lord, he sends a Gentleman of worth to awake him out of his trance; wherein the
French would assuredly think any pause, if not death, yet a lethargy of true
honor in both. This stirred a resolution in his Lordship to send Sir Philip a
Challenge. Notwithstanding, these thoughts in the great Lord wandered so long
between glory, anger, and inequality of state, as the Lords of her Majesty's
Counsel took notice of the differences, commanded peace, and labored a
reconciliation between them. But needlessly in one respect, and bootlesly in
another. The great Lord being (as it should seem) either not hasty to adventure
many inequalities against one, or inwardly satisfied with the progress of his
own Acts: Sir Philip on the other side confident, he neither had nor would
lose, or let fall any thing of his right. Which her Majesty's Counsel quickly
perceiving, recommended this work to her self.

The Queen, who saw that by the loss, or disgrace of either, she could gain
nothing, presently undertakes Sir Philip; and (like an excellent Monarch) lays
before him the difference in degree between Earls, and Gentlemen; the respect
inferiors ought to their superiors; and the necessity in Princes to maintain
their own creations, as degrees descending between the peoples licentiousness,
and the anointed Sovereignty of Crowns: how the Gentleman's neglect of the
Nobility taught the Peasant to insult upon both.

Whereunto Sir Philip, with such reverence as became him, replied: First, that
place was never intended for privilege to wrong: witness her self, who how
Sovereign soever she were by Throne, Birth, Education, and Nature; yet was she
content to cast her own affections into the same moulds her Subjects did, and
govern all her rights by their Laws. Again, he besought her Majesty to
consider, that although he were a great Lord by birth, alliance, and grace; yet
he was no Lord over him: and therefore the difference of degrees between free
men, could not challenge any other homage than precedence. And by her Fathers
Act (to make a Princely wisdom become the more familiar) he did instance the
Government of K. Henry the eighth, who gave the Gentry free, and safe appeal to
his feet, against the oppression of the Grandees; and found it wisdom, by the
stronger corporation in number, to keep down the greater in power: inferring
else, that if they should unite, the overgrown might be tempted, by still
coveting more, to fall (as the Angels did) by affecting equality with their
Maker.

This constant tenor of truth he took upon him; which as a chief duty in all
creatures, both to themselves, and the sovereignty above them, protected this
Gentleman (though he obeyed not) from the displeasure of his Sovereign. Wherein
he left an authentical president to after ages, that howsoever tyrants allow of
no scope, stamp, or standard, but their own will; yet with Princes there is a
latitude for subjects to reserve native, and legal freedom, by paying humble
tribute in manner, though not in matter, to them.

CHAP. VII.
THE next step which he intendded into the world, was an expedition of his own
projecting; wherein he fashioned the whole body, with purpose to become head of
it himself. I mean the last employment but one of Sir Francis Drake to the West
Indies. Which journey, as the scope of it was mixed both of sea, and land
service; so had it accordingly distinct Officers, and Commanders, chosen by Sir
Philip out of the ablest Governors of those Martial times. The project was
contrived between themselves in this manner; that both should equally be
Governors, when they had left the shore of England; but while things were a
preparing at home, Sir Fran. was to bear the name, and by the credit of Sir
Phil. have all particulars abundantly supplied.

The reason of which secret carriage was, the impossibility for Sir Philip to
win the Queen, or Government (out of the value which they rated his worth at)
to dispense with an employment for him so remote and of so hazardous a nature.
Besides his credit, and reputation with the State lay not that way. So as our
provident Magistrates expecting a Prentiship more seriously in Martial, than
Mechanical actions; and therein measuring all men by one rule; would (as Sir
Philip thought) not easily believe his unexperience equal for a design of so
many diverse, and dangerous passages: howsoever wise men, even in the most
active times have determined this art of Government, to be rather a riches of
nature, than any proper fruit of industry, or education. This (as I said) was
one reason, why Sir Philip did cover that glorious enterprise with a cloud.
Another was, because in the doing, while it past unknown, he knew it would pass
without interruption; and when it was done, presumed the success would put envy
and all her agents to silence.

On the other side Sir Francis found that Sir Philip's friends, with the
influence of his excellent inward powers, would add both weight, and fashion to
his ambition; and consequently either with, or without Sir Philip's company,
yield unexpected ease, and honor to him in this voyage.

Upon these two diverse Counsels they treat confidently together; the
preparations go on with a large hand amongst our Governors; nothing is denied
Sir Francis that both their propounding hearts could demand. To make which
expedition of less difficulty, they kept the particular of this plot more
secret than it was possible for them to keep the general preparations of so
great a journey; hoping that while the Spaniard should be forced to arm every
where against them, he could not any where be so royally provided to defend
himself, but they might land without any great impediment.

In these terms Sir Francis departs from Plymouth with his ships; vowed and
resolved that when he staid for nothing but for a wind, the watch word should
come post for Sir Philip. The time of the year made haste away, and Sr Francis
to follow it, either made more haste than needed, or at least seemed to make
more than really he did. Notwithstanding, as I dare aver that in his own
element he was industrous; so dare I not condemn his affections in this
misprision of time. Howsoever a letter comes post for Sir Philip, as if the
whole fleet stayed only for him, and the wind. In the mean-season the State
has intelligence that Don Antonio was at sea for England, and resolved to land
at Plymouth. Sir Philip turning occasion into wisdom, puts himself into the
employment of conducting up this King; and under that veil leaves the Court
without suspicion; over-shoots his father-in-law then Secretary of Estate in
his own bow; comes to Plimmouth; was feasted the first night by Sir Francis,
with a great deal of outward Pomp and complement.

Yet I that had the honor as of being bred with hm from his youth; so now (by
his own choice of all England) to be his loving, and beloved Achates in this
journey, observing the countenance of this gallant mariner more exactly than
Sir Philips leisure served him to do; after we were laid in bed, acquainted
him with my observation of the discountenance, and depression which appeared in
Sir Francis; as if our coming were both beyond his expectation, and desire.
Nevertheless that ingenuous spirit of Sir Philip's, though apt to give me
credit, yet not apt to discredit others, made him suspend his own, and labor to
change, or qualify my judgment; Till within some few days after, finding the
ships neither ready according to promise, nor possibly to be made ready in
many days; and withal observing some sparcks of false fire, breaking out
unawares from his yoke fellow daily; It pleased him (in the freedom of our
friendship) to return me my own stock, with interest.

All this whlie Don Antonio lands not; the fleet seemed to us (like the weary
passengers Inn) still to go further from our desires; letters came from the
Court to hasten it away: it may be the leaden feet, and nimble thoughts of Sir
Francis wrought in the day, and unwrought by night; while he watched an
opportunity to discover us, without being discovered.

For within a few days after a post steals up to the Court, upon whose
arrival an Alarm is presently taken: messengers sent away to stay us, or if
we refused, to stay the whole Fleet. Notwithstanding this first Mercury, this
errand being partly advertised to Sir Philip beforehand, was intercepted upon
the way; his letters taken from him by two resolute soldiers in Mariners
apparel; brought instantly to Sir Philip, opened, and read. The contents as
welcome as Bulls of excommunication to the superstitious Romanist, when they
enjoin him either to forsake his right, or his holy Mother Church, yet did he
sit this first process, without noise, or answer.

The next was a more Imperial Mandate, carefully conveyed, and delivered to
himself by a Peer of this Realm; carrying with it in the one hand grace, the
other thunder. The grace was an offer of an instant employment under his
Uncle, then going General into the Low Countries; Against which although he
would gladly havedemurred; yet the confluence of reason, transcendencie of
Power, fear of staying the whole Fleet, made him instantly sacrifise all these
salfe places to the duty of obedience.

Wherein how unwillingly soever he yielded up his knowledge, affections,
public and private ends in that journey; yet did he act this force in a
gallant fashion. Opens his reserved ends to the General; encourages the whole
Army with promise of his uttermost assistance; saves Sir Francis Drake from
blastings of Court, to keep up his reputation amongst those companies which he
was presently to command; clears the daseled eyes of that Army, by showing
them, how even in that foreign employment, which took himself from them, the
Queen had engaged herself more ways than one against the Spaniards ambition:
so as there was no probability of taking away her Princely hand from such a
well-ballanced work of her own.

Nevertheless as the Limbs of Venus picture, how perfectly soever began, and
left by Apelles, yet after his death proved impossible to finish: so that
Heroical design of invading, and possessing America, how exactly soever
projected, and digested in every minute by Sir Philip, did yet prove impossible
to be well acted by any other man's spirit than his own; how sufficient soever
his associate were in all parts of navigation; whereby the success of this
journey fell out to be rather fortunate in wealth, than honor.

Whereupon, when Sir Philip found this, and many other of his large, and
sincere resolutions imprisoned within the pleights of their fortunes, that
mixed good, and evil together unequally; and withal discerned, how the
idle-censuring faction at home had won ground of the active adventures abroad;
then did this double depression both of things, and men, lift up his active
spirit into an universal prospect of time, States, and things: and in them
made him consider, what impossibility there was for him, that had no delight to
rest idle at home, of repropounding some other foreign enterprise, probable,
and fit to invite that excellent Princesses mind, and moderate Government, to
take hold off. The placing of his thoughts upon which high pinnacle, laid the
present Map of the Christian world underneath him.

CHAP. VIII.
IN which view, nature guiding his eyes, first to his Native Country, he found
greatness of worth, and place, counterpoysed there by the arts of power, and
favor. The stir^ng spirits sent abroad as fuel, to keep the flame far off:
and the effeminate made judges of danger which they fear, and honor which they
understand not.

The people (by disposition of the clime) valiant, and multiplying, apt
indifferently to corrupt with peace, or refine with action; and therefore to be
kept from rust, or mutiny, by no means better than by foreign employments: His
opinion being that Ilanders have the air and waters so diversely moving about
them, as neither peace, nor war, can long be welcome to their humors, which
must therefore begovern'd by the active, and yet steady hand of authority.
Besides he observed the Sea to have so natural a Sympathy, with the
complexions of them she invirons, as be it in traffic, piracie, or war, they
are indifferent to wander upon that element; and for the most part apter to
follow undertaking chance, than any settled ends in a Marchant-traffique.

Now for the blessed Lady which then governed over us: how equal soever she
were in her happy creation for peace, or war, and her people (as I have showed)
humble to follow her will in either, yet because she resolved to keep within
the Decorum of her sex, she showed herself more ambitious of ballancing
neighbor Princcs from invading one another, than under any pretense of title,
or revenge, apt to question or conquer upon foreign Princes possessions. And
though this moderate course carried her into a defensive war, which commonly
falls out rather to be an impoverishing of enemies, than any means to enrich,
or discipline their Estates, that undertake it; yet could not all the rackes of
loss, injury, or terror, stir this excellent Lady into any further degree of
offensive war, than only the keeping of her Navy abroad, to interrupt the
safe-comming home of his Indian Fleet, and hinder the provision, contracted for
in all parts of Europe, to furnish another invincible Navy, wherewith he
purposed to besiege the world, and therein (as his first step) her divided
Kingdoms.

On the other side, in this survay of foreign Nations, he observed a fatal
passivenesse generally current, by reason of strange inequalities between
little humors and great fortunes in the present Princes reigning.

Amongst whom for the first object Henry the third of France appears to him in
the likeness of a good Master, rather than a great King; buried in his
pleasures, his Crown demain exhausted, impositions multiplied, the people
light, the Nobility prone to move, and consequently his Country apt, through
scorn of his effeminate Vices, either to become a prey for the strongest
undertaker, or else to be Cantonized by self-division. In both which possible
disasters, their native wealth, and variety of objects, perchance have made
both King, and people (howsoever confusedly erring) yet to live secured by the
providence of chance.

Again, he saw the vast body of the Empire resting (as in a dream) upon an
immovable center of self-greatness; and under this false assumpsit, to have
laid the bridle on the neck of the Emperor, to work them artificially, with a
gentle, or steady hand, to his own will.

And to confirm, and multiply this clowdy danger, he discerned how that
creeping Monarchy of Rome (hy her Arch-instruments the Jesuits) had already
planted fine Schools of serving humanity in diverse of their reformed Cities:
intending so to tempt this welbelieving people, with that old forbidden tree of
knowledge, as they might sin desperately against their own Estates, before they
knew it.

The like mist these crafty-raisers invented (as he thought) to cast over that
well-united fabric of the Hanses: whose ends being merely wealth, and their
seats environed on every side with active, and powerful neighbors, would (in
all probability) make them as jealous of absolute Princes in prosperity, as
zealous in distress to seek protection under them. So that they being at this
time grown mighty by combination, if they should be neglected, would prove apt,
and able to sway the balance unequally to the ends of the stronger.

Besides, he discerned yet a greater, and more malignant aspect from that
spreading Monarchy of Spain; which absolutely commanding the house of Austria,
governing the Conclave, and having gotten, or affecting to get a commanding
intelligence over these Cities; would soon multiply unavoidable danger, both to
themselves, and us, by mixing the temporal, and spiritual sword, to their
crafty conquering ends.

Nay more; how upon the same foundation they had begun yet a more dangerous
party, even amongst the German Princes themselves; by adding to the fatal
opposition of Religion between them, the hopes, fears, jealousy, temptations
of reward, or loss, with all the unnatural seeds of division; which might make
them, through these confused threatenings, and exticements, to become an easy
prey for the Spaniards watchful, unsatiable, and much promising ambition.

He likewise observed, Battorie that gallant man, but dangerously aspiring King
of Poland, to be happily peised by the ancient competition between him, and his
Nobility, and as busy to encroch upon their Marches, and add more to his own
limited Sovereignty, as they were to draw down those few prerogatives it had,
into that well mixed, and balanced Aristocracie of theirs.

Denmark, howsoever by the opportunity, and narrowness of his Sound, restrained
to the selfness of profit; yet by discipline, and seat, able to second an
active undertaker with shipping, money, etc. But too wise, with these strengths
to help any foreign Prince to become Emperor over himself, or otherwise to
entangle his Estate offensively; or defensively in common Actions.

The Sweden environed, or rather imprisoned with great and dangerous
neighbors, and enemies. The Polae pretending Title to his Kingdom, and with a
continual claim by sword, inforceing him to a perpetual defensive charge. The
King of Denmark being unsafe to him upon every occasion, by ill neighborhood
among active Princes. And lastly, the barbarous Moscovite, only quiet through
his own distress, and oppressions elsewhere. So as like a Prince thus
strictly environed, the King of Sweden could not (among Princes) stand as any
pregnant place of exorbitant help, or terror; otherwise than by money.

The Switzers swollen with equality; divided at home; enemies, yet servants to
Monarchies; not easily oppressed, in the opinion of those times; nor able to
do any thing of note alone: and so a dangerous body for the soul of Spanie to
infuse designs into.

The Princes of Italy careful to bind one another by common caution;
restrained from the freedom of their own counsels, by force of stronger powers
above them, and as busy in keeping down their people, to multiply profit out
of them, as to entise the stranger thither, to gain moderately by him. Through
which narrow kind of wisdom, they being become rather Merchant than Monarchall
States, were confined from challenging their own, or enlarging their dominions
upon neighbors; and lastly, in aspect to other Princes rights, conjured within
neutrall Circles, by the mystical practice of an abusing Conclave, and
aspiring Monarch of Spain.

The Moscovite bridled by his barbarous neighbor the Tartar; and through
natural ignorance, and incivility, like a poor Tenant upon a rich Farm,
unequal to his inferiors.

The Grand Signior asleep in his Saraglia; as having turned the ambition of
that growing Monarchy into idle lust; corrupted his Martial discipline;
profaned his Alcoran, in making war against his own Church, and not in person,
but by his Basha's; consequently by all appearance, declining into his people by
such, but more precipitate degrees, as his active Ancestors had climbed above
them.

Now while all these Princes lived thus fettered within the narrowness of their
own Estates, or humors; Spain managing the Popedom by voices, and pensions
among the Cardinals, and having the sword both by land, and sea in his hand;
seemed likewise to have all those Western-parts of the world, laid as a Tabula
rasa before him, to write where he pleased; Yo el Re. And that which made this
fatal prospect the more probable, was his golden Indian Mines; kept open, not
only to feed, and carry his threatening Fleets, and Armies, where he had will,
or right to go; but to make way, and pretense for more, where he list, by
corrupting, and terrifying the chief Counsels both of Christian and Heathen
Princes. Which tempting, and undermining course had already given such
reputation both to his Civil and Martial actions; that he was even then grown
as impossible to please, as dangerous to offend.

And out of which fearful Almanac this wakeful Patriot, besides an universal
terror upon all Princes, saw (as I said) that this immense power of Spain did
cast a more particular aspect of danger upon his native Country: and such as
was not likely to be prevented, or secured by any other Antidote, than a
general league among free Princes, to undertake this undertaker at home. To
make this course plausible, though he knew the Qu. of England had already
engaged her fortunes into it, by protecting the States General, yet perceiving
her Governors (as I said) to sit at home in their soft chairs, playing fast or
loose with them that ventured their lives abroad; he providently determined
that while Spain had peace, a Pope, money, or credit; and the world men,
necessity, or humors; the war could hardly be determined upon this Low Country
stage.

Because if the neighborhood of Flanders, with help of the sudden sea
passage, should tempt these united Princes to fall upon that limb of the
Spanish Empire; it would prove (as he supposed) an assailing of him in the
strongest seat of his war; where all exchanges, passages, and supplies were
already settled to his best advantage: and so a force bent against him, even
where himself could wish it.

Flanders being a Province replenished with offensive, and defensive Armies:
and fortified with diverse strong Cities: of which the assailing Armies must be
constrained, either to leave many behind them, or else to hazard the loss of
time, and their gallantest Troops in besieging of one.

Again he conceived that France it self was like enough to be tender, in
seconding our designs with horse, or foot there; our neighborhood upon the
same Continent (out of old acquaintance) not being over-welcome to them, as he
presumed. And for succors from other Princes; they were to come far, and pass
through diverse dominions with difficulty, distraction, loss of time, and
perchance loose-handed discipline.

And so concludes, first, that it would be hard for us to become absolute
Masters of the field in Flanders, or to ground our assailing of him there upon
any other argument, than that ever-betraying Fallax of undervaluing our
enemies, or settling undertaking Counsels upon marketmens Intelligence, as
Caesar says the French in his time used to do. Which confident ways, without
any curious examination what power the adverse party has prepared to
encounter, by defense, invasion, or division, must probably make us losers,
both in men, money, and reputation. And upon these and the like assumpsits he
resolved, there were but two ways left to frustrate this ambitious Monarchs
designs. The one, that which diverted Hanibal, and by setting fire on his own
house made him draw in his Spirits to comfort his heart; the other that of
Jason by fetching away his golden Fleece, and not suffering any one man quietly
to enjoy that, which every man so much affected.

CHAP. IX.
TO carry war into the bowels of Spain, and by the assistance of the
Netherlands, burn his shipping in all havens as they passed along; and in that
passage surprise some wellchosen place for wealth, and strength: easy to be
taken, and possible to be kept by us: he supposed to be the safest, most quick,
and honorable Counsel of diversion. Because the same strength of shipping
which was offensively employed to carry forces thither; and by the way to
interrupt all Martial preparations, and provisions of that griping state;
might by the convenient distance between his Coast, and ours (if the Spaniard
should affect to pay us with our own moneys) fitly be disposed both ways; and
so like two arms of a natural body (with little addition of charge) defend,
and offend; spend and supply at one time.

Or, if we found our own stock, or neighbors contribution strong enough to
follow good success to greater designs; then whether our adventure once more,
in stirring up spirit in the Portugal against the Castilians tyranny over
them, were not to cast a chance for the best part of his wealth, reputation,
and strength, both of men and shipping in all his dominions.

Again, lest the pride of Spain should be secretly ordained to scourge it self,
for having been a scourge to so many, and yet in this real inquisition escape
the audacity of undertaking Princes; Sir Philip thought fit to put the world in
mind, that Sevill was a fair City; secure in a rich soil, and plentiful
traffic; but an effeminate kind of people, guarded with a conquering name;
and consequently a fair bait to the piercing eyes of ambitious Generals, needy
Soldiers, and greedy Mariners. In like sort he mentioned Cales, as a
strength, and key to her traffiquefull, and navigable river, not fit to be
neglected in such a defensive, and diverting enterprise, but at least to be
examined.

Lastly, whether this audacity of undertaking the conqueror at home; would not,
with any moderate success, raise up a new face of things in those parts; and
suddenly stir up many spirits, to move against the same power, under which
they long have bin slavishly conjured, and by this affront, prove a deforming
blemish in the nice fortune of a fearful usurper?

Or if that shall be thought an undertaking too full of charge, hazard, or
difficulty; then whether it will not be just in the wisdom of Estate, managed
among active Princes; that as Qu. Elizabeth had ever been tender, in preserving
her Sovereignty upon the narrow seas; and wisely considered, how nature, to
maintain that birthright of hers, had made all wars by sea far more cheap,
proper, and commodious to her, than any expedition upon land could possibly be:
I say, whether to continue this claim, would not prove honor to her self,
advantage to her traffic, and reputation to her people; I mean, if she
should please, in those cloudy humors, and questions reigning between her self,
and other Princes, to keep a strong successive fleet, all seasonable times of
the year, upon this pretty Sleeve, or Ocean of hers? I say, to keep them as
provident surveyers what did pass from one state to another, wherein the law
of Nature, or Nations had formerly given her interest to an offensive, or
defensive security. A Regal inquisition, and worthy of a sea-Soveraign,
without wronging friends, or neighbors, to have a perfect intelligence what
they had, or wanted for delicacy, peace, or war in general: And in particular,
a clear perspective glass into her enemies Merchant, or Martial traffic,
enabling this Queen so to balance this ambitious Leviathan in either kind; as
the little fishes, his fellow Citizens, might travel, multiply, and live
quietly by him under the protecton of nature.

Again, let us consider, whether out of this, or the like Audit, it will not be
found a just tribute to opportunity, the rudder of all state wisedoms. That as
Qu. Elizabeth was a Sovereign, which rested with her sex at home, and yet moved
all sexes abroad to their own good; whether (I say) as she from a devoted zeal
to the Church, had by Sir Nich. Throgmorton, in the beginning of her reign,
stirred up spirits in that over-mitred French Kingdom, to become watchful
guardians of peace, and Religion there. I say, whether in the same Christian
providence there might not, by the neglect, or breach of many Treaties, an
occasion be justly taken to reap a reasonable harvest out of that wellchosen
seed time, by receiving Rochel, Breast, Bourdeaux, or any other place upon that
Continent, distressed for Religion, into her absolute protection? Nevertheless,
not with intent of reconquering any part of her ancient Domanies, lineally
descended from many ancestors; howsoever those places so taken may seem seated
like tempters of Princes, to plead in the Court of Mars such native, though
discontinued rights, as no time can prescribe against; but only to keep those
humble religious souls free from oppression, in that super-Jesuited sovereignty.

In which religious design to encourage the Qu. he advised us to examine if
the diversions naturally rising amongst their unlimited French Grandees, grown
up per saltum with their Kings above Laws, Parliaments, and Peoples freedom;
would not in all probability cast up some light dust into their superiors eyes,
as tributes to their common Idol Discorder; and so perchance either by treaty,
or sight of the first Army, stir up Bouillon, and Rohan for Religion; other
Roytelets with hope to make safe their subaltern governments, even through the
ruins of that over-soring sovereignty?

And is not as probable again, that even the greatest Cities, raised and
standing upon the like waving encroachments of time, and advantageous power
would readily become jealous of the least strict hand carried over them, by
interruption of traffic, greediness of Governors, pride of their own wealth,
or indefinite impositions; as Paris, Bourdeaux, Marseilles, Roan, or Lions?
whereby they might likewise be tempted, either to run headlong with the
stream, or at the least to stand at gaze, and leave the Heraldry of Princes to
be decided by the stronger party, as for the most part, they hitherto have been.

Nay in this Climax to come nearer yet; is it probable that even the Catholic
Princes, and Provinces environing this vast Kingdom, would (as now they do)
for want of vent, break their hopes, and servilly run out upon the ground like
water, and not rather when this new rent should appear, choose to shake off a
chargeable, and servile yoke of Mountebank holiness under Spanish Rome, and to
that end presently mingle money, counsels, and forces with ours? As quickly
resolved that this way of a ballancing union, amongst absolute Princes, would
prove quieter rest for them, and sounder foundations for us, than our former
parties did, when we conquered France, more by such factious and ambitious
assistances, than by any odds of our Bows, or Beef-eaters, as the French were
then scornfully pleased to term us: I say, even when in the pride of our
conquests, we strove to gripe more than was possible for us to hold; as appears
by our being forced to come away, and leave our ancestors blood, and bones
behind, for Monuments not of enjoying, but of over-griping and expulsion.

So that the sum of all is; whether the taking or surprise of Cales, Rochel,
Bourdeaux, or some such other good out, or inlet upon that Mayn, offered, into
our protection, would not prove honor to us, as a brave earnest either to war,
or peace? Beneficial to the French King, and Crown against their wills; as
manifesting to their hot spirits, and young Councels, that undertaking is not
all? And besides clearly showing, in Mars his true glass, how that once
wel-formed Monarchy had by little, and little, let fall her ancient, and
reverend pillars, (I mean Parliaments, Laws, and Customs) into the narrowness
of Proclamations, or Imperial Mandates: by which like bastard children of
tyranny she has transformed her Gentry into Peasants, her Peasants into
slaves, Magistracy into Sale works, Crown-revenue into Impositions. And therein
likewise published the differences between Monarchs, and Tyrants so clearly to
the world, as hereafter all Estates, that would take upon their necks the yoke
of Tyranny, must justly be reputed voluntary slaves in the choice of that
passive bondage.

Whereby, one question naturally begetting another, the next (as I take it)
must be what this Austrian aspiring family would do, while these two Kingdoms
should stand thus engaged? Whether invade the King of Denmark alone, hoping by
his ruin to subdue the yet subdued Princes of Germany to get the Sound, and
Eastern Seas, with all their Maritime riches into his power: to bring the Hanse
Towns into some captivated subjections, and thereby become Sovereign over all
Eastern traffic by Sea, and land? Or else by lulling France asleep with
Imperial Matches, or promises, find means to steal the Flower-de-luce into
the Lions garland; and in that current of prosperity to Citadellize the long
oppressed Netherlands into a tenure of uttermost bondage; and so build up his
Eagles nest above the threatening of any inferior Region.

But it many times pleases God by the breaking out of concealed flashes from
these fatal clouds of craft, or violence, to awake even the most
superstitious Princes out of their enchanted dreams; and cause them to resist
suddenly to make head against this devouring Sultan, with leagues offensive,
and defensive; And by an unexpected union to become such frontier neighbors to
this Crown-hunter, as he might with great reason doubt their trading upon his
large cloven feet, who intended to have set them so heavily upon the heads of
many more ancient States, Peoples, or Scepters than his own. And lastly, in the
same press, by this one affront in the Lions face, publishing to the world that
power is infinite no where but in God: so as the first blow well stricken, most
commonly succeeds with honor, and advantage to the judicious, able, and active
undertakers.

Out of which divine providence, governing all second causes by the first, is
it not probable that even the natural vicissitudes of war, and peace, would
bring forth some active propositions between these many ways allied Kingdoms
of England, and France, to a perfect reconciliation, and as many again of
irreconciliable division between them, and Spain? France being stirred up by a
joint counsel, and proposition of assistance, to the recovery of her long
sleeping rights in Navarre, or Naples; and England only to distract this
ambitious Monarch from his late Custom, in deposing Kings, and Princes, as
Navarre, Portugal, the Palatine, Brunswick, and etc. as in a second course of
his devouring gluttony, interrupt him from future prosecutions of Denmark, and
Germany it self, to the same end; with his constant intent, to bring all the
earth under one man's tyranny.

To prevent which deluge of boundless power, Sir Philip was of opinion, that
more than charge, it could be no prejudice; if to the unvizarding of this
masked triplicity between Spain, Rome and the Sovereign Jesuits of France; I
say if the Queen, as defendress of the faith, for a main pledge of this new
offensive, and defensive undertaken league, would be pleased to assist the
French King with the same forces by Sea, or land, wherewith, till then, she had
justly opposed against him. And consequently putting the Spaniard from an
offensive, to a defensive War, manifestly publish, and give credit to this
unbelieved truth, viz. that this Arch-Conqueror never intended other favor to
the Pope, Emperor, or Jesuits, in all this conjunction, than Poliphemus
promised to Ulysses, which was, that they should be the last whom he purposed
to devour.

And farther to encourage these great Princes in this true balancing design
with the chargeable, and thorny passages proper to it; he providently saw the
long threatened Duchy of Savoy would be in their view: with assurance that
this active Prince would think it a safe diversision of dangers from his
domestical Estate, and a fit stage to act his foreign cobwebbs upon, if he
might have them shadowed under the wings of stronger, and every way more able
Powers; without which his mean Estate must in all probability force him to
shift his outward garments perchance too often.

The Venetians again, foreseeing with their Aristocraticall jealousy, that
their Estate had only two pregnant dangers hanging over it; the one Eastward
from the grand Signior, who easily moves not his encompassing half Moon; the
other Westward from this Solomon of Spain, whose unsatiable ambition, they
knew, would rest upon no center, but creep along the Mediterranean Seas, till
he might (contrary to the nature of those waters) overflow all weak; or secure
neighbor Princes, without any other title, or quarrel, than Stet pro ratione
voluntas. And foreseeing again in this sudden violence, that they could expect
no Estate to be selfly engaged in their succor; but must resolve to stand, or
fall alone by that course. Where, on the other side, if the Eastern Half Moon
should but seem to move toward them, they were assured to have all the Estates
of Europe, engaged by their own interests, to join with them. Upon this view
there is no doubt, but that wise City would have resolved it to be a choice of
less evil, to join with these great Princes, in diverting his Spanish
galleys, and galleons by Sea, and his inveterate Armies by land from
disturbing, or subjecting the safety, and traffic of all Christendom to his
seven patched coated Kingdoms, rather than for want of heart or opportunity,
to stand neuter (as they do) and become treasurers both of money, and munition
for him, that already intends thus to conquer them, and enjoy it.

Again, shall we (said Sir Philip) in these collections of particulars, forget
the State of Italy it self? which excellent temper of spirits, earth, and air,
having long been smothered, and mowed down by the differing Tyrannies of Spain,
and Rome, shall we not be confident they would, upon the approaching of these
armies, both stir up those benumbed Soveraignties, which only bear the name of
free Princes, to affect their own Manumissions, and help to chase away these
succeeding and oppressing Garrisons, whose forefathers formany years had sold
life, liberty, and laws for eight pence the day; and so resolutely oppose
those Spanishborn, or Spanish-sworn Tyrannies, which have for diverse ages
Lorded over that most equally tempered Nation.

Or whether the winter in those Seas, giving opportunity without suspicion, may
not encourage the Claim of our old rights in the Kingdom of Sicilie, more
legal than most of his Spanish intrusions; and therein be welcome to the Grand
Signior, the freedom of Algiers, even to Italy it self. And besides, if we
prospered, yield abundance of wealth by spoil, and trade: with such a seat for
diversion, or possession, as by many visible, and invisible helps, might be
kept, or put away with infinite advantage?

Lastly, he made a Quaere, whether the Pope himself would not (like a secular
Prophet) to keep his becoming Chaplain a little the farther off; either wink,
or at least delay his thundering curses, or supplies of Peter Pence against
these qualifying Armies, only to moderate the overgreatnesse of his Spanish
Monarchy? whose infancy having been nourished under the Miters holy water,
and sophistries of his practicing Conclaves, dares now imperiously publish to
the world a resolution, of taking all other distinctions from amongst men,
saving that Canonical regiment of wit and might, whereby he might so preserve
his spiritual ambition entire, without any charge or change of Religion, or
Soveraignties from one hand to another, but like a holy father mediate the
restoring of Italy to her ancient free, and distinct Principalities. Whereby
now by this moderate course, admit the Pope for his part, should impair his
temporal profits, and subaltern jurisdiction a while; yet shall he be sure,
(as I said) to multiply his spiritual honors, and enlarge that Kingdom, by
these works of Supererogation. And by joining with his fellow Princes in a
contribution, by way of account, or countenance to pay these great Armies, be
sure to sit rent-free under his, and their own vines, as absolute spiritual,
and temporal Princes ought to do?

From which (says he) this conclusion will probably follow; that the
undertaking of this Antonie single, I mean France, would prove a begetting of
brave occasions jointly to disturb this Spanish Ottoman, in all his ways of
crafty, or forcible conquests. Especially since Queen Elizabeth, the standard
of this conjunction, would infallibly incline to unite with the better part,
and by a sudden changing of Mars his Imperious Ensigns, into a well balanced
treaty of universal Peace, restore and keep the world within her old
equilibrium or bounds.

And the rather, because her long custom in governing, would quickly have made
her discern, that it had been impossible, by force, or any human wisdom to have
qualified these overgrown Combinations of Spain; but only by a countermining
of party with party, and a distracting of exorbitant desires, by casting a
gray headed cloud of fear over them; thereby manifesting the well disguised
yokes of bondage, under which our Modern Conquerors would craftily entice the
Nown-adjective-natured Princes, and subjects of this time to submit their
necks. A map (as it pleased her to say) of his secrets, in which she confessed
herself to be the more ripe, because under the like false Ensigns, though
perchance better masked, she had seen Philip the second after the same measure,
or with little difference, to Henry the third of France, a principal
fellow-member in that earthly founded, though heavenly seeming Church of Rome,
when he redelivered Amiers, Abbeville, etc. together with that fouldier-like
passage made by the Duke of Parma through France, to the relief of Paris; yet
whether this provident Philip did frame these specious charities of a
conqueror, Augustus-like, aspiring to live after death greater than his
successor; or providently foreseeing that the diverse humors in succeeding
Princes, would prove unable to maintain such green usurpations, in the heart of
a Kingdom competitor with his seven-headed Hydra kept together only by a
constant and unnatural wheel of fortune, till some new child of hers, like
Henry the fourth, should take his turn in restoring all unjust combinations or
encrochments; or lastly, whether, like a true cutter of Cumine seeds, he did
not craftily lay these hypocritall sacrifices upon the Altar of death, as
peaceofferings from pride to the temple of fear, as smoaks dying of a diseased
conscience choked up with innocent blood: of all which perplexed pedigrees, I
know not what to determine otherwise; than that these Tyrannical enchrochments
do carry the images of Hell, and her thunder-workers, in their own breasts, as
fortune does misfortunes in that wind-blown, vast, and various womb of hers.

Or if this should seem of too high a nature, or too many chargeable parts:
then whether to begin again where we left and by the example of Drake, a mean
born subject to the Crown of England, invade, possess, and ^nhabite some well
chosen havens in Peru, Mexico, or both, were not to strike at the root, and
assail him where he is weakest; and yet gathers his chiefest strength to make
himself Monarch over all the Western Climes? supplies being as easy to us, as
to him, we having both winds, and seas indifferently open between us.

CHAP. X.
UPon due consideration of which particulars, he foreseeing that each of the
former required greater resolution, union, and expense, than the naturality,
diffidence, and quiet complexion of the Princes then reigning could well bear;
and besides the freedom of choice to be taken away, or at the least
obstructed by fatal mists of ignorance, or factious counsels reigning among
the Ministers of Kings: he resolved from the grounds of his former intended
voyage with Sir Francis Drake, that the only credible means left, was, to
assail him by invasion, or incursion (as occasion fell out) in some part of
that rich, and desert West-Indian Mine.

First, because it is an observation among the wisest, that as no man is a
Prophet in his own Country; so all men may get honor much cheaper far off
than at home, and at sea more easily than at land.

Secondly, in respect he discovered the Spanish conquests in those remote
parts, so much noised throughout the world, to be indeed like their Jesuits
Miracles; which coming far, were multiplied by Fame and Art, to keep other
Nation sin wonder, and blind worship.

Thirdly, out of confident belief, that their inhumane cruelties had so
dispeopled, and displeased those countries; that as he was sure to find no
great power to withstand him; so might he well hope the Relics of those
oppressed Cimerons would joyfully take Arms with any forrainer to redeem their
liberty, and revenge their parents blood.

Fourthly, by reason the scale of distance between Spain and America was so
great; as it infallibly assured Sir Philip, he should find leisure enough to
land, fortify, and become Master of the field, before any succor could come
thither to interrupt him.

Fifthly, the pride, delicacy, and security of the Spaniard, which made him live
without Discipline; and trust more to the greatness of his name abroad, than
any strength, order, courage, or munition at home.

Sixthly, Sir Philip prophesying what the pedigrees of Princes did warrant, I
mean the happy conjunction of of Scotland, to these populous Realms England and
Ireland; foresaw, that if this multitude of people were not studiously
husbanded, and disposed, they would rather diminish, than add any strength to
this Monarchy. Which danger (he conjectured) could only by this design of
foreign imploiment, or the peaceable harvest of manufactures at home, be safely
prevented.

The seventh, and a chief motive indeed was, that no other action could be less
subject to emulation of Court, less straining to the present humors of State,
more concurring with expectation, and voice of time; nor wherein there was
greater possibility of improving merit, wealth, and friends.

Lastly, he did, as all undertakers must do, believe that there is ever good
intelligence between chance and hazard, and so left some things not summed up
before hand by exact minutes. But rather thought good to venture upon the cast
of a Rubicon Die; either to stop his springs of gold, and so dry up that
torrent which carried his subduing Armies every where; or else by the wakefull
providence of threatened neighbors, force him to waft home that conquering
Metal with infinite charge, and notwithstanding unwarranted from enriching
those enemies, whom he principally studied to suppress by it.

To confirm which opinion, he foresaw how this racked vanity of the Spanish
government (intending to work a change in the free course of nature) had
interdicted all manufacture, traffic, or vent by sea, or land, between the
natives of America, and all nations else, Spain excepted. And withal, to make
the barrenness of Spain more fertile, how he had improved that idle Castilian,
by employments, in activeness, wealth, and authority over those vanquished
creatures; suffering the poor native Americans to be suppressed with heavy
impositions, discouraging idleness, bondage of laws, sheering of the humble
sheep to cloth the proud devouring Wolves; finally, under these, and such like
quintessences of tyranny striving (as I said) even besides nature, to make
barren Spain the Monarchy, and that every way more fertile America to be the
Province. All which affections of power to be wiser, and stronger than the
truth, this Gentleman concluded would in fulness of time make manifest; that the
heavy can no more be forced to ascend, and rest fixed there, than the light to
go downward, as to their proper center.

Notwithstanding, the state of Tyrants is so sublime, and their errors founded
upon such precipitate steps, as this growing Spaniard both did, does, and ever
will travel (with his forefathers in Paradise) to be equal, or above his
Maker; and so to imprison divine laws within the narrownes of will, and humane
wisdom, with the fettred selfsnesses of cowardly or other confident Tyranny.
In which preposterous courses, to prevent all possibility of commotion, let the
Reader be pleased to observe, how that continually he forces his own subjects
free-denized in America, to fetch weapons of defense, conquest, invasion; as
well as ornament, wealth, necessity, and delicacy, out of Spain, merely to
retain want, supply, price, weight, fashion, and measure, still (contrary to
nature) in that barren Crown of Castile, with an absolute power resting in
himself to rock, or ease both peoples, according to the waving ends of an
unsteddy, and sharp pointed Pyramid of power.

Nay, to rise yet a step higher in this bloody pride; Sir Philip, our
unbelieved Cassandra, observed this limitless ambition of the Spaniard to have
chosen that uttermost Citadell of bondage, I mean the Inquisition of Spain, for
her instrument. Not, as in former Masks, to prune, or govern; but in a
confidence rising out of the old age of superstitious fantasms, utterly to root
out all seeds of humane freedom; and (as Sr Philip conceived) with fatal
dissolution to it self. In respect that these types of extremity would soon
publish to the world, what little difference Tyrants strive to leave between
the creation, use, and honor of men, and beasts, valuing them indifferently but
as Counters, to sum up the diverse, nay contrary uses, and Audits of sublime and
wandering supremacy, which true glass would (in this Gentleman's opinion) show
the most dull and cowardly eye, that Tyrants be not nursing Fathers, but
step-fathers; and so no anointed deputies of God, but rather lively Images of
the dark Prince, that sole author of dis-creation, and disorder, who ever
ruins his ends with over-building.

Lastly, where his reason ended, there many divine Precepts, and Examples did
assure him, that the vengeance of God must necessarily hang over those
hypocritical cruelties, which under color of converting souls to him, sent
millions of better than their own, they cared not whither: And in stead of
spreading Christian religion by good life, committed such terrible
inhumanities, as gave those that lived under nature manifest occasion to abhor
the devily characters of so tyrannical a deity.

Now though this justice of the Almighty be many times slow, and therefore
neglected here on earth; yet (I say) under the only conduct of this star did
Sir Philip intend to revive this hazardous enterprise of Planting upon the Main
of America; projected, nay undertaken long before, (as I showed you) but ill
executed in the absence of Sir Philip; with a design to possess Nombre de
Dios, or some other haven near unto it, as places, in respect of the little
distance between the two seas, esteemed the fittest Rendez-vouz for supply, or
retreat of an Army upon all occasions. And besides, by that means to circle in
his wealth and freedom, with a joint fore-running Fleet; to the end, that if
the fortune of Conquest prospered not with them, yet he should infallibly pay
the charge of both Navies, with infinite loss, and dis-reputation to the
Spaniard.

And in this project Sir Philip proceeded so far with the united Provinces, as
they yielded to assist, and second the ships of his Sovereign, under his
charge, with a fleet of their own. Which, besides a present addition of
strength, he knew would lead in others by example.

Again, for supply of these Armies, he had (out of that natural tribute, which
all free spirits acknowledge to superior worth) won 30 Gentlemen of great
blood, and state here in England, every man to sell one hundred pounds land, to
second, and countenance this first Fleet with a stronger.

Now when these beginnings were by his own credit and industry thus well
settled: then to give an excellent form to a real work, he contrived this new
intended Plantation, not like an Assylum for fugitives, a Bellum Piraticum for
Banditi, or any such base Ramas of people; but as an Emporium for the
confluence of all Nations that love, or profess any kind of virtue, or
Commerce.

Wherein to incite those that tarried at home to adventure, he propounded the
hope of a sure, and rich return. To Martial men he opened wide the door of sea
and land, for fame and conquest. To the nobly ambitious the far stage of
America, to win honor in. To the Religious divines, besides a new Apostolical
calling of the last heathen to the Christian faith, a large field of reducing
poor Christians, misled by the Idolatry of Rome, to their mother Primitive
Church. To the ingenuously industrious variety of natural richesses, for new
mysteries, and manufactures to work upon. To the Merchant, with a simple
people, a fertile, and unexhausted earth. To the fortunebound, liberty. To the
curious, a fruitful womb of innovation. Generally the word gold was an
attractive Adamant, to make men venture that which they have, in hope to grow
rich by that which they have not.

What the expectation of this voyage was, the time past can best witness; but
what the success should have been (till it be revived by some such generous
undertakers) lies hid in Gods secret judgments, who did at once cut off this
Gentleman's life, and so much of our hope.

Upon these enterprises of his, I have presumed to stand the longer, because
from the ashes of this first propounded voyage to America* that fatal Low
Country action sprang up, in which this worthy Gentleman lost his life.
Besides, I do ingenuously confess, that it delights me to keep company with
him, even after death; esteeming his actions, words, and conversation, the
daintiest treasure my mind could then lay up; or can at this day impart with
our posterity.

CHAP. XI.
THerefore to come at the last to that diverting employment, promised to him
under his Uncle in the Low Countries: he was, upon his return to the Court,
instantly made for Garrison, Governor of Flushing, and for the Field, General
of the Horse; in both which charges, his carriage testified to the world,
wisdom, and valor, with addition of honor to his Country by them.

For instance; how like a Soldier did he behave himself, first in contriving,
then in executing the surprise of Axil? where he revived that ancient, and
secure discipline of order, and silence in their March; and after their
entrance into the town, placed a band of choice soldiers to make a stand in
the Marketplace, for security to the rest, that were forced to wander up and
down by direction of Commanders; and when the service was done, rewarded that
obedience of discipline in every one, liberally, out of his own purse.

How providently again did he preserve the lives and honor of our English Army,
at that enterprise of Gravelin? where though he was guided by directions given
him; yet whether out of arguments drawn from the person of La Motte, Commander
of that town, who had a general reputation of too much worth, either
Simon-like to deceive, or easily to be deceived; or out of the strength and
importance of that place, precious to the owner in many respects, the least of
which would redouble loss to the growing ambition of a Conqueror; or whether
upon caution given by intelligence; or whatsoever light of diversion else; he
(I say) was resolute not to hazard so many principal Gentlemen, with such
gallant Troops and Commanders which accompanied him, in that flattering
expedition. Yet because he kept this steady counsel in his own bosom, there
was laboring on every side to obtain the honor of that service. To all which
gallant kind of competition, he made this answer, that his own coming thither
was to the same end, wherein they were now become his rivalls; and therefore
assured them, that he would not yield any thing to any man, which by right of
his place was both due to himself, and consequently disgrace for him to execute
by others: again, that by the same rule, he would never consent to hazard them
that were his friends, and in diverse respects his equals, where he found
reason to make many doubts, and so little reason to venture himself.

Yet as a Commander, concluding something fit to be done, equally for obedience
and trial, he made the inferior sort of Captains try their fortune by dice
upon a drums head: the lot fell upon Sir William Brown his own Lieuetenant, who
with a choice company presently departed, receiving this provisionall caution
from Sir Philip, that if he found practice, and not faith, he should straight
throw down his Arms, and yield himself prisoner; protesting that if they took
him, he should be ransomed; if they broke quarter, his death most severely
revenged.

On these forlorn companies go with this Leader, and before they came into the
town, found all outward signals exactly performed; when they were entered, every
street safe and quiet, according to promise, till they were past any easy
recovery of the gate; then instantly out of the cellars under ground, they were
charged by Horse and Foot. The Leader, following his Generals commandment,
discovers the treason, throws down his arms, and is taken prisoner. The rest of
the company retire, or rather fly toward their ships, but still wounded and cut
off by pursuit of their enemies; till at length a Sergeant of a band, with
fifteen more, all Sidney's men (I mean such as could die to win honor, and do
service to their country) made a halt, and being fortunately mixed of pikes,
halberds, and muskets, resolved to be slain with their backs to their friends,
and their faces to their enemies; they moved, or stayed with occasion; and were
in both continually charged with Foot and Horse, till in the end eight were
slain, and eight left alive. With these the Sergeant wounded at the side with a
square die out of a field-piece, made this brave retreat within view, and at
last protection of their own Navy; bringing home even in the wounds, nay ruins
of himself, and company, reputation of courage, and Martial discipline to his
Country.

Moreover, in those private accidents of coffeehouse and quarrel, which
naturally accompany great spirits in the best governed Camps, how discreetly
did Sir Philip balance that brave Hollock, made head of a party against his
Uncle? When putting himself between indignities offered to his Sovereign,
through the Earl of Leicesters person; and yet not fit for a supreme Governors
place to ground a duel upon; he brought those passionate charges, which the
Count Hollock addressed upwards to the Earl down by degrees upon himself. Where
that brave Count Hollock found Sir Philip so fortified with wisdom, courage,
and truth; besides the strong party of former friendship standing for him in
the Counts noble nature; as though sense of honor, and many things else equal,
and unequal between them, were in appearance beyond possiblitie of peecing; yet
this one inequality of right on Sir Philip's side, made the propounder calm;
and by coming to terms of expostulation, did not only reconcile those two
worthy spirits, one to another, more firmly than before; but withal through
himself wrought, if not a kind of unity between the Earl of Leicester, and the
Count Hollock, at least a final surcease of all violent jealousies, or
factious expostulations.

These particulars I only point out, leaving the rest for them, that may,
perchance, write larger stories of that time. To be short; not in complements
and art, but real proof given of his sufficience above others, in very little
time his reputation, and authority amongst that active people grew so fast, as
it had been no hard matter for him, with the disadvantage of his Uncle, and
distraction of our affairs in those parts, to have raised himself a fortune
there. But in the whole course of his life, he did so constantly balance
ambition with the safe precepts of divine, and moral duty, as no pretense
whatsoever could have entised that Gentleman, to break through the circle of a
good Patriot.

CHAP. XII
THus shall it suffice me to have trod out some steps of this Britane Scipio,
thereby to give the learned a scantling, for drawing out the rest of his
dimensions by proportion. And to the end the abruptness of this Treatise may
suit more equally with his fortune, I will cut off his Actions, as God did his
Life, in the midst; and so conclude with his death.

In which passage, though the pride of flesh, and glory of Mankind be commonly
so allied, as the beholders seldom see any thing else in it, but objects of
horror, and pity; yet had the fall of this man such natural degrees, that the
wound whereof he died, made rather an addition, than diminution to his spirits.
So that he showed the world, in a short progress to a long home, passing fair,
and weldrawn lines; by the guide of which, all pilgrims of this life may
conduct themselves humbly into the haven of everlasting rest.

When that unfortunate stand was to be made before Zutphen, to stop the issuing
out of the Spanish Army from a streict; with what alacrity soever he went to
actions of honor, yet remembering that upon just grounds the ancient Sages
describe the worthiest persons to be ever best armed, he had completely put on
his; but meeting the Marshall of the Camp lightly armed (whose honor in that
art would not suffer this unenvious Themistocles to sleep) the unspotted
emulation of his heart, to venture without any inequality, made him cast off
his Cuisses; and so, by the secret influence of destiny, to disarm that part,
where God (it seems) had resolved to strike him. Thus they go on, every man in
the head of his own Troop; and the weather being misty, fell unawares upon the
enemy, who had made a strong stand to receive them, near to the very walls of
Zutphen; by reason of which accident their Troops fell, not only unexpectedly
to be engaged within the level of the great shot, that played from the
Rampires, but more fatally within shot of their Muskets, which were laid in
ambush within their own trenches.

Now whether this were a desperate cure in our Leaders, for a desperate
disease; or whether misprision, neglect, audacity, or what else induced it, it
is no part of my office to determine, but only to make the narration clear,
and deliver rumor, as it passed then, without any stain, or enammel.

Howsoever, by this stand, an unfortunate hand out of those forespoken
Trenches, brake the bone of Sir Philip's thigh with a Musket Shot. The horse he
rode upon, was rather furiously cholleric, than bravely proud, and so forced
him to forsake the field, but not his back, as the noblest, and fittest biere
to carry a Martial Commander to his grave. In which sad progress, passing
along by the rest of the Army, where his Uncle the General was, and being
thirsty with excess of bleeding, he called for drink, which was presently
brought him; but as he was putting the bottle to his mouth, he saw a poor
Soldier carried along, who had eaten his last at the same Feast, ghastly
casting up his eyes at the bottle. Which Sir Philip perceiving, took it from
his head, before he drank, and delivered it to the poor man, with these words,
Thy necessity is yet greater than mine. And when he had pledged this poor
soldier, he was presently carried to Arnheim.

Where the principal Chirurgions of the Camp attended for him; some mercinarily
out of gain, others out of honor to their Art, but the most of them with a
true zeal (compounded of love and reverence) to do him good, and (as they
thought) many Nations in him. When they began to dress his wound, he both by
way of charge, and advice, told them, that while his strength was yet entire,
his body free from fever, and his mind able to endure, they might freely use
their art, cut, and search to the bottom. For besides his hope of health, he
would make this farther profit of the pains which he must suffer, that they
should bear witness, they had indeed a sensible natured man under their hands,
yet one to whom a stronger Spirit had given power above himself, either to do,
or suffer. But if they should now neglect their Art, and renew torments in the
declination of nature, their ignorance, or over-tenderness would prove a kind
of tyranny to their friend, and consequently a blemish to their reverend
science.

With love and care well mixed, they began the cure, and continued it some
sixteen days, not with hope, but rather such confidence of his recovery, as
the joy of their hearts over-flowed their discretion, and made them spread the
intelligence of it to the Queen, and all his noble friends here in England,
where it was received, not as private, but public good news.

Only there was one Owl among all the birds, which though looking with no
less zealous eyes than the rest, yet saw, and presaged more despair: I mean an
excellent Surgeon of the Count Hollocks, who although the Count himself lay
at the same instant hurt in the throat with a Musket shot, yet did he neglect
his own extremity to save his friend, and to that end had sent him to Sir
Philip. This Surgeon notwithstanding (out of love to his Master) returning
one day to dress his wound, the Count cheerfully asked him how Sir Philip did?
And being answered with a heavy countenance, that he was not well; at these
words the worthy Prince (as having more sense of his friends wounds, than his
own) cries out, Away villain, never see my face again, till thou bring better
news of that man's recovery; for whose redemption many such as I were happily
lost.

This honorable act I relate, to give the world one modern example; first,
that greatness of heart is not dead every where; and then, that war is both a
fitter mould to fashion it, and stage to act it on, than peace can be; and
lastly, that the reconciliation of enemies may prove safe, and honorable,
where the ciment on either side is worth. So as this Florentine precept
concerning reconciled enemies, deserves worthily to be buried with unworthines
the author of it, or at least the practice of it cried down, and banished, to
reign among barbarous heathen spirits, who while they think life the uttermost
of all things, hold it safe in no body that their own errors make doubtful to
them. And such seems every man that moves any passion, but pleasure, in those
intricate natures.

Now after the sixteenth day was past, and the very shoulder-bones of this
delicate Patient worn through his skin, with constant, and obedient posturing
of his body to their Art; he judiciously observing the pangs his wound stang
him with by fits, together, with many other symptoms of decay, few or none of
recovery, began rather to submit his body to these Artists, than any farther to
believe in them. During which suspense, he one morning lifting up the clothes
for change and ease of his body, smelt some extraordinary noisome savor about
him, differing from oils and salvs, as he conceived; and either out of natural
delicacy, or at least care not to offend others, grew a little troubled with
it; which they that sat by perceiving, besought him to let them know what
sudden indisposition he felt? Sir Philip ingenuously told it, and desired them
as ingenuously to confess, whether they felt any such noisome thing, or no?
They all protested against it upon their credits. Whence Sir Philip presently
gave this severe doom upon himself; that it was inward mortification, and a
welcome messenger of death.

Shortly after, when the Chirurgions came to dress him, he acquainted them with
these piercing intelligences between him, and his mortality. Which though they
opposed by authority of books, paralleling of accidents, and other artificial
probabilities; yet moved they no alteration in this man, who judged too truly
of his own estate, and from more certain grounds, than the vanity of opinion in
erring artificers could possibly pierce into. So that afterward, how freely
soever he left his body subject to their practice, and continued a patient
beyond exception; yet did he not change his mind; but as having cast off all
hope, or desire of recoverie, made, and divided that little span of life which
was left him in this manner.

CHAP. XIII.
FIrst, he called the Ministers unto him; who were all excellent men, of diverse
Nations, and before them made such a confession of Christian faith, as no book
but the heart can truly, and feelingly deliver. Then desired them to accompany
him in Prayer, wherein he besought leave to lead the assembly, in respect, (as
he said) that the secret sins of his own heart were best known to himself, and
out of that true sense, he more properly instructed to apply the eternal
Sacrifice of our Saviors Passion and Merits to him. His religious Zeal
prevailed with this humbly devout, and afflicted company; In which well chosen
progress of his, howsoever they were all moved, and those sweet motions
witnessed by sighs and tears, even interrupting their common devotion; yet
could no man judge in himself, much less in others, whether this rake of
heavenly agony, whereupon they all stood, were forced by sorrow for him, or
admiration of him; the fire of this Phoenix hardly being able out of any ashes
to produce his equal, as they conceived.

Here this first mover stayed the motions in every man, by staying himself.
Whether to give rest to that frail wounded flesh of his, unable to hear the
bent of eternity so much affected, any longer; or whether to abstract that
spirit more inwardly, and by chewing as it were the cudd of meditation, to
imprint those excellent images in hs soul; who can judge but God?
Notwithstanding, in this change, (it should seem) there was little, or no
change in the object. For instantly after prayer, he entreated this quire of
divine Philosophers about him, to deliver the opinion of the ancient Heathen,
touching the immortality of the soul: First, to see what true knowledge she
retains of her own essence, out of the light of her self; then to parallel with
it the most pregnant authorities of the old, and new Testament, as supernatural
revelations, sealed up from our flesh, for the divine light of faith to reveal,
and work by. Not that he wanted instruction, or assurance; but because this
fixing of a lovers thoughts upon those external beauties, was not only a
cheering up of his decaying spirits, but as it were a taking possession of that
immortal inheritance, which was given unto him by his brotherhood in CHRIST.

The next change used, was the calling for his Will; which though at first
sight it may seem a descent from heaven to earth again; yet he that observes
the distinction of those offices, which he practiced in bestowing his own,
shall discern, that as the soul of man is all in all, and all in every part; so
was the goodness of his nature equally dispersed, into the greatest, and least
actions of his too short life. Which Will of his, will ever remain for a
witness to the world, that those sweet, and large, even dying affections in
him, could no more be contracted with the narrowness of pain, grief, or
sickness, than any sparkle of our immortality can be privately buried in the
shadow of death.

Here again this restless soul of his (changing only the air, and not the
cords of her harmony) calls for Music; especially that song which himself had
entitled, La cuisse rompue. Partly (as I conceive by the name) to show that the
glory of mortal flesh was shaken in him: and by that Music it self, to fashion
and enfranchise his heavenly soul into that everlasting harmony of Angels,
whereof these Concords were a kind of terrestrial Echo: And in this supreme,
or middle Orb of Contemplations, he blessedly went on, within a circular
motion, to the end of all flesh.

The last scene of this Tragedy was the parting between the two brothers: the
weaker showing infinite strength in suppressing sorrow, and the stronger
infinite weakness in expressing of it. So far did invaluable worthiness, in
the dying brother enforce the living to descend beneath his own worth, and by
abundance of childish tears, bewail the public, in his particular loss. Yea
so far was his true remission of mind transformed into ejulation, that Sir
Philip, (in whom all earthly, passion did even as it were flash, like lights
ready to burn out) recals those spirits together with a strong virtue, but weak
voice; mildly blaming him for relaxing the frail strengths left to support him,
in his final combat of separation at hand. And to stop this natural torrent
of affection-in both, took his leave, with these admonishing words:

Love my Memory, cherish my Friends; their Faith to me may assure you they are
honest. But above all, govern your Will, and Affections, by the Will and Word
of your Creator; in me, beholding the end of this World, with all her Vanities.

And with this Farewell, desired the company to lead him away. Here this noble
Gentleman ended, the too short Scene his life; in which path, whosoever is not
confident that he walked the next way to eternal rest, will be found to judge
uncharitably.

Thus you see how it pleased God to show forth, and then suddenly withdraw this
precious light of our sky; and in some sort adopted Patriot of the
States-Generall. Between whom, and him, there was such a sympathy of
affections; as they honored that exorbitant worth in Sir Philip, by which
time, and occasion had been like enough to metamorphose this new Aristocracy of
theirs into their ancient, and much honored form of Dukedom. And he again
applauded that universal ingenuitie, and prosperous undertakings of theirs;
over which perchance he felt something in his own nature, possible in time to
come an elect Commander. So usual is it for all mortal constitutions, to
affect that, which insensibly often works change in them to better, or worse.

Now though I am not of their faith, who affirm wise men can govern the
Stars; yet do I believe no Star-gazers can so well prognosticate the good, or
ill of all Governments, as the providence of men trained up in public
affairs may do. Whereby they differ from Prophets only in this; that Prophets
by inspiration, and these by consequence, judge of things to come.

Amongst which kind of Prophets, give me leave to reckon this Gentleman; who
first having, out of the credible Almanach of History, registered the growth,
health, disease, and periods of Governments: that is to say, when Monarchies
grow ready for change, by over-relaxing, or contracting, when the states of
few, or many continue, or forsake to be the same: and in the constant course of
these vicissitudes, having foreseen the easy satietie of mankind with
Religion, and Government, their natural coffeehouse with the present, and
aptness to welcome alteration: And again, in the descent of each particular
form to her own center, having observed how these United Provinces had
already changed from their ancient Dukedomes to Popularitie: and yet in that
Popularitie, been forced to seek protection among the Monarchies then reigning;
and to make perfect this judgment of his, had summed up the league offensive,
and defensive between us, and them; even then he grew doubtful, lest this
advantage would in time leave latitude for envy, and competencie, to work some
kind of rent in our Union.

But when in the progress of this prospect, he fell into a more particular
consideration of their traffic, and ours: they without any native commodities
(Art and diligence excepted) making themselves Masters of wealth in all
Nations: We again, by exporting our substantial riches, to import a
superfluous mass of trifles, to the vain exhausting of our home-borne staple
commodities; he certainly concluded, that this true Philosophers stone of
traffic, which not only turned base metals into gold, but made profit by
Wars in their own bosoms, would infallibly stir up emulation in such lookers
on, as were far from striving otherwise to imitate them.

And out of these or the like grounds has many times told me, that this active
people (which held themselves constantly to their Religion, and Freedom) would
at length grow from an adjective to a substantive, and prosperous subsistence.
Whereas we on the other side, dividing our selves, and waving in both, should
first become jealous, then strange to our friends, and in the end (by
reconciliation with our common enemy) moderate that zeal, wherein excess
only is the mean; and so be forced to cast our fortunes into their arms for
support, who are most interested in our dishonor, and ruin. These with many
other dangers (which he provisionally feared) howsoever the wisdom of our
Government may perchance have put off by prevention: yet were more then
conjecturall in the aspect of superior, inferior, foreign, and domestique
Princes then reigning.

But suppose we could not by this Calendar comprehend the change of Aspects,
and Policies in several Kingdoms; yet we may at least therein discern, both
the judgment of this Prometheus concerning our selves, and the tender affection
he carried to that oppressed Nation. Which respect of his they again so well
understood, as after his death the States of Zealand became suitors to her
Majesty, and his noble friends, that they might have the honor of burying his
body at the public expense of their Government. A memorable wisdom of
thankfulness, by well handling the dead, to encourage, and multiply faith in
the living.

Which request had it been granted, the Reader may please to consider, what
Trophies it is likely they would have erected over him, for posterity to
admire, and what inscriptions would have been devised for eternizing his
memory. Indeed fitter for a great, and brave Nation to enlarge, then the
capacity, or good will of a private, and inferior friend. For my own part I
confess, in all I have here set down of his worth, and goodness; I find my
self still short of that honor he deserved, and I desired to do him.

I must therefore content my self with this poor demonstration of homage; and
so proceed to say somewhat of the toys, or Pamphlets, which I inscribe to his
memory, as monuments of true affection between us; whereof (you see) death has
no power.

CAP. XIV.
WHen my youth, with favor of Court in some moderate proportion to my birth,
and breeding in the activenesse of that time, gave me opportunity of most
business: then did my yet undiscouraged Genius most affect to find, or make
work for it self. And out of that freedom, having many times offered my fortune
to the course of Foreign employments, as the propriest forges to fashion a
Subject for the real services of his Sovereign; I found the returns of those
mis-placed endeavors to prove, both a vain charge to my self, and an
offensive undertaking to that excellent Governesse, over all her Subjects
duties and affections.

For instance, how mild soever those mixtures of favors, and corrections were
in that Princely Lady: yet to show that they fell heavy in crossing a young
man's ends; I will only choose, and allege four out of many, some with leave,
some without.

First, when those two mighty Armies of Don John's, and the Duke Casimires, were
to meet in the Low Countries; my Horses, with all other preparations being
shipped at Dover, with leave under her Bill assigned: Even then was I stayed by
a Princely Mandate, the Messenger Sir Edward Dier. Wherein whatsoever I felt,
yet I appeal to the judicious Reader, whether there be any latitude left (more
then humble obedience) in these nice cases between duty, and selfenesse, in a
Sovereigns service?

After this, when Mr Secretary Walsing ham was sent Ambassador, to treat with
those two Princes in a business so much concerning Christian blood, and
Christian Empires; then did the same irregular motion (which seldom rests, but
steals where it cannot trade) persuade me, that whosoever would venture to go
without leave, was sure never to be stayed. Upon which false axiom (trusting
the rest to chance) I went over with Mr Secretary, unknown: But at my return
was forbidden her presence for many months.

Again, when my Lord of Leicester was sent General of Her Majesty's Forces
into the Low Countries, and had given me the command of an hundred Horse; then
I giving my humors over to good order, yet found, that neither the earnest
intercession of this Grandee, second with mine own humble suit, and many other
Honorable Friends of mine, could prevail against the constant course of this
excellent Lady with her Servants. So as I was forced to tarry behind; and for
this importunity of mine to change my course, and seem to prefer nothing
before my service about her: This Princess of Government, as well as
Kingdoms, made me live in her Court a spectacle of dis-favour, too long as I
conceived.

Lastly, the universal fame of a battle to be fought, between the prime
Forces of Henry the third, and the religious of Henry the fourth, then King of
Navarre; lifting me yet once more above this humble earth of duty, made me
resolve to see the difference between Kings present, and absent in their
Martial Expeditions. So that without acquainting any creature, the Earl of
Essex excepted, I shipped my self over: and at my return, was kept from her
presence full six months, and then received after a strange manner. For this
absolute Prince, to sever ill example from grace, averrs my going over to be a
secret employment of Hers: and all these other petty exiles, a making good of
that cloud, or figure, which she was pleased to cast over my absence.
Protecting me to the world with the honor of her employment, rather then she
would, for examples sake, be forced either to punish me farther, or too easily
forgive a contempt, or neglect, in a Servant so near about her, as she was
pleased to conceive it.

By which many warnings, I finding the specious fires of youth to prove far
more scorching, then glorious, called my second thoughts to counsel, and in
that Map clearly discerning Action, and Honor, to fly with more wings then one:
and that it was sufficient for the plant to grow where his Sovereigns hand had
planted it; I found reason to contract my thoughts from those larger, but
wandering Horizons, of the world abroad, and bound my prospect within the safe
limits of duty, in such home services, as were acceptable to my Sovereign.

In which retired view, Sir Philip Sidney, that exact image of quiet, and
action: happily united in him, and seldom well divided in any; being ever in
mine eyes, made me think it no small degree of honor to imitate, or tread in
the steps of such a Leader. So that to sail by his Compass, was shortly (as I
said) one of the principal reasons I can allege, which persuaded me to steal
minutes of time from my daily services, and employ them in this kind of writing.

Since my declining age, it is true, that I had (for some years) more leisure
to discover their imperfections, then care, or industry to amend them: finding
in my self, what all men complain of in the world, that it is more easy to
find fault, excuse, or tolerate, then to examine, and reform.

The works (as you see) are Tragedies, with some Treatises annexed. The
Treatises (to speak truly of them) were first intended to be for every Act a
Chorus: and though not borne out of the present matter acted, yet being the
largest subjects I could then think upon, and no such strangers to the scope of
the Tragedies, but that a favorable Reader might easily find some
consanguinitie between them; I preferring this general scope of profit, before
the selfreputation of being an exact Artisan in that Poetical Mystery,
conceived that a perspective into vice, and the unprosperities of it, would
prove more acceptable to every good Readers ends, then any bare murmur of
discontented spirits against their present Government, or horrible periods of
exorbitant passions among equals.

Which with humble sails after I had once ventured upon this spreading Ocean
of Images, my apprehensive youth, for lack of a well touched compass, did
easily wander beyond proportion. And in my old age again, looking back on them
with a fathers eye: when I considered first, how poorly the inward natures of
those glorious names were expressed: then how much easier it was to excuse
deformities, then to cure them; though I found reason to change their places,
yet I could not find in my heart to bestow cost, or care, in altering their
light, and limited apparel in verse.

From hence to come particularly to that Treatise entitled: The Declination of
Monarchy. Let me beg leave of the favorable Reader, to bestow a few lines more
in the story of this Changling, then I have done in the rest; and yet to use no
more serious authority then the rule of Diogenes, which was, to hang the Posie
where there is most need.

The first birth of that Phantasme was divided into three parts, with intention
of the Author, to be disposed amongst their fellows, into three diverse Acts of
the Tragedies. But (as I said before) when upon a second review, they, and the
rest were all ordained to change their places; then did I (like an old, and
fond Parent, unlike to get any more children) take pains rather to cover the
dandled deformities of these creatures with a coat of many seames, then
carelessly to drive them away, as birds do their young ones.

Yet again, when I had in mine own case well weighed the tenderness of that
great subject; and consequently, the nice path I was to walk in between two
extremities; but especially the danger, by treading aside, to cast scandal
upon the sacred foundations of Monarchy; together with the fate of many
Metaphysicall Phormio's before me, who had lost themselves in teaching Kings,
and Princes, how to govern their People: then did this new prospect dazzle
mine eyes, and suspend my travel for a time.

But the familiar self-love, which is more or less born in every man, to live,
and dye with him, presently moved me to take this Bear-whelp up again and
lick it. Wherein I, rowsing my self under the banner of this flattery, went
about (as a fond mother) to put on richer garments, in hope to adorn them. But
while these clothes were in making, I perceived that cost would but draw more
curious eyes to observe deformities. So that from these checks a new counsel
rose up in me, to take away all opinion of seriousness from these perplexed
pedegrees; and to this end carelessly cast them into that hypocritical figure
Ironia, wherein men commonly (to keep above their works) seem to make toies
of the utmost they can do.

And yet again, in that confusing mist, when I beheld this grave subject
(which should draw reverence and attention) to be over-spangled with
lightness, I forced in examples of the Roman gravity, and greatness, the
harsh severity of the Lacedemonian Government; the riches of the Athenian
learning, wit, and industry; and like a man that plays diverse parts upon
several hints, left all the indigested crudities, equally applied to Kings, or
Tyrants: whereas in every clear judgment, the right line had been sufficient
enough to discover the crooked; if the image of it could have proved credible
to men.

Now for the several branches, or discourses following; they are all Members
of one, and the same imperfect body, so as I let them take their fortunes (like
Essays) only to tempt, and stir up some more free Genius, to fashion the
whole frame into finer mould for the worlds use. The first limme of those
Treaties (I mean that Fabric of a superstitious Church) having by her
masterfull ambition over Emperors, Kings, Princes, free States, and Councels,
with her Conclave deceits, strengths, and unthankfulness, spread so far beyond
my Horizon, as I at once gave over her, and all her derivations to Gamaliels
infallible censure; Leaving Laws, Nobility, War, Peace, and the rest, (as
glorious Trophies of our old Pope, the sin) to change, reform, or become
deformed, according as vanity, that limitlesse mother of these Idolatries,
should either win of the truth, or the truth of them.

Lastly, concerning the Tragedies themselves; they were in their first creation
three; Whereof Antonie and Cleopatra, according to their irregular passions, in
forsaking Empire to follow sensuality, were sacrificed to the fire. The
executioner, the author himself. Not that he conceived it to be a contemptible
younger brother to the rest: but lest while he seemed to look over much
upward, he might stumble into the Astronomers pit. Many members in that
creature (by the opinion of those few eyes, which saw it) having some childish
wantonness in them, apt enough to be construed, or strained to a personating
of vices in the present Governors, and government.

From which cautious prospect, I bringing into my mind the ancient Poets,
metamorphosing man's reasonable nature into the sensitive of beasts, or
vegetative of plants; and knowing these all (in their true moral) to be but
images of the unequal balance between humors, and times; nature, and place.
And again in the practice of the world, seeing the like instance not
poetically, but really fashioned in the Earl of Essex then falling; and ever
till then worthily beloved, both of Queen, and people: This sudden descent of
such greatness, together with the quality of the Actors in every Scene, stirred
up the Authors second thoughts, to be careful (in his own case) of leaving
fair weather behind him. He having, in the Earls precipitate fortune,
curiously observed: First, how long this Noblemans birth, worth, and favor had
been flattered, tempted, and stung by a swarm of Sectanimals, whose property
was to wound, and fly away: and so, by a continual affliction, probably
enforce great hearts to turn, and toss for ease; and in those passive
postures, perchance to tumble sometimes upon their Sovereigns Circles.

Into which pitfall of theirs, when they had once discerned this Earl to be
fallen; straight, under the reverend style of Laesa Majestas, all inferior
Ministers of Justice (they knew) would be justly set loose to work upon him.
And accordingly, under the same cloud, his enemies took audacity to cast Libels
abroad in his name against the State, made by themselves; set papers upon
posts, to bring his innocent friends in question. His power, by the Jesuiticall
craft of rumor, they made infinite; and his ambition more then equal to it.
His Letters to private men were read openly, by the the piercing eyes of an
Atturnies Office, which warranteth the construction of every time in the worst
sense against the writer.

My self, his Kinsman, and while I remained about the Queen, a kind of
Remora, staying the violent course of that fatal Ship, and these windewatching
Passengers (at least, as his enemies imagined) abruptly sent away to guard a
figurative Fleet, in danger of nothing, but these Prosopopeia's of invisible
rancor; and kept (as in a free Prison) at Rochester, till his head was off.

Before which sudden journey, casting mine eyes upon the catching Court airs,
which I was to part from; I discerned my Gracious Sovereign to be every way
so environed with these, not Jupiters, but Pluto's thunderworkers; as it was
impossible for Her to see any light, that might lead to grace, or mercy: but
many encouraging Meteors of severity, as against an unthankful favorite, and
traitorous Subject; he standing, by the Law of England, condemned for such.

So that let his heart be (as in my conscience it was) free from this
unnatural crime, yet these unreturning steps seemed well worth the observing.
Especially in the case of such a Favorite, as never put his Sovereign to stand
between her People, and his errors; but here, and abroad placed his body in the
forefront, against all that either threatened, or assaulted Her.

And being no Admiral, nor yet a Creator of Admiralls, whereby fear, or hope
might have kept those temporary Neptunes in a kind of subjection to him; yet
he freely ventured himself in all Sea-actions of his time. As if he would war
the greatness of envy, place, and power, with the greatness of worth, and
incomparable industry. Nevertheless he wanted not judgment to discern, that
whether they went with him, or tarried behind, they must probably prove
unequal yoke fellows in the one; or in the other passing curious, and carping
judges over all his public Actions.

Again, this gallant young Earl, created (as it seems) for action, before he
was Martial, first as a private Gentleman, and after as a Lieutenant by
Commission, went in the head of all our Land Troops, that marched in his time;
and besides experience, still wan ground, even through competency, envy, and
confused mixtures of equality or inequality, amongst the factious English, all
inferior in his own active worth, and merit.

Lastly, he was so far from affecting the absolute power of Henry the thirds
Favorites, I mean under a King to become equal at least with him, in
creating and deposing Chancellors, Treasurers, and Secretaries of State, to
raise a strong party for himself; as he left both place, and persons entire in
their supreme jurisdictions, or Magistracies under his Sovereign, as she
granted them. And though he foresaw a necessary diminution of their peaceful
predicaments by his carrying up the standard of Mars so high, and withal knew
they (like wise men) must as certainly discern, that the rising of his, or
falling of their scales depended upon the prosperity, or unprosperity of his
undertakings: yet (I say) that active heart of his freely chose to hazard
himself upon their censures, without any other provisionall rampire against
the envious, and suppressing crafts of that party, then his own hope, and
resolution to deserve well.

Neither did he (like the French Favorites of that time) serve his own humors
or necessities, by selling seats of Justice, Nobility, or orders of honor, till
they became Colliers pour toute best, to the disparagement of creating power,
and discouraging of the Subjects hope, or industry, in attaining to
advancement, or profit: But suffered England to stand alone, in her ancient
degrees of freedoms, and integrities, and so reserved that absolute power of
Creation sacred in his Sovereign, without any mercenary stain, or allay.

CAP. XV.
NOw after this humble, and harmless desire of a mean subject, expressed in
qualifying a great subjects errors, by the circumstance of such instruments, as
naturally (like Bats) both fly, and prey in the dark; Let the Reader pardon
me, if I presume yet again to multiply digression upon digression, in honor
of her, to whom I owe my self, I mean Queen Elizabeth: and in her name clear
y to know, that though I lament the fall of this great man in Israel,
nevertheless the truth enforces me to confess, that howsoever these kinds of
high justice may sometimes (like the uttermost of the Law) fall heavy upon one
brave spirit; yet prove they mercy to many by example: and therefore as Regal,
and Royal wisdoms, ought to be honored equally in all the differing
Soveraignties through the world, of one, few or many.

And if this assumpsit must be granted universally; then how much more in the
case of such a Princess, as (even while she was subject) left patterns that
might instruct all subjects, rather to undergo the indignation of Sovereigns
with the birthright of duty, then with the mutiny of over-sensible, and
rebellious affections; which ever (like diseased pulses) beat faster, or slower
then they should, to show all to be infected about them? Whereas this Lady, in
the like strains, by an humble, and constant temper, had already with true
obedience triumphed over the curious examinations of ascending flattery, or
descending Tyranny, even in the tenderness of Princes successions.

And to make this manifest to be choice, and not chance: even when her
stepmother misfortune grew ripe for delivery, then was she neither born crying,
as children be: nor yet by the sudden change from a prison, to a Throne, came
she upon that Stage confusedly barking after all that had offended: but like
one borne to behold true light, instantly fixes her thoughts upon larger
notions then revenge, or favor. And in the infancy of her Reign, calls for
Benefield her hard-hearted Jailer; bids him enjoy not a deserved, but free
given peace under his narrow vine: with this assurance, that whenever she
desired to have prisoners over severely entreated, she would not forget to
commit the custody of them to his charge.

Again, for the next object, looking backward upon her sisters Reign, she
observes Religion to have been changed; Persecution, like an ill weed, suddenly
grown up to the highest; The mercy of the infinite perscribed, by abridgment of
time, and adding torments to the death of his creatures: salvation published in
many more Creeds then she was taught to believe: A double Supremacy in one
Kingdom; Rome become Emperor of the Clergy, and by bewitching the better
half of man (I mean the soul) challenging both over Clergy, and Laity, the
style of the Great God: Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium.

This view brought forth in her a vow, like that of the holy Kings in the Old
Testament; viz. that she would neither hope, nor seek for rest in the mortal
traffic of this world, till she had repaired the precipitate ruins of our
Saviors Militant Church, through all her Dominions; and as she hoped, in the
rest of the World, by her example. Upon which Princelike resolution, this She-
David of ours ventured to undertake the great Goliath among the Philistines
abroad, I mean Spain and the Pope; despises their multitudes, not of men, but
of Hosts; scornfully rejects that Holy Fathers wind-blowne superstitions, and
takes the (almost solitary) truth for her Leading-Star.

Yet tears she not the Lions jaws in sunder at once, but moderately begins
with her own Changlings; gives the Bishops a proper motion, but bounded: the
Nobility time to reform themselves, with inward, and outward Council; revives
her Brothers Laws for establishing of the Churches doctrine, and discipline,
but moderates their severity of proceeding; gives frailty, and sect, time to
reform at home: and in the mean season supplies the Prince of Conde with men,
and money, as chief among the Protestants in France; gathers, and revives the
scattered hosts of Israel at the worst: takes New Haven, perchance with hope of
redeeming Callice, to the end her axle-trees might once again lie upon both
shores, as her right did: refuses marriage, reformes and redeemes Queen Mary's
vanities, who first glorying in the Spanish seed, publishes that she was with
child, and instantly offers up that Royal supposed Issue of hers, together
with the absolute Government of all her Natives to the mixed Tyranny of Rome and
Castile.

In which endless path of servitude, the Noune* adjective nature of this
superstitious Princess, proceeded yet a degree further; striving to confirm
that double bondage of people, and Posterity, by Act of Parliament. Where on
the other side, the Spanish King, beholding these remiss homages of frailty,
with the unthankful, and insatiable eyes of ambition, apprehends these petty
sacrifices, as fit strawes, sticks, or feathers, to be pulled out of faint
wings, for the building up, and adorning of a Conquerours nest. And under this
Tyrannical Crisis, takes freedom to exhaust her treasure to his own ends,
breaks our league with France, and in that breach shakes the sacred foundation
of the rest, winnes St Quintins, while we lost Callice.

Contrary to all which thoughtbound Councels of her sister Mary's, Queen
Elizabeth (as I said) not yet out of danger of her Romish subjects at home;
threatened with their mighty faction, and party abroad; pestered besides with
want of money, and many binding Laws of her sisters making: yet like a Palm,
under all these burdens, she raises her self Prince-like: and upon notice of
her Agents disgrace abroad, his servants being put into the Inquisition by the
Spaniard; her Merchants surprised in America, contrary to the league between
Charles the fifth, and Henry the eighth; which gave free traffic: In omnibus,
and singulis Regnis, Dominiis, Insulis, notwithstanding that Astronomicall, or
rather biaced division of the world by the Popes lines, which (contrary to the
nature of all lines) only keep latitude for the advantage of Spain: She (I say)
upon these insolences, receives the Hollander, and protects him from
persecution of the Duke of Alva: settles these poor Refugees in Norwich,
Colchester, Sandwich, Maidstone, and South-Hampton.

Yet again, when this faith, distinguishing Duke appealed to her self: she
binding her heart for better, or worse, to the words of her Contract; summons
these afflicted strangers to depart. Their number was great, their time short,
and yet their weather-beaten souls so sensible of long continued oppressions
in their liberties, and consciences, as (by the opportunity of this Ostracisme)
they in their passage surprised Brill, Flushing, and diverse other Towns,
expulsing the Spaniards; and by this brave example, taught, and proclaimed a
way of freedom to all well affected Princes, and Provinces, that were oppressed.

Wherein it may please the Reader to observe, that Henry the third of France,
being one in the same League, and belike upon change of heart, which ever
brings forth new questions, demanding, whether mutual defense against all,
extended to the cause of Religion? was presently answered by her; that she both
treated, and concluded in the same sense; and if it were required at her hands,
would perform every branch of it to her uttermost. The French King hereupon
makes war with the Protestants: Monsieur his brother secretly protects them by
Casimire.

Again about that time, at the request of the Spanish King, she guards his
Navy into Flanders; where it being lost, and she requested by the same King to
lend him her own Ships, for recovery of the Maritime Towns fallen from him:
this blessed Lady both denies this crafty request of a Conqueror; and withal
providently refuses any of his ships to be harbored in her Ports. Yet in
honor of her ancient League with the House of Burgundy, she publishes the
like inhibition to her beloved, and safe Neighbors the Netherlands. And
instantly, with a strong judgment in ballancing of foreign Princes, persuades
the King of Spain to make peace with the Hollanders, and on the other side
disswades those distressed Hollanders from joining with France. As I conceive,
thinking that Kingdom (manumised from us by time) might through the
conjunction of the Holland shipping, and Mariners, with their disciplined
Land-Armies of horse and foot, prove more dangerous enemies, either by way of
invasion, or incursion (as I said once before) then that Kings glorious
Standard, borne among his barbed horse, and light foot had hitherto done,
either in our entised undertakings, or abandoned retraits.

Besides it is worthy of reverence in this Queen, that she never was afraid, or
ashamed to aver the quarrel of Religion for a ground of her friends, or
enemies.

And though in the charity of a Christian Prince, even in the danger of a
growing faction at home, she was content to let devout conscience live quietly
in her Realms: yet when they began to practice disunion in Church, as their
Jesuited spirits naturally affect to do. Then to show that she was as well
servant to God, as by him King over Peoples, she tied the head of the sacrifice
perchance a little closer to the horns of the altar. And made those spirits
which would not know the true God altogether, to have some kind of sense, or
smart of his Religious Laws; howsoever they were dead, and sacrificed to the
growing Supremacy of the Roman Miter, or conquering Scepter of Spain; ordained
(as she thought) by excess of playing fast or loose with God, and the world;
in time, one to devour the other; ambitious and superstitious subtleties being
an Abyss, or Sea, where the stronger infallibly devoures the weaker.

She makes a public League, for defense of Religion, with the King of Scots,
Denmark, and the Princes of Germany; persuades a Marriage between Scotland and
Denmark; exileth all Jesuits, and Seminary Priests by Act of Parliament; makes
it felony to harbor any of them in England, or for the English to send any of
theirs beyond the Seas, to be trained up among them.

Upon the loss of Aniuerpe, she resolutely undertakes the protection of the
Netherlanders, and to distract the Spaniard (as I said before) sends Drake to
the West Indies, with 21 Ships, who surprised Domingo, and Cartagena. And
immediately after his return, with spoil, and triumph (to prevent all
possibility of Invasion) she sets him to Sea again, with Commission to burn
all Ships, Gallyes, and Boats, along his Spanish Coasts. Who, in the same
Voyage, breaks through diverse of his Gallyes in the Bay of Cales, appointed to
withstand him; takes, burns, and drownes 100 Sail laden with munition, and
victuals. From thence in his way to Cape St Vincent, he surpriseth three Forts:
burns ships, fisher-boats, and nets; and then making for the Azores, he there
takes a Carricke coming from the East Indies.

The next year (as treading in his steps) Cavendish returns from his journey
about the world, with the spoil of nineteen Ships, and of many small Towns in
America.

This and such like providence did this miracle of Princes use in all her Wars,
whereby her Wars maintained her wealth, and that wealth supplied her War. So as
she came ever in state, when she demanded aid from her House of Commons.
Neither did she fetch, or force presidents from her Predecessors in those
demands: but made her self a president to all Posterities, that the love of
people to a loving Princess is not ever curiously balanced, by the
self-pittying abilities of mankind: but their spirits, hearts, and states
being drawn up above their own frail selfnesse, the audit is taken after;
and perchance summed up with a little smart to themselves, wherein they glory.

Neither did she, by any curious search after Evidence to enlarge her
Prerogatives Royal, teach her subjects in Parliament, by the like
self-affections, to make as curious inquisition among their Records, to color
any encroaching upon the sacred Circles of Monarchy: but left the rise or fall
of these two balances asleep, with those aspiring spirits, who (by advantage
of state, or time taken) had been authors of many biaced motions. And in some
confused Parliaments amongst the Barons Wars, even forced her Ancestors, with
one breath, to proscribe and restore; to call out of the House of Commons, by
Writ, to the upper House, during the Session: Wherein one man's sudden
advancement proves envious to four hundred of his equals; and from the same,
not truly active, but rather passive vain, to imprison and release
unjudicially, sometime striving to master the multitude, by their Nobility,
then again waving the Nobility with the multitude of people; both marks of
disease, and no healthful state in a Monarchy. All which she providently
foresaw, and avoided; lest, by the like insensible degrees of misleading
passions, she might be constrained to descend, and labor the compassing of
disorderly ends, by a Mechanical kind of University Canvasse.

So that this blessed, and blessing Lady, with a calm mind, as well in quiet,
as stirring times, studied how to keep her ancient under-earth buildings, upon
their first well laid foundations. And if she found any strayed, rather to
reduce them back to their original circuits, then suffer a step to be made
over, or besides those time-authorized assemblies. And by this reservednesse,
ever coming upon the stage a Commander, and no Petitionet, she preserved her
state above the affronts of Nobility, or people; and according to birthright,
still became a sovereign Judge over any dutiful, or encroaching petitions of
Nobles, or Commons.

For this Lady, though not prophetically, yet like a provident Princess, in
the series of things, and times, foresaw through the long lasting wisdom of
Government, a quintessence, howsoever abstracted out of Moral Philosophy, and
humane Laws, yet many degrees in use of mankind above them. She, I say,
foresaw, that every excess of passion expressed from the Monarch in Acts, or
Councels of Estate, would infallibly stir up in the people the like cobwebs of
a popular spinning, and therefore from these piercing grounds, she concluded,
that a steady hand in the government of Sovereignty, would ever prove more
prosperous, then any nimble or witty practice, crafty shifting, or Imperious
forcing humors possibly could do.

Again in the latitudes which some modern Princes allow to their Favorites,
as supporters of Government, and middle walls between power, and the peoples
envy; it seems this Queen reservedly kept entrenched within her native
strengths, and Scepter.

For even in the height of Essex his credit with her, how far was she from
permitting him (like a Remus) to leap over any wall of her new-built Anti-Rome;
or with a young, and unexperienced genius to shuffle Pulpits, Parliaments,
Laws, and other fundamental establishments of her Kingdoms, into any
glorious apparances of will, or power? It should seem a foreseeing, that
howsoever this unexpected racking of people might for a time, in some
particulars, both please, and add a glossy stick to enlarge the Eagles nest;
yet that in the end all buildings above the truth, must necessarily have forced
her two Supremacies, of state, and nature, to descend, and through
irregularities acted in her name, either become a sanctuary between the world,
and inferior persons errors; or (as playing an after-game with her subjects,
for a subject) constrain her to change the tenure of commanding power, into a
kind of unprincely mediation. And for what? Even vanity to entreat her people,
that they would hope well of diverse confusions: howsoever they might seem
heady, nay ignorant passions: and such as threaten no less, then a loss of
native Liberties, descended upon her people, by the same prescription of time
and right, by which the Crown had descended upon her self, and her Ancestors;
with a probable consequence of many more sharp pointed Tyrannies over them and
their freedoms, then their happily deceased Parents ever tasted or dreamed of.

Besides, admit these flatterings, and threatenings of hope, or fear (which
transcendent power is sometimes forced to work by) could have drawn this
excellent Princess, and her timepresent subjects to make brass an equally
current standard with gold, or silver, within her Sea compassed Dominions; yet
abroad, where the freedom of other Soveraignties is bounded by Religion,
Justice, and well-waigh'd commerce amongst Neighbor-Princes, she foresaw, the
least thought of multiplying self-Prerogatives, there would instantly be
discredited and reflected back to stir up discouragement in the softest hearts,
of her most humble and dutiful subjects.

Therefore contrary to all these captived, and captiving apparances, this
experienced Governesse of ours published to the world, by a constant Series in
her actions, that she never was, nor ever would be overloaden with any such
excesses in her Person, or defects in her Government, as might constrain her
to support, or be supported by a Monopolous use of Favorites; as if she would
make any greater then her self, to govern Tyrannically by them.

Nay more; so far off was she from any lukewarmnesse in Religion, as if a
single testimony may have credit, that blessed Queens many and free discourses
with my self, ingeniously bare record; that the unexpected conversion of Henry
the Fourth fell fatally upon him, by the weaknesses of his Predecessor Henry
the Third, and the dissolure miscarriage of his Favorites. Who like Lapwings,
with the shells of authority about their necks, were let loose to run over all
the branches of his Kingdom, misleading Governors, Nobility, and People from
the steady, and mutual rest of Laws, Customs, and other ancient wisdoms of
government, into the wildernesses of ignorance, and violence of will. Amongst
which defects, all fundamental changes (especially of Religion) in Princes
would be found (as she conceived) the true discipline of Atheism amongst their
Subjects; all sacrifices, obedience excepted, being but dearebought knowledges
of the Serpent, to expulse Kings, and People once again out of Mediocrity,
that reciprocal Paradise of mutual humane duties. Prophetically concluding,
that whosoever will sell God to purchase earth, by making that eternal unity
of many shapes, must in the end make him of none: and so be forced with loss,
contempt and danger to traffic not for an heirs place, but a younger
biothers; in that Church, at whose wide gates he had (with shame enough)
already turned in. And under conditions of a Servant, rather then of a Son,
be constrained for his first step to set up the Jesuits faction, providently
suppressed by himself before, and therein to shake the Sorbonists, faithful
supporters in all times of Crowne-Soveraignty, against these slave-making
conjunctions between the Spaniard, and his Chaplain. Nay, yet with a greater
show of ingratitude, his next step must be to suppress those humble souls,
who had long supported him, whilst he was King of Navarre, against that
murdering Holy Water of Spanish Rome. Lastly, to show that no power can rest
upon a steep, he must precipitately be forced to send Ambassadors to Rome
(with his Sword in his scabbard) servily begging mercy, and grace of such
reconciled enemies, whose endless ends of spiritual, and temporal Supremacy*
(this Princess knew) would never forgive any heavenly Truth, or earthly power
that should oppose their Combination. Finally she concluded that hollow Church
of Rome to be of such a Bucephalus nature, as no Monarch shall be ever able to
bestride it, except only the stirring Alexanders of time present, wherein the
world is passing finely overshot in her own bow.

Wherefore to end, (as I began) with the case of Essex, was not this excellent
Princess therein a witness to herself, that she never chose, or
cherished-Favourite, how worthy soever, to Monopolize over all the spirits, and
business of her Kingdom; or to imprison the universal counsels of nature,
and State, within the narrowness of a young frail man's lustful, or
unexperienced affections? Not thinking any one, especially a Subject, better
able to do all then her self. Where like a worthy head of a great body, she
left the Offices, and Officers of the Crown free to govern in their own
Predicaments, according to her trust. Reserving appeals to her self, as a Sea
-- mark to warn all Creatures under her that she had still a creating, or
defacing power inherent in her Crown and Person, above those subalterne places
by which she did minister universal justice. And though her wisdom was too
deep to nurse or suffer faction amongst those great Commanders, and
distributers of Public Rights: yet was she as careful not to permit any
Aristocraticall cloud, or pillar, to show, or shadow forth any superstitious,
or false lights between her and her people.

CAP. XVI.
Again in her household affairs she kept the like equal hands ballancing the
sloth or sumptuousness of her great Stewards, and white staves, with the
providence, and reservednesse of a Lord Treasurer, kept up the Tables for
Servants, Suitors, and for honors sake in her own house; not suffering public
places to be made particular farms of private men, or the honor of her
household to be carried into theirs: And withal, by the same reverend Auditor,
she watched over the nimble Spirits, selfe-seeking or large-handednesse of her
active Secretaries; examining their Intelligence, money, Packets, Bills of
transportation, Propositions of State, which they offered up by their places,
together with Suits of other Natures, in her wisdom still severing the deep
business from the specious but narrow selfnesse of inferior Officers.

Besides, all these were examined by reverend Magistrates, who having bin
formerly issuers of her Majesty's Treasure in the Secretaries places, did now
worthily become Governors of her Finances, as best able to judge between the
selfnesse of place, or person, and the real necessities of her State, and
Kingdom. A fine art of Government by well chosen Ministers successively to
wall in her Exchequer from the vast expense of many things, especially upon
Foreign Ambassadors, which (she knew) could neither bring reverence, nor
thankfulness to their Sovereign.

Under which head of Foreign, and Domestique Ambassadors, the answer
wherewith that Majesticall Lady entertained the Polarke, expected a treating
Ambassador, but proving (as she told him) a defying Herald, is never to be
forgotten among Princes, as an instance how sensible they ought to be of
indignity, and how ready to put off such sudden affronts, without a prompting
of Counselors; again worthily memorable among her Subjects, as a
demonstrative argument that she would still reserve Moses place entire to her
self amongst all the distributions of Iethro.

And to go on with her Domestique affairs how provident was she, out of the
like caution, and to the same end, that even he who oversaw the rest, might
have his own greatness overseen, and limited too. Whereupon she forgot not to
allay that vast power and jurisdiction of her Treasurers Office, with inferior
Officers of her Finances, and perchance under an active Favorites eyes, kept
her own; Besides she watched and checked him in his marriage made with Paulet
his Predecessor, reserved that man's accounts, and arrears as a rod over his
Grandchilds alliance, qualified, and brought the fines of his many, and great
Copyholds to easy rates, would never suffer any proposition to take hold of
uniting the Duchy of Lancaster to her Exchequer, what narrow reasons soever
were alleged of sparing and cutting off the multiplicity of Officers, with
their wages and ignorances or corruptions, all chargable, and cloudy paths,
which the dealing with Princes moneys does as naturally bring forth, as Africa
does Monsters. But like a provident Sovereign, knowing that place in a
Monarchy must help as well to train up servants, as to reward, and encourage
merit; she constantly (to that end) keeps that Chancellorship of the Duchy
entire, and will not make the rewarding part of her Kingdom less, to overload
her Exchequer with any addition of isntrumental gain amongst under Officers,
into whose barns those harvests are inned for the most part.

Again with the same caution in all her doings she made merit precious, honor
dainty, and her graces passing rare, keeping them (as the Venetians do their
curiously refined gold) to set an edge upon the industry of man, and yet (like
branches of Creation) sparingly reserved within the circuit of her Throne, as
inherent, and tender Prerogatives, not fit to be left at random in the power
of ambitious Favorites, or low-looking Counselors, whose ends are seldom so
large, or safe for the public, as the native Princes Councels are, or ought
to be.

For her Clergy with their Ecclesiastical, or Civil jurisdictions, she
fashioned the Arches, and Westminster Hall to take such care one to bound
another, that they in limiting themselves, enlarged their Royalties, as the
chief and equal foundations of both their greatnesses; she gave the superior
places freely, lest by example she should teach them to commit symony with
their inferiors, and so add scandal in stead of reputation to Gods Word,
whose allowed Messengers they affect to seem.

Her Parliaments she used, to supply her necessarily expended treasure, and
withal, as Maps of orders, or disorders, through her whole Kingdom. In which
reverent Body (as I said before) she studied not to make parties, or faction,
advancing any present Royallist in the nether House, to stir up envy upon her
self amongst all the rest, and so publish the Crown to use personal practices
of hope, or fear, in these general Councels of her Kingdom, but by
forbearing art was never troubled with any artificial brickwals from them; so
as their need and fears concurring with her occasions, made their desires and
counsels concur too, and out of those equal, and common grounds forced every
man to believe his private fish ponds could not be safe, whiles the public
state of the Kingdom stood in danger of present, or expectant extremities.

Her Councell-board (as an abridgment of all other jurisdictions) she held up
in due honor, propounded not her great businesses of State to them with any
prejudicate resolution, which once discovered, suppresseth the freedom both of
spirit and judgment, but opens her self clearly, hears them with respect;
observes number, and reason, in their voices, and makes a quintessence of all
their concords, or discords within her self, from whence the resolutions and
directions came suddenly, and secretly forth for execution.

To be short, she kept awe stirring over all her Courts, and other employments,
as her antidote against any farther necessity of punishments; In which arts of
men, and Government, her nature, education, and long experience, had made her
become excellent above both Sexes.

Again, for the Regiment of her Grandees at home, she did not suffer the
Nobility to be servants one to another, neither did her Gentry wear their
Liveries as in the Ages before; their number and wealth was moderate, and their
spirits and powers counterpoised with her Majesty, from being Authors of any
new Barons Wars, and yet reserved as brave half paces between a Throne and a
people.

Her Yeomendry, a state under her Nobles, and above her Peasants (proper to
England) she maintained in their abilities, and never gave them cause to
suspect, she had any intent, with extraordinary Taxes out of the course of
Parliaments, insensibly to impoverish and make Boors, or slaves of them,
knowing that such a kind of champion country, would quickly stir up the
Nobility it self, to become doubtful of their own fences, and by consequence
in danger, not only of holding lives, lands, goods, and Liberties at their
Sovereigns indefinite pleasure, but by suspense of those nursing, and
protecting Parliaments, to have all other native birthrights, viz. Pulpits,
Laws, Customs, Voices of Appeal, Audits of Trade, humble, and reverent
mention of Coronation-oaths; legal publishers, and maintainers of War, true
Maps of Diseases, and cures through her Kingdom, with many other mutual
ciments of honor, and use, between Sovereign, and subjects, like to be
confounded, or at least metamorphosed into Prerogative Taxes, wherein the
people neither have voices, nor valuable return. I say, this home-borne
Princess of ours making her prospect over these wildernesses of will, and
power, providently for her self, and happily for us, refused the broad branch
of Pythagoras Y, and chose that narrower, but safer medium of State-assemblies,
concluding that these two Honorable Houses, were the only judicious,
faithful, and industrious Favorites of unincroaching Monarchs.

So that it appears she did not affect, nor yet would be drawn (like many of
her ancient Neighbors the French Kings) to have her subjects give away their
wealth after a new fashion, viz. without return of Pardons, ease of
grievances, or comfort of Laws, lest her loving people might thereby dream of
some secret intent to indennize their lives, wealth, and freedoms, into a ship
of Athens, of which the name being old, and all riders, sleepers, and other
Timbers new, they were to be shipped down a stream of the like nature ever,
and yet never the same. Besides not to be shipped into that ship as Mariners,
Soldiers, Saylors, or Factors, but rather as slaves, or conquered Outlaws,
with great dishonor to the Legal, and Royal state of Monarchical
Government, as she conceived. From which example of chaste power, we that live
after this excellent Lady, may with great honor to her ashes resolve, that she
would have been as adverse from bearing the envy of printing any new Lines of
Tax, Impositions, Proclamations, or Mandats (without Parliaments) upon her
ancient celestial, or terrestrial Globes, as her humble subjects possibly
could be, or wish her to be.

Now if we shall examine the reason of her cutting between Laws, Kings powers,
and the Peoples freedom, by so even a thread, what can it be, but a long and
happy descent within the pedegrees of active Princes, together with the
moderating education of Kings children in those times; or lastly in a
quintessence of abilities, gathered out of those blessed, and blessing mixtures
of nature; Education, and Practice, which never fail to lift up man above man,
and keep him there, more then place or power shall by any other encroaching
advantages ever be able to do.

In which Map, as in a true perspective glass, this provident Princess seeing
both her own part, and her peoples, so equally, nay advantagiously already
divided, and disposed, she thought it both wisdom, and justice to leave them
balanced, and distinguished as she found them; Concluding that the least
change of Parallels, or Meridian Lines newly drawn upon any the ancient Globes
of Monarchall Government in absence of Parliaments, would (like the service of
God in an unknown Language) prove profaned, or misunderstood; And consequently
register such a Map of writing, and blotting of irregular raising, and
depressing disadvantagious matching of things real, and humors together, as
must multiply Atheism in humane duties, cast trouble upon her Estate for want
of reverence at home, and provoke this heavy censure through all the world
(Spain only excepted) that she endeavored the raising of an invisible Tyrant
above the Monarch; and to that end had made this step over Laws, and Customs
into such a dangerous kind of ignorant, and wandering confusion, as would
quickly enforce mankind, either to live like exhausted creatures, deprived of
Sabbaths, or like barren earth without privilege of any Jubilee, which
metamorphosing prospect (as they thought) would resemble Circes guests,
transform her people into diverse shapes of beasts; wherein they must lose
freedom, goods, fortune, language, and kind, all at once.

An enchanted confusion imaged by the Poets, to warn Princes, that if they
will easily be induced to use these racks of wit, and power indefinitly, and
thereby force a free people into a despairing estate, they must even in the
pride of their Governments, look in some sort to be forced again, either to
sacrifice these Empsons, and Dudleyes, as the most popular act such Princes can
do, or else with the two edged sword of Tyranny, irregularitie to climb a
degree yet higher then the truth, to maintain these Caterpillars in eating, or
offering up Religion, Laws, etc. to the covetous, cruel, or wanton excesses
of encroaching Tyranny, as though God had made all the world for one.

Nay more it pleased this provident Queen even curiously to foresee, what face
her estate was like to carry, if these biaced humors should continue any long
reign over us, viz. contempt to be cast over the Majesty of the Crown, fear
among the people, hate and envy against the reverend Magistrate, entisement of
domestique spirits to mutiny, or foreign to invade upon any occasion, the
Court it self becoming a Farm, manured by drawing up, not the sweet, but
even the brows of humble subjects; and lastly the Councellboord, that glorious
type of Civil Government, compelled to descend, and become Broker for money,
executioner of extremity, better acquainted with the Merchant, or mechanical
scraping Revenues of sick, and exhausted Kingdoms, then foreign Treaties,
equal balances of Trade, true grounds of Manufactures, mysteries of
Importation, and Exportation, differing strengths, and weaknesses of Crowns,
alteration of Factions, or parties with advantage, danger of alliances made to
the benefit of the stronger, the steady (though sometimes intermittent)
undertakings of the Conqueror, with all things else that concern Magnalia
Regni, and so apt instruments, not reverently to show Princes the truth, but
rather self-loving creatures full of present and servile flatteries, even to
the ruin of that Estate wherein they have and enjoy their honors.

Which confusion of place and things being clearly imaged within her, persuaded
this Lady to restrain the slavish Liberties of Transcendency, within Laws, and
Parliaments, as two unbatter'd Rampires against all overwrestings of power, or
mutinies of people, and out of these grounds to conclude Prince-like, with her
forefathers, that superstructiones antiquae nec facile evertuntur, nec solae
runnt. In this axiom making manifest to the world, that time presents
children, with their young, and unexperienced capacities, are much too narrow
moulds, for any large branches of well-founded Monarchies to be altered, or new
fashioned in, the new and old seldom matching well together, let the Ciment of
seeming wisdom on either side appear never so equal.

Now for the right use of these high pillars, if we shall descend to inferior
functions, we there find her (like a working soul in a healthful body) still,
all, in all, and all in every part. For with the same restraining providence,
she kept the Crown from necessity to use Imperial, and chargable Mandates
upon her people, when she had most need of their service, contrary to the
wisdom of all Government; Neither did she by mistaking, or misapplying
instances (gathered out of the fatal conquests of her Ancestors) parallel her
present need, and Levies with theirs, but wisely considered that the King, and
the people were then equally possessors of both Kealmes, and so in all
impositions contributers to themselves at the first hand.

From which grounds, like a contented and a contenting Sovereign, she
acknowledged these differences to be real, and accordingly by an equal audit
taken from her itinerant Judges, with the Justices inhabiting in every County,
after she was well informed of her subjects abilities, and her enemies
threatenings, she then, by advice of her Privy-Councell summoned her
Parliaments, demanded aid, and was never refused; In return of which loving
and free gifts, she disposed those extraordinary helps to the repayring, and
provisionall supplying of her Forts along the Coast, with offensive and
defensive munitions, she stored her Office of the Ordnance as a royal Magazine
to furnish the whole Kingdom in extremity, and when there were no wars, yet she
kept it full, as an equal pledge of strength, and reputation, both abroad, and
at home.

Lastly, this Princess being confident in these native Sea-walls of ours, fit
to bear moving Bulwarks in martial times, and in Civil Traffiques to carry
out, and in, all Commodities with advantage; she double stored her Navy
Magazines with all materials, provided beforehand for such works, and things,
as required time, and could not be bought with money; besides, she furnished
her Sea Arsinals with all kind of staple provisions, as Ordnance, Pitch, Rosin,
Tar, Masts, Deale-boards, Cordage, etc. for the building, and maintaining of
her Navy, flourishing in multitude of Ships for War and Trade.

And as the life of that vast body, she for increase of Mariners, gave Princely
countenance to all long voyages, knowing they would necessarily require
Ordnance, new munition, and burden; and further to encourage this
long-breathed work, she added out of her Exchequer an allowance of so much in
the tun for the builders of any ships upward of so many hundred Tuns; She
cherished the fisher-boats with privileges along her Coasts, as nurseries of
Seamen; brought Groniland, and Newfound-land fishing in reputation to increase
her stock of Mariners, both by taking, and transporting what they took far off.

And for the Governors of her Navy under the Admiral, as well in times of
peace as war, she chose her principal Officers out of the gallantest Sea
Commanders of that time, whose experience she knew taught them how to husband
and guide her Muscovy Company in general Provisions, not as partner with her
Merchants in building, but restraining the Ship-keepers riot, or expense in
harbor, and at Sea, how to furnish, or martial ships, and Mariners in all
kind of Sea Fights to their best advantage.

Besides, through the same men's judgments, she made all directions pass for the
diverse moulds required in shipping between our Seas, and the Ocean, as the
drawth of water, high, or low, disposing of ports, cleanly rooms for Victuals,
convenience of Deckes for Fight, or Trade, safe conveyance for Powder, and all
other munition, fit Stowage of Sea stores, according to the difference of
heats, or colds in the Climes they were to reside in, or pass through.

Again, as well to instruct the Captains in their particular duties, as to
keep a hand of Government over the large trust, and charge committed to them,
in all expeditions, the Ship with her furniture, tackling, and men, the Gunners
Room with all munition of that kind, the Boat-swains provision of Anchors,
Cables, Canvas, and Seastores, the Pursers, Stewards, and Cooks Rooms touching
victuals were delivered to the Captains by Bill indented; the one part kept
with the Officers of the Navy at home, the other in the hands of every private
Captain to examine his accounts by when he returned: of which my self am
witness, as being well acquainted with the use of it in my youth, but utterly
unacquainted with the change since, or any reasons of it.

Lastly, this great Governesse could tell how to work her high Admirals
(without noise) to resign their Patents, when the course of times made them in
power, and gain, seem, or grow too exorbitant; yet kept she up their Command
at Sea, and when they were there made them a limited, or absolute Commission
under the great Seal of England, sometimes associating, and qualifying their
place, with a Council of war of her own choice, and ever guiding the
generalities of the Voyage with instructions proper to the business, and to be
published at Sea in a time prefixed.

Out of which caution in her principal expeditions, she striving (as I said)
to allay that vast power of place with some insensible Counterpoise, many times
joined an active Favorite with that Sea Neptune of hers, making credit, place,
and merit, finely competitors in her service; Besides, she well understanding
the humors of both, tempered them so equally one with another in her latter
expeditions, as the Admiral being remiss, and apt to forgive all things,
Essex severely true to Martial Discipline, and loath to wound it by forgiving
petty errors under that implacable Tyrant Mars, in all likelihood her Fleet
could hardly be over sailed, or under ballasted, and consequently the Crown
(in her absence) was sure to be guarded with more eyes than two, to prevent
confufusion in Martial Affairs; where every Ship proves beyond the amendment
of second thoughts, and so fatal to that state which paies, and negligently
ventures.

The Merchant-part of her Kingdom was oppressed with few impositions, the
Companies free to choose their own Officers, to fashion their Trade, assisted
with the name and countenance of her Ambassadors, the custom, and return of
their industry, and adventures, contenting them in a free Market without any
nearer cutting of peoples industry to the quick.

The Flushingers, and Dunkerkers in succession of time, it is true, did much
afflict their Traffic, though with small strength; whereupon she first
traveled to suppress them by force, but found the Charge grow infinite, and
the cure so casual, as she joined Treaty with the Sword, and set her Seas by
that providence, and industry, once again at liberty from all molestation, or
danger of Pirates.

Her Universities were troubled with few Mandates, the Colleges free in all
their Elections, and governed by their own Statutes, the gross neglect of
using the Latin Tongue she studied to reform, as well for honor of the
Universities, as for her own service in all Treaties with Foreign Princes, she
studied to multiply her Civilians with little charge, and yet better allowance
to their Profession.

In a word, she preserved her Religion without waving, kept both her Martial,
and Civil Government entire above neglect, or practice, by which, with a
multitude of like instances, she manifested to the World, that the well
governing of Princes own Inheritances, is (in the clear house of Fame)
superior to all the far noised conquests of her over-griping Ancestors, since
what Man lives, conversant in the Calenders of estates, but must know, that had
not these wind-blown conquests of ours happily been scattered, they must in
time have turned the moderate wealth, and degrees of England into the nasty
poverty of the French peasants; brought home Mandates in stead of Laws, waved
our freedoms in Parliaments with new christened Impositions, and in the end
have subjected native and active Albion to become a Province, and so inferior
to her own dearly bought foreign conquests, being forced to yield up the
superlative works of power, to the equal Laws of Nature, which almost every
where (America excepted) proclames the greater to be naturally a Lawgiver over
the less.

CAP. XVII.
YEt as this wise and moderate Governesse was far from incroaching upon any
other Princes Dominions, so wanted she neither foresight, courage nor might,
both to suppress all insolences attempted against her self, and to support
her Neighbors unjustly oppressed, whereof by the Readers patience I will here
add some few instances.

She had no sooner perfected her Virgin-triumph over that sanctified, and
invincible Navy, and by that loss published the Spanish ambition, weakness,
and malice to all Christendom, secured her own estate, revived the
Netherlands, confuted the Pope, turned the caution of the Italian Princes the
right way, and amazed the world; but even then to pursue that victory, and
prevent her enemies ambition, which still threatened the world with new Fleets;
then (I say) did this active Lady conclude, with advise of her Council, and
applause of her Kingdom, to defend her self thenceforth by invading, and no
more attend the Conquerors pleasure at her own doors.

Out of which resolution she first sent forth the Earl of Cumberland, who
attempted the surprise of Porto Ricco, accomplished it with honor, and so
might have kept it, had not disease, and disorder proved more dangerous enemies
to him, then the great name, and small force of the Spanish did.

Again to prevent danger, not in the bud, but roor, she took upon her the
protection of Don Antonio King of Portugal, sent Sir John Norris, and Sir
Francis Drake, with a Royal Fleet, and eleven thousand men to land, seconded
with the fortune, and countenance of the Earl of Essex; they took the base
Town of the Groyne, and when they had overthrown all that came to succor it,
and burnt the Country, then marched they on to Lisbone, and in that journey
sacked Penicke, wasted Villages, and Provinces, entered the suburbs of Lisbone
even to the gates of the High Town, and burnt threescore Spanish hulkes full
of provisions.

And to the same end, she did, and still meant successively to maintain a
Fleet of her own Ships, and her fast friends the Netherlands upon his Coasts,
not only to disturb the return of victuals, munition, and materials for War,
with which the Empire, Poland, and the Hanse Towns did usually, and fatally
(even to themselves) furnish this growing Monarch, but withal to keep his Navy
which was riding, and building in many havens, from possibility of getting head
in any one place to annoy her; and thirdly to set such a Tax upon the wafting
home of his Indian Fleets, as might (in some measure) qualify that fearful
abundance which else was like enough to spread infection through the soundest
Councels, and Counselors of all his Neighbour-Princes.

In the mean time, the French King Henry the third (heartned by her example,
and success) did encounter the Guisards, a strong Faction depending upon
Spain. And when he was made away by treason, and the Leagues in Arms under
the Spaniards protection, then did the Queen providently take opportunity to
change the Seat of her Wars, and assisted Henry the fourth, the succeeding
King, by the Earl of Essex, until he was able to subsist by himself, and
till, by her support he was strengthened, both to overthrow the League, and
become a second balance against the great, and vast desires of Spain.

Neither did she rest here, or give him breath, but with a Fleet of one hundred
and fifty Sail, and a strong Land-army, sent the Earl of Essex, and the
Admiral of England to invade Spain it self, they took Cales, spoiled his
Fleet of twenty Gallyes, and fifty nine Ships, the riches whereof were valued
at twelve millions of Ducats. Immediately after, employed she not the Earl of
Essex with a Fleet to the Islands? In which Voyage he sacked Villa Franca,
took prizes to the value of four hundred thousand Ducats at the least.

Now when this Spanish Invader found himself thus well paid with his own
coin, and so forced to divert the provoked hand of that famous Queen held over
him, by stirring up Tirone in Ireland; to which end he sent money, and Forces
under Don John d' Aquila, even then that Lady, first by Essex, and after by
Montjoy, overthrew the Irish, and sent home the Spaniard well recompensed with
loss, and dishonor for assisting her Rebels.

By which and the like active courses of hers in successive, and successful
undertakings, that provident Lady both bore out the charge of all those
expeditions, requited his Invasion, clipped the fearful wings of this growing
Monarch, and made his credit swell through all the mony-banks of Europe,
causing withal as low an Ebb of his treasure.

Again by this imprisoning of the Lion within his own den, she did not only
lessen his reputation (a chief strength of growing Monarchs) but discovered
such a light as perchance might have forced him in time, to dispute the Titles
of his Usurpations at home, and have given Portugal, Arragon, and Granoda
opportunity to plead their rights with Castile in the Courts of Mars, if God
had either lengthened the days of that worthy Lady who understood him, or time
not neglected her wisdom so suddenly, by exchanging that active, victorious,
enriching, and ballancing course of her defensive Wars, for an idle (I fear)
deceiving shadow of peace. In which whether we already languish, or live
impoverished, whilst he grows potent, and rich, by the fatal security of all
Christendom, they that shall succeed us, are like to feel, and judge freely.

Thus you see how our famous Judith dispersed the terror of this Holofernes,
like a cloud full of wind, and by a Princely wakefulnesse, preserved all those
Sovereign States that were in league with her, from the dangerous temptations
of power, wealth, and practice, by which the growing Monarchs do often
entangle the inferior, but yet Sovereign Princes. And amongst the rest, from
that useful traffic of his Leiger Ambassadors, who trained up in the nimble
exchange of Intelligence, grow to be of such a Bucephalus nature, so like Rome,
as I said before, a body of such members, as the Alexanders of their time can
only manage, and make use of; Instance Mendosa, in whom she had long before
discovered, and discredited all practices of those specious employments of
Conquerers Agents.

Besides in honor of her be it spoken, did not this mirror of Justice, by
restraining that natural ambition of getting other Princes rights, within the
natural bounds of well-governing her own, become a beam of such credit, as
most of the Kings, or States then reigning, freely yielded; both to weigh their
own interests within the scales of her judgment, and besides to assist her in
bounding out the Imperial Meeres of all Princes by the ancient precession of
Right, and power.

Lastly, did she not purchase the like reputation even amongst the heathen, and
by it destroyed a nest, which this aspiring Monarch began to build in the
Seraglio of Constantinople; For she thinking it no wisdom to look on, and see
his Spanish pistols pierce into so high a mountain of Forces, and dispose of
them at his pleasure, providently opened the stronger Monarchs eyes to discover
how craftily the weaker wrought his ends at the cost of all defective, or
sleepy Princes about her.

Yet did not this Sovereign Lady intercept his designs from under any
Goddess shield (whom Homer makes the Grecian Worthies shoot, and hit) but
displanted him by a gallant Factor of her Merchants in a league of Traffic,
and prevailed to make his Ambassador landed at Ragusa, housed in
Constantinople, and all under protection of Ferrat chief Vizier, yet, and upon
a contract of thirty thousand zecchins already paid him, glad to return, and
ship himself away, with more expedition then he landed.

Besides which reputation given to her name by the Grand Signior in this
particular, she generally got power to keep this fearful Standard of the half
Moon waving in such manner over all the King of Spaines designs, as he durst
move no where against his Neighbour-Christian Princes, for fear of being
encompassed within the horns of the heathen Crescent.

But these things swell, and require a more authentical History, to continue
the memory of that wonder of Queens, and women; in honor of whose sacred name,
I have presumed thus to digress, and admonish all Estates by her example, how
they may draw use, and honor, both from the dead, and the living, the change
of times having no power over real wisdoms, but infinite over the shadows of
craft, and humors of petty States, which commonly follow the greater Bodies,
as they are unequally extended, or contracted about them.

Wherefore now to conclude these Heroical Enterprises abroad, together with
the reformations of her State at home, the refining of the English Standard
embased by her sister, the preservation of her Crown-Revenue entire, her
wisdom in the change of Laws, without change of dangers, the timely and
Princely help she gave to Henry the fourth when he had nothing but the Town of
Diepe left him, his credit, and means being utterly exhausted, and so that
brave King ready, either to take Sea, and escape, or fly for succor into
England, her constant establishment of Religion in Ireland, driving the Spanish
Forces diverse times from thence, who were maliciously sent as well to stir up
her subjects to rebel as to maintain, and support them in it, together with
the former recited particulars, howsoever improperly dispersed, or bundled up
together, yet are in their natures of so rare a wisdom, as I believe they will
still be more and more admired, and justly in that excellent Princess, even
many Ages after her death.

Thus have I by the Readers patience, given that Egyptian, and Roman Tragedy a
much more honorable sepulture, then it could ever have deserved, especially in
making their memories to attend upon my Sovereigns hearse, without any other
hope of being, then to wait upon her life, and death, as their Maker did, who
has ever since been dying to all those glories of Life which he formerly
enjoyed, under the blessed, and blessing presence of this unmatchable Queen and
woman.

Now if any man shall demand why I did not rather leave unto the world a
complete history of her Life, then this short memorial in such scattered, and
undisgested minutes, let him receive this answer from a dead man, because I am
confident no flesh breathing (by seeing what is done) shall have occasion of
asking that question, whilst I am living. Presently after the death of my most
gracious Queen, and Mistress, the false spirits, and apparitions of idle grief
haunted me exceedingly, and made all things seem either greater, or less then
they were; so that the farther I went, the more discomfortable I found those
new resolutions of time, to my decayed, and disproportioned abilities; yet
fearing to be cursed with the Fig Tree, if I bore no fruit, I rouzed up my
thoughts upon an ancient axiom of Wise men; Si quicquid offendit, relinquimus
cito; inerti otio torpebit vita; and upon a second review of the world, called
to mind the many duties I ought to that matchless Sovereign of mine, with a
resolution to write her life in this manner.

First, seriously to have begun with the uniting of the Red, and White Roses,
in the marriage of Hen: the seventh; In the like manner to have run over Henry
the eighths time, until his several rents in the Church, with a purpose to
have demurred more seriously upon the sudden change in his Son Edward the
sixth, from superstition to the establishment of Gods Ancient, Catholic, and
Primitive Church; those cobwebs of re-conversion in Queen Maryes days, I had
no intent to meddle with, but only by pre-occupation to show, that Princes
captived in Nature, can seldom keep any thing free in their Governments, but
as soyles manured to bring forth ill weeds apace, must live to see Schism
arise in the Church, wearing out the real branches of immortal truth, to
weave in the thin leaves of mortal superstition, and to behold in the State
all their fairest industries spring, and fade together, like Ferne-seed;
Lastly, I intended with such spirits, as Age had left me, to revive my self in
her memory, under whom I was bred.

Now in this course, because I knew, that as the liberality of Kings did help
to cover many errors, so truth in a story would make good many other defects
in the writer. I adventured to move the Secretary, that I might have his favor
to peruse all obsolete Records of the Council chest, from those times down as
near to these, as he in his wisdom should think fit; he first friendly
required my end in it, which I as freely delivered him, as I have now done to
you.

Against her memory he, of all men, had no reason to keep a strict hand, and
where to bestow a Queen Elizabeth's servant with less disadvantage to himself
it seems readily appeared not; so that my abrupt motion took hold of his
present Counsel. For he liberally granted my request, and appointed me that
day three weeks to come for his warrant, which I did, and then found in show a
more familiar, and graceful aspect then before, he descending to question me,
why I would dream out my time in writing a story, being as like to rise in
this time as any man he knew; Then in a more serious, and friendly manner
examining me, how I could clearly deliver many things done in that time, which
might perchance be construed to the prejudice of this.

I shortly made answer, that I conceived an Historian was bound to tell nothing
but the truth, but to tell all truths were both justly to wrong, and offend not
only Princes, and States, but to blemish, and stir up against himself, the
frailty and tenderness, not only of particular men, but of many Families, with
the spirit of an Athenian Timon; And therefore showed my self so far from
being discouraged with that objection, as I took upon me freely to adventure
all my own goods in this Ship, which was to be of my own building. Immediately
this Noble Secretary, as it seems, moved, but not removed with those selfenesse
of my opinion, seriously assured me, that upon second thoughts he durst not
presume to let the Councell-chest lie open to any man living, without his
Majesty's knowledge and approbation.

With this supersedeas I humbly took my leave, at the first sight assuring my
self this last project of his would necessarily require sheet after sheet to
be viewed, which I had no confidence in my own powers to abide the hazard of;
and herein it may please the Reader to believe me the rather by these
Pamphlets, which having slept out my own time, if they happen to be seen
hereafter, shall at their own peril rise upon the stage, when I am not;
Besides, in the same proposition I further saw, that the many Judgments, which
those Embryoes of mine must probably have past through, would have brought
forth such a world of alterations, as in the end the work it self would have
proved a story of other men's writing, wity my name only to put to it, and so a
worship of time, not a voluntary homage of duty.

Farther I cannot justify these little sparks, unworthy of her, and unfit for
me; so that I must conclude with this ingenuous Confession, that it grieves me
to know I shall (as far as this abrupt Apology extends) live, and dye upon
equal terms with a Queen, and Creature so many ways unequal, nay,
infinitely superior to me, both in Nature, and Fortune.

CAP. XVIII.
NOw to return to the Tragedies remaining, my purpose in them was, not (with
the Ancient) to exemplify the disastrous miseries of man's life, where Order,
Laws, Doctrine, and Authority are unable to protect Innocence from the
exorbitant wickedness of power, and so out of that melancholic Vision, stir
horror, or murmur against Divine Providence: nor yet (with the Modern) to
point out Gods revenging aspect upon every particular sin, to the despair, or
confusion of mortality; but rather to trace out the high ways of ambitious
Governors, and to show in the practice, that the more audacity, advantage, and
good success such Soveraignties have, the more they hasten to their own
desolation and ruin.

So that to this abstract end, finding all little instruments in discovery of
great bodies to be seldom without errors, I presumed, or it rather escaped
me, to make my Images beyond the ordinary stature of excess, wherein again
that women are predominant, is not for malice, or ill talent to their Sex; But
as Poets figured the virtues to be women, all Nations call them by Feminine
names, so have I described malice, craft, and such like vices in the persons of
Shrews, to show that many of them are of that nature, even as we are, I mean
strong in weakness; and consequently in these Orbs of Passion, the weaker
Sex, commonly the most predominant; yet as I have not made all women good with
Euripides, so have I not made them all evil with Sophocles, but mixed of such
sorts as we find both them, and our selves.

Again, for the Arguments of these Tragedies they be not naked, and casual,
like the Greek, and Latin, nor (I confess) contrived with the variety, and
unexpected encounters of the Italians, but nearer Levelled to those humors,
councels, and practices, wherein I thought fitter to hold the attention of the
Reader, than in the strangeness, or perplexedness of witty Fictions; In which
the affections, or imagination, may perchance find exercise, and entertainment,
but the memory and judgment no enriching at all; Besides, I conceived these
delicate Images to be over-abundantly furnished in all Languages already.

And my Noble Friend had that dexterity, even with the dashes of his pen to
make the Arcadian Antiques beautify the Margents of his works; yet the honor
which (I bear him record) he never affected, I leave unto him, with this
addition, that his end in them was not vanishing pleasure alone, but moral
Images, and Examples, (as directing threads) to guide every man through the
confused Labyrinth of his own desires, and life: So that how soever I liked
them not too well (even in that unperfected shape they were) to condescend that
such delicate (though inferior) Pictures of himself, should be suppressed; yet
I do wish that work may be the last in this kind, presuming no man that
follows can ever reach, much less go beyond that excellent intended pattern
of his.

For my own part, I found my creeping Genius more fixed upon the Images of
Life, than the Images of Wit, and therefore chose not to write to them on whose
foot the black Ox had not already trod, as the Proverb is, but to those only,
that are weather-beaten in the Sea of this World, such as having loft the sight
of their Gardens, and groves, study to sail on a right course among Rocks, and
quicksands; And if in this ordaining, and ordering matter, and form together
for the use of life, I have made those Tragedies, no Plays for the Stage, be
it known, it was no part of my purpose to write for them, against whom so many
good, and great spirits have already written.

But he that will behold these Acts upon their true Stage, let him look on that
Stage wherein himself is an Actor, even the state he lives in, and for every
part he may perchance find a Player, and for every Line (it may be) an instance
of life, beyond the Authors intention, or application, the vices of former Ages
being so like to these of this Age, as it will be easy to find out some
affinity, or resemblance between them, which whosoever reads with this
apprehension, will not perchance think the Scenes too large, at least the
matter not to be exceeded in account of words.

Lastly, for the Style; as it is rich, or poor, according to the estate, and
ability of the Writer, so the value of it shall be enhansed, or cried down,
according to the grace, and the capacity of the Reader, from which common
Fortune of Books, I look for no exemption.

But to conclude, as I began this work, to entertain, and instruct my self,
so if any other find entertainment, or profit by it, let him use it freely,
judge honorably of my friend, and moderately of me, which is all the return
that out of this barren Stock can be desired, or expected.

FINIS.

