THE LORD DIGBIES SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, To the Bill of Attainder, of
the Earl of STRAFFORD, the 21 of APRIL, 1641.

Printed in the year 1641.

THE LORD DIGBYES Speech in the House of Commons, to the Bill of Attainder of
the Earl of Strafford, the 21. April. 1641.
Master Speaker,
WE are now upon the poin^ of giving (as much as in us lies) the final
Sentence unto death or life, on a great Minister of State and Peer of this
Kingdom, Thomas Earl of Strafford; a name of hatred in the present age by his
Practizes, and fit to be made a terror to future ages by his punishment.

I have had the honor to be employed by the House in this great business, from
the first houre^ that it was taken into consideration: it was a matter of great
trust, (and I will say with confidence) that I have served the House in it with
industry, according to my ability, but with most exact faithfulness and
secrecy.

And as I have hitherto discharged my duty to this House and to my Country, in
the progress of this great Cause; so I trust I shall do now in the last
period of it, to God and to a good conscience.

I do wish the peace of that unto my self, and the blessings of Almighty God
to me and my posterity, according as my judgment on the life of this man,
shall be consonant with my heart, and the best of my understanding in all
integrity.

I know well Master Speaker, that by some things I have said of late, whilst
this Bill was in agitation, I have raised some prejudices upon me in the cause.

Yea some (I thank them for the plain dealing) have been so free as to tell
me, that I suffered much by the backwardness I have shown in this Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, against whom I had been formerly so
keen, so active.

Master Speaker, I beg of you and the rest but a suspension of judgment
concerning me, till I have opened my heart unto you freely and clearly in this
business.

Truly Sir, I am still the same in my opinions and affections, as unto the
Earl of Strafford, I confidently believe him the most dangerous Minister, the
(...) insupportable to free subjects that can be characterd.

I believe his practices in themselves as high, as tyrannical, as any subject
ever ventured on, and the malignity of them hugely aggravated by those rare
abilities of his, whereof God has given him the use, but the Devil the
application. In a word, I believe him still that grand Apostate to the
Commonwealth, who must not expect to be pardoned it in this world, till he be
dispatched to the other. And yet let me tell you Master Speaker, my hand must
not be to that dispatch. I protest as my conscience stands informed, I had
rather it were off.

Let me unfold unto you the Mystery, Master Speaker.

I will not dwell much upon justifying unto you my seeming variance at this
time from what I was formerly, by putting you in mind of the difference
between prosecutors and Judges.

How misbecomming that fervor would be in a Judge which perhaps was
commendable in a prosecutor. Judges we are now, and must put on another
personage.

It is honest and Noble, to be earnest in order to the discovery of Truth, but
when that has been brought as far as it can to light, our judgment thereupon
ought to be calm, and cautious.

In prosecution upon probable grounds, we are accountable only for our
industry or remissness, but in judgment, we are deeply responsable to God
Almighty, for its rectitude or obliquity. In cases of life, the Judge is Gods
Steward of the parties blood, and must give a strict account for every drop.

But as I told you Master Speaker, I will not insist long upon this ground of
difference in me now, from what I was formerly.

The truth on it is Sir, the same ground whereupon I (with the rest of the five
to whom you first committed the consideration of my Lord of Strafford) brought
down our opinion, that it was fit he should be accused of Treason, upon the
same ground I was engaged with earnestness in his prosecution, and had the
same ground remained in that force of belief with me, which till very lately
it did, I should not have been tender in his condemnation. But truly Sir, to
deal plainly with you, that ground of our accusation, that spur to our
prosecution, and that which should be the basis of my judgment, of the Earl
of Strafford, as unto Treason, is to my understanding quite vanished away.

This it was Master Speaker.

His advising the King to employ the Army of Ireland, to reduce England.

This I was assured would be proved, before I gave my consent to his
accusation. I was confirmed in the same belief, during the prosecution, and
fortified in it most of all since Sir Henry V^in^s preparatory examinations, by
the assurances which that worthy member Master Pymme gave me, that his
Testimony would be made convincing by some notes of what passed at the I^nto
concurrent with it, which I ever understanding to be of some other Counselor,
you see now prove but a Copy of the same Secretaries notes, discovered and
produced in the manner you have heard, and those, such disjoynted fragments of
the venomous part of discourses, no results, no conclusions of Councels, which
are the only things that Secretaries should register, there being no use at
all of the other, but to accuse and to bring men into danger.

But Sir, this is not that which overthrowes the evidence with me, concerning
the Army of Ireland; nor yet that all the rest of the (...) upon their oaths,
remember nothing of it.

But this (...) I shall tell you, is that which (...) me under favor, to an
utter overthrow of his evidence, as unto that of the Army of Ireland? Before,
whilst I was a prosecutor, and under tie of Secrecy; I might not discover any
weakness of the cause which now as a judge I must. Master Secretary was
examined thrice upon oath, at the preparatory committee.

The first time he was questioned to all the Interrogat^^^, and to that part of
the seventh which condemns the Army of Ireland, he said positively in these
words, I cannot charge him with that. But for the rest, he desires time to
recollect himself, which was granted him.

Some days after, he was examined a second time, and then deposes these words
concerning the Kings being absolved from rules of government, and so forth very
clearly. But Being priest to that part, concerning the Irish Army, again can
say nothing to that.

Here we thought we had done with him, till diverse weeks after, my Lord of
Northumberland and all others of the Iunto, denying to have heard any thing
concerning those words of reducing England by the Irish Army, it was thought
fit to examine the Secretary once more, and then he deposes these words, to
have been said by the Earl of Strafford to his Majesty: you have an Army in
Ireland, which you may employ here to reduce, (or some word to that sense)
this Kingdom.

Master Speaker, these are the circumstances which I confess with my
Conscience, thrust quite out of doors that grand Article of our charge,
concerning his desperate advice to the King, of employing the Irish Army here.

Let not this I beseech you, be driven to an aspersion upon Master Secretary,
as if he should have sworn otherwise then he knew or believed, he is too
worthy to do that; only let thus much be inferred from it, that he who twice
upon oath with time of recollection, could not remember any thing of such a
business, might well a third time misremember somewhat: and in this business
the difference of one Letter, here for there, or that for this, quite alters
the case, the latter also being the more probable, since it is confessed of all
hands, that the debate then was concerning a war with Scotland, and you may
remember that at the Bar he once said to employ there. And thus Master Speaker,
I have faithfully given you an account what it is that has blunted the edge of
the Harchet or Bill with me toward my Lord of Strafford.

This was that whereupon I accused him with a free heart, prosecuted him with
earnestness, and had it to my understanding bin proved, should have condemned
him with innocence. Whereas now I cannot satisfy my conscience to do it.

I profess I can have no notion of any bodies intent to subvert the Laws
treasonably, but by force; and this design of force not appearing, all his
other wicked practices cannot amount so high with me.

I can find a more easy and more natural spring, from whence to derive all
his other Crimes, then from an intent to bring in Tyranny, and to make his own
posterity, as well as us, Slaves; as from revenge, from Pride, from Avarice,
from passion, and insolence of nature.

But had this of the Irish Army been proved, it would have diffused a
complexion of Treason over all, it would have been a With indeed, to bind all
those other scattered and lesser branches, as it were into a faggot of Treason.

I do not say but the rest may represent him a man as worthy to dye, and
perhaps worthier then many a Traitor. I do not say but they may justly direct
us to Enact that the like shall be Treason for the future.

But God keep me from giving judgment of death on any Man, and of ruin to
his innocent Posterity, upon a Law made, a Posteriori.

Let the mark be set on the door where the Plague is, and then let him that
will enter dye.

I know Master Speaker, there is in Parliament a double power of life and death
by Bill, a Judicial power; and a Legislative: the measure of the one, is
what is Legally just; of the other, what is prudentially and politickly fit for
the good and preservation of the whole. But those two, under favor, are not to
be confounded in Judgment. We must not piece up want of Legality with matter
of convenience, nor the defailance of prudentiall fitness, with a pretense of
legal Justice.

To condemn my Lord of Strafford judicially as for Treason, my conscience is
not assured that the matter will bear it.

And to do it by the Legislative power, my reason consultively cannot agree to
that, since I am persuaded, neither the Lords nor the King will pass the Bill,
and consequently that our passing it, will be a cause of great divisions and
combustions in the State.

And therefore my humble advise is, that laying aside this Bill of Attainder,
we may think of another, saving only life, such as may secure the State from
my Lord of Strafford, without endangering it, as much by division concerning
his punishment, as he has endangerd it by his practices.

If this may not be hearkened unto, let me conclude in saying that unto you all,
which I have thoroughly inculcated to mine own conscience upon this occasion.
Let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and sadly consider what we are
going to do with a breath, either justice or murder; justice on the one side,
or murder heightened and aggravated to its supremest extent. For as the
Casuists say, that he who lies with his sister commits incest, but he that
marries his sister sins higher, by applying Gods Ordinance to his crime: So
doubtless he that commits murder with the sword of Justice, heightens that
crime to the utmost.

The danger being so great, and the case so doubtful, that I see the best
Lawyers in diametrall opposition concerning it; Let every man wipe his heart as
he does his eyes, when he would judge of a nice and subtle object. The eye if
it be pretincted with any color, is vitiated in its discerning. Let us take
heed of a blood-shotten eye of Judgment.

Let every man purge his heart clear of all passions, (I know this great and
wise body politic can have none, but I speak to individuals from the
weakness which I find in my self.) Away with all personal animosities, away
with all flatteries to the people, in being the sharper against him, because he
is odious to them; away with all fears, least by the sparing his blood they
may be incenst; away with all such considerations, as that it is not fit for a
Parliament, that one accused by it of Treason should escape with life.

Let not former vehemence of any against him, nor fear from thence, that he
cannot be safe while that man lives, be an ingredient in the sentence of any
one of us.

Of all these corruptives of judgment, Master Speaker, I do before God
discharge my self to the uttermost of my power,

And do with a clear Conscience wash my hands of this man's blood, by this
solemn protestation, that my Vote goes not to the taking of the Earl of
Straffords life.

FINIS.

