THE Power of God, Overpowering the CREATURE.

Which Power came upon me William Britten, the 3d. day of the 11th. Month,
(called February) 1659. not suffering me to depart my Chamber, until I had
promised the Lord to Answer a Book, which I had then never seen, and but once
heard of; set forth by William Prynne in defense of Tyths, etc. and to present
the Answer in Print unto the Governing Power of England for the time being.

But making delays, and Fran. Spira-like, consulting with flesh and blood, the
Lord terrified me in Conscience for neglect, yet in mercy did set me (like
Jonah) the second time upon the same work.

2 Chronicles. 34.14. Hilkiah the Priest found a Book of the Law of the Lord. And
verse. 15. Hilkiah delivered the Book to Shaphan. And verse. 18. Shaphan read it
before the King. And verse. 30. He read in their ears all the words of the Book
of the Covenant. And verse. 32. The King caused all that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And verse. 33. Josiah took away all the
Abominations out of all the Countries. And 2 Kings 23.25. Like unto him was
there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, etc.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1660,

THE Power of God Overpowering the CREATURE.
According to my engagement unto the Lord, who has led me forth in this Work,
I humbly present this Answer unto the Governing Power of England, which I
acknowledge to be King Charles II. with His Council and Parliament.
William Britten.
TO allow Gospel Ministers a Maintenance, the Scriptures are clear for it, but
in what manner, and from whom the same shall arise, the Gospel Law can best
decide the Controversy.

I shall not answer each Page of his Book, seeing there are so many Itterations
and repetitions of things, especially in those large discriptions of the Jewish
Tyths, and Levittical Priesthood, wherein he strives to model a Maintenance
from thence to Gospel Ministers; but is to us as if he had pleaded for
Circumcision to our Gentile Churches.

His Book has two Parts, I begin with the former, and so pass through both;
first viewing those Scriptures he makes use of, to see if any such thing as
Tyths or a settled Maintenance for Ministers of the Gospel be found in holy
Writ, to be either practiced or named amongst Disciples, or Believers in the
primitive times, when the Scriptures were written, and people became
Christians, which ought to be our guide and rule to follow.

At his 4th. page he begins with Scripture, as Matt: 10.5. etc. Luke 10.1. etc.
how our Savior authorized and sent forth the 12. and the 70. Disciples to
preach the Gospel, etc. by which Commission, they were not to carry any
provision for their journey, for the workman is worthy of his meat. Verse. 10.


Answ. Nor were they to receive Tyths or other settled Maintenance; nor bargain
aforehand what reward should be for their pains; neither had they any humane
power to enforce supplies whilst they were upon that work; nor to punish any in
body or estate that refused to give unto them where they came to preach; God
never taught his Messengers to persecute any for unkindness in these spiritual
works, Mat. 10.14 Acts 13.51.
but if they will not receive them, the dust of their feet must be a testimony
against such: yet these Teachers must go forth, and trust to their Master for
their reward, from whose Spirit they had freely received, Mat. 10.8.
and were to give freely, (not sell it) and they which did partake of their
spiritual work in hearing, were likewise led by the same spirit to impart unto
the Teachers for corporal supplies.

In page 5. he uses John 4.36. etc. how he that reapeth receives wages, -- so
both rejoice together, etc,

Answ. This joy is not only of this life, but also that everlasting joy wherein
God will reward his faithful ones: but here note three things; first, the
Reaper must be a Workman of the Masters appointment. Secondly, the same Master
must pay him, and not a stranger. Thirdly, his wages must be according to his
Lords contract; all which the Parable makes plain, and how they received every
man a Penny from their Master, etc. So Gospel Ministers must be called of God
to that Work, Mat. 20.1, etc.
going forth freely with the Gift in Teaching, and his promise is, that good
measure shall be returned them again, Luke 6.38. But those that dare not go
forth to preach until their bargain is made, or assurance aforehand by a
humane Law, to compel a Reward for their Labor, show plainly they dare not
rely upon God for a Maintenance, but will rather trust men to secure the same:
for although they profess Gods Call to that Ministry at entering into it, Tit.
^.16.
yet in works of obedience to believe him, therein they deny him, as not
trusting to his promises to provide for them, Heb. 13.5.

In his 7th. page he produces 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. how the Elders that Rule well,
should be counted worthy of double honor, etc. The Ox shall not be muzzled,
and the Labourer is worthy of his reward.

Answ. The double honor is taken to be respect and Maintenance, which being
given freely, as led forth of God from his Law in the heart, shows Obedience
answerable in a true Professor: which double honor must not be raked and torn
from the hearers by a human power, but drawn forth by the love of God; that as
the Ox is not to be muzled when he works for his Master in harvest; neither is
he to have power over his Master by pulling and tearing what he list from him,
but to be a partaker, as refreshed with some of the harvest benefit: all which
sets forth the duty of true Converts, who ought freely to respect and maintain
such pure Gospel Ministers as have need and are religiously free to receive
those necess^ries: that as they receive benefit by Scripture laborers, so it
is their duty, and the love of God will constrain them (if they are true
Christians) to show kindness unto his Messengers; but all these Scriptures ma^e
nothing toward Tyths, or a settled maintenance, the gift is left free unto the
cheerful g^vers in the several generations according to the tenor of the
Scriptures

2 Cor. 9.7.
Mat. 9.38. He uses also, wherein our Savior bids pray the Lord of the
Harvest, that he will send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

Answ. This sets forth Gods power, who only can fit and call men to the
Ministerial office, which may show us how all the humane learning that men can
obtain, cannot make a Gospel Minister; it is the proper work of God, and to him
we must pray to furnish us in a pure Ministry; and it may inform us of the
great mistakes about this weighty work, wherein many have undertaken to make
Ministers, Divines, Bachellors, and Doctors of Divinity (or holiness) etc.
which is impossible for carnal men to do; It is only God that makes men holy,
and divine, as to partake of the divine nature: 2 Pet. 2.4.
From whence note; First, Gospel Ministers are the Lords laborers. Secondly,
They must be called and set to work by him. Thirdly, I^ we must pray unto him
for sending them, it shows humane authority cannot do it. Fourthly, Whom he
calls into his Vineyard, he will also reward, not by the might of men, or power
of the sword, but by the Spirit of God, Zech. 4.6.
is the way that the Lord will work.

He uses, Romans 13.7, 8. Wherein the Apostle writes of, Tribute, Custom,
Fear, Honor, and Love.

Answ. Tribute and Custom was due to Caesar, and the same Christ paid, as did
the Jews, Mat. 17.25.
it being a temporal thing, and for the like work, as to maintain Caesar's Army,
which could not be offensive to the conscience; but whereas Tyths are paid,
they are to a wrong use and end, for maintaining a Ministry contrary to the
pure Gospel practice, which must needs be heavy upon poor tender consciences;
yea such Tyth gains and settled maintenance which is to be forced from men,
draws many a carnal wretch to be of that function where they can compel people
to pay; so that there is a great difference betwixt paying Tribute and Custom
to maintain an Army, for defense of a Nation, and the paying an imitating
Ministry by force of flesh, as if it were a true Ministry sent ^orth of God,
and to set up their post by the Lords post, Ezekiel. 43.8.
etc. but concerning Fear, Honor, and Love, it is wished those graces were
better known, and more practiced amongst us.

He uses, 1 Cor. 9.4. etc. Wherein the Apostle pleads a power that God gives
in use of the creatures, as a fre^dome to partake of carnal things where they
did impart spirituals, and so to eat of the milk etc.

Answ. It is true, that the right Gospel Ministers have that freedom from God
so to do; but then observe these particulars. First, This power must be from
the Lord, and not by a humane power, seeing neither Christ nor any of his
Apostles did assume such a thing. Secondly, Those that receive by this power of
God, must take of the true flock, Revel. 22.15. Revel. 21.27. 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal.
5.19.
and not of Swearers, Drunkards, Liars, Whoremongers, etc. which shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, but be shut out. Thirdly, Note how far the Apostle
was from a humane law, to compel, that he did not use his power given him of
God to receive the peoples free gift, lest the Gospel work should be hindered, 1
Cor. 9. 12, 15. Therefore those that use any other power than from the Lord, in
forcing a maintenance for Ministers, Ier. 2.13.
they forsake the fountain, and betake themselves to the broken Cistern.

Gospel Ministers are Gods laborers, whom he send into his Vineyard or
Kingdom of grace to wor^ there, but if these prove like the World, to strive
for Preferment, Pride, Riches, and Honor there, the^ will be no more able to
get truly into his Kingdom than is a Camel to go through the eye of a needle;
Mat. 19.24.
for thereby they fall into the great snare, which the servan^ of God should
flee from, 1 Timothy 6.9. Therefore warn all those from the Lord that desire the
ministerial office to wait in the pure way, but go not forrh unti^ you are
truly called of God, and look not on any carn^ ends to draw you, for whatsoever
is of the World (...) not of God, 1 Timothy 6.8.
1 John 2.15, 16. And learn of that Gospel-planter to be content with food and
raiment, wh^ had learning and piety, yet poverty was joined ther^ with; and if
Gospel practice be our rule, to have no ^ther maintenance but the peoples free
gift, then tho^^ that seek to be Gospel Ministers would do it out of pure love,
and not self ends, yea then women would not desire to marry unto them for
carnal greatnes^ but for their goodness.

He uses, Romans 15.26, 27. how it pleased them o^ Macedonia, and Achaia, to
make a certain contrib^tion for the poor Saints -- that as the Gentiles ha^
been made partakers of their Spiritual things, the duty is also to minister
unto them in Carnal things.

Answ. First, this relief for the Saints, was a v^luntary act, for it pleased
them so to do; It being o^ of a pure Gospel love, and not by outward compul^^on.

Secondly, It was no Tyths or settled maintenan^^ but a certain contribution in
time of need for the po^ Saints.

Thirdly, Such free gifts from the richer to the poorer, are debts that God
requires, as verse. 27. Whose debtors they are, yet the Lord never gave man a
humane power to compel this debt.

Fourthly, As Gospel giving and receiving in spirituals, and temporals are
free, without compulsion; so those acting therein, do declare themselves of the
same body, wherein one Member supplyeth the want of another. 1 Cor. 12.26.


Lastly, This gift, debt, or contribution, was from the true flock, and not of
those that lived in their filth; which shows of whom Gospel Ministers may take
relief.

It is worthy of observation, to note the difference betwixt the Law Ministers
in Temple Worship, and the Gospel Ministers in Spiritual Worship, and how near
our National Ministry has come to that under the Law.

Theirs of the Law. Our National. First, God made a Law to give the Levites
Tyths. Men made Laws to give the National Tyths. 2. They had offerings -- So
had the National. 3. God gave them the Law, which they read to the people, for
they owned the prophesies, but little before the captivity. Men made a set form
of prayer, which they read; and after that a directory, whereas Ministers
should do the works of God as the Spirit leads them, John 16.13. Men built high
places in several parishes, which were Mass-houses a long time, and called them
Churches, and consecrated them, pretending they were holy. 4. God owned their
Temple, built for his worship at Jerusalem, as a holy place which was
consecrated. 5. They used Temple worship, with music, etc. They had Organs and
other instruments. 6. They had high Priests. They had Arch Bishops. 7. They had
Priests Garments appointed of God. They had Surplices, Hoods, Tippets, etc.
appointed of men. 8. God appointed the Tribe of Levi for that office. Men
designed University Scholars, to be the only Ministers. They looked so much on
the outward, that God hated it, Isa. 1.14. So did too many of these look on the
fleece, gains, and outward worship, but little purity.

Whereas, if we look on the Gospel Ministry which should be our guide, we shall
find a poor despised Christ, who came in poverty and so lived; that i^ his
Ministerial office laid by his power, in compelling corporal necessities, and
took peoples love i^ giving him food, 2 Cor. 8.9
and ministering to him of their substance, Luke 8 3 Phil. 2.7. Luke 11.37. John
2.2. Luke 14. 1. Luke 19.5. Luke 19.31. Mat. 8.^0.
Nor did he claim either horse to ride upon, or house to dwell in as his own:
all which pattern from him shows us, (if we are Gospe^ Ministers) how to wave
the pomp and glory of the World, which practice the Apostles followed, wh^
approved themselves the Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6 4, 10. Yea Gods witnesses in
the several ages were sufferers, and went about as poor despised creatures yet
of them the World was not worthy, Heb. 11.36, 37 38.

Mat. 6.33.
It is the duty of a true Minister, to seek first the Kingdom of God, and trust
unto his master for supplies, who has promised to add what is needful, no^
doing as the heathen Gentiles, ver. 24.32.
taking care what t^ eat, drink; etc. looking for humane security to infor^ his
Salery, before he sets upon the work; and if o^ living be small to study how a
greater may be obtain for all these things are opposite to the Apostles
practice, who sought not the peoples wealth, 2 Cor. 12.14.
but their eternal welfare.

Object. If some say, Ministers having nothing for teaching, but what is given
them according to the Gospel manner, that may make people worse, which care not
for teaching, so they can save their Tyths.

Answ. Although Gospel allows not Ministers to take maintenance of such filthy
persons, yet Gods Law authorizeth Magistrates to punish such offenders for
their wickedness, who sin presumtuously, yea to make them as Israel did the
uncircumcised to be drawers of water, and hewers of wood, Josh. 9.21.
be they rich or poor, not suffering such to bear offices in the Kingdom: and
if godly persons only were put in office and authori^y, and such Swearers,
Liars, Drunkards, Whore-mongers, and other beast-like people kept off and
punished, then David's practice would be followed, and a blessing follow upon
the Na^ion; yea, Psalm. 101.1. etc.
then the one half of those nurseries and seed-plots of sin, (called Alehouses)
could not continue.

He uses, Mal. 3.8, 9. Wherein the Lord complains of the people robbing him in
tyths and offerings, upon which they were cursed; and in Levit. 27.30. Tyths
are called the Lords; and Hag. ^.9 the curse is said to be upon the increase
for neglect thereof; also in Hag. 2.16. etc.

Answer As thus Tyths were the Lords, and those that withheld them was said to
rob God, so were free gifts from Saints, given to Gospel Ministers and others
in want, due unto Jesus Christ, and owned by him, as he evidently declares, by
the with holding or giving unto such, as to himself, saying, I was hungry, Mat.
23.35. etc.
Thirsty, Naked; a Stranger, in Prison, etc. and thus you did unto me, by which
you may see. First, how Tyths were the Law-ministers pay, and free gifts the
Gospel Ministers pay. Secondly, How Tyths under the Law, and free gifts under
the Gospel are the Lords own. Thirdly, How those that withheld Tyths from the
Priests, or free gifts from the Gospel Ministers, the Lord takes it as done to
himself. Fourthly, How those Tyths, and Gospel free gifts were never set forth
by humane authority, but God gave them to his Messengers by his own power,
under the several dispensations for their maintenance. Fifthly, How God never
gave power unto man, that one creature should Curse, Fine, Imprison, or
persecute another for refusing, detaining, or neglecting the payment of Tyths
to the Levites, or free gifts to Gospel Ministers, but he reserved that to
himself, as the places before cited do evidently declare. So that in all the
Scriptures I find not any power God gave to man in settling a maintenance for
Priests, Levites, or Gospel Ministers, Ezekiel. 44.28.
but the Lord did that work, who being the Levites inheritance, they had no
possession in the Land, nor humane Law to compel what God gave them; nor did
Christ give unto his Apostles any humane authority to enforce a maintenance
from their auditors, but they must go forth empty, without money, Scrip, etc.
nor can we read of any in Scripture that assumed a humane power to compel such
things, except Elies Sons of Belial. 1 Samuel 2.12.16.


He affirms in his Plea, that Patryarchs gave Tyths before the Law; and Page
53. tells us, that then they vowed Tyths to God.

Answ. The Scriptures speak no such thing. For although Abel, Noah, Isaac, and
Jacob, offered to God, yet Abraham only paid Tyths, Genesis 14.18. Heb. 7.1. etc.
in a voluntary way once unto Melchisedeck, without any command to do it, or to
continue it yearly, which free will Act he did after the victory he obtained;
as Noah offered an offering after deliverance from the general flood, Genesis
8.20. and so Noah and Abraham did hereby show their thankful obedience to the
Lord who gave them such deliverances; as did those Converts when they had
victory over sin, and became Disciples of Christ, in token of thankfulness,
they made their goods common to poor Disciples, Acts 2.44. Acts 4.34. And as
Zacheus when salvation was come to his house (or heart) to manifest his joy, he
gave to the poor, and made restitution where he had been unjust; Luke 19.8.
all which actions, of Abraham's giving Tyths, Zacheus restitution, and the
Disciples community, were a like free, alike voluntary, none of them forbidden
to be continued, nor none of them commanded to be imitated, yet all were holy
actions; so that these things make nothing for a Gospel plea to settle Tyths,
or a yearly maintenance for Gospel Ministers, neither was these works entailed
upon their posterity (as Englands Tyths are said to be) but left to the
freedom of after generations: also note, how Abraham gave the tenth of the
spoils taken by his Soldiery from the enemy, so it was not of his own labor,
and of his Servants and Cattle, whereby they had toiled in heats and colds all
the year, as Englands Tyth-takers do force it from many; so that this free work
in Abraham is neither warrant nor example, for us to make a Law in our Nation,
to compel men by force and violence, in paying the tenth of all their labor
and increase unto a Ministry.

Yet these things, and about the Jewish Tyths, do much enlarge his book, and of
the Jewish warriers which gave of the spoils in time of Temple worship; he
seeking to model something from thence for us to imitate, Heb. 9.9.10.
not observing these gifts and sacrifices how they held until the time of
reformation: but if he had well weighed the Apostles discourse, from Heb. 7.1.
to Heb. 8.13. he might have seen the scope thereof, to declare the excellency
and clearness of Christ's Kingdom,, Heb. 8.10, 11. in the New Covenant wo^ when
all shall be taught of God, John 6.45.
and he will write (...) Laws in their hearts, so that his teacher, the anoint
(...) abides within, and there is no need of men to teac^ 1 John 2.27. When by
the Spirit of God, the who^ shall be full of light, Luke 11.36. as the sure wo^
of prophecy, from that Spirit will make a glorio^ work, 2 Pet. 1.19.
to shine as a light in a dark place; but thi^ mystery, which flesh is more
ready to cavil at; a^ why? Because the natural man sees not spirituall^ an^ so
these things are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. ^ 14.

But thus much I may open, that in the New Cov^nant work, all hireling Teachers
shall be laid asid^ so that men will not assume the Ministerial office u^til
they have a sure call of God to go forth, nor sh^^ pure hearers give heed unto
any, but those thus calle^ whereby that one God, by his own Spirit shall tea^
his Ministers what to speak, and their auditors ho^ to use what is made known,
and so Teachers a^ Hearers, all in the true Church shall be taught (...) God,
as they are all ^aught by his Spirit, and no^ speaks or hears, but by the
leadings forth of the sa^ God; Mat. 10.20.
and thus declares our Savior, it is not (...) that speak but the Spirit of
your Father that speake^ in you; so that in the pure Gospel work of his
Min^sters, God owns their speakings to be his, and the teachings to be his,
Luke 10.16. Mat 25.35. etc.
as he did of his Prophets, and (...) takes good or evil done to them as to
himself: therefo^ all those who long for this glorious New Covena^ work, leave
off to plead for a hireling Ministry (...) serve for lucres sake, and live in
filth (as many do and let us go on to the perfection of things.

He uses, Mat. 23.23. Luke 11.42. about t^ Jews Tything Mint, Rue, etc. which
by them ou^ to be done.

Answ. God never commanded any people upon ^he earth, to pay Tyths but the
Jews, so this only ^oncern'd them, and is nothing to us Gentile Church^s, from
whom the Lord never required such a thing ^s Tyths, or any settled Maintenance
for his Mini^ters whatsoever, nor did the Apostles ever practice ^uch a thing,
nor do the Scriptures any where seem to ^ountenance the same; therefore as
every building ^tands on its own Basis, so our Gospel Churches must be built
upon the Gospel Foundation, Jesus Christ ^eing the cheef corner stone; but
those that impose or ^orce any Tyths, Ephesians. 2.20.
or settled maintenance for the Mini^try by a National law, they are besides
this true Foundation work, being upon that combustible mat^er, of Wood, Hay,
Stubble, etc. which must be ^ryed and burnt up by the fire of Gods Spirit. 1
Cor. 3.10.12.


He uses, Gal. 6.6. How he that is taught in the word should communicate unto
him that teaches in all good things,

Answ. According to the pure Gospel practice, his should be our way to maintain
faithful Ministers, ^y communicating, imparting, or giving freely unto them
without any outward inforcement whatsoever, ^f Fines, Warrants, Persecution,
etc. That as God ^reely sends forth his Teachers, so the auditors to re^eive
the same spiritual nourishment freely, without honey or the like price, of
Indenting, Securing, Rev 21.6. Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. Mat. 10.8.
Bar^aining, etc. aforehand, what to have for teaching: ^o likewise were the
converts to retaliate freely in cor^oral supplies unto such Teachers by way of
commu^ication; that is, as the Disciples in teaching, made ^he spiritual gift
common, or free to all that desired it: ^o those that were taught, should make
their corporal ^ourishments common or free unto such Ministers, (...) necessity
required, for the word is (...), com^unices, which holds forth that Communion,
union, together in the body of Christ, society and fellowship, as every member
helping, communicating, and taking care one of another.

He uses, Luke 19.8. about Zacheus restitution, and giving ^o the poor, etc.

Answ. This nothing concerns a settling of a Maintenance, etc. But here
professors may behold a notable sign of a true convert: and if William Pryn had
took the like pains to draw Englands several sects unto Zacheus practice, he
had done a good work; which if taking effect, there are many professors would
not be quiet in their consciences, to sit still upon their dunghills of ill
gotten goods, until restitution was made in what they had wronged others.

He uses Romans 13.1, etc. how every soul must be subject to the higher Powers,
etc. And so would infer from thence, that as the powers of a Nation make a law
for Tithes, etc. So such a Power should be obeyed therein

Answ. This Inference is no Gospel, but a wrong consequence drawn forth; for
although the powers of a Nation, can and ought to make laws agreeable to the
law of God, yet they have no power from the Lord to restrain or bind the tender
consciences in a spiritual work, as forcing them to transgress therein, or else
to suffer persecution.

Nebuchadnezzars power made laws, which I doubt not but in temporal rights the
Jews obeyed; but when his decree was to worship the Image, Dan. 3.1, etc
that being repugnant to God Law, their was no damnation unto Shedrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, who could not in conscience yield unto it, that being no
Ordinance of God. It is good therefore that those which make laws and execute
them, be first grounded in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15.
which are able to make men wise unto Salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus:
Being well accquainte^ with Gods Laws, to know which are in force and what is
repealed; seeing all Christian laws should be measured by the rule of God Laws:
and if no Scripture speaks the same thing you have in hand; yet see which
comes nearest to it, that so like Moses the servant of God, knowing his Laws
well, you may be the better able to give forth Laws unto the people.

He uses 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to ^he King as supreme, etc.

Answ. This Scripture comes near unto the former, at which time of Paul and
Peter's preaching, the ^upream Powers did not make Ordinances against Christian
professors; for the sev^ral Nations in that ^art of the world under Caesar's
government, had their ^iberty in worship, and so had the Christians until ^he
times of persecution: yea those then in government were greater friends unto
them, then was the professing Jews; Mat. 27.24. Act. 12.3. Acts 23.24. Act.
14.2.
for even Pilate condemned Christ ^t the Jews: request: and Herod's cruelty was
to please ^he Jews: also Paul was defended from the Jews rage ^y that present
Power: yea the Jews stirred up the Gentiles against the disciples, and the Jews
in Baby^on, Media, Persia, etc. Had their liberty in religion, ^eing to pray
for that peace of the City where they was ^n captivity, Jer. 29 7.

Such freedom had the Gospel planters, that Paul's ^reached the Gospel from
Jerusalem to Illyricum: Romans 15.19.
so ^at it fully appears, how these Ordinances to be submit^^^ unto, and those
higher powers unto whom subjecti^n, should be showed, was then required in
civil rights and temporal things, not any way binding the consci^nce, nor
hindering their Christian worship; which ^otwithstanding the Jews cruelty, yet
such a liberty ^^ld until bloody Nero began to persecute and but^er the
Saints; for God never gave his creatures power to force and drag one another to
their Forms and to fine, imprison, and punish each other about ca^ses of
Conscience, and matters of Religion; tho^^ things are betwixt God and the Soul,
as outward thing are betwixt man and man. And although Chri^ teache^h us to
bless them that curse us, and pray for the that persecute us: Mat. 5.44.
yet I find not any Command, to pr^ for such a Power that persecutes the
Conscience, (...) continue ruling over us; but that prayers, supplicat^ons,
thansgivings, etc. be made for Kings, and for (...) that are i^ authority, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
thar we may lead a quiet a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: which
(...) that the King may so rule, and those in Authority execute the Laws,
whereby we may pray for him (...) them, showing our subjection, and enjoying
our Ch^^stian freedom, as Christ has made us free, Ioh* ^ 36. 1 Cor. 7.13
That as we are bought with a price, so we (...) not be the servants of men
unto their Forms; for that compels or enforces me unto his Form u^ pretense
of a Religious work, denies me of my C^stian liberty, which Christ has
purchased for me^

Concerning a humane inforcement of Tyths, though no Scriptures allow it; yet
William Pr^ pretends to gather something from Hezekiahs pra^ in commanding the
People to give the portion o^ Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.

Answ. He commanded no more than wha^ Lord before had given them; so Hezekiah
man Law to settle a Maintenance, neither did he us^ compulsion by prisons, 2 Chronicles. 30.10.
swords, punishment or the^ on refusers, although many mocked at his M^gers
sent forth by him; so this of Hezekiah is no^ to us.

He brings in two Heathen Kings to prove the forcement of Tyths, which were
Darius, and A^erxes, Ezra 6.11
who made and gave decrees to Ezra, (...) building the Temple, etc.

Answ. God calls Assyria the rod of his wrath, Ezra 7.11
Isa. ^0.5. and Nebuchadnezzar his servant, Ier. 27.6, 7. and Cyrus his
Shepherd, Isa. 44.28. as they executed ^e Lords pleasure, to serve in what he
made them in^ruments: and so when Gods time was come to turn ^e Captivity, he
made use of these two Heathen ^^ings, that Commissioned Ezra: But this concerns
^t the inforcement of Tyths, etc. only it shows thus ^uch. First, What base,
mean things, God some^es makes use of to fulfill his pleasure. Secondly, 1 Cor.
1.27, 28.
that when the Lords time is to Captivate, or to ^ing forth, none shall
withstand it.

He uses Acts 5.1, etc. Of Ananias and Saphy^, in keeping a part back, when
they had given it to ^oly use.

Answ. Theirs was a voluntary act, as others were make their goods common and
free to other Dis^les in want: now before these two had so promised, ^ir goods
were their own, but being so given by ^^mselves to that use of Community, Verse.
4.
they were the ^^rds, and for the refreshment of his Saints in want: ^refore
they not performing to give all, when they ^d engaged all, and God was witness
to it, but kept ^k a part, they thus failing in it, lied unto God, ^d so
perished in their sin of Covenant breaking. ^t Promise-breakers consider this,
how in such a ^uce or Covenant God is witness; for in these lat^ days many
show themselves according to the Apo^s prophecy: therefore be careful to
perform what ^ceeds out of your mouths. 2 Timothy 3.3.


He cites, Acts 5.38, 39. of Gamaliels counsel, ^ut the Apostles new Doctrine,
who desired that ^ight be let alone, etc.

Answ. Good were it, if Englands Lawyers, would ^n of that wise Gamaliel; to
let the new discoveries God alone, that he by his servants may show his good
pleasure; and not to choke and stiffle the li^ in its breaking forth, because
it is something m^ than as yet flesh understands; for often times when (...)
carnal man runs suddenly upon action, he striket^ against the appearances of
God.

He uses, Romans 2.1. etc. about judging of o^ etc. which Scripture if well
applied, might take us from self justifying, for it is commonly the high c^ceit
of our selves, and our own form, that causet^ to judge and condemn another; and
thus did (...) proud Pharisee, whereas self commendation is not proved, Luke
18.11. 2 Cor. 10.18.
but whom the Lord commands.

He uses, Romans 12.20. How we ought to (...) love unto our enemies: which
lesson I heartily d^ that both he and my self may truly strive for, the we may
heap those coals of love upon our ene^ heads, whereby they may love us again.

I shall now search further into the Scriptures, the Gospel practice of Saints,
in the virgin tim^ the Church, which should be our presidents to fol^
concerning relief of poor Disciples and Teachers m^tenance.

Acts 11.29.
Relief was sent according to each persons a^ and determina ion, which doubtless
was to suc^ both teachers and hearers, so that was not done ^^ny humane law.

Acts 16.15.34.
Lydia, out of her free love, caused the Discipl^ partake of her substance, and
so did the Iaylor.

Paul coveted no man's silver nor gold, but his h^ ministered to his necessities,
(he being a Tent-ma^ and shows from our Lord, that i^ is more blesse^ give,
Acts 18.3. Acts 20.33. etc.
than to receive; so Paul lived not on the swe^ other men's labors, but wrought
to maintain him and supply the wants of others, and brought alm^ his Nation;
Acts 24.17.
all which stands in opposition to a^ced maintenance.

We are taught to distribute unto the necessity of Saints, given to
hospitality, etc. and Romans 15.7, 9. Romans 12.13.
to receive one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God; and
that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, etc. which he further opens
concerning their practice, verse. 26, 27. not only by a profession of holiness,
but also in doing good to others in want: being so led forth to make a
distribution, as distributing, or contributing of temporal things, by works of
mercy answerable to what they professed; that as faithful Ministers spare not
to teach, so converts should be ready to impart and give, in all which the
Apostle neither commands, teaches, or practices any humane violence.

1 Cor. 4.11, 12. Although Gospel Teachers suffered hunger, thirst, and the
like, yet they were contented, laboring with their hands; not calling to
earthly Powers to settle them a maintenance, but trusting God for corporal
supplies, as he should move the peoples hearts to give, not using that power
from God, as 1 Cor. 9.4. etc. whereby he might have feasted and filled himself
with the creatures, but he kept under his body in subjection, why? 1 Cor. 9.27.
lest having preached to others, Paul should be a cast away

2 Cor. 2.17. Says the old translator, we are not as many which make
Merchandise of the word of God: etc. Wherein it is evident, how the true
Apostles abhorred Preaching for hire, yet having nothing in possession (as to
call their own) but the Churches did supply their wants, which Churches being
in poverty, 2 Cor. 6 10.
they acted willingly therein; first giving themselves to the Lord, and then
give unto the Disciples by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. so it was
not by the will of men, but there was a willing mind, verse. 12.14. working that
equality, wherein the abundance of the teachers spirituals supplied the hearers
wants, and the abundance of the hearers temporals supplied the teachers wants.

1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
At Corinth and Galatia they were taught to lay by in store of the collection of
Saints: how? not as men compelled them, but as God had prospered every one, and
2 Cor. 9.5. Paul exhorts to this bounty in giving, not threatening or
compelling, but in a lovely Gospel manner, as every man purposed in his heart
to do it cheerfully; in which he commends them for their liberal distribution,
but gives the thanks to God, who led them forth thereunto, 2 Cor. 9.7, 8, 13,
15. In 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. Paul desires to present the Church a chaste Virgin, yet
fears her adulterating, therefore to stir them up in zeal, he shows his love
unto them, and how he had robbed, (or neglected the service of) other Churches
(...), accipiens stipendium, taking Wages, Salary, or corporal supplies of
those other Chuches, 2 Cor. ^1.7, 8.
yet did Preach or do service at Corinth.

Phil. 2.25. Epaphroditus (the Phillippians Messenger) did Minister to Paul's
wants, not pay him Tyths or a settled Maintenance; and the Church did
communicate to his afflictions, sending once and again, as a gift not upon a
yearly bargain and contract, but in time of need freely.

Phil. 4.14. etc.
1 These. 2.9. The Apostles labored night and day, rather than they would be
chargable to any, which holds forth four things. first, they were far from
Hirelings to Preach the Gospel. Secondly, they would not eat and live upon
other men's labors. Thirdly, hereby it is evident, that it is not unfit, or
unlawful for a Gospel Minister to work and take honest pains with his body. 2
These. 3.8, 9.
Fourthly, they thereby left a President of those Virgin times unto us of their
practice, who were true Gospel Ministers, and although they had a power from
God to take of their hearers, yet they would not do it, because of leaving ^ood
ensample to follow. Heb. 12.1. etc.


And now seeing that Divine matter in Scriptures ^ords so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside ^ry weight, etc. is it not the Lords work to undo
heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, Isa. 58.6.
and ^t ye break every yoke? Let true Ministers look un^ Jesus our Lawmakers,
who endured the cross, and ^s not ashamed of his poverty in temporals, that so
^y may not faint in their minds, but trust to him (...) a Maintenance.

(...) come next to answer such humane matter which ^illiam Prynne lays down
for his plea, to uphold ^ths and a settled Maintenance for Ministers.

^n Page 20. He pleads, if Ministers be poor, they (...) be contemptible, and
less authoratative to the peo^.

Answ He learned not this from Christ, who me in poverty, and so lived poor in
temporals; for riches and outward pomp is eyed by the world, so christ came in
opposition thereunto, yet bids us ^n of him, Mat. 11.29. who left us these
examples part of his sufferings; which the Apostles like^e did partake of, 2
Cor. 8.9. 2 Cor. 6.10.
yet in all this poverty many were ^de rich, wherein Christ our Lawmakers, and
his ^^ostles, (the Gospel Planters) neither sought for ^es nor humane authori^y
to insult over the people; at Minister which seeks to be rich, and bear autho^
over the people, Iam. 2.5. 1 Timothy 6.8. etc.
has not any Gospel warrant for practice; neither does God choose rich men for
(...) outward pomp, but the poor, rich in faith: yea Apostle bids the man of
God flee those things as ^re, being content with food and raiment, 2 Timothy

^^ge 29. He reckons up large expenses of Books, ^ols Education, Term of
Years, etc. to fit men for ^inistry.

Answ. All these make a carnal man no more ^tual, than a new suit of aparrel
will make a dead to live again: indeed humane learning may do as a servant to
attend in the spiritual work, but ^ry unfit for mastership to command, yet many
strong opinions of it, as if none were fit for the ^stry but humane learned
men; whereas Paul's ed^on at Gamaliels feet made him no Apostle, b^ call of God,
Acts 22.3, 4. Neither was Moses (...) from his Court breeding in Pharaohs House
to Prophet, but from being a Shepherd.

Deuteronomy. 34.10. Exodus 3.1.10.
Page 41. And other places, he much inveig^ against Soldiers, Tradesmen, and
Lay-me^ Pre^ching, terming them ignorant Asses, understand not Rhetoric, and
Elloquence.

Answ. In this he parallels the Jewish Rulers, looked on the Apostles to be
(...), Acts 4.13.
Idiots, ^norant and unlearned men, calling the people confessed Christ,
accursed, John 4.48, 49. as^ the Pharisees and Rulers had believed on him*
proud, rich flesh, that was in power, had ingros^ wisdom of God unto it self,
and so held it unf^ Fishermen, and other Tradesmen, should first b^ in Christ,
and then declare to others what the learned or received from him.

In diverse Pages as 11.17.^8. etc. he pleads mutative justice, how Ministers
should have ^pence, as other Merchants and Tradesmen, wh^ter and sell one
commodity for another.

Answ. See what breaks forth unawares, (...) describes his Tradesmen, who
Merchandise letter, what is learned by hearsay, but lest (...) be judged
envious, I shall leave his expressions juditious Reader.

Page 44. He tells us, that Ministers are n^ called by immediate inspiration of
God, b^ study night and day for what they Preach.

Answ. See how he is opposite to Scriptures, Joel. 2.18. Acts. 2.17. Mica. 4.1.
Ier. 31.33.
which declare the abundant flowing forth of the Spirit in the latter days:
Gods mountain to be exalted, and he writing his Law in Peoples hearts, and all
taught of God, the Fountain opened for sin and uncleanness; and the false
Prophets to be ashamed of their visions, neither shall they wear a rough
Garment to deceive, Zech. 13.1, 4. yea more is promised by the flowings forth
of Gods Spirit, (which must be immediate from him,) to be done in these latter
days, than of any other times: and the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.9.
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his; whence note, if a
man have this Spirit it must be immediate from God, seeing man cannot give it;
but if he have it not, then such a one cannot be a Minister of Christ, for he
is none of his; therefore those Ministers not immedi^tely fitted, and sent
forth by this Spirit, are not of God, but of men's sending, and how can they do
the work of him that never set them?

When Christ called his Apostles, then they followed him, when he sent them
forth to Preach, they had authority to go and not before; and when Paul was
called of God, Gal. 1, 1, 16.
and had Jesus Christ revealed in him, he conferred not with flesh and blood,
but went to preach the Gospel unto the heathen; and we find no where that a
cessation should be of this Spirit, although the man of sin has a long time
darkened the truth, and few have come forth in the persecuting times by this
spiritual power, yet the Lords Arm is not shortened, nor his Spirit drawn back;
but he has manifested himself herein, by many called forth to warn and
forewarn, Rulers, Governors, and others, in these latter days, of which I am
to give notice from the Lord, That upon the fourth day of the third month
(called May) last, 1660. God showed me that those Messengers (called Quakers)
was sent forth by him, and were to be owned as such. Luke 9.1.


Christ Jesus Commissionated His Twelve Apostles to Preach, etc. when he was
with them in flesh, yet they did not continue Preaching upon that authority
after his death, but received a new commission after his Resurrection, when the
vessel o^ his body had been broken, and the Spirit which filled it was to be
shed abroad, Mat 12.18.
all power being given unto him, he then authorizeth them as a risen conqueror,
to go forth, yet they must not execute this commission until it was sealed by
the Spirit of promise, which he shed on them abundantly, Acts 10.38. Ephesians.
1.13. Tit. 3.6. but this they must wait for at Jerusalem, Acts 1.4. Acts 2.1.
until the Lords time, which they received at the day of Pentecost: where we
may observe, how they waited in silence for this Spirit, not running forth to
Preach upon a humane call, no not upon the first Commission, although Christ
gave it them, but they must tarry for a new, to Preach a Christ risen from the
dead, and risen by his spiritual power in their hearts, when THE POWER OF GOD,
had overpowered the Creature.

At Page 60. He strives further, to make their examples in time of Temple
Worship to be presidents unto us, as to have the Soldiers give the tenth of
the spoil unto the Priests now, as they did then, telling us, it was the
opinion of Divines, Councils, and Canonists, at his 70. Page.

Answ. The opinions of those, might be men that would share in the benefit
thereof, and such would seek their gain from their quarter, pleading for their
own ends, Isa. 56.11.
but for this we have no Gospel example; ye there may be a plot, for if the
Soldiers could be drawn to give the tenth part of the spoil unto the Priests,
then it was not for the poor farmer to contend, seeing the Priests Power might
equalize the Popes, in Peter's Keys, and Paul's Sword; for what could not be
effected for the Priests one way, the Sword might compel it another way; but
everlasting praises be to God who has kept England out of this condition.

Page. 88. He terrifies people with fears and dangers, if they refuse to pay
Tyths, alleging what befell Jeroboam in six evils, for spoiling the Priests and
Levites possession.

Answ. He in so doing opposed the Law of God, and so the Lord punished him
accordingly; but Christ gave us no law for such a Maintenance, therefore our
sin would be the greater if we should pay it, and three evils would be
committed: as paralelling Jeraboams practice, first he went the wrong way of
Worship, and so do those that own such to be Gospel Ministers, which are not
called of God thereunto, yet force a Maintenance for them, contrary to the
Gospel practice; Secondly, He made Priests of the worser people, and so do
those that take such Ministers which are but carnally minded, and Preach for
gains. Thirdly, He shut out the Lords Priests, and set up Priests of his own
choosing; and so do they that refuse Teachers called of God, because they are
Tradesmen; and set up of their own choice, because they have humane learning.
All which caused ruin on Jeroboam's Posterity; and this I am to give warning
unto England's Powers, that until Tyths and other oppressions be taken away,
and Gods Laws made our Laws, both within us, and without us, the Lord will keep
overturning, and bring desolation if there be no amendment.

Page 113. He again sets forth his Ministry as Hirelings, and that accordindly
they should have Hire.

John 10.13.
Answ. See his own confession, and a Hireling cares not for the Sheep, but for
the fleece and gains; yet we agree to maintain those Ministers which God sends,
and the Saints own, being called, and rewarded according to Gospel Law; but to
Force, Compel, Pull, Tear, Imprison, Persecute, etc. about Religion to make
Christians, by bringing them into such a set form, and then to do the like to
hurry them into that form, or else to punish those that refuse it, was never
taught us in Scriptures.

Page 138. He tells us there are three sorts of Priests, First, every
sanctified Christian for his family. Secondly, The public (or national Priest)
Thirdly, Christ Jesus.

Answ If a man be sanctified to act as a Priest in his Family, where did God
forbid him to do the like amongst other believers? 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Revel. 1.6.
Rev. 5.10.
the holy Ghost tells us how the sanctified ones are a royal Priesthood, which
should show forth Gods Praises: yea Kings and Priests to Reign with him on
Earth; so the Lord makes no such distinction, as W. P. does, but by the Holy
Ghost informs us, how all the Saints have liberty to prophecy (or Preach) one
by one.

The Verb (...) Anuntio or Praedico, signifies to Preach, Show, Tell, Publish,
or Declare; and thus the Priesthood of Saints should show forth Gods Praises,
1 Pet. 1.9.
etc. and this may be done two ways, First, by speaking; Secondly, by writing;
and this W. P. would not have every sanctified Christian to do publicly, but
the Parish Priest should do it: now according to his own law, if none but
parish Priests may show or declare these things in public, then why does he
declare them publicly by writing, see^ng he makes no such profession to be a
public Priest? Thou art in excusable O man -- for where^n thou judge
another, Romans 2.1.
thou condemnest thy ^elf.

Page 145. He pretends to answer William Thorps ^rgument; how in the times of
the Apostles, and ^or 200. or 300. Years after, they received no Tyths for
Preaching, but lived upon the peoples alms and voluntary contributions.

Answ. This W. P. cannot deny, but uses eva^asions and stories to get from it,
yet none of them ^ll can contradict it, but that William Thorp says ^rue in
it, which agrees with Scriptures, for the Apostles did so in what they took by
alms and volun^ary contribution, but no compulsion by any humane law whatsoever
was then used; so the new divice for Settling and forceing a Maintenanee for
Ministers was none of the foundation upon Christ the Corner Stone; but when
Antichrist crept in, he ^aught the Priests, Pride, Idleness, and Fullness,
Ephesians. 2.20.
which could not be maintained but by covetousness and oppression; so first
they obtained a settled Main^enance, and after that by degrees, gained a power
al^o to enforce it by violence; all which was against ^he Gospel practice.

His Book having two parts, I have done with the ^^rst, and now come to the
second, to view some ^umane matter therein also contained, yet some^hing he
has by way of appendix about Melchese^ech, and his proof is the opinions of
Petrus Cuneus and Griffith, Williams, which being but Opinion I shall wave it.

At Page 7. He is about Authors, Fathers, Hi^^ories, and other humane Writers,
old and new to ^^nfirm his plea, yea he proceeds to Pagan Romans, Heathens
Arabians, Carthaginians, etc. telling us, page 11. how those that vowed their
Tyth^ to Jupiter, Apollo, etc, in doing of it had a plentiful crop, and page
12. tells of Demostens the Pagan who reproved those that did rob (the feigned
goddess) Minerva, of her tenths, etc. and of tenths t^ Apollo and Diana, with
the Temple and Alta^ for her worship, running diverse pages on this account.

Answ. These things are far from a Gospel ple^ more fitter to be reprehended,
than recorded for Christians to take examples by, seeing the Scripture should
be our guide.

Page 22. He pretends a settled Maintenance for Ministry, from the Creation to
this present; and the it must be by Tyths.

Answ. He now contradicts himsef in what ^ granted; that in the Gospel planting
no Tyths we^ paid amongst Christians for the first 200. or 30^ Years, neither
do we read in Scriptures that ev^ Tyths were settled or commanded of God until
t^ Livitical Law; and then he gave that order unto t^ Jews only, and to no
other, which was many hundred years after the Creation, until which time (...)
read of none that paid Tyths, but Abraham once in voluntary act, by way of
congratulation, when Mechesedech brought bread and Wine, Gen 14.18
and blessed hi^ but herein we may behold, how he wrests the Scri^tu es,
according to the Apostles expression.

2 Pet. 3 16.
Page 26. He proceeds to tell us how Tyths m^ be enforced upon refusers by
coercive Laws, etc. Troopers hold their Horses with Bits and Bridl^ and
quickened with Spurs, when lazy; and as Sh^herds their Sheep with dogs and
hooks, etc.

Answ. By this we may see what cruelty ratio^ creatures would use one toward
another, if ^ Higher Powers would suffer it, as appears by his expressions,
even as to Horses, etc. Surely the man forgets himself what he saw once and
suffered under prelacy, that now by a humane Law, would thus Tyrannize over his
fellow creatures, without any authority from the Lord; remember that place,
Mat. 18.28. It is hard measure when a man released out of Prison, shall begin
to pull his fellow by the throat, and show no compassion.

Page 43. He presents us with a Catalogue of Englands Laws made for Tyths,
which have been many.

Answ. What was done in times of Ignorance God wincked at, Acts 17.30.
but when he shines upon a Nation by the clear Gospel Light of Christ, he wills
men to repent, and come out of that darkness. It was formerly with England, as
to Israel in Egypt, under dark dispensations; and although Joseph of Arimathea
might plant a true Church here, yet Antichrist soon crept in, as appears by the
after setting up of Popery, and compulsion unto set forms by the Clergy, who
condemned the witnesses in several ages that God raised up against such
traditions, sentencing them for Heretics; the Clergy Power overswaying in
Councils, Synods, etc. Whereby they insulted over Governors, and Magistrates
pretending to have Peter's Keys in remitting, and sending to Hell at their
pleasure; so that where opposition was made against them, they persecuted,
making Magistrates often times as their slaves, being overswayed as Pilate was
by the High Ppriest in crucifying Christ, of which things the Apostle foretold,
how grievous Wolves should offend the Church. Acts 20.29.


Formerly Englands layety was in much ignorance of Scriptures, the then Clergy
agreeing, that Lay men should not meddle with the meaning thereof, so
concerning things of Religion, the Clergy swayed as they listed, although Kings
and Parliaments made Laws, yet no Law would be allowed of by them, against
Priestly Power and Maintenance: yet afterward when the light did shine more
forth in Queen Elizabeth's days; things of worship must be done as the Clergy
would have it, so take away the Popish Power, and Mass Book, if a prelatical
power may remain, and the Diana of Tyths continue: and how did the late
usurping Protector, conglutinate the Clergy unto himself, but by augmenting
their Maintenance, Acts 19.24.
and continuing the old Laws to enforce the same, by Tyths, etc. as formerly.

Jehu boasted to Iehonadab of his zeal, destroyed the House of Ahab, and slew
Baals Prophets, yet he would not trust God with his cause in the peoples
Worship to go up to Jerusalem, 2 King. 10.11.15. ver. 25.29.
but left the Calves in Dan and Bethel, as the old snare unto Israel from the
time of Jeroboam 1 King. 12.26, 27, 28. So Prelacy would demolish Popery, and
Presbytery would overthrow Prelacy, conditionally an outward Clergy power may
hold, and the old Settled, Forced, Popish Maintenance continue, for they dare
not trust God in this case of Maintenance, taking it in the pure Gospel manner,
by a free contribution, as the Apostles took it, but they will go beyond the
Lord and his Stewards, and Ambassadors which himself employed in his Gospel
work.

Note Reader, this sad story of Religion, how Iehu's practice is still
followed, where such a Ministry will eat and destroy the name of one another,
as Ieh^ did the House of Ahab, and yet he and other Kings in Israel to continue
the sins of Jeroboam, so for Prelacy to eat out Popery, and Presbyters to eat
out Prelacy, etc. and yet the Idol of Tyths to continue, which draws so many
unto that office; what is all this but Iehu's practice still continued?

I confess since Queen Elizabeth's time, many things have been sweetly
manifested, and diverse witnesses according to the present discoveries have
given forth their Testimonies: but to be wondered at, we may observe, that
within these last twenty years, there has been more discoveries made of Gospel
Mysteries, th^n was by all the English Chergy, for live hundred years before, 1
Cor. 1.2^. etc.
unto which work not many mighty were called, but God made use of weak low
instruments for this purpose, so that opposers may like those despisers, Acts
13.41.
wonder at this great work of God.

Yet W. P. Is not ashamed to set them forth by the Names of Friars, Jesuits,
Seminary-Priests, Seekers* Gifted Brethren, Dippers, Quakers, New-Lights,
Troopers, Soldiers, Mechanics, Anabaptists, Impious, Atheists,
Buff-Preachesrs, Antitrinitarians, Antiscriturians, Blasphemous Sectaries,
Heretics, New Illuminates, Ranters, Itinery, Prodicants, Inspired Brethren,
etc. As may appear in almonst forty Pages, In his first part, 36. 41. 43. 57.
81. 98. 102. 116 117. 119. 126. 131. 133. 134. 135. 143. etc. And in his second
part the Title Page, and Pages there, the 3. 22. 44. 37 47. 52. 66. 74. 81. 87.
90. 96. 116. 126 127. 141. 147 etc Venting himself again the People of God,
Luke 16.14. Mark 6.3.
in which he immitates the covetous Pharisees that derided Christ; (and what is
done to believers, is as done to their Master, Mat. 25.40.45.) They called his
Pedigree to account, Is not this the Carpenter -- being offended at him, yea
both the Priests and Temple Captain was grieved because Peter and John the
Fishermen taught the people. Acts 4.1.2.


But what if we find a traitorous Judas amongst the Twelve, Acts 8.9.13.
and Simon the Sorcerer amongst the Disciples Baptized: Is it equity to call
them all such? or what if a Seminary Priest creep in amongst those called
Quakers? or a Jesuit takes upon him the form of a Baptist? There is no justice
to reproach the whole society with the names of Sorcerers, Traitors, Jesuits,
etc. or if a Whoremaster should be found in his Parish, he would not think him
an honest man that should affirm they were all such: Therefore it had been
better to have first learned the royal Law, Mat. 7.12.
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye EVEN SO to them etc.

Page 60. He yields there was no penal Laws enforcing Tyths, in the primitve
and purest times of the Gospel, for 500 years after Christ, yet he evades this,
by telling us, there was no president in Scriptures for High Courts of Justice,
Martial, etc.

Answ. It seems by his Answer to the Objection page 61. that he understands not
the difference betwixt a Law for spiritual things made by the Lord, and a Law
for temporal things made by the creature Concerning such Courts that reach but
to the body and estate, the Power of a Nation may set up, so they be not
oppressive, although there is no Scripture for it; as a National power may make
a Law for repairing of high ways, and punish offenders that refuse to do the
same; but this is no warrant therefore, that the powers of a Nation may amend,
or change the ways of God, where his Gospel way is a free contribution for
Ministers, that men should in such a case, amend or change the same way to
Tyths and a settled Maintenance: hence then observe, that where the Lord has
made a law, or left us presidents or examples what to do in spritual duties, it
is altogether unsafe for man to pull down Gods Law, and set up a humane Law,
doing as the Jews, which made the Commandment of God, Mat. 15.6.
of none effect by their tradition, therefore as the true Ministerial work is
the Lords, and is a spiritual work, so let that spiritual God command it, and
by his Law rule and govern it; but what is temporal, and given to the creature,
let man content himself therewith, not reaching beyond the power which God has
given him.

Page 82. He tells us Tyths are no burden, grievance, or oppression to those
that pay them, etc.

Answ. They are a burden and grievance to the conscience, to act in paying
Tyths against the Gospel Law, and Gospel practice, for thereby many true Saints
are forced to sin against God, and their consciences, in giving away the tenth
part of what they have toyled for, Prove. 1^ 14.
or else they shall not enjoy their outward quietness, and a wounded spirit who
can bear; and the oppression also is excessive; for if a man have Land worth 3.
s. the Acre by the year, which he clears and improves upon his own mere
charges, to bestow 10. s. the Acre in cost and labor upon it, the Tyth-takers
will have the tenth of it all, if there be but his seed again, and so therein
he takes Tyth of all the charge, of all the servants labors of the Cattels
labor, of all other charges, and of the; seed Tythed the year before, etc.

Page 86. He tells us that abolishing Tyths will be no ease to Tenants, hut
gains to Landlords, who thereupon will raise their Rents.

Answ. This contains a sum of his sixth Query, and is there enlarged.

Page 113. He tells us that Tyth opposers do it not out of Piety or Conscience,
but merely from Base Covetous Carnal Hearts.

Answ. This he asserts here, and then in his eight Query demands if it be not
so.

In diverse places he pleads the antiquity of Tyths, to be of old standing, and
therefore to be continued.

Answ. Drunkenness may be proved from Noah; Adultery from David: Idolatry from
Solomon's time, etc. yet they are not good because they are old: but if he had
said the antiquity, (or oldness) of Popery; Tytbs, and the Mass Book, makes
them good, his plea had been as weighty.

He complains that those, which he so often reproacheth, have not wrote against
Jesuits, Ro^^s Emissories, etc.

Answ. He h^ving no just plea against them, would now caluminate their persons
devising devices to stain their reputation, Ier. 18.18. Acts 6.12.1.
by Jesuits, etc. as the Jews did to Jeremiah, and Steven: but the pure people
of God own no Iensit, etc. yet possible it is for such a one to creep in, and
not be found out at present, yea to have diverse false Members, form in the
outward, and not discovered suddenly, as Judas amongst the twelve, Simeon the
Sorcerer amongst the Disciples, etc. so to have d^ceivers creep in with the
people of God is no new thing.

He often stikes at one John Can by reproaches, scoffs, etc. upbraiding him
by being an excise man, etc.

Answ. I know neither of you by face, but may not an Excise man be a Disciple
as well as a Custome-taker: Luke 5.27
It is evident how God looks upon the present condition, Who shows his esteem
of former works both good and bad, Ezekiel. 18.26, 27. And when the Lord will
rec^ive Publicans in mercy, why should the self justifying Pharisees, blame him
because they had been sinners? Mary Magdalen was a sinner, Luke 15.1.2. Mark 16.
but the seven Devils being cast out, she became a true convert unto whom
Christ first appeared after he was risen from the dead.

What if I had been a Shepherd like Moses, A Thresher of Wheat like Gedeon,
Exodus 3.1. Jude 6.11.
a Plow man like Elisha, 1 King 19.19. A Herd-man like Amos, 7.14, 15. A
Tent-maker like Paul; a Fisherman like Peter, James, and John; yea if I were a
Cobbler or a Tinker, must I not therefore obey Gods call, to answer W. P.
because of an outward mean employment? The Priests and Pharisees liked well of
Paul, when he took their parts in persecuting, but becoming a convert, they
were like mad men against him: Acts 22.4.22.
The flesh of Dives was richly clad and fed, looking loftily over the flesh of
Lazarus; but although flesh makes such difference, God looks on high and low
alike, to call unto, or employ in his work, be they Jews or Gentiles, Learned,
or Unlearned, he respects not Persons, nor eyes his spiritual gifts any more to
a Universitie Scholar, than to poor wretch that beggs at the door, Acts 10.34.
and if Gods call, and Gods spiritual gifts bestowed, make the fittest Persons
for Gospel Ministers, then envy not mean men because they receive the same, let
not thine eye be evil, seeing God is good; as to make him, that was least, and
last in learning, Mat. 20.14, 15.
to be equal with the first.

Having passed his second part, he makes a Postscript, how Canutus King of
Denmark, would have his people to pay Tyths, but his brother Olaf and the
People refused, and slew Canutus, but presently followed a great scarcity of
corn, etc.

Answ. God sometimes sends judgments on men after good performances, thereby to
prove their faithfulness in the work, as Job 1.5.14. having Sacrificed, had
diverse tidings of several miseries to try him. Abraham lived with his kindred
in Haran, and God bid him depart thence to Canaan, where he stayed but a time,
and then came a Famine, Genesis 12.1. etc.
that he left that Land, and went into Egypt where he denied his Wife, etc. now
the carnal man might reason it thus, Abraham was not content to live with his
Father, but would be of a new sect in Canaan pretending God called him thither,
but now you may see God against him, driving him out thence into Egypt for a
little victuals, etc. so if the story of Canutus be true, there might be a work
in it, as in that of Abraham, which the natural man perceives not.

Page 149. He sets down his admonition, etc. whose scoffs and mocks therein, I
shall leave to each Christian beholder, who may consider whether they are
badges of the flesh or of the Spirit, demanding this question, whether mocks
and malice, are suitable in a professor.

One thing I had almost passed by, which is the description of W. P's
sufferings in the front of his book, wherein I note, first his picture is set
by his sufferings, which was neither the practice of Christ, not his Apostles,
secondly, Paul's sufferings are set underneath his sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc.
yet I esteem Paul's the worthiest; Thirdly, verses are added, as to illustrate
the show, which the Apostles did not, but went away rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ Iesusr Fourthly, on each side his
picture, stands a coat of Arms or Crest, Acts 5.41.
as if the shell, or the Creatures picture therein, or such like dead things
did suffer also, which outward inanimate figures to set forth man's sufferings,
have no warrant in Scriptures, nor any such examples left us from Christ nor
his Apostles.

He concludes with ten Queries made out of the matter in his Book, therefore a
short answer may serve to each of them, thus abreviated.

1. He Queries, if diverse poor Petitioners against Tyths, are not fitter to be
punished as factious, than encouraged as zealous, etc.

Answ. Gods Gospel Law, does not allow Tyths to us Gentile Churches, therefore
those that oppose them, show the more loyalty to our Lord and his Law, for
which they ought not to be punished, but encoura^ed for their obedience.

2. He Queries if Petitioners against Tyths be ^ot greater enemies to the
Ministers, than the Tyths, and so fitter to be banished, etc.

Answ. If he knows any to be so, let him discover them, and their envy fall
upon themselves; it is the lord searches the heart, Ier. 17.10.
and will reward accordingly ^ut here he shows his own envy and cruelty; first
he Queries, and then gives judgment, before he knows ^hether it be thus or not,
whose sentence is persecuter ^ke, from before in punishment, he is now come to
^anishment: O Sir the Gospel work is a work of mercy.

3. He Queries if there be not above 100. Religious Persons, etc. liable to pay
Tyths, and desire ^he continuance thereof.

Answ. I question not but above 100. Religious Persons joined with Aaron in the
Calf, all which made (...), no God, and there might be above 100. Exodus 32.
Persons ^f quality consent to Jehu for continuing the Idols in ^an and Bethel,
which they could plead antiquity ^or, as some have done for Tyths, 2 King
16.29. Mark 7.3. etc.
yet all these and ^he Jewish traditions, were against the Lord, so it is ^ot
the Number, Goodness, or wisdom of the Crea^ure, will make such a Law good,
which Gods Law ^ill not hold forth.

4. He Queries if the downfall of Tyths, will not ^e a bteach of Englands
Charter, etc.

Answ. Concerning Freemen, Free-holds, or ^ther Tenures, etc. as also
Customs, Manors, ^ents, and the like in temporal things to a temporal ^se and
end, may be in Englands Charter, but for ^yths and Ministers Maintenance, we
have Gods ^harter, which was made before, and according to ^aw, the first Deed
and Statute stands in force until another be made that commands or nulls the
form^ so here is Gods Charter first by a Gospel Law, wh^ allows no Tyths, nor
any settled Maintenance Gospel Ministers, but Peoples free contribution m^ long
before Englands Charter, from whence I c^clude, he that enforces Tyths on
Gentile Church makes a breach in the Gospel Charter, and as W. ^ pretends he
that refuses to pay Tyths, breaks En^lands Charter, which I close with that of
the Apost^ whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken u^ you, Acts 4.19.
more than unto God; Judge ye.

5. He Queries if John Can and other Tyth op^sers, should not have proved
their proceeding again Tyths by Scriptures, etc.

Answ. The Lord has called me to do it.

6. He Queries if Tyths be taken away, where they may not be doubled in other
Taxes, or raised Landlords Rents, etc.

Answ. It matters not, for the goods it self, wel^ not upon that, but the sin
and snare it brings upon in paying it to such a use and end, both against
Gospel Law, and our own consciences, let them doubled or trebled in a temporal
work, I hope Sai^ will not regard that, if God be not dishonored the^ by.

7. He calls Tithe deniers, giddy pated, etc. and queries if it be not a most
arrogant, inexcusa^ high Presumption, etc. of such, adding something his old
matter about Abraham; and of Gods in^tuting them, etc.

Answ This query is but Abbreivate of his long f^^ about Abraham's paying
Tithes, etc. which was (...) answered before, therefore I shall avoid Tautolog^
only this I shall remind you of, First how none Abraham ever paid Tithes before
the Levitical (...) being once done in a Voluntary way, secondly how People in
the World was ever commanded of God to ^y Tithes, but the Jews only, thirdly
how the Vir^in Gospel Churchs never took Tithes of any, or said any, nor
demanded any; fourthly how there was ^o kind of settled Maintenance then for any
Gospel Mi^isters: fifthly note how forcing unto forms, and com^elling of
Maintenance, were all from Rome, when the ^east like power got the Victory,
six^hly see how far William Prynne is from a Gospel plea, that has no Gospel
whatsoever to prove that which he pretends.

8. He queries of Faith and piety in Tithe refusers, etc. but ends with a
farther misery then punishments, and Banishment; he also runs much upon Abraham
voluntary act of giving Tithes, questioning ^f opposers may not come to Hell
Torments for ^t.

Answ. Faith and piety consist not in a work opposite to the Gospel: but these
things he asserted before, and now he queries if it be not so: yet thus much I
may tell him, that men may possibly seem to have Faith and piety, yet be
without it: neither can he or ^ know what Principle a man acts from, in seeing
his outside, so we cannot tell him what Faith and piety is within others.

9 He queries if Tithes opposing be not imagina^y fraud, covetousness, etc.

Answ. To tell him this, we must know men's hearts, which God only can discover:
but if any act ^o, or do deny them on that account, I heartily wish ^hey were
well known, that the godly who cannot pay a forced Maintenance without sinning
against the Lord, and making a breach in his Royal Gospel char^er, and wounding
their own consciences, might not ^e censured because some do dissemble.

10. He queries what danger may come on the Na^ion if Tyths should be taken
away; yet ends with a scoff. How such Tithe opposers, may be inrold Saints in
the Roman Calendar.

Answ. To take away Tyths would be the like dan^ as it was to tread on Dagons
threshold: 1 Samuel 5.5.
or for K^ Henry the 8. to take away the Popes Supremacy, (...) Monastries,
Abbeys, etc. from Popish uses: bu^ terrify People with dangers and fears, is
no t^ thing, for thus the Spies acted when Isreal should into Canaan, Numb.
13.32.
which much dismayed the People: (...) so now we have many thus hindering the
glorious ^berty of the Sons of God, that like Isreal's adversar^ at rebuilding
of the Material Temple, in formd t^ were a rebellious People. Ezra. 4.4, 12,
13. Nehem. 2.17. Nehem 4.1, 7.
But God will have (...) work done, although Sanballat, and other Enim^ scoff
at it,

Thus have I declared, an answer according to t^ Lords leading me forth in it:
I must deliver som^what more, which God has designed me to do, (...) five and
twentieth day of the 3d. month (cally May* 1660.

Ier. 18.3.4.
O Powers of England, the fountain of Gods M^cy is still open unto us, and his
work is upon the when wherein he makes men instrumental in turning (...) about,
and has tried several parties in doing of i^ when Prebitery had groaned for
Liberty under pr^lacy, he at last obtaind it, but then he sought to (...) up
himself, and thought much to grant that Liber^ to his fellow Creatures, which
he groaned for und^ another; so he being laid by, God set Independe^ to work,
Hosea 6.4.
who made a show of righteousness like Eph^im, but as the dew, it soon wasted,
and their day w^ past also; whereupon the Baptist party had their t^^^ who
proving self seekers like the former, their d^ soon ended; 2 Samuel 15.4.
yet all these, etc. before their day ca^ to work at the wheel, seemd to be
wishing like A^solam, O that I were made Judge in the Land, (...) note the
proceedings: how these made shows like Iehu (...) Iehonadab, but what was
effected, of that pretend^, woeful experience can Testify thereof, 2 King
10.15, 29. Cor. 3, 5.
Iehu de^rted not from Ieroboams Idolatry, nor did these ^ave their ptide, and
covetousness which is Idola^y,

As it is just with God to try men, so thereby he ^aves them without excuse;
likewise it is his mercy, Mat. 22.2, etc.
^hen one proves unfaitfull, or refuses his spiritual ^ovision, to call in
others, all which he has done; ^d now is your day to be instruments in his
hand, for ^ting forth his glory and doing his work, look there^re to it, and
remember what many of you have ^ought upon in times past to do, if ever you had
such ^day; see now and consider the things that belong unto ^^urs, and our
peace, lest our case become as Ie^^salems. Many talk of settling religion, who
under^^and it not; Luke 19.42.
but where or how can it be astablisht without if it be not settled within the
heart, and if it be ^ithin there is no man can mend it, therefore it is not
^^tward Laws or inforcements to an external form, at makes a Christian: and
concerning Tyths, if ^y man will voluntarily pay them still let him do it, ^a
if he will give half he has to his Minister, or ^ake his goods common, any of
these men may do they will, so they do it freely; for the Saints look ^^on a
free ministry, and a free maintenance according (...) the pure Gospel practice,
but what is otherwise is ^pure: nor can all outward inforcements, add any ^ing
of inward purity, more then life can be detained ^hen it is expiring forth of
the body.

As the Gospel manifestation of God is clearer, so ^ints in this come to a more
glorious Light, Mat. 5.16, 28. John 4.23.
being ^quired to walk in a more perfect obedience, not ^ith a lustful eye,
but a single heart, no observation (...) places, but in spirit and Truth: to
walk in love using no filthiness, jesting, or foolish talking; wh^ in no liars,
Ephesians. 2.4. Rev. 22.19. Mat. 7.12.
etc. shall have part in the blessed inh^tance, therefore to be mindful of that
Royal Law* doing what we would be done unto.

And this is the sum of that message God has set upon, wherein may be
observed, how W. P. ple^ opposite to the Gospel Letter and Practice: there^ I
am to conclude. That there is no Gospel Ple^ Tyths, nor any forced Maintenance
for Minister^ the Gospel.

THE END.
LONDON Printed and are to be sold by Rob^ Wilson, at the sign of the
Black-Spread Eagle, and Windmill, in Martins near Aldersgate. 1660.


